
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 10, 2016
Q. On an iPhone, is there a way to assign specific text alert sounds to different people so that you can tell who is texting without looking at the screen? The Sound settings let you assign only one text tone and one ringtone for everyone.A. You can assign specific alert sounds for both text messages and incoming calls to people in your iPhone’s address book. To get started in iOS 10, open the Contacts app from the home screen; you can also open the Phone app and then tap the Contacts icon at the bottom of the screen to get there.On the Contacts list, locate the name of the person whose alert you want to change and tap it open. When the individual address card appears, tap the Edit button in the upper-right corner of the screen.Scroll down to the Text Tone line, select it and choose another alert sound from the list. You can hear a sample of the sound when you tap it. Once you’ve found the tone you want to use, select it and tap the Done button in the upper-right corner of the screen. (If you do not find the tone you want, tap Buy More Tones at the top of the screen, which takes you to the iTunes Store and its selection of brief, 99-cent audio snippets from “Star Wars,” “Star Trek,” Beethoven’s Symphony No. 5 and other sources.)If you also want to assign a specific ringtone to that person for telephone calls, tap Ringtone on the contact screen and choose a sound clip from the Ringtones list. If you do not care for the stock offerings, tap Buy More Tones at the top of the screen to sample the options crafted from popular songs; ringtones are priced at $1.29. (You can also make your own.)The steps for assigning certain ringtones to contacts on Android phones are usually similar, but they may vary based on the version of Android, the wireless carrier and the phone manufacturer. As with the iPhone, third-party ringtone apps are another option for customizing your sound library.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »