AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I have an analog television in the kitchen that predates the digital HDTV revolution. I’d like to attach an inexpensive streaming device like the Amazon Fire TV Stick to it, but the specifications say an HDMI port is required. Am I out of luck?A. Most streaming video devices that connect to your television need an HDMI port and the wide-screen rectangular aspect ratio for the best performance. However, you can get a special converter that lets you use the Amazon Fire TV Stick with older sets — like those with screens in the 4:3 aspect ratio and the yellow, red and white composite jacks for connecting video devices to the television.These converters typically cost around $40 to $70 and can be found online. Cirago’s HDMI to AV Composite Converter is one such product; the Bleiden company makes several adapters for connecting an older television to the Amazon Fire TV Stick, the Google Chromecast, the Apple TV, the Roku Streaming Stick or at least two of Roku’s set-top boxes.Keep in mind that the video picture on the older television will be in standard definition (not the high-definition image an HDTV can show). Some converters and TV models may not work together well and have difficulty displaying the picture properly or playing copyrighted content. Customer reviews on product pages or comments on video forums may give you an idea of how well a certain converter may do with a specific TV model.While Amazon’s Fire TV products, Apple TV and Google Chromecast all require an HDMI connection, Roku has one device in its line of streaming TV hardware that does not require an extra converter. Of the company’s seven streaming products, (including the $130 Roku Ultra with 4K and HDR picture quality and a series of Roku-equipped television sets), the $40 Roku Express Plus model works with either composite or HDMI connections.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement