
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 15, 2016
Q. Children can type sex-related terms into Google and get explicit content, including images. What can be done about this?A. Google’s SafeSearch filter can block quite a bit of content like pornography from search results, so make sure the feature is turned on. To do this on a desktop browser, go to https://www.google.com/preferences. (The filter is also available in the settings for mobile browsers and the Android and iOS versions of the Google app.)On the Search Settings page, make sure there is a check in the box next to “Turn On SafeSearch.” To prevent the filter from being disabled, click the Lock SafeSearch button, enter your Google account password and save your changes. You can also turn on the filter from the menu under the Settings icon on a Google search-results page. (For those who do not use Google Search, the Yahoo and Bing search engines also offer such filtering.)When the filter is enabled, it can block a lot of explicit material, like screening out most pictures of breasts and instead showing images of tufted titmice and other small birds when a common slang term for female anatomy is entered in the search box. However, SafeSearch — like most filters — is not infallible and some content may slip by. If you see objectionable content in SafeSearch results, report it to Google at https://www.google.com/webmasters/tools/safesearch.SafeSearch can get turned off again if you delete browser cookies or your internet service provider overrides the settings. If you find you need stronger protections for your children’s browsing habits, app use and social media habits, consider third-party parental control programs; free or inexpensive services like Familoop and Qustodio can give you an idea of what this type of software can do. But many children need to use the web for schoolwork and will inevitably come across content that will generate the need for a family discussion.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Keeping Search Safe for Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »