
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 16, 2016
Q. I thought Yahoo and Gmail messages were stored on those companies’ servers rather than on my computer. How and why do email messages get stored on the computer?A. Many web-based mail services — including Yahoo, Gmail, iCloud and Outlook.com — give you the option of downloading your messages to the computer through a stand-alone email program, instead of only keeping them online. Some people prefer this because it keeps copies of the messages locally on the computer for archiving. Doing this makes the downloaded mailbox contents accessible without an internet connection, too.For mail services with storage limits, downloading the messages to the computer also helps free up space online. Some people prefer using desktop programs to more easily manage mail accounts from multiple services or to avoid the advertisements that are the price paid for using a “free” service.Downloading messages from a web-based service takes a bit of setup, although the Windows and Mac operating systems have simplified it by allowing you to select a popular mail service from a list and enter your user name and password to add it to the computer’s mail program. You usually have to enable message downloads to a stand-alone program in the account settings of your web-based email service.Keeping your mail online has its advantages, especially if you check the account from multiple computers and devices. Storing your mail online also means it is backed up.Depending on the mail service you use, you may get better spam filtering through the web version. Google has also added several useful tools to its web-based Gmail service, like instant translation from other languages or messages bundled into topics (like Shopping or Travel) with its Inbox by Gmail service.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »