
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 21, 2016
Q. Microsoft hasn’t updated Windows Movie Maker in years. I have it on my Windows 10 PC from when I upgraded the computer from Windows 8, but will there ever be a proper app version for Windows 10?A. Windows Movie Maker has been around for more than 15 years, but it has not been updated since the version that was included with the Windows Essentials 2012 software suite. The program is still available for download from Microsoft’s site for some versions of Windows, but not for much longer: The company says the software will reach the end of its support on Jan. 10, 2017.The same page of release notes for Windows Essentials 2012 also says Movie Maker will soon be available from the Windows Store for Windows 10 users. At the moment, however, the Windows Store has Microsoft’s Movie Moments app for 60-second creations and several similarly named moviemaking apps, but no new edition from Microsoft — yet.If you do not want to use the outdated version of Windows Movie Maker and do not see any apps in the Windows Store that fit your needs, you can find several open-source video-editing programs and alternative applications for Windows around the web. Free editing programs save money, but they may require more expertise to install and may not include dedicated technical support (aside from web documentation). Some freeware apps may also be ad-supported.Commercial video-editing tools for Windows can cost hundreds of dollars, but several consumer-oriented programs cost much less. For example, the standard edition of Pinnacle Studio 20 has a regular price of $60 (with slightly more expensive versions that include more features). Adobe Premiere Elements 15 costs around $100, but it is on sale for $60 until Nov. 30. You can also download a free trial version from Adobe’s site first. Magix Movie Edit Pro, normally $120, is on sale for $50 until the end of the month.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Making Movies With Windows 10.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »