AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie BennerSnap, the company that runs the social media service Snapchat, soared in its initial public offering, setting the company up as the most valuable American technology company to go public since Facebook. Here’s how Snap got to this point.Created in 2011 by two Stanford University fraternity brothers, Evan Spiegel, 26, and Bobby Murphy, 28, the Snapchat app lets people send messages that disappear. The ephemeral messaging quickly caught on with college and high school students, some of whom used the app to send racy messages and other juvenilia. Now Snapchat, which is used by more than 158 million people every day, has pioneered new ways to interact with photos, videos and other users, as well as new formats for advertisers to reach customers. The company, which rebuffed a $3 billion acquisition offer from Facebook in 2013, is on track to generate $1 billion in revenue next year, according to the investment bank Jefferies. Last fall, Snapchat changed its name to Snap, indicating that it planned to expand as a company beyond the messaging app. Snap, based in Venice, Calif., also released Spectacles, which are sunglasses with an embedded camera.Snapchat is full of entertaining and addictive features. They include:Chat: Snapchat lets users send messages to one another that disappear within seconds. You have to know your friend’s user name to send a message, which makes Snapchat a place where people tend to connect with those they actually know.Lenses: The Lenses feature lets people augment their selfies with things like cartoon dog ears, floral hair wreaths and animated butterflies.Filters: The Filters tool overlays people’s photos with images or stickers. Many Snapchat filters are available based on one’s location; they are known as geofilters. If you are in San Francisco, for example, you may see special stickers with the Victorian homes, known as Painted Ladies, for which the city is famous.Stories: Snapchat lets users string together photos and short videos to keep a running account of their days. The images disappear over time, so people tend to check in on their friends’ Stories often. People watch Stories for a personal perspective on life.Live Stories: Snapchat’s editors select images and videos that are taken by the app’s community of users to tell stories about places and events. Users give Snapchat permission to do so via the terms of service. People watch Live Stories for a community perspective on life.Discover: News and entertainment companies present their stories on Snapchat Discover. Some brands, such as “Saturday Night Live” and the cable network E!, have created Discover-only content, making the Snapchat app feel like a media company in and of itself. People watch and read Discover for an editorial perspective on life.Memories: This is the Snapchat feature people use to save a personal collection of images and videos. Otherwise, the content on Snapchat — including Discover and Chat messages — will disappear.The company’s revenue has been growing briskly as advertisers flock to the ad products that are unique to Snapchat. These ad tools look and feel the same as the products consumers use. Advertisers can create their own lenses, as Taco Bell did in May for Cinco de Mayo. The result was a giant taco head that people could integrate with their selfies. Advertisers can also buy a geofilter. The luxury jeweler Tiffany created a geofilter that worked only when someone was in a Tiffany store. Advertisers can create their own Stories, or create more traditional 10-second video ads that run during Live Stories.Mr. Spiegel recently introduced Snap’s first hardware product, a pair of sunglasses with embedded cameras, called Spectacles. Wearers can take short videos that automatically upload to the Memories part of Snapchat’s app. While the company has described Spectacles as an experimental toy, the device could provide the app’s editors and advertisers with more content to tell stories and advertise against.Snapchat started out as a company for young people. But much like Facebook, which began as a service for high school and college students, Snapchat has started attracting older adults. More than 40 percent of the United States population from ages 18 to 34 use the Snapchat app, and more than half of all new users in the country are older than 25, according to the company. Katie Benner is a technology reporter covering venture capital and startups. She previously wrote about technology at Bloomberg and the Information, and she covered Wall Street while a writer at Fortune magazine.
 @ktbenner @ktbennerAdvertisement