By MIKE ISAACNOV. 30, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Late last year, the Facebook co-founder Mark Zuckerberg and his wife, Priscilla Chan, said they would donate 99 percent of their Facebook shares toward a new financial vehicle for charitable purposes.Now, Mr. Zuckerberg’s chief lieutenant, Sheryl Sandberg, is making her own philanthropic move.Ms. Sandberg, Facebook’s chief operating officer, plans to transfer nearly $100 million of her Facebook shares to an existing fund, according to a document filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Wednesday. She intends to use the new money in the fund for charitable giving, said a person briefed on the plans who was not authorized to speak publicly about them.Ms. Sandberg will direct the money to organizations that, among other things, deal with women’s empowerment issues, according to the person familiar with her plans. That includes LeanIn.org, a nonprofit group that Ms. Sandberg founded based on her best-selling book about women in the workplace, “Lean In: Women, Work and the Will to Lead.” Her plans were reported earlier by Recode.Facebook did not immediately comment on Ms. Sandberg’s action.Ms. Sandberg has a history of charitable donations to groups like LeanIn.org, as well as to anti-poverty efforts in some Bay Area counties.AdvertisementLike Mr. Zuckerberg, Ms. Sandberg has signed the Giving Pledge, a campaign founded by the billionaires Bill Gates and Warren E. Buffett, that asks the world’s wealthiest people to give away at least half their wealth either during their lifetime or upon their death.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Sandberg’s philanthropy has broadened since the sudden death of Dave Goldberg, her husband of more than 10 years, when the couple was on vacation in Mexico last year. She has spoken about the grieving she underwent in the months after his passing, publicly posting about it to her Facebook page.AdvertisementAlong with her other causes, Ms. Sandberg’s donations will include a gift to OptionB.org, a new charity she plans to start that will be focused on helping others cope with loss and hardship. She is also in the midst of writing “Option B,” a book about resilience in the face of hardship.Ms. Sandberg transferred roughly 880,000 Facebook shares to her “donor-advised fund,” which operates much like a charitable savings account and is tax-deductible. The fund is managed by the mutual fund giant Fidelity.Mr. Zuckerberg and his wife are using a different financial structure, a limited liability company, for their philanthropy. In September, they pledged a chunk of the money — at least $3 billion over the next decade — toward preventing, curing or managing all diseases by the end of the century.A version of this article appears in print on December 1, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Sandberg Plans to Use $100 Million for Charity.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.