AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Quentin HardyFor decades, countries around the world have felt the effects on their culture of one of America’s strongest exports: Hollywood cinema. For China, at least, it now seems to be Silicon Valley’s turn.As Paul Mozur writes, Chinese entrepreneurs are studying the region’s storied start-up culture, watching fictional business movies about the area for clues and taking tourist vacations to stand at the headquarters of Facebook and Google.What’s going on here? Partly, it seems, the Chinese corporate tourists are beguiled by the Valley’s dreamlike promises of changing the world and growing filthy rich almost overnight. Nothing too surprising there; in fact, not too different from the Hollywood fare so heavily consumed around the world.There’s more to it than that, however. As Mr. Mozur writes, China has many accomplished technology companies, but they struggle with Confucian and Communist traditions of respecting order, consensus and seniority. Their American counterparts, raised on stories of pioneers on the frontier, thrive in a supposed ethos of “move fast and break things.”That’s actually a pretty common spirit in places like Shenzhen, where small manufacturers ceaselessly tweak and copy designs, throwing stuff out to the world in hopes it will be a hit. More productively, China has actually exceeded the United States in its creation and use of new mobile technologies.Those are the exceptions, and for the most part Chinese tech is pretty slow-moving, particularly in the more government-sponsored areas, like semiconductors. Companies like Baidu, which champion a Chinese version of fast-moving Valley culture, are newer.Even there, when employees want to learn how to be more Valley-like, they are issued a copy of “Baidu Analects,” a kind of study guide to being spontaneous and independent. The effort sounds a little like a combination of “The Analects of Confucius” and Mao’s Little Red Book.If successful, it wouldn’t be the first time American-style management has affected Asian business culture. Japan’s huge postwar economic recovery, with a focus on quality products and productivity, is largely recognized as building on the ideas of W. Edwards Deming, an American engineer and statistician.Mr. Deming’s ideas were readily taken up partly because they fit existing Japanese cultural practices. Turning China into a paradise of creative disruption is probably less likely. But who knows? Maybe on those tour buses is a future Mark Zuckerberg, and he’ll be inspired by the giant “thumbs-up” logo outside Facebook headquarters.Advertisement