
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 5, 2016
Q. The problem of spam in the iCloud calendar seems to be getting worse. Is Apple officially doing anything about it?A. Apple is aware of the current wave of spam messaging showing up as iCloud calendar or photo-sharing invitations. The company released a statement on Nov. 30 that read, “We are sorry that some of our users are receiving spam calendar invitations. We are actively working to address this issue by identifying and blocking suspicious senders and spam in the invites being sent.”Spam has been infiltrating email, text messages, social media and other forms of communications for decades and, as people often do on those mediums, ignoring the unwanted calendar requests is one way of dealing with the situation. But if you find the garbage invitations too annoying as you wait for Apple to isolate and block spammers from abusing its system, you can still use these workarounds.Turning off iCloud Photo Sharing in your iCloud or iOS Photos & Camera settings — at least until Apple gets the spam blockade in place — lets you avoid the photo-sharing spam. To divert invitations to your iCloud mail for easy deletion, log into your iCloud account in your web browser, select Calendar and click the gear-shaped settings icon. Select Preferences, click the Advanced tab and in the Invitations area, switch it to the email option.To dump existing calendar invitations without replying to the spammers, open the Calendar app on your iOS device. Tap Calendars at the bottom of the screen, then the Edit button in the top-left corner. In the iCloud area, select Add Calendar, name it Spam or whatever you’d like and tap Done.Return to the main calendar and select the spam invitation in the Inbox. Under the invitation name, tap Add to Calendar and then pick your new Spam calendar. Return to the main calendar screen, tap the Calendars button and then Edit again. In the iCloud list, tap Spam, scroll down to the bottom to choose Delete Calendar and then confirm your decision to zap the Spam calendar for good.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Stopping Spam in iCloud Calendar.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »