
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
DEC. 7, 2016
We’re getting close to Christmas. This year, you might want to imagine a tree with nothing but software under it, and one small and powerful box from Apple or Samsung.As Farhad Manjoo writes, the great days of gadgets, a standard for much Christmas giving over the last couple of decades, appear to be over. Walkman music players, Fitbit fitness trackers, GoPro cameras and many more such modern wonders are all vanishing or seemingly on their way out.What made consumers turn away? Certainly not a waning passion for shiny gewgaws of tech. It not like these items have been replaced by traditional board games, paddle balls or tops.Rather, many of them have disappeared into features on a smartphone. They exist mostly as software, capable of upgrades over the air. That means they cost less and get better over time. When the venture capitalist Marc Andreessen talked about “software eating the world,” this is what he meant.AdvertisementBut does that truly mean we have nothing to wonder over, save what’s available in an app store? Not entirely. The trick is to think of things that a smartphone can’t do yet, or stretch our imaginations about what tech entails.A good place to look for high-tech gadgets that aren’t going away is the kitchen. The boom in sous vide gadgets (two of which were reviewed by Brian X. Chen last week) is likely to continue, at least until Apple makes a phone people are comfortable sticking in boiling water.AdvertisementLast month, Whirlpool came out with a machine that turns scraps into compost in 24 hours. There is an app for it, but a phone won’t be handling the main work.The cocktail smoker is another device unlikely to be replaced by a hickory flavor iPhone. It is also ingenious and puzzling — who knew anyone needed their whiskey infused with wood smoke? — which pretty much defines a Christmas gadget.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Then there are drones. Farhad notes that the company 3D Robotics appears to have stumbled, but DJI, the Chinese company that swamped it, recently came out with a collapsible drone. Still some innovation there, and not the kind Samsung can replicate in a phone.Stretch the definition of tech to include new materials, and you can throw in the recently announced lightweight, biodegradable shoe from Adidas.You get the picture. Go where the phone can’t and there seem to be plenty of places for gadgets. At least for a few more Christmases.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »