AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. My daughter has been living in South America for the last year and we communicate daily via WhatsApp on our iPhones. Our text history is a wonderful diary of her experiences there and I would like to be able to save them to my computer and print them out for us to enjoy in the future. Is there a simple way to do this?A. The WhatsApp site offers instructions for emailing the contents of a conversation in a file to yourself, which could then be printed. Open the WhatsApp program, tap Chats at the bottom of the screen and select the conversation you want to save. At the top of the screen, tap your daughter’s name, scroll to the bottom of her contact file and choose Email Chat. You have the option to send the conversation with or without any attached media; and once you decide, type in your email address and hit Send.If the conversation file is too large to send by email, you may be able to use a third-party program that can retrieve chat histories from your iPhone’s backup files in iCloud or iTunes. Recovery programs for your PC or Mac — like iPhone Backup Extractor, iTunes Backup Extractor and iBackup Extractor — can grab chat histories and more from your iPhone backup files, but read the program’s instructions before getting started so you know what to expect.Q. Do the quick response squares found on the corners of bills, financial statements, etc. contain sensitive info — and thus should be shredded?A. As an identity-theft precaution, old statements that include quick response (QR) codes for scanning and payment through a special mobile app should be shredded along with outdated bills and financial statements that do not have QR codes — simply because the papers contain basic personal information about you like your name and address. While QR codes (those bar codelike black-and-white squares) on statements do not include your financial information, they typically encode your account number with the company and the amount and due date for the payment.QR codes that store information or take you quickly to a website do save time, but the technology can be abused. QR codes can be used to whisk you to a malware-riddled website, and hackers can scan QR codes and bar codes on discarded airline boarding passes to get flight and traveler information.TIP OF THE WEEK Need to record a short video of a game or an open program on your computer for educational or demonstration purposes? In Windows 10, open the game or app you want to record and press the Windows and G keys. In the “Do you want to open Game bar” box that appears, select the “Yes, this is a game” option (even if it is not) and press the red dot — or the Windows-Alt-R key combination — to start and stop recording. The resulting video is saved in the Captures folder within the Videos folder on the PC.The free QuickTime Player software built into Mac OS X can record the action on a Mac’s screen. Visit the Mac’s Applications folder and open the QuickTime Player app. Go to the File menu and select New Screen Recording. Click the red Record button and then click anywhere on the screen to start recording; you can also record just part of the screen by dragging the mouse around the area you want to capture before you click the Start Recording button. Click the black Stop button in the menu bar, or press the Command, Control and Escape keys to stop the recording. The resulting clip pops up on screen for you to review and save. J.D. BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement