AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Pui-Wing TamTalk about a no-win situation that many leaders of the biggest tech companies have found themselves in.On Wednesday, a group of about a dozen of these luminaries — including Timothy D. Cook, chief executive of Apple, and Larry Page, chief executive of Alphabet — are making the trek to Trump Tower in Manhattan to meet with President-elect Donald J. Trump. It will be a breathtaking gathering of some of the most valuable companies in the world.But as David Streitfeld reports, the agenda for this round table is full of topics that Mr. Trump has been discussing for some time — but which will not necessarily make the tech companies look good.There is the matter of jobs. Tech companies, many of which have outsourced their manufacturing outside the United States and have advanced trends like automation, are not in a particularly strong position to argue they have spread jobs throughout the country.There is the matter of the repatriation of money into the United States. Tech companies such as Apple have held billions of dollars outside of the country for years without bringing those funds back in for tax reasons. Again, these companies do not have the strongest hand here.There is also how unpredictable Mr. Trump himself might be and how he might use Twitter as a pulpit after the meeting to proclaim victory against the tech companies or to castigate the executives. The president-elect has been unafraid to criticize all manner of companies in the past few weeks — Boeing, Carrier and Lockheed Martin among them — using Twitter.Even if the companies and Mr. Trump get along, whatever the tech firms do to cooperate with the president-elect might be assailed back home in Silicon Valley, which has been wary about the president-elect. Kara Swisher of the technology site Recode wrote on Monday that the tech executives “should be ashamed of themselves for lining up like sheeple after all the numskull attacks Trump has made” on the tech sector in the past.Stay tuned for who comes out of the meeting smelling the sweetest, if anyone.Advertisement