
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 14, 2016
Q. There seems to be quite a range of prices on streaming video set-top boxes and sticks. What more do you really get with the more expensive ones priced at $150 or more, compared with the plug-in sticks that cost $30 to $40?A. In short, many of the set-top boxes on the more expensive end of the current video-streaming spectrum have processors robust enough to handle ultra-high-definition video, games and apps. The streaming sticks — most of which resemble a large USB flash drive but plug into the video port on the back of the television — display video in resolutions of 1080p or 720p, but do not support games or other extras. If you are shopping around, check your television set’s resolution and technical specifications and make a list of the features you absolutely want to have in a video-streaming device.Many of the higher-end streaming products, like Google’s $69 Chromecast Ultra, the $80 Roku Premiere or Amazon’s $90 Fire TV, have more powerful processors and can now handle ultra-high-definition 4K video; Roku’s top-shelf $130 Ultra model offers 4K video and high dynamic range (HDR) color on compatible video. While 4K content is becoming easier to find, keep in mind you need to have a television set capable of displaying ultra-HD video to see it properly.The latest generation of the Apple TV box ($149 for the less-expensive model) does not support 4K video, but comes with storage space that allows you to download apps and play games on the television screen. The newest Apple TV can respond to voice commands with its Siri assistant, just as Amazon’s Fire TV box uses the company’s Alexa assistant to call up shows and games.For those who simply want to add Netflix, Hulu and other streaming services to a regular high-definition television set, smaller devices like the $40 Amazon Fire TV Stick, the $35 Google Chromecast or the $30 Roku Express deliver for much less. If you have a lot of content purchased from a particular media store, like Amazon, Google Play or iTunes, getting a device from the same company may make streaming it from the computer or tablet easier. Media-server apps like Plex or Kodi also work with many streaming devices to bring the video, photos and music on your computer and mobile devices to the big screen, alongside your subscription services.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »