
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 22, 2016
Q. How does my web browser know that a site could be malicious?A. Most modern browsers now include built-in phishing and malware protection to help shield your computer from online attacks. The latest versions of Apple Safari, Google Chrome, Microsoft’s Edge and Internet Explorer browsers, Mozilla Firefox and the Opera browser are among those with such security features.To recognize potentially dangerous pages, the browser typically consults a blacklist of sites that have been reported to contain phishing pages or be loaded with infectious and malicious software. If you visit a site on the blacklist, the browser displays a warning as it blocks the page. To keep up with evolving threats, your browser contacts its home server regularly when you are online to download an updated list of suspected malicious sites.The Chrome browser updates itself this way, and Google’s software robots constantly comb the web looking for new and revised websites. Mozilla uses Google’s so-called Safe Browsing technology and Unwanted Software policy in Firefox to block sites with various levels of bad intentions. Microsoft’s browsers use the SmartScreen filter to analyze pages, block blacklisted sites and check downloaded files for potential security issues.If you are not sure if the phishing and malware blockers are turned on, check your browser’s settings or preferences area. Website owners who feel that their sites have been unfairly blacklisted can use Google’s Report Incorrect Phishing Warning form or request a review from the nonprofit StopBadware.org group in hopes of passing inspection; the group also has online advice for webmasters of hacked sites.Third-party security programs like those offered by Sophos, Malwarebytes and other companies provide additional protection for your computer or device beyond what the browser can block. Many software makers have free basic versions of programs for budget-minded users who do not need as many features.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »