AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I keep a ton of stuff in my Dropbox account, which is fine for my desktop computer with its spacious hard disk. I installed the Dropbox app on my ultrabook (instead of just logging in on the web), but it’s nearly filling up my laptop’s available drive space. Is there a way to link to just some of the files — and not everything in the Dropbox folder?A. Through its apps and cloud service, Dropbox lets you store files in your account and sync them to all the computers and devices that use that account so that everything, everywhere, is up-to-date. However, you do not have to keep all the files stored in your main Dropbox folder on every connected machine.The desktop Dropbox app for Windows, Mac and Linux systems has a Selective Sync setting you can use to tell Dropbox which folders you want to see on each computer. To make things easier for selectively synchronizing your files later, you may want to organize the contents of your Dropbox folder first so all your files are tucked into labeled folders.When you have things sorted, open the Dropbox app on the ultrabook by clicking the Dropbox icon in the Windows system tray, or via the menu bar on a Mac or Linux computer. Choose Preferences from the menu. When the Preferences box opens, click the Account tab. On the Account screen, click the Selective Sync button.You should see a list of all the folders nestled within the main Dropbox folder. Uncheck the boxes next to folders you do not need to use on the laptop. Click the O.K. button when you are finished. Dropbox will then remove the folders you turned off and keep only the ones that remain checked. Note that the folders are removed onlyfrom the laptop; they are still available on your desktop computer and through the Dropbox website.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement