For nearly a decade, the defining characteristic of the tweet — the unit of communication on Twitter — has been its brevity: Users are restricted to 140 characters.That may soon change. Twitter is experimenting with introducing a longer form of tweet, according to two people familiar with the company’s plans, in what would be another gradual move away from the simplistic design sensibility that the service was originally founded upon.The project, which internally has been referred to as “beyond 140,” is still in its testing phase and is not set to be introduced until at least March, said the people, who requested anonymity because they were not authorized to speak about the company’s plans. Twitter has not determined what the final tweet character limit will be, according to people familiar with the discussions. One number that has been tossed around internally is 10,000 characters, the same limit that users have inside private Twitter messages. Another possibility could be 5,000 characters, these people said. Re/code first reported the news on Tuesday. A Twitter spokesman declined to comment.The test is another signal of the changes at Twitter under Jack Dorsey, the co-founder and onetime wayward son who was appointed chief executive last year after a multiyear hiatus from the company. Since his elevation to chief executive, Mr. Dorsey has tried to make Twitter more accessible to the masses, a problem that the company has struggled with for years, much to the consternation of its investors.Mr. Dorsey has made clear to employees that as far as redesigning the product is concerned, no feature is sacred. Twitter has experimented with tweaking its reverse chronological timeline, for example, a move that drew some comparisons to the algorithmically curated Facebook News Feed.That being said, the new character limit extension is not likely to look drastically different than what Twitter users are familiar with. In the new design, tweets will still appear limited to 140 characters in the stream, as has typically been the case. If the content of the tweet is longer than 140 characters, users can expand it with the click of a button to read further.The idea, according to the people familiar with Twitter’s plans, stemmed from seeing the creative ways people work around the service’s current 140-character count. Some users post screenshots of large blocks of text, for instance, or so-called “tweetstorms” of multiple tweets in rapid succession, in order to circumvent the text limitations on the service. “Beyond 140” is an attempt to appease those users without completely disrupting the visual layout of Twitter’s current design.Twitter has made changes to its look in the past. In 2013, Twitter started allowing photo previews in the tweet stream, a move similar to services like Tumblr and Instagram. Twitter years ago also allowed some linked articles from web publishers to appear in preview form inside of tweets.Many Twitter users were quickly up in arms after news of the possible character limitation extension became public, tweeting their disapproval for how the service might change. In a tweet containing a text screenshot on Tuesday, Mr. Dorsey appeared to try to assuage users’ fears that Twitter may change drastically. “We didn’t start Twitter with a 140 character constraint. We added that early on for it to fit into a single SMS message,” Mr. Dorsey wrote. “We will never lose that feeling.” This article, by the way, is 3,501 characters in length.