AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. What exactly is the difference between Gmail and Inbox? I have both apps on my phone and am not sure which one to use.A. Gmail, initially released as an invitation-only service in 2004, is Google’s official web-based email service and a competitor to Microsoft’s Outlook.com (formerly Hotmail.com), Yahoo Mail and Apple’s iCloud mail service, among others. Inbox, first released as an invitation-only service in 2014, is a program that attempts to sort and organize your Gmail messages into logical groupings so they are easier to manage — especially on a mobile device.You do not need an invitation to use either service anymore, but you need to have a Gmail address to use Inbox. Google makes both a Gmail app and an Inbox app for devices running Android and iOS. If you like the way Inbox organizes your messages, you can also use it with your desktop web browser after you have set it up on your mobile gadget; point your Chrome, Firefox or Safari browser to inbox.google.com to use it there.If you have both apps installed and set up, your messages (and the actions you take with them) are synced between Gmail and Inbox. Messages you archive, delete, create or mark as spam are handled the same way in both apps, no matter which one you are using at the time. Some features appear in only one app, though. You need to create your vacation response messages and certain filters in Gmail, while Inbox Reminders are not visible in Gmail.People who like the traditional approach to dealing with email may prefer Gmail’s more straightforward message view. However, those who like anything that saves time — or automatically organizes information for quick perusal on the go — may favor Inbox. If you want to get to know the newer app a little better, Google has created an Inbox Help Center online and has a brief demo video on YouTube.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement