Even with some recent wobbles in the start-up world, big sums are continuing to roll into technology start-ups.Just a few days into 2016, Flatiron Health, a start-up that gathers and analyzes data on cancer treatments and sells software based on those insights, said it had raised $175 million in a funding round led by the pharmaceutical giant Roche. Flatiron declined to disclose its valuation.As part of the deal, Flatiron gets more than money. Roche will buy several of Flatiron’s software products, which are based on subscriptions, in a move that is set to expand the start-up’s stream of recurring revenue and better position it for a future initial public offering. The partnership between the two companies is nonexclusive, and Flatiron can continue to work with other pharmaceutical companies.“We plan to go public in two to three years,” Nat Turner, Flatiron’s chief executive and co-founder, said in an interview. “To do so, we’ll have to meet certain financial metrics, and this investment sets us up to do that.”The deal shows that sizable funding rounds for private companies are continuing, even after some investors said last year that they were beginning to see a drop in the number of venture firms writing huge checks to start-ups. Mutual fund investors had started to mark down the value of their stakes in privately held companies like Snapchat and Dropbox.Much like the ride-hailing company Lyft, which this week announced it had raised $500 million from General Motors, Flatiron is tapping a deep-pocketed corporate investor that wants to benefit from the expertise of a start-up. G.M.’s core business is threatened by changing car ownership patterns, a phenomenon it hopes to slow by teaming up with a potential rival to develop a network of self-driving cars and create short-term car rental hubs across the United States.Like many other big pharmaceutical companies, Roche is dealing with threats to its core business from generic-drug makers on the low end. It is also facing a shift in the health care payment system, in which insurers are paying more for treatments when they have been shown to be effective. Roche, a major player in the oncology market, said it would use Flatiron’s data to bring new drugs to market faster, keeping its drug pipeline full of innovative new treatments for which it can charge a premium. Generic versions of those drugs will not be available for several years. It will also use Flatiron’s data to better match patients with the treatments that will be most effective.“Flatiron has tremendous data that helps us understand how medicine reacts in patients,” said Daniel O’Day, the chief operating officer at Roche. “This is a long-term strategic investment, and the strategic collaboration benefits us. The value in the investment is not to generate a financial return.”Mr. Turner said Flatiron was weeks away from finalizing its funding round in November when Roche said it was interested in investing in the company that he founded with Zach Weinberg in 2012. “It was clear that Roche would be a great partner and bring brand value to Flatiron,” Mr. Turner said. “We wrapped up the deal in about a month.”Mr. Turner and Mr. Weinberg founded Flatiron with the aim of organizing the world’s cancer data and making it easy to analyze. The hope was that cancer centers, pharmaceutical companies and other health care professionals could create treatments faster and pair patients with more effective regimens when armed with information about how drugs performed in the real world. The company has about 250 employees and has its headquarters in New York City.Flatiron’s two founders had previously started an advertising technology company called Invite Media, which they sold to Google in 2010. They became interested in health care and oncology after watching several family members and friends battle cancer.Flatiron’s growth has tracked the rising interest among health care players in personalized medicine, a practice that tailors treatments to individuals. The aim is that personalized medicine will improve patient outcomes more quickly and help reduce health care costs in the United States, which now account for a significant percentage of the economy. President Obama said in last year’s State of the Union address that the health care industry should invest more in personalized medicine, and venture capital investors and entrepreneurs have flooded the space.According to the National Venture Capital Association, investment in health care services more than doubled in 2015 to $720 million, and rose 60 percent in 2014 to $345 million.Other investors in Flatiron’s latest round include Allen & Company, the Scottish investment firm Baillie Gifford and the health-care-focused investment firm Casdin Capital. Previous investors include GV, formerly known as Google Ventures, and First Round Capital. Mr. O’Day will join Flatiron’s board, and the start-up will use the money to improve its products. Flatiron has a raised a total of $313 million.Roche invested in Foundation Medicine, a company that uses genetic information to identify the best treatments for patients, in early 2015. Foundation Medicine, which was also backed by GV, went public in 2013.