

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
JAN. 6, 2016
It’s a cliché for journalists to whine about International CES, the annual consumer electronics show that brings gadget-hounds and billionaires like a nerdy plague upon Las Vegas this week. As many have complained — yours truly included — CES long ago devolved into a noisy parade of puffed-up announcements that usually amount to nothing.But if news from CES feels especially desultory this year, it might not be the show that’s at fault. Instead, blame the tech cycle. We’re at a weird moment in the industry: The best new stuff is not all that cool, and the coolest stuff isn’t quite ready.It’s not that today’s tech is terrible — lots of potentially groundbreaking ideas are just around the corner. In product labs across the world, engineers and designers are working to turn a collection of annoying buzzwords — artificial intelligence, virtual reality, wearables, the “Internet of things,” autonomous cars and drones — into products that we find irresistible. They are all pushing the limits of what machines can currently accomplish, and working to come up with business models that customers will stomach. In time, after years of experimentation and incremental advances, many of these technologies might become mainstays.But that future will take a few years to pan out. In the meantime, you can expect to be bombarded with early versions of tomorrow’s tech that are bound to feel janky and incomplete. Welcome to Prototype World, a brief intermission in your regularly scheduled program of disruption, during which everything new will more or less stink.Advertisement“It’s like the junior high years in technology,” said Ben Bajarin, an analyst at Creative Strategies. “We’re in those awkward teenage years where everything looks and feels funky.”AdvertisementOver the next couple of CESes, there’s a good chance we will see a lot of devices that will feel not quite ready. Virtual reality will underwhelm, artificial intelligence will feel annoyingly unintelligent, and cars and drones that navigate themselves will seem safer when parked. There will be wearables you won’t want to wear and home devices that will make you want to buy a new place.“It will eventually cross that hump and become mature, but it’s not there right now,” Mr. Bajarin said.It’s unsurprising that early versions of new tech will be a bit flawed. But what’s unusual about the current moment is how many new, interdependent technologies are coming about at the same time. We’re in the middle of a grand cycle in technology — the revolution pushed by smartphones, social networks and ubiquitous online servers (that is, the cloud everyone talks about). Over the last decade, these three technologies have altered wide swaths of the business world, destroying and creating hundreds of billions of dollars in wealth in sectors as varied as media and transportation.Venture capitalists are eager to see these trends continue. Fred Wilson, a co-founder of Union Square Ventures, told me he was paying close attention to opportunities for mobile devices and social networks to alter health care, finance and education.Hunter Walk, of the firm Homebrew, echoed this idea. “It may be true that there’s not a consumer-tech phenomenon that breaks through this year, but the cascading wave of tech goodness from mobile isn’t close to being done when we look at this other part of your life called work,” he said. “So, I’m not bored.”I take his point; we in the press are often quick to become bored and demand the next great thing. And yet, what can I say? I am kind of bored. Even if smartphones and social networks have lots of room to grow before conquering the world, they feel like old, mature tech. This is an industry that moves on anticipation of the next great thing. Artificial intelligence, virtual reality, autonomous vehicles and wearable computers are the building blocks of tomorrow’s great tech cycle. The trouble is, the cycle is just getting started.To understand what it’s like to live in Prototype World, consider Apple’s current hiccups. As Nilay Patel of The Verge wrote recently, 2015 was Apple’s “year in beta” — a year in which the company released a bunch of new stuff that fell short of the usual dazzle. The most obvious example was Apple Watch, a device that every reviewer said had a lot of potential, but in its current form felt a bit kludgy. If only the watch were faster, smaller and did more.But how will Apple get there from here? Improving the watch will require lots of fundamental advances over a period of years — smaller, faster processors and radios; better batteries; better artificial intelligence and voice recognition, among other things. Can Apple provide all that? Probably, and if it doesn’t, some other smartwatch maker will most likely do it. But it won’t happen this year. It might not even happen next year. You’ll just have to wait.AdvertisementSimilar hurdles await every other next-gen buzzword. Take virtual reality. After years of promise, some observers are calling 2016 the year that virtual reality goes mainstream. The CES floor is littered with goggles that promise to fly you into worlds more interesting than your own. Oculus, the Facebook subsidiary,  began taking orders for its much-anticipated Rift headset on Wednesday. Microsoft says that its HoloLens — which technically is closer to “augmented reality” than “virtual reality,” but potato-potahto — will also be ready soon. A decade from now, we may well look back on 2016 as the year virtual reality turned the corner from a futuristic novelty into a mainstream possibility.But that doesn’t mean you’ll enjoy virtual reality in 2016. According to the graphics-chip maker Nvidia, your computer will most likely not be able to support most virtual reality devices. Even if you’re able to get them up and running, the first devices will be underpowered and expensive. The goggles might make you nauseated or give you a headache, and doctors are still figuring out the deeper ways that simulated reality may affect your psyche. As with new video game consoles or media formats, you can expect most of the initial virtual reality content to be lackluster or unsavory (not that there’s anything wrong with that). Don’t discount the time it will take everyone to learn how to use virtual reality — and the time it will take app makers to create software that conforms to how people begin to use it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Similar advances will also be required to perfect self-driving cars and self-flying drones. Advances in A.I. will also power a set of intelligent assistants far smarter than Siri, some that don’t make you tear your hair out.All this could be grand: A few years from now, if you believe the boosters in Vegas this week, many of us will be shuttling around in self-driving cars, regularly plugging into reality-defying virtual worlds, and adorning ourselves with smart jewelry that will seamlessly integrate our bodies with the Internet. Our homes will be connected, our drones will be autonomous and our phones will sizzle with artificial intelligence.That’s a good vision to keep in mind as you struggle, over the next few years, to get anything to work as it should.Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo A version of this article appears in print on January 7, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Tech’s Awkward Years.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »