AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Do you need a special keyboard to make a euro symbol on Android 6.0?A. The standard keyboard that comes with most versions of Android includes the euro symbol (€), but that character is not immediately visible. When you are tapping out an email message or other text and need to insert the euro sign, tap the ?123 key in the lower-left corner of the keyboard.In the second row of numbers and symbols, press and hold your finger on the dollar-sign key. Above your finger, a box will pop up showing several currency symbols; these include the peso, the euro, the cent sign, the pound sterling and the yen. Without lifting your finger from the screen, slide to the euro symbol and then pull your finger off the glass to insert the character into the text. (Apple’s iOS 9 keyboard tucks currency characters away in a similar place under the dollar sign and includes the Korean won symbol for good measure.)Android 6.0 includes other press-and-hold shortcuts that supply additional characters to its on-screen keyboard. By pressing the question mark and exclamation point symbols, you can get the inverted versions used in Spanish. Pressing keys in the number row reveals available fraction characters. On the regular ABC keyboard, pressing characters in the top row of the QWERTY keys leads to shortcuts for numbers or accented vowels. Other letters that also take accents in certain languages (like a, c and n) show their alternate versions when you press down on them.As an alternative method, when you are on the ?123 keyboard, tap the ~[< symbol on either side to see most of the currency symbols as visible keys, along with certain mathematical symbols and characters like the copyright mark. The smiley-face symbol in the bottom-right corner of any keyboard layer takes you into the emoji collection.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement