
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 8, 2016
Q. When I migrated from iPhoto to Photos for OS X on my Mac, all of my iPhoto Events were converted into albums and buried in a parent folder called iPhoto Events. This makes reaching them very time-consuming. Is there a way to move all these old events into the main Albums tab?A. Apple’s upgrade last year from its older iPhoto program to Photos for OS X made a number of changes to the way pictures were organized on the Mac. In addition to iPhoto Events’ becoming albums within the iPhoto Events folder, certain types of iPhoto Smart Albums may be missing or look different. The Photos app also converts star ratings and flags into searchable keywords.While certain changes from the iPhoto-to-Photos conversion cannot be reversed, you can at least dig out and move your old iPhoto Events groups from their new location and put them with the rest of your albums. One way to move just a few events (typically cataloged by date) out of the iPhoto Events folder is to start by clicking on that folder in the Photos sidebar; if you do not see the sidebar on the left side of the Photos window, go to the View menu and choose Show Sidebar.The main part of the window now displays all the groups in the iPhoto Events folder. From there, you can click and drag the thumbnails for separate events out of the iPhoto Events window and put them in the sidebar under Albums so that they show up with the rest of your collection.From the sidebar, you can also click the triangle next to iPhoto Events to reveal all the subfolders within it, and then drag specific events up the sidebar and drop them under the Albums heading. If you would prefer not to display the sidebar in your Photos program, or want to move all the items out of the iPhoto Events folder at once, you can do that too.Click the Albums tab and open the iPhoto Events icon to reveal all your old events on the screen. Press the Command and A keys on the keyboard (or choose Select All from the Edit menu) to highlight all the events. Next, right-click (or hold down the Control key and click) and choose “Move [Number] Albums Out Of ‘iPhoto Events’  ” to transfer everything out of the folder and into the Albums view. If you do not want to move all the events at once, you can also hold down the Command key while clicking specific events, before right-clicking (or Control-clicking) the batch to get the menu with the Move option.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »