
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 11, 2016
Q. How can I print my iCloud contact list from the web?A. When you are logged into your iCloud account and have the Contacts page open in your browser, first select the addresses you want to print. To choose every contact, click All Contacts on the left side of the screen, then click in the list of contacts and press Control-A (Windows) or Command-A (Mac) on the keyboard to select all the names.At the bottom-left corner of the Contacts page, click the gear-shaped Settings icon. In the menu that opens, choose Print to send a copy of your iCloud address book to the printer.If you have installed the iCloud for Windows software on your PC and are syncing iCloud Contacts with Microsoft Outlook, you can print your contacts from the Outlook program. The steps can vary based on your version of Microsoft Outlook, but in Outlook 2013, for example, click People and then select My Contacts in the Folder pane. Click the File tab and click Print. In the Settings area, you can pick the style of printed contacts sheet you want to make, like Phone Directory Style. Click Print to send the file to the printer.Mac users syncing iCloud contacts to the OS X Contacts program can print their address books from the computer as well. In the Mac’s Contacts program, click the iCloud contacts option on the left side of the window and then select the names you want to print. In the File menu, select Print. Click the Show Details button in the Print box if you do not see additional formatting options. In the Style area, use the drop-down menu to choose a format (like Lists or Pocket Address Book) for your addresses before you click the Print button; the Contacts print box can print the addresses as mailing labels for formatted for envelopes as well.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »