Drones might get all the attention, but Amazon’s interest in more traditional methods of moving things around is not slowing down.The retailer’s China subsidiary has received United States approval to ship ocean freight for other companies. That could make it cheaper and easier for sellers on Amazon to move goods from Chinese factories to Amazon’s American warehouses.Amazon’s Federal Maritime Commission filing was noticed by Flexport, a logistics firm based in San Francisco. Amazon China could start “cross-docking” goods in United States ports “for direct injection into Amazon’s courier network,” Ryan Petersen, Flexport’s chief executive, wrote on Thursday in a blog post.An Amazon spokesman declined to comment.Mr. Petersen noted that ocean freight does not cost much by itself these days — under $10 to ship a flat-screen TV across the Pacific.As a result, “a considerable portion of logistics costs come through labor costs — particularly compliance and coordination of cargo handoffs between different players in the chain,” he wrote. “It’s here that automation, something no traditional freight forwarding company can do even 1 percent as well as Amazon can, becomes the key competitive advantage over legacy freight forwarders.”Other recent moves by Amazon in the logistics space reportedly include acquiring the 75 percent of the French delivery company Colis Privé that it does not already own. It is also said to be negotiating for its own fleet of cargo planes. And Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s chief executive, personally invested in Convoy, a start-up by an ex-Amazonian that books local and regional trucks on demand.Amazon wants to get people their purchases as fast as possible, but it also wants to shave some dollars off its shipping costs, said Jarrett Streebin, founder of EasyPost, a logistics company in San Francisco.“Having their own fleet of planes will be a huge move,” Mr. Streebin said. “They would no longer need to spread out their more expensive inventory around the country or pay FedEx to get it somewhere by the next day. They could send it themselves from one hub.”A version of this article appears in print on 01/18/2016, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Amazon Gains Approval to Ship Ocean Freight.