By J. D. BIERSDORFERNOV. 6, 2015
Q. I would like to donate our cellphones to the military. How do we wipe the memory clean and where do we send them?A. Before you erase everything on the phone, make sure you have backed up all the data on the device elsewhere and have logged out of all the online accounts you use on the phone. The Federal Trade Commission’s website has a checklist of steps to take when preparing a phone for donation or recycling.Most modern mobile phones include a setting to delete all data and return the device to its blank-state factory settings. Your wireless carrier may have its own guide to erasing your phone. For example, you can look up your model on AT&T’s site to get instructions, Verizon Wireless has a guide and Sprint’s support site has a link to user manuals for removing data.Apple has specific steps for erasing all content from its iPhones, iPads and other devices, as does Microsoft for erasing content on its Windows Phones.AdvertisementGoogle has a similar set of instructions for wiping data on its Android devices, although two researchers from the University of Cambridge published a paper this year that detailed their success at retrieving personal data from “erased” Android gadgets. Encrypting the data on the phone before performing the factory reset is one suggestion for keeping your information private after you pass along the phone. (Google’s instructions for erasing and encrypting data apply to its unmodified version of Android; steps for your phone’s manufacturer and wireless carrier may vary slightly.)AdvertisementOnce you have fully erased the phone, you just need to find a charity that puts your donation where you want it. Cellphones for Soldiers is one national nonprofit group that is focused on helping United States troops. The organization has recycled more than 11 million old phones since 2004 and has used donations to buy talk-time calling cards and send them to members of the military.You can find out where to send your old phones or find drop-off locations for your old gear on the group’s website. Cellphones for Soldiers also has a deal with the Gazelle electronics buyback site — Gazelle donates the equivalent of 15 percent of your trade-in price to the charity if you opt to sell your phone to the company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Operation Gratitude is another organization dedicated to the military. The group accepts donations of old smartphones and other electronics and uses the proceeds to create packages for soldiers serving overseas. Instructions for donating can be found here.Using a DVR Without CableQ. I see that some digital video recorders are advertised as working without a cable subscription. How do they work and what kind of programs can you record?A. Digital video recorders that record television shows without a cable subscription — and the cable company’s handy conversion box and recorder equipment — usually connect to an antenna designed to pull in over-the-air television signals. Although it may seem as if cable and satellite providers are the main sources of content delivery, television networks have not stopped broadcasting their signals to the public. Most of those signals went from analog to digital in 2009.The programs you can record on such an antenna-based DVR include shows that are broadcast over the air, like those from the networks ABC, CBS, NBC, Fox, PBS and Univision. While you may not get the most popular shows on cable without a cable subscription, over-the-air TV has the low monthly price of “free” once you buy your hardware.Some cable-free DVR boxes can record broadcast television, as well as shows from streaming services or programming sources you use with a broadband Internet connection; the Channel Master DVR Plus and the Tablo 2-Tuner OTA DVR are two such options, but some models require an external USB drive as well. TiVo has several DVR models that work with an antenna, but you need a subscription to the TiVo service.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.