By MARK SCOTTNOV. 6, 2015
Senior European officials said on Friday that they expected to complete a new trans-Atlantic data sharing agreement in the next three months that would allow companies to continue moving online information like social media posts and search queries to the United States.The renewed effort comes a month after Europe’s highest court ruled on Oct. 6 that a 15-year-old pact — known as a safe harbor agreement — did not provide sufficient protection for the region’s citizens when their data was transferred between Europe and the United States.European and American officials had been trying to forge an updated agreement even before the court’s ruling, and they plan to continue those efforts next week in Washington.The October decision by the European Court of Justice has caused major headaches for the world’s technology giants, including Google and Facebook, as well as nontech businesses that move information like payroll or pension data between regions. These companies, which have to use more complicated transfer mechanisms since the safe harbor agreement was invalidated, rely on moving personal data across the Atlantic as part of their digital advertising services.Advertisement“We need an agreement with our U.S. partners in the next three months,” Andrus Ansip, the European vice president in charge of the region’s digital single market, said in a statement on Friday. “The E.U. and the U.S. are each other’s most important trading partners. Data flows between our continents are essential for people and businesses.”AdvertisementDespite optimism about a new data-transferring deal, European and United States policy makers have struggled to reach agreement since they started working on the issue two years ago.Both sides are said to believe that an agreement can be finished by early next year, but negotiators are stuck in part on what kind of access national intelligence agencies will have to people’s online data. The information includes social media posts and online search histories, as well as more traditional information like financial and personal records.European officials want the United States to provide greater assurances over how their citizens’ data may be made available to American intelligence agencies when it is transferred outside the region.European policy makers are concerned that without further limits, any new data-transferring agreement would be challenged in European courts, according to two people with knowledge of the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By contrast, United States officials said that they believed they had provided sufficient guarantees, and that the recent ruling failed to consider improvements to American privacy safeguards over the last two years that restrict what information is accessible to the country’s intelligence agencies.“The ruling does not give adequate credit for the robust protections of privacy available in the U.S.,” Ted Dean, a senior official at the United States Commerce Department, which is leading the data-transferring negotiations, told Congress in a written statement on Tuesday.This issue is expected to be at the heart of a new round of negotiations next week when Vera Jourova, Europe’s commissioner of justice, travels to Washington to meet with her American counterparts. In recent weeks, both sides have been in almost daily contact, and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. talked to Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the European Commission, about the data-transferring impasse this week.That time frame has become increasingly important after Europe’s independent data protection authorities warned last month that they would take actions, including issuing financial penalties to companies, if Europeans’ data was not better protected in the United States by the end of January 2016.AdvertisementWhile some European privacy watchdogs believe a new data-transferring deal would offer appropriate safeguards, others want new legislation to give Europeans the right to sue in United States courts when data is misused.“A new safe harbor agreement is part of the solution, but it’s not all of it,” said Isabelle Falque-Pierrotin, who leads the French data protection authority and has been a vocal campaigner to expand Europe’s rules beyond the 28-member European Union.The European court’s ruling “is the new reality,” she added. “Political actors have to respect the new state of law.”A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Europe Aims for Early ’16 in Data Pact.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.