AdvertisementSupported byBy Farhad Manjoo and Mike IsaacEach Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Farhad: Hey Mike, welcome to my squad! See what I did there? This week, our friends at The Wall Street Journal published a handy dictionary of slang terms used by millennials. I thought I’d try out some of these “cool-kid” words in our newsletter. That’s lit, right?Mike: I’m still not calling you my bae.Farhad: O.K., on to this week’s tech news, which was pretty minimal actually — the January doldrums are upon us. A few small items: Anthony Foxx, the United States transportation secretary, announced an initiative to streamline rules for self-driving cars, a move that pleased many auto and tech companies that had been critical of the patchwork of state regulations around robot cars.And Grindr, the app for gay men to find fun nearby, sold a majority stake to a Chinese gaming company.Mike: What kind of fun? Like amusement parks? Skee-Ball?Farhad: Um, no. And there were some headlines about Apple: The Financial Times reported that Apple’s new streaming service, Apple Music, had acquired 10 million subscribers in its first six months. Spotify has at least twice as many paying users — and it has 75 million users total, counting its free tier — but Apple seems to be catching up. Also, BuzzFeed reported that Apple was altering its iAd business, a system for app makers to run ads in their apps, which had always been a tiny business for the company. Apple will no longer employ an ad sales staff for the system, Buzzfeed says — instead iAd will become an automated platform. The upshot: Apple is not an ad company, and it never will be.Also, the Nest thermostat, the epitome of Internet-connected home devices, suffered a major glitch recently that plunged people’s homes into the ice age. That is what you get for relying on robots, I say. That’s why I heat my house with garbage fires.Mike: You heat your house with your tweets?Farhad: Har-Har. Speaking of which, let’s talk about start-ups. Foursquare raised another $45 million, as you wrote. And shares of GoPro, the sports-camera company that went public in 2014, fell to an all-time low after the company  announced dismal holiday sales and layoffs of 7 percent of its staff.If you ask me, the start-up scene sounds so basic rn. But what do you think?Mike: Well, if by “basic” you mean boring, I disagree. But for a different reason than you might think.I feel that the theme of start-ups of this era is the evisceration of old industries, particularly in the logistics and service economies, aided by new technologies. Uber is perhaps the seminal harbinger of that change; take one well-entrenched industry (taxi and livery service) with a corner on the market and no need for innovation. Add one start-up with a clever, convenient approach and a willingness to flout laws. Pour millions of dollars on idea. Repeat.So while things like food delivery or on-demand office cleaning or whatever are certainly not as world-changing and attractive as robot monkey butlers, it is pretty much par for what Silicon Valley stands for: the destruction of the old in the name of efficiency and expediency.Farhad: Wait, wait, wait. Are you saying that not only is someone working on robot monkey butlers but that they will be attractive robot monkey butlers? Take my money!Mike: I’m being serious! These new start-ups come with a whole bunch of other problems. Who are we serving? Who gets hurt? And who are the real winners? These are the questions I am constantly asking myself and others. And those questions certainly deserve to be asked instead of waved off in the name of some nebulous idea of progress.And that, my basic friend, is what is interesting to me: those being marginalized while the death and rebirth of new industries are widely celebrated by a handful of people in a small enclave of California. (I also like the technologies themselves, some of the time, at least.)But I am curious as to what would not bore you right now. What sort of start-ups are you looking for? What more do you want than on-demand booze and cookies?Farhad: Oh, I think you have the wrong idea. I did not mean that the start-ups themselves were boring. I actually agree that these logistics companies could in fact be pretty world-changing.What I do think is pretty basic right now is the start-up financing scene. A year ago, the market looked crazy. Venture capitalists were funding anything that moved, and unicorns were everywhere. Then, in the fall, a gloom fell over the market, and it seemed we were headed for some kind of bust.Now, though, something different is happening — things have slowed down, and everyone seems kind of O.K. with it. Foursquare’s effort was a “down round,” meaning its new valuation is lower than its old one. On Friday, Jawbone, the fitness-device start-up, said it had raised $165 million in an investing round that valued the company lower than investors thought it was worth in 2014. These are probably the first of many down rounds we will see. But its investors say Foursquare’s business is thriving. It has set its sights lower than in its high-flying early days, but the new vision is more realistic and plausible. It all sounds so … sensible. It’s neither a bubble nor a bust; it feels like business as usual. Or, as the angel investor Jason Calacanis said in a blog post this week, the bubble has been successfully “deflated.”This new reality sounds good for the start-up environment. But for those of us covering it, a “controlled deflation” does not make for a juicy story. It is not one that will make you go, yassss!Mike: I really hope my midlife crisis does not come in the form of testing a faddish horrible vernacular. I would prefer hair plugs and a Ferrari.Anyway, I think you discount the fiscal irresponsibility of many 20-somethings given millions of dollars. Sometimes venture capitalists pray they are funding the next Facebook, and end up getting a Clinkle.That is to say, there will certainly be spectacular flameouts to come. And they will not be lit, as it were. Ugh, why did I say that?Farhad: It’s because you’re thirsty, my friend. You’re just so thirsty. See you later.Advertisement