
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
JAN. 22, 2016
This interview with Amit Singh, president of Google for Work, was conducted and condensed by Adam BryantQ. What were your early influences?A. I grew up in India. My dad was in the armed forces, and at an early age I went to a boarding school in Delhi and learned most of my leadership lessons there. There were a lot of sports teams, and everyone belonged to one of five houses, as they were called.It’s quite an interesting experience at 12 years old. You learn sharing, and with boarding school food you were always starving. So you learn negotiation — one jam roll is worth 10 butters, for example. You really stayed together as a team because there’s a lot of rivalry with the other houses. It’s like Harry Potter.I also remember wanting to be on the basketball team, but I’d never played basketball before. And I wanted it desperately enough that I used to wake up a few hours before everybody else and just practice by myself. I did that for six months. Then I made the team and eventually became the captain. As a senior, I was the prefect, in charge of our house.AdvertisementWhen did you move to the United States?I did my undergrad at the Delhi College of Engineering, and then I did my master’s in industrial and management at Rensselaer Polytechnic in upstate New York. I didn’t know much about technology at that stage, but I got a job right after that with Oracle.And what were some early leadership lessons for you?I learned the hard way about the importance of coaching people rather than jumping in and doing the work for them. A lot of folks have a tough time with that balance, and I did, too. Instead of giving people advice or coaching them on how to present something, I would go and do it for them or write their presentation.Over the years, I have tried to find the balance of when to jump in and when to coach. I’ve also learned how to coach. A lot of folks wait until a formal review, and I’ve always felt that the best coaching is in the moment and actionable.It’s about trying to make somebody better versus criticizing someone for doing something. Done right, people love it, because you’re really invested in their success. The flip side is that if you just say what’s wrong, then people feel terrible.Other lessons?Whatever amount of time you’re spending communicating, it’s never enough. I realized that so much gets lost in translation in emails. You have to spend time communicating your point of view and establishing a vision for the team and how you’re going to get there. It’s superimportant.AdvertisementI think people are looking for inspiration. Work needs to have meaning, and they want to feel like they’re part of something bigger. To do that well, you have to be thoughtful, and you have to communicate effectively.Another lesson is that as big as the organization might be, it doesn’t always take that much to reach out and connect with people. We have a very flat structure at Google, and it’s pretty open. Anybody can come into my office and say, “Hey, I want to have a cup of coffee with you.” I remember being so motivated by a leader who always felt so accessible even though he spent all of five minutes with me.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I’ve also learned over time that you can’t do too many things well. And so you narrow the focus down to the things that truly matter, which forces you to prioritize ruthlessly. Sometimes you just have to say that you’re not going to that meeting. That takes some self-confidence and discipline.How do you hire? What qualities are you looking for?Are they open, do you like them, does their style mesh with yours and the rest of the team? Do they care about things beyond just their own success? Those are things that are hard to test for. You have to spend time with people to get to know them.I typically do a lot of reference checks. It’s amazing what you’ll find if you just are persistent and ask the right questions. And hiring for a specific role because they just did that role elsewhere is a good starting point, but I look at candidates much more broadly.Can this person stretch? Can we make a judgment that this person can learn new things, and it doesn’t have to be business-related. They could be passionate about something completely different. You have to put them at ease to get them to talk about those interests.We also have a broad set of interviewers — we have a minimum of four at Google — that gives you diverse points of view and then you connect to see if this is the right person. Diversity of thought is actually the most invaluable thing in a business community. If we’re always agreeing with each other, then we haven’t gone down paths of debate that allow new ideas to emerge.Some of the best discussions are passionate but respectful, so that you leave a meeting without feeling like you’ve lost something, even though your point of view may not have been the one that was adopted. That is what fosters innovation in a company — a clash of ideas, but a respectful clash.The balance is how to get it right, and the people you introduce into that mix and the culture you create around debate are the two variables.What advice do you give new college grads?They grow up learning a few things about how to approach problems. The piece that they possibly miss is that, once you’re in the real world, it’s all about other people. Giving is more important than your point of view.AdvertisementAnd learning how to get along and work together, work in a team, is the difference between frontline managers and leaders. Leaders find a way to work together. They find a solution. There’s always a way, and you’ve got to find what that way is.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2016, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Fostering a Respectful Clash of Ideas.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »