By MIKE ISAACJAN. 24, 2016
Jack Dorsey began his tenure last year as Twitter’s chief executive with layoffs and a string of new personnel appointments. It turned out those moves were just a prelude.The social networking company is in the midst of a major overhaul of its top ranks in the next few weeks, from its eight-member board to key executives in engineering and product, according to people familiar with Twitter’s plans, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the details were private. Mr. Dorsey confirmed some of the changes late Sunday night in a tweet.The shake-up is taking place as Mr. Dorsey, 39, attempts to reshape Twitter. The social networking service, used by presidential candidates such as Donald J. Trump and sports stars like the basketball player Stephen Curry, has failed to attract droves of new users. That has investors questioning how useful the service is for people and whether it will become a mainstream hit on the scale of Facebook or Instagram. Shares of Twitter have plunged nearly 55 percent in the last year.Mr. Dorsey has been pointed in his critique of Twitter’s problems and what needs to be done to solve the issues. “A greater clarity of our purpose, our objectives and putting the people that use Twitter first drives the urgency we now feel,” he said last year. “You should expect Twitter to be as easy as looking out your window to see what’s happening.”AdvertisementTo grapple with Twitter’s problems, Mr. Dorsey is turning to a bigger slate of directors. The San Francisco-based company plans to announce the appointment of two new board members soon, said the people familiar with the plans. While the names of the new directors could not be learned, one of them was a high-profile media personality, the people said. Twitter also plans to appoint a new chief marketing officer, they said.AdvertisementThe additions are to be accompanied by several departures of Twitter executives. At least one executive was asked to leave, according to people familiar with the matter, while others are departing of their own volition.Late Sunday, Mr. Dorsey announced the exits of Alex Roetter, Twitter’s senior vice president of engineering; Kevin Weil, senior vice president of product; Katie Jacobs Stanton, vice president of global media; and Brian “Skip” Schipper, vice president of human resources.“All four of them will be taking some well-deserved time off,” said Mr. Dorsey, who added that all of the departures were voluntary.Jason Toff, general manager at Vine, the social video app that Twitter acquired in 2012, also announced his plans to rejoin Google to work on virtual reality projects on Sunday evening.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A Twitter spokesman declined to comment further. Recode earlier reported on the departures. Mr. Roetter, Mr. Weil, Ms. Stanton and Mr. Toff confirmed they were leaving Twitter with tweets.The changes are reminiscent of the revolving door of executives that took place under previous Twitter chief executives. Under Dick Costolo, who was the C.E.O. before stepping down last year, the company also experienced numerous changes, including in the roles of head of engineering and chief financial officer.Mr. Dorsey, who was named Twitter’s permanent C.E.O. in October, has not been shy about making personnel changes since taking over from Mr. Costolo. Gabriel Stricker, the company’s chief communications officer, left not long after Mr. Dorsey returned. In October, Mr. Dorsey announced layoffs of as many as 336 employees, or 8 percent of the work force.More recently, the company appointed Jeffrey Siminoff, a former Apple director, as vice president of diversity and inclusion, and also promoted Jeff Seibert, who works closely with Mr. Dorsey, to lead consumer product.AdvertisementTwitter’s board has also seen some changes. Mr. Costolo left the board last year after resigning from the company. In October, Twitter appointed Omid Kordestani, Google’s former chief business officer, as executive chairman. Mr. Dorsey has said he would seek additional outside candidates for the board, which has been criticized as insular and dominated by company insiders.More broadly, Mr. Dorsey has made clear his intention to make Twitter more accessible to mainstream users and has said that no feature of the social networking service was sacred. Twitter has experimented with tweaking its reverse chronological timeline, for example, as well as longer tweets.If the company meets expectations, Mr. Dorsey has said, “Twitter will become the first thing everyone in the world checks to start their day and the first thing people turn to when they want to share ideas, commentary or simply what’s happening.”A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Twitter’s Revolving Door Takes Another Spin.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.