
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 25, 2016
Q. I need to upgrade my Mac laptop, but I see none of the new models comes with CD drives anymore. How do I move my iTunes library and photos to a new computer, and is there a way to still burn music discs for the car?A. Apple’s OS X software includes a program called Migration Assistant to transfer user accounts, files and settings from one Mac to another. To use the program, you need a way to connect the two computers. You can link them over the same wireless network or over a wired Ethernet network. Since most new Mac laptops do not include Ethernet ports these days, you can either invest in an adapter that converts a USB port (or one of the newer Thunderbolt ports on some Mac laptops) to an Ethernet port; MacBook models with the single USB-C port may need a USB-C to USB adapter as well.If your Macs have ports in common, like Thunderbolt, you can hook them together with the appropriate cable. And, as another data-transfer method, if you use Apple’s Time Machine backup software with an external drive, you can use it to move your files from the old Mac to the new one.Once you get your iTunes library and the rest of your files moved to the new Mac laptop, you need to find a compatible external CD/DVD drive to connect to it so you can resume burning music playlists to disc. Apple recommends its own USB SuperDrive for use with iTunes and many of its Mac models, but it admits that some third-party drives also work. Third-party CD/DVD drives, like those from LG Electronics and Samsung, are often less expensive, but check the hardware specifications to make sure the drive is compatible with your new laptop and Apple’s current OS X 10.11 operating system.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »