AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I was going to try Cortana, Microsoft’s version of Siri, but to use it, you have to allow Microsoft access to your location, your contacts, voice input, information from email and text messages, browser history, search history, calendar details “and other information.” Naturally, I declined. Why does Microsoft need so much personal information and what does Microsoft do with it?A. Personal assistant programs like Cortana and Apple’s Siri are meant to make your life easier by responding to voice commands for sending messages to specific people, locating nearby businesses, adding appointments to your calendar and similar tasks. But to perform those actions, the software needs information from you — like your contacts list for addressing those messages, your location for finding businesses currently near you, or access to your calendar so it can add events.When you use voice commands with an assistant program (including Siri and Google’s search app), your audio data may also be sent to the company’s servers to process the request and improve speech recognition. Your browsing and search histories are probably collected, too. Companies often claim this is to provide more relevant results, but the data may also be used to help send more targeted advertisements your way.The Privacy Statement page on Microsoft’s site goes into greater detail about use of the personal information the company collects from you on behalf of Cortana (and its other services like Bing and Outlook.com). Microsoft’s “Cortana, Search and privacy: FAQ” page explains how to keep a tighter grip on your privacy, even if you do use Cortana in a limited fashion on a Windows Phone or Windows 10 device.Microsoft is not the only company posting privacy statements and gathering more information than you may suspect. If you use Siri or Google Now, both Apple and Google have lengthy declarations posted on their respective sites that explain what they intend to do with your data, as do sites like Facebook and Twitter.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement