
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 28, 2016
Q. I installed a virtual private network program on my iPhone to use for protection when public Wi-Fi was the only connection option around, but now I can’t turn it off. In the iPhone’s connection settings, I keep flipping the VPN button to Off, but it turns itself back on. What do I do?A. Virtual private network apps (like Cloak, TunnelBear and VyprVPN) create a secure, encrypted connection over public wireless networks. They do this so you can surf with less worry about someone with malicious intent intercepting your data; some apps can also hide your phone’s physical location and make it appear as if you are in a different country. As a protective measure, your VPN app may be set to start up and connect automatically each time you use the Internet.If you open the iPhone’s Settings icon and find that the VPN button near the options for Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and Cellular stubbornly refuses to switch off, scroll down a bit and tap General. On the General settings screen, flick your way down until you get to the VPN setting. Select it to go to the next screen, which should contain the settings for the personal VPN app you are using. Tap the app name or “i” icon to see information about the app. If you see a Connect on Demand or other button indicating that the app will connect automatically, turn off the setting there.Depending on the VPN app you are using, you may also find configuration controls and settings within the app itself, and its developer’s site should have support information. When the VPN has been successfully disabled, the small VPN icon at the top of the iPhone’s status bar should not be visible when you are using a network connection.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »