By PRADNYA JOSHIFEB. 2, 2016
Ups and downs are nothing new in the fast-moving technology industry. And as soon as a company hits turbulence, calls for a management shake-up almost always follow.Yahoo has been through this cycle several times. Marissa Mayer, its current chief executive, became the company’s seventh leader in less than five years when she took over in 2012. Her hiring initially brought new energy and helped Yahoo’s stock regain some respect. But now she faces increasingly stiff headwinds herself, and is coping with low morale and a brain drain. On Tuesday she announced some plans to simplify and cut costs, including layoffs, and said the company would explore the possibility of selling some of its assets.Twitter, another struggling company, is also shaking up its leadership. It brought back a founder, Jack Dorsey, as chief executive last summer and he is now shaping a major overhaul of its executive ranks.History suggests that changing course can have big results. But not every company has needed to shake up its ranks to regain its footing. And even those that did bring in new management have found themselves under attack again:In the late 1990s, Priceline seemed to have the golden touch. On its first day of trading in 1999, its market value hit $12.9 billion. At the time, it was the highest first day valuation of any company that had gone public.AdvertisementIt soon tried to branch out, applying its “name your own price” concept to a wide variety of products, from groceries to home mortgages. But this experiment ended as quickly as it had begun, as financing dried up. By the end of 2000, its founder, Jay Walker, left the company and the board to focus on another venture.The company’s stock plummeted. At one point, the company was worth less than $250 million.But then, the company’s fortunes slowly turned. The Hong Kong billionaire Li Ka-shing increased his stake in the company in June 2001. A month earlier, the company had shuffled its executive ranks, and named Jeffery Boyd as president and later, chief executive. Mr. Boyd focused the company more on hotel bookings and expanded in Europe.AdvertisementOver the years, Priceline acquired competitors including Booking.com, Kayak and OpenTable, becoming dominant in the online travel segment. By 2010, it surpassed Expedia in online hotel reservations. It now has a market value of $53 billion.Keeping competition at bay is critical for any technology company, said David Hsu, a professor of management at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. “If you’ve discovered a valuable space, there’s a lot of companies, new entrants,” he said.Amazon was a pioneer in web retailing, beginning with online book sales in 1995. In 1999, Time magazine anointed the founder, Jeff Bezos, its Person of the Year. But the company had not recorded a profit in its early years, causing some analysts and investors to question whether it was any different than all the other dot-coms that failed by 2001.Mr. Bezos does not hold final control over Amazon as some other prominent tech founders do, like Mark Zuckerberg, who owns the majority of the controlling shares of Facebook. Yet stockholders stuck by Mr. Bezos and his strategy, and in the final quarter of 2001, the company reported a healthy profit. Its first full-year profit would have to wait until 2003, about six years after it went public.“At Amazon, they were ruthlessly committed to the customer experience,” said Nick Donatiello, a lecturer at the Stanford Graduate School of Business. “And that is still their strategy.”Profit remains somewhat elusive for the company, but much of its absence was intentional, with the company investing in growth. By 2006, for example, Amazon was branching out into serving businesses for storage, databases and other infrastructure with Amazon Web Services. Though it took years, Amazon’s retail investments have begun to pay off, as Farhad Manjoo wrote recently.AdvertisementThrough it all, Mr. Bezos consistently relayed his growth plan to investors.That’s unlike some tech companies like Yahoo and Twitter, Professor Hsu of Wharton said. “There’s no clear communication either by way of their actions or their words as to how they are going stay relevant.”“Of course, it is unlikely Bezos could have anticipated how the various initiatives would turn out,” he added. “He therefore had some sense of the necessary pacing of new business introductions to widen the touch points Amazon would need to ultimately win.”As chief of eBay, Meg Whitman was credited with bringing the fledgling company into the modern era. But when she stepped down after nearly 10 years at the helm, growth had stalled. The online auction site, like Amazon a darling of the dot-com boom, was suddenly stagnant. A year later, it named as its chief John Donahoe, the president of eBay’s marketplaces division, whom Ms. Whitman had recruited from the consulting firm Bain & Company.Under Mr. Donahoe’s tenure, eBay did not abandon its core business of online auctions. But it increasingly moved into mobile and its PayPal online payments subsidiary. It also began offering merchants valuable e-commerce tools. Among its big purchases was the 2011 acquisition of GSI Commerce, which helps manage the websites and online marketing campaigns for retailers including Toy “R” Us and Kenneth Cole. It also sold the voice and video service Skype, a company that was successful but did not exactly fit into the e-commerce model. (Criticism came later that Skype had been sold too cheaply.)“It took a change in management to clean up some prior misdirection and set a new strategy,” said Robert Peck, an analyst with SunTrust Robinson Humphrey. “To make these changes, the company needed to ‘reset expectations’ and take the short-term hit from Wall Street as it invested for the long-term gain.”The success did not last. In 2014, Carl C. Icahn, the activist investor, attacked the eBay’s management but eventually settled his boardroom battle. A few months later, Mr. Donahoe and the board said they had reached the same conclusion that Mr. Icahn had: EBay should be split in two, spinning off PayPal into a separate company. Mr. Donahoe left his job as chief executive, though was named chairman of PayPal after the split.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.