
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 4, 2016
Q. The Windows 10 upgrade is a free download for Windows 7 and Windows 8.1 machines, but it doesn’t seem to have its own serial number and obviously didn’t come with an installation DVD. What happens if I need to reformat my hard drive and reinstall the operating system? How do I reactivate Windows?A. Depending on how you upgraded to Windows 10 and the version you were previously using, you may not need a product key (serial number) to activate Windows 10 again after a clean installation. Microsoft notes that product keys for many versions of Windows 7, Windows 8 and Windows 8.1 can be used now, starting with Windows 10, version 1511, which was released as a system update last November. The product keys for Enterprise editions of those older Windows versions, as well as those from volume licenses or counterfeit copies of Windows, will not work, though.When Windows 10 was first released as an upgrade for Windows 7 or Windows 8.1 users, Microsoft was activating the new software with what it called a “digital entitlement” that took the place of a product key. As long as the computer is running a fully upgraded and legitimate version of Windows 10 that was activated without errors, the digital entitlement should allow you to reinstall the system on the PC as needed. (However, the company says that if you have made major changes to the computer’s hardware, like swapping in a new motherboard, you may have to call Microsoft Customer Support to reactivate Windows 10.)Before you reinstall Windows 10, make sure the system has indeed been activated by going to the Start menu to Settings, then to Update & Security and on to Activation. Later, if you are asked for a product key during the reinstallation (and did not use the number from an older version of Windows to originally activate the software), click the Skip button; Windows 10 should automatically activate itself after it finishes installing.If you have to fully reinstall Windows 10, you can do so in several ways, including from a previously created recovery drive or from Windows 10 installation software on a DVD or USB drive. The Microsoft Software Download page on the company’s site has the software and tools you need to create a bootable Windows 10 DVD or make your own USB recovery drive, as well as a frequently asked questions page that may have some useful answers.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »