AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. How can I transfer files from a 10-year-old Dell PC to a MacBook Pro?A. Crossing platforms from a Windows machine to a Mac can be as simple as copying folders and files from the PC onto an external USB drive, and then connecting the drive to the Mac and copying the files there. OS X can easily handle most common formats, like .jpg photos, .mp3 music files, text documents and browser bookmarks. You may need to invest in the Mac equivalents of certain programs, like Microsoft Office, if you want to use Office files in familiar surroundings, but you can also find inexpensive or free equivalents like Office Online, Google Docs or Apple’s iWork for iCloud to work with the documents.Moving files between the two computers over a network connection is another approach. You can set up the Windows PC to share files with the MacBook over a network connection or connect the two computers to copy files.Manually relocating your files can be tedious, and you may have to do a lot of digging around on the PC to find everything you want to transfer, but Apple has a free piece of software that may simplify the moving process.The Windows Migration Assistant tool, available to download from Apple’s site, works with PCs running Windows XP and later. When the PC and the Mac are connected to each other on the same network (or linked directly to each other with an Ethernet cable), the Windows Migration Assistant can transfer email accounts, browser bookmarks, contacts, calendars, certain system settings, photos, videos, iTunes content and other files from the home directory on the PC — and put everything in the right place on the Mac. Apple’s support site has an online guide to moving your files and settings on the PC to the Mac and instructions for using the Windows Migration Assistant.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement