AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. How do these free online broadband speed tests work, and are they an accurate measurement of my laptop’s Internet connection?A. Ookla Speedtest.net, one of the more popular online tests, has a page on its site that explains in full technical detail how it arrives at its results. In simple terms, Speedtest.net measures the time it takes for your computer to exchange brief messages with the testing server, as well as how long it takes for your computer to download and upload a small amount of data. Other speed-testing sites like MegaPath SpeakEasy Speed Test and Bandwidth Place very likely use similar methods.While the tests are intended to give a general idea of your computer’s connection speed, a number of factors can affect results. Depending on your broadband service, you may see slower speeds at certain times of the day, like in peak Internet use hours during the workday, or in the evenings, when video-streaming is a popular activity. Try to test your connection at various times.Your physical distance from the testing server, your hardware and any other activity on your home network (like online gaming or large file downloads) during the test can also hamper your speed score. To rule out a slow wireless network, some sites recommend conducting the test over a wired Ethernet connection to your network router.If you want to test the connection speed of any mobile devices you may have, you can find speed test apps in your app store. The Federal Communications Commission has its own apps for iOS and Android that measure connection speeds in detail, and the agency uses the data anonymously to help evaluate the national broadband system.But the F.C.C. is not the only government entity looking into the state of high-speed Internet access. In December, Eric T. Schneiderman, the attorney general of New York, invited New Yorkers to test their home broadband speeds at InternetHealthTest.org and share the results with his office as part of an investigation into the accuracy of advertising claims made by broadband service providers.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement