
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 10, 2016
Q. When I’m sending a Gmail message in my web browser, I’ve noticed that the email addresses for certain people have completely wrong, outdated or unrelated names connected to them. How can I correct this?A. You can edit the information for people in your Gmail address book in the Contacts list. To get there, log into your account and in the upper-left corner, click on the word “Gmail” (or “Mail,” if you have a corporate account) and select Contacts from the menu.If you are using the older version of the Contact Manager, your address book appears as a list of names and email addresses. Click a contact to open the entry and make your changes to the information on the card. When you are finished editing the contact, click the Save Now button at the top of the screen.If you have switched to the new version of the address book that Google calls Contacts Preview, select the entry you want to change and click the gray pencil icon on the right side of the screen; you can also open the entry first and then click the pencil icon in the upper-right corner of the contact card to edit the information. Click the Save button when you are done.While you are in the Contacts area, you can clean up your address list further by deleting old entries. When you have a contact open, click the More menu (usually represented by three dots) and choose the Delete option. You can also remove multiple contacts at once by clicking the boxes next to each name and then using the Delete command in the More menu, or by clicking the trash icon in the Contacts Preview toolbar.If you discover later that you have accidentally deleted an address you meant to keep, Google lets you restore your contacts list to a previous version, as long as you do so within 30 days of deleting them. Just go to the More menu at the top of the old Contacts Manager screen (or on the left side of the Contacts Preview), and choose Restore Contacts.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »