
Bits By                     
 JIM KERSTETTER
 
FEB. 11, 2016
Twitter’s earnings on Wednesday were by no means a surprise. The company’s revenues were still going up over the last three months of 2015, but the number of people who use it stopped growing.Now you may ask: Why does it matter that user growth has stalled, when revenue is still going up? To answer that question, let’s use the neighborhood deli metaphor.Consider an ad on Twitter — that’s how the company makes money, after all, — to be a tasty pastrami sandwich. Now imagine everyone within five blocks of your deli loves your pastrami sandwiches.But it is impossible to sell sandwiches outside of that five-block neighborhood. At some point, you’re going to run out of customers. Even worse, they’ll probably get tired of your pastrami and start eating something else.AdvertisementThat’s what happens when Twitter stops growing. If its users are limited — like the deli’s neighborhood — the number of ads it can sell is capped. And once it hits that cap, there is nowhere to go but down.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Twitter executives can console themselves with one thing: Silicon Valley bigwigs are still using it to embarrass themselves. On Tuesday, the venture capitalist and Facebook board member Marc Andreessen took to Twitter (as he often does) to express his frustration with regulators in India who blocked a free Facebook Internet service. Along the way, he appeared to mount a defense of the economics of British colonial rule.AdvertisementThis, not surprisingly, did not go over well in India. By Wednesday morning, Mr. Andreessen, not known as the apologizing sort, posted a round of mea culpa tweets and promised to leave discussions about colonialism to people who know something about it. He apologized again in the afternoon.Also on Wednesday afternoon, Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, took to his social media service to both criticize and distance his company from Mr. Andreessen’s comment.So Twitter may be slowing down, but you can’t say it isn’t still interesting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »