
FEB. 13, 2016

Related Article
AT&T, once known informally as Ma Bell, is a storied American brand that goes back under a succession of names to the late 19th century, after Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone.Alexander Graham Bell invents the telephone in Boston. The first words were to his assistant: “Mr. Watson, come here. I want you.” A year later, the Bell Telephone Company is formed.  The American Telephone and Telegraph Company is created as a subsidiary of Bell Telephone to build and operate a long-distance telephone network. Its first line, between New York and Philadelphia, has a capacity of one call. The original patents on the telephone expire. Over the next decade, 6,000 phone companies begin operating in local areas around the country. In 1899, American Telephone becomes the holding company of the Bell system.American Telephone settles an antitrust lawsuit. It becomes a government-approved monopoly, but agrees to allow independent phone companies to connect to its long-distance network.Nearly 40 years after their first call, Dr. Bell and Thomas Watson talked by a 3,400-mile transcontinental telephone line between New York and San Francisco.American Telephone is added to the Dow Jones industrial average. In time, it becomes the most widely held stock because it is so safe.The first rotary-dial telephones are installed in Norfolk, Va. The last phones requiring operator assistance (“one ringy-dingy, two ringy-dingy”) are phased out in 1978. For a long stretch of the 20th century, Bell Labs is the most innovative scientific organization in the world. Its most notable invention is the transistor, invented in 1947, which is the building block of all digital products. “Hello, London,” said the president of AT&T in New York, heralding the opening of transatlantic phone service using radio signals. The phone travels over 850 miles of land and 6,300 miles of ocean and is occasionally interrupted by static.“AT&T, this is Rose, how may I help you?,” said one of the thousands of female operators who would plug calls into a manual “cord board.” The first operators were teenage boys who had worked on telegraphs, said George Kupczak, an AT&T historian. Men were quickly replaced and did not return until the early 1970s when federal law required equal opportunity. A call is made from a car driving through Central Park to the offices of Link Radio on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. Direct long-distance dialing service, without the aid of an operator, becomes available. The first transatlantic telephone cable conversations are distinct and even, in contrast to the fading often experienced on radio telephones. The system of twin cables across the floor of the Atlantic can carry 36 voice messages at one time, three times the capacity of radio telephone to Europe. Ten years after the government filed an antitrust lawsuit, and two years after a settlement was reached, American Telephone is broken up, retaining its long-distance and equipment manufacturing businesses.Signaling a determination to move beyond telecommunications, AT&T buys a computer maker. Three years later, it buys a cellular company and begins an race to build a national wireless network. Following Congress’s 1996 deregulation of the telecommunications industry, AT&T acquires the nation’s No. 2 cable television company.AT&T pulls back from an effort to become the first one-stop shop selling long-distance, wireless, cable television and Internet services. It announces that instead it will break itself into four parts.SBC, the second-largest regional phone company, buys AT&T. Formerly known as Southwestern Bell, it was one of AT&T’s oldest affiliates. AT&T was undone by cheaper Internet technology, growth in a cellphone industry where it has no role and regulatory changes that squeezed it out of the local phone market. “For SBC, this is a really dumb idea,” one analyst said.After scrapping its takeover of T-Mobile USA, AT&T agrees to buy the satellite television operator DirecTV. The deal is an attempt to tilt the balance of power with media companies as the market for broadband Internet and video shifts.The telecommunications giant agreed to buy Time Warnerto buy Time Warner, the home of HBO and CNN, for about $85.4 billion, creating a new colossus capable of both producing content and distributing it to millions with wireless phones, broadband subscriptions and satellite TV connections.Advertisement