AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Do credit card companies send customers text messages about their accounts, or is this yet another hacking scheme?A. Your credit card company can send text messages to your mobile device regarding account matters — as long as you have signed up to receive the messages from your issuing financial institution or bank. American Express, Bank of America, Chase, Citibank, Discover, USAA and Wells Fargo are among the many companies that offer mobile alerts about account activity. The service is typically free, but you may have to pay text-messaging charges from your wireless carrier.If you have not specifically signed up for text alerts, any messages sent to your phone concerning “deactivated,” “blocked” or “locked” accounts and asking you to call a supplied telephone number are most certainly frauds. (Poor spelling and messages claiming to be from banks you do not use are further indicators of fraudulent intentions.) Do not call the number or attempt to block future messages by replying “STOP” — which just confirms you got the message. As the Federal Communications Commission advises, most wireless providers allow you to forward the unwanted message to 7726 (SPAM) to block the sender.You can always call the customer service number listed in the back of your credit card if you are concerned about your account. Signing up to receive account alerts is a good way to keep on top of your account activity — especially if one of your card numbers has been stolen and used to make large unauthorized purchases.The early months of the year tend to bring an increase in fraudulent activity by text, telephone and email, especially by swindlers claiming to be from the Internal Revenue Service. Some calls (which can use Caller ID spoofing) may sound quite authentic while demanding money for back taxes, but the Internal Revenue Service does not call to demand immediate payment unless it has previously contacted you through postal mail about outstanding taxes.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement