
Tech Tip  
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 18, 2016
Q. Do they still make USB television tuners for Mac? I can’t seem to find any that work in this country. What are other options for cord-cutters and people without TVs to watch live television on a Mac?A. Mac-friendly television tuners on USB sticks have become hard to find, especially since Elgato, one of the major manufacturers, stopped selling the devices in North America last year. Elgato also discontinued its EyeTV Lite software for the tuners and does not support it on the current version of Mac OS X. (For Mac owners who bought Elgato EyeTV tuner hardware before the company abandoned the continent, Elgato does offer a $30 upgrade to its EyeTV 3 software for recording and managing television shows on the computer.)If you hunt around online long enough, you may be able to find some of Elgato’s discontinued USB tuners for Mac (as well as the also defunct PCTV for Mac HD Mini Stick or the AVerTV Hybrid Volar M) on reseller sites or eBay. Be warned that the markup on outdated models from some resellers is exorbitant, especially when the tuners originally cost around $150 or less. As some TV tuner devices are designed to work with international broadcast television standards, make sure any device you are considering can receive the A.T.S.C. or Clear Q.A.M. digital signals used in North America.If you cannot find a discontinued or used Mac-compatible USB TV tuner, you have other options for watching live TV on your computer. For instance, Hauppauge, which makes a number of TV tuner add-ons for Windows and Microsoft’s Xbox One game console, sells the Broadway box — a $150 gadget that connects to a digital TV antenna and your home network to pull in over-the-air broadcasts that can be watched on the Mac. (The Broadway’s user guide is online for those who want to know what to expect in terms of setup and configuration.)Websites that collect live streams from television stations worldwide (like FilmOn, Streema and wwiTV.com) can be another source of content, and the apps and sites for local channels may also have live streams available. SlingTV, a $20-a-month package of live TV channels, has an app for the Mac and is yet another way to watch real-time broadcasts on your computer.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »