AdvertisementSupported byApp SmartBy Kit EatonEveryone loves a bit of celebrity-watching, and the Oscars give us plenty of excuses to do so. One great way to keep on top of all the gossip is through an app, and there are plenty of them out there catering to our curiosity about the Academy Awards and the entertainment industry.Among all the apps promising to deliver celebrity news, the WhoSay app stands out for one interesting reason: Its material is supplied by the celebrities themselves. The makers of WhoSay promise that more than 1,600 well-known names use the app to share photos, videos and news with their fans.The app’s home page is an image-heavy, scrollable feed that contains updates from its famous users, along with other content like galleries and Q. and A. sessions. You can scroll through collected news on the home page, view only trending stories, explore the app’s content by categories like “film” and “rising stars” or just search for news on a particular celebrity.Tapping on an article lets you read it in more detail, and see more photos or videos.In some ways, WhoSay is like a regular news app that’s celebrity-centric, but it has celebrity input, and feels very lighthearted and fun. Unlike other apps in this category, it doesn’t take itself too seriously, or go over the top with celebrity obsessions. And while there are already Oscar-related articles in the app, it is also great for keeping up with news on fashion models, sports stars and other famous people. It is free on both iOS and Android.FirstLook Celebrity Photos and Videos is another useful celebrity news app. With its many sources and up-to-the-minute updates, the app is supposed to give you the feeling that you’re among the first to see relevant articles, photos and videos from big events like the Oscars.Because of its clean interface — with emphasis on plenty of white space and photos — this app feels more like a digital magazine than a website, and its scrolling design makes it easy to scan through the news and spot interesting items.The app has a clever way to connect you to news about particular celebrities. A photo containing Ariana Grande and Tony Bennett, for example, is accompanied by a button that lets you follow each celebrity in your news feed, to get future content.Clicking on the app’s “Explore” tab is the trick for seeing event-specific news. Right now this shows lots of Grammy information and photos from New York Fashion Week. Soon, this is where you’ll find many Oscar-related items. FirstLook also has a social media component, where you can collect “followers” of your own who want to see what you have “favorited” in the news feeds.FirstLook is fun to use, though scrolling through the news pages can be a bit slow. Videos play automatically, which can make surprisingly loud soundtracks burst from your phone’s speakers. FirstLook is free on iOS, but it isn’t available on Android.For a more traditional celebrity news app, check out E! Online, which is free for iOS and Android devices. It has been popular for a while, and its design reflects the same professional look and feel that E!’s TV channel has.The app has content covering general entertainment news, photos from events and live feeds that are useful when it is awards time.The app is free, but this means it sometimes feels like a big advertisement for associated E! shows. The news articles are written in a style that has all the hallmarks of typical celebrity news coverage, including an overdose of exclamation points. Of course E! does live event coverage rather well, so if you can deal with the few downsides to this app, like slow load times, it is worth trying out for Oscars night.Finally, the venerable Internet Movie Database has a fabulous app that will be invaluable during the Oscars.IMDb Movies and TV has the same detailed movie information as the famous IMDb website, so you can amuse yourself by browsing through movie trivia or details about an actor’s life during the boring bits of the awards show.The IMDb app also has a good news service as part of its home page. This offers articles from different online sources in one convenient list. The articles tend to be more serious and readable than other entertainment apps. The articles are also clearly attributed, so it is easy to go to the source website to read longer articles.You can filter the app’s feed to see trending news, movie news and news about celebrities in general or to search for your particular interests. IMDb is fast, fascinating and easy to use. It is free on iOS and Android. And if you want to see any of the Oscar-winning films, the app can help with that, too.Animated GIF keyboards for iOS are two a penny, but the Walkie app is set apart by its pedigree: Its cute, dancing emoji characters are animated by former Pixar staff members. The emoji are delightful, and stand apart from rival GIFs. It is free on iOS.Advertisement