AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike IsaacStripe, the San Francisco-based e-commerce start-up, thrives when other businesses do well. So the company wants to help many more businesses get off the ground.That is the reason behind Stripe Atlas, a new product the company unveiled this week at the Mobile World Congress in Barcelona, Spain. It aims to make it easier for entrepreneurs to set up small businesses in the United States. If all goes according to Stripe’s plan, Atlas could let start-up founders sidestep some of the bureaucratic hurdles that often hamper building a new business.Determining eligibility requires little more than filling out a form. After that, Stripe will incorporate an entrepreneur’s company as a business entity in Delaware, and provide the entrepreneur with a United States bank account and Stripe merchant account to accept payments globally.The target audience is all of the entrepreneurs outside the United States who want access to the country’s well-developed banking infrastructure and business services. Stripe is particularly interested in attracting entrepreneurs from Africa, Latin America, the Middle East and parts of Asia, among other regions.“A majority of the growth over the next 10 years will come from these underserved markets,” Patrick Collison, co-founder and chief executive of Stripe, said in an interview last week. “That includes about 6.2 billion people we don’t reach yet, and that’s a huge missed opportunity if we didn’t try to do so.”Eligible entrepreneurs will also be offered access to basic tax and legal consulting and business services from partners like PricewaterhouseCoopers, and will receive free credit to run their online business on the Amazon Web Services hosting platform.Atlas is to begin on Wednesday in an invitation-only beta test; entrepreneurs can apply for the program through Stripe or one of the 50-plus start-up accelerator programs that the company has teamed up with globally. The beta program’s cost is $500.It seems like a fine deal for fledgling entrepreneurs, and considering the cumulative value of the services offered, it essentially is. It is also potentially lucrative for Stripe, which processes digital payments for small and medium-size online businesses. More businesses using Stripe means an increase in payments processed over all. Stripe takes a small percentage of each transaction processed.For Dana Khater, the 22-year-old founder of Coterique, a digital platform based in Cairo for little-known international designers who want to sell their clothing online, setting up Atlas will help solve a problem as seemingly simple as paying her stable of designers.“Right now, everything is very manually operated,” Ms. Khater said. “I need to go to the bank, withdraw money, then go to an exchange rate site, go back to the bank and set up the wire transfer. It’s a huge tax on my time and effort.”Ms. Khater will also be saved the cost of traveling to the United States — which often requires more than one trip — to set up the services herself.There has been a retrenching in doling out venture capital in Silicon Valley and other start-up hubs like New York, and for months, global markets have been in turmoil, causing some investors to become more risk-averse. That could affect the number of entrepreneurs willing to start a small business.What’s more, Stripe is potentially luring away entrepreneurs to incorporate themselves in the United States instead of, say, their home countries. That means fewer tax dollars for the nations these entrepreneurs reside in, which could irk local governments.Mr. Collison said the time horizon for Atlas is focused less on Day 1 than on Day 1,000.Stripe said Atlas would help entrepreneurs incorporate in countries outside the United States over time, but said there would still be a positive net effect on local economies in host countries if entrepreneurs incorporated in America succeed.“If you don’t have Atlas, the business may not get off the ground in the first place,” said Benjamin M. Lawsky, former superintendent of financial services for New York State, who now sits on the advisory board for Atlas. “Or the innovator will get up and move out of the country to where the advanced economy is — like in the U.S., for example.”Advertisement