By KATIE BENNERFEB. 26, 2016
CUPERTINO, Calif. — Even before Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, began his speech on Friday at the company’s annual shareholder meeting, he got a standing ovation.As Mr. Cook, 55, stood before the auditorium on Apple’s campus, the audience — made up mostly of investors in the company — rose from their seats and applauded him.“Where we stand in times of controversy is a measure of our character,” said the Rev. Jesse L. Jackson, an Apple shareholder who attended the meeting. “Some leaders only follow opinion polls. Others stand up for their principles, refuse to compromise, and mold opinion. We have such a leader of Apple, Tim Cook.”The meeting was a striking scene of support for Mr. Cook, who has led Apple into a battle against the United States government. The company is opposing a federal court order requiring it to help law enforcement officials break into an iPhone used by one of the attackers in last year’s mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif. Apple has said that the government is overstepping its bounds and that complying with the order could set a dangerous precedent, while law enforcement officials say the order is a one-time situation.Apple is “a staunch advocate for our customers’ privacy and personal safety,” Mr. Cook said at the meeting. “We do these things because they are the right things to do. Being hard doesn’t scare us.”AdvertisementTechnology’s largest companies are now also aligning themselves with Apple. Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Twitter and Yahoo have said they will file one or more briefs in California federal court next week in support of Apple. More could join.AdvertisementCindy Cohn, the executive director of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, who was also at the meeting, said she applauded Apple’s leadership in fighting for the security and privacy of customers. She said the foundation would file a brief supporting Apple’s refusal to comply with the court order.During the shareholder meeting, an energized Mr. Cook, dressed in his customary blue oxford shirt and jeans, also noted that Apple had released new versions of its mobile and desktop operating systems, which have the advanced security and encryption features that have frustrated the law enforcement agents who want access to data on Apple’s devices. He said 77 percent of all active devices were using these most advanced and secure operating systems.Other social issues were also raised at the meeting. Mr. Cook said a pay study at the company had found that women earned 99.6 cents for every $1 that men did and that underrepresented minorities earned 99.7 cents for every $1 that white employees earned in similar roles. Mr. Cook said the company was taking measures to erase the discrepancy.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Shareholder Support for Cook.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.