

      By LAURA MORTON

FEB. 28, 2016

Photographs and Text By LAURA MORTON Tales of enormous fortunes created by the technology industry brought a gold rush in recent years that has gripped San Francisco and the Silicon Valley. Many young dreamers – entrepreneurs, geniuses, idealists – flocked to the area with the hope of starting a successful start-up or striking it rich by joining the right company at the right time. The tech boom has contributed to growing income inequality in the area. And many of the young transplants profiled below are not among the area’s elite, at least not yet. They often live on the cheap while working on their companies, a process known as bootstrapping. They work long hours with hopes to build empires. And their lives are intertwined: They live with each other, network with one another in co-working spaces, compete with everyone and party together. Over the last few months, the headlines have changed, amid gyrating tech stocks and questions over the broader economy. For every success story, there will be many more failures. Yet most of these dreamers believe that the industry remains a true meritocracy: that those who deserve to succeed will do so.  Three entrepreneurs, Noah Levenson, Nick Cole and Oliver Page, seen from left to right, mingled at an industry networking event at the W Hotel in San Francisco in August 2014. The event — the Start-Up and Tech Mixer — is held every few months and typically draws hundreds of attendees. Many entrepreneurs have said they need to be in the area precisely for these types of events, so that networking opportunities can eventually help them to raise funds and build their companies.Sandy Frank, Mackenzie Hughes and Danielle Gaglioti, seen left to right, working in 2014 on a start-up called Akimbo inside the apartment that Ms. Hughes and Ms. Gaglioti were subletting in San Francisco. The company, described as a “career development platform,” is based in New York, but Ms. Hughes and Ms. Gaglioti were in town for the summer to participate in Tumml, an urban ventures accelerator program. Ms. Frank joined them as an intern. They often worked from home depending on their meeting schedule and available transportation options. Adrien Thibodaux, Lyrod Levy and Adrien Chometon, seen from left to right, taking a smoking break in the backyard of a fraternity house where Mr. Levy and another co-founder were sleeping that evening in Berkeley, Calif., in August 2014. The three are co-founders of Weeleo, a peer-to-peer currency exchange platform, and all were in San Francisco from France for the summer to participate in an accelerator program. To save money, Mr. Levy and their fourth co-founder couch-surfed for the summer instead of renting an apartment. Andrew Hines, center, and Cassidy Clawson set up a makeshift release party in March 2015 for their beta app called Picnic, a game involving taking selfies in response to challenges to act out certain emotions. The release had to be postponed after the co-founders realized that the TestFlight program from Apple, which was necessary for the beta testing, was temporarily down, preventing them from going live.Jonathan Dillon, center, worked with teammates to make a pet food dispenser that could be controlled remotely. It was part of a project for the Hackster Hardware Weekend hackathon in San Francisco in March last year. Hackathons are events, often spread out over a few days, where developers and programmers collaborate on projects, many times for awards and prizes. Participants in Cal Hacks 2.0, a 36-hour hackathon in October 2015, building projects inside the football stadium at the University of California, Berkeley. According to the event organizers, 2,071 participants attended from 143 schools and 10 countries. Steve Castellotti, the founder and chief executive of Puzzlebox, demonstrating Orbit, a helicopter that doubles as an educational toy, to attendees of the Start-Up and Tech Mixer. Lev Konstantinovski took a nap during the data science program he was attending at Galvanize, a co-working space in San Francisco, last March. The theme of the common room at Galvanize is meant to resemble Dolores Park, a popular park in the city’s Mission District. A participant at a hackathon organized in August 2014 by Shirts.io, a T-shirt printing company, took a brief pause during the 37-hour event.From left, Noor Siddiqui, Conor White-Sullivan, Dylan Enright and Karen X. Cheng eating dessert during a dinner party hosted at the office of Wefunder, where Mr. Enright works, in February 2015. Wefunder is a crowd-funding service that connects start-ups and investors online. The company and its founders throw large dinner parties almost every Wednesday at their office, which also serves as the home of several employees. Connor McGill, second from right, smoked cigars with his co-workers during his last day of work at Hackers/Founders, an organization that helps early-stage entrepreneurs, located in the Hacker Dojo in Mountain View, Calif. Mr. McGill was leaving his job to attend the University of California, Davis. At a happy-hour event at Rothenberg Ventures, a venture capital fund that has investments in various virtual reality, drone and artificial intelligence technologies, an attendee tried on a virtual reality headset as others listened to a speaker in another room.Rothenberg, which invests in early-stage technology companies with a focus on millennial founders, recently started River, a virtual reality accelerator program. Emily Erickson, center, and her boyfriend, Sean Ahrens, second from left, hosted a party last March in their room at 20 Mission, a shared living community, otherwise known as a co-living space, in San Francisco. Around 45 people, many of them technology entrepreneurs, live in 20 Mission. The space is a former single-room-occupancy hotel that had been vacant for several years before being turned into the co-living community. Ben Greenberg is one of the residents. He is a software programmer and has a start-up that sells glow-in-the-dark decorations and party supplies. Samidha Visai, center, and Anushree Vora, second from left, were among the people that came out for an early-morning dance party, called Daybreaker, on a cruise ship in San Francisco in August.Ms. Visai and Ms. Vora, two college students from the University of Michigan, were spending the summer in San Francisco working as interns at start-ups focused on health care technology. Daybreaker events, which are marketed as substance-free dance parties on weekdays, have been particularly popular among younger technology workers. Dancers often go straight to work from the event.Advertisement