By NICOLE PERLROTHMARCH 1, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch joined a parade of Obama administration officials to tech’s home turf on Tuesday. Their message: National security depends on the industry’s cooperation.The heavyweights from Washington arrived against the backdrop of Apple’s fight with the Federal Bureau of Investigation over access to an iPhone and a growing fissure between Washington and Silicon Valley.The F.B.I. is trying to force Apple to write software to help it break into the phone of one of the gunmen in December’s mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif. The phone is protected by a security scheme that would wipe its data after a series of incorrect password attempts. Apple has so far refused to cooperate, and the company is fighting a court order requiring it to aid investigators.In a speech Tuesday at the RSA Conference, arguably the world’s largest gathering of computer security experts, Ms. Lynch avoided directly addressing the fight with Apple, and emphasized the need to find middle ground.Advertisement“I know that neither our technology companies nor their leaders have any sympathy for terrorists or criminals who target Americans,” Ms. Lynch told an audience at the city’s Moscone Center. “And the Department of Justice will never sacrifice the safety of the American people or the ideals we all cherish.”AdvertisementBut in a stage interview with a Bloomberg journalist, Emily Chang, after her speech, Ms. Lynch was asked what the middle ground would be between the F.B.I. and Apple.“For me, the middle ground” is to do “what the law requires,” Ms. Lynch responded, which drew a smattering of laughter and hisses from the audience. She said law enforcement has for years had Apple’s help getting access to iPhones without controversy, and that “having the inability to obtain evidence that could save lives is a real risk.”Though it is focused on a tough password mechanism, the Apple controversy is an extension of a decades-long fight between the tech industry and the federal government over the use of encryption technology. Once considered a carefully regulated munition, not unlike a tank, encryption came into wide use with the advent of the commercial Internet and was the key to modern e-commerce.The encryption fight was considered by many in Silicon Valley to have been settled in the 1990s, but the widespread government monitoring of Internet traffic revealed in documents released by Edward J. Snowden, the former government contractor, in 2013 led to the renewal of industry efforts to toughen security.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Apple’s fight with the F.B.I. has added to that tension, and a number of other tech companies are expected in the coming days to file court briefs in support of Apple. Among their fears is that creating the software to break into the iPhone could create a backdoor that could be used repeatedly by law enforcement or the spy agencies of other countries.The director of the National Security Agency, Admiral Michael S. Rogers, also attempted a conciliatory tone at the RSA event. Admiral Rogers did not speak to the Apple case, or even mention the word encryption, but repeatedly emphasized the need for partnership and dialogue to fight cyberthreats. “I implore all of us to be part of that constructive dialogue,” he said. “It’s time to stop talking past each other.”In a speech made nearby at San Francisco’s Commonwealth Club, Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter acknowledged that encryption had been a “hot topic here in the Bay Area,” but said he could not address the Apple case because of the ongoing litigation. Instead, he noted that the Pentagon had a vested interest in strong encryption and that the Defense Department is “the largest user of encryption in the world.”Security experts in the tech industry may not be so quick to embrace conciliation. “You’re opening a can of worms,” Ron Rivest, a cryptographer and professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, told a separate RSA audience.Advertisement“The systems we have are so fragile that trying to have extra keys, or extra ways in, or ways to take them apart is asking for all kinds of trouble,” Mr. Rivest said. “The good of the country depends on having strong security.”Other cryptographers on the panel with Mr. Rivest agreed, with one notable exception: Adi Shamir, an Israeli cryptographer and co-inventor, with Mr. Rivest and Len Adleman, of the RSA encryption algorithm that became the namesake of the annual security conference.Mr. Shamir argued that Apple had “goofed” by not complying in the San Bernardino case and for not anticipating that the F.B.I. would ask for help to crack the shooter’s iPhone password.“Even though Apple helped in countless numbers of previous cases, they decided not to comply this time,” Mr. Shamir said. “My advice would have been, comply this time, and wait for a better test case when the case is not so clearly in favor of the F.B.I.”Katie Benner contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Obama Administration Officials Soften Approach at Tech Symposium.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.