

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

UPDATED March 21, 2016

The technology company has been locked in a major legal battle against law enforcement officials over privacy and security.
The technology company has been locked in a major legal battle against law enforcement officials over privacy and security.The F.B.I. has been trying to force Apple to help investigators gain access to an iPhone used by Syed Rizwan Farook in the December mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif. Bureau officials say that encrypted data in Mr. Farook’s phone and its GPS system may hold vital clues about where he and his wife, Tashfeen Malik, traveled in the 18 minutes after the shootings, and about whom they might have contacted beforehand.It sounds like a simple problem but the solution would be complex. The password mechanism built into the phone will erase the phone’s data after 10 incorrect password attempts. That security is standard on newer iPhones, and to get around it, Apple says it would have to create new software. The company has fought a federal court order requiring it to provide access to the F.B.I., on the grounds that it violates its right to due process. Apple has said that forcing it to write new software violates its First Amendment right, an argument that has some precedent. Courts have ruled in the past that writing code is a form of free speech.Providing help to break into this one iPhone, Apple has also argued, could create a permanent way to bypass iPhone password protection for law enforcement officials or even the spy agencies of other countries.In a similar case in Brooklyn, a judge ruled in Apple’s favor in late February. The Justice Department appealed that ruling. Unlocking the iPhone in the Brooklyn case would be far easier for Apple, because it involves a device running an older operating system with simpler encryption.The Justice Department said in a filing on March 21 that it believes it has found another way to get into Mr. Farook’s phone. It cautioned, however, that it still needed to be tested. In the case of Mr. Farook’s iPhone, the F.B.I. lost a chance to capture data from the phone when it ordered that the gunman’s password to iCloud, the Internet service Apple customers can use to back up information that is stored on their devices, be reset shortly after the rampage. F.B.I. personnel apparently believed that by resetting the iCloud password, they could get access to information stored on the iPhone. Instead, the change had the opposite effect — locking them out and eliminating other means of getting in. Simply put, the government contends that cooperation in cases like this could help prevent terrorist attacks against Americans.Privacy advocates and Apple supporters say they worry that if the F.B.I. succeeds in getting access to the software overriding Apple’s encryption, it would create easy access for the government in many future investigations.Apple senior executives, for their part, have said their defiance was not a business choice. But cooperating with the government now could quickly lead to murkier situations internationally, especially in China, where officials have been pushing for greater control over the encryption and security of technology sold there.China has become Apple’s second-largest market after the United States. People there spent $59 billion on Apple products in the last fiscal year. Saying yes to the United States government could make it hard for Apple to later say no to China, and saying no could significantly affect the company’s bottom line. Google, Amazon, Facebook, Microsoft and a parade of other technology companies filed a barrage of court briefs on March 3 in support of Apple.Despite what the F.B.I. says, many in the industry worry the San Bernardino case could be a prelude to many others, and they point to a number of other pending cases in which the government wants Apple’s help to unlock iPhones. Though officials like Defense Secretary Ashton Carter say it is not the case, industry leaders worry the government is trying to create a permanent “back door” that would allow investigators or spies to circumvent encryption or password protection. Apple and law enforcement officials have been explaining their positions to both the public and Congress, but in the end it is a court case, not a popularity contest.Both Apple and the Justice Department have filed briefs and the federal court was scheduled to hold a hearing on the matter in California on Tuesday, March 22. However, on Monday, the 21st, the government was granted a request to postpone the hearing, saying that it might no longer need Apple’s assistance to extract data from the phone used in the attack. Government lawyers are expected to report on their progress on April 5.Advertisement