AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. At least once a month, Microsoft invades my Windows 7 computer with so-called improvements. I have no idea what they are. How can I find out?A. The Windows Update program on your PC not only downloads and installs new software from Microsoft, but it also keeps a list of what it has done to your computer. You can see this running list of installed software by going to the Start menu and selecting Windows Update (or typing “update” in the search box to find it). On the left side of the Windows Update box, select View Update History.When the Update History box opens, you’ll see a list of updates that have already been downloaded and installed on your system. In addition to Windows security patches, you may also see updates for other Microsoft programs like Word or Outlook.Double-click on an entry in the list to see more information, including the installation date and a brief description of what problem the update was intended to resolve. A link to further information from Microsoft’s support site is often included. If you have Windows Update set to download but not automatically install new updates, click the “available updates” link on the main Windows Update screen to get more details about each new piece of software waiting for you. (Keep in mind that Microsoft has started to push its Windows 10 update out to Windows 7 users through Windows Update now, too.)Microsoft pushes out program updates at least once a month for Windows and its other programs like Microsoft Office. Although you may receive notifications from Windows Update regarding new software every few weeks, most of the security repairs tend to arrive on the second Tuesday of the month, a day often referred to by many as “Patch Tuesday.” Microsoft calls these monthly updates “security bulletins” and posts brief summaries of what each update in the patch batch is supposed to protect on your computer; you can read these summaries in the Library area of the Microsoft’s Security TechCenter site.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement