AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I have no idea what kind of graphics card my computer has inside, or the amount of memory it has. Is there a quick way to find out?A. On a Windows 10 computer, one way to find out is by right-clicking on the desktop area and choosing Display Settings. In the Display Settings box, select Advanced Display Settings and then choose the Display Adapter properties option. On the Adapter tab in the box, you should see the brand of the graphics card and its memory amount listed. You can also get to the same Properties box from the Windows 10 Start menu — select Settings, then System to get to Advanced Display Settings, and then Display Adapter Properties.On a Windows 7 system, right-click on the desktop area and choose Screen Resolution. Click the Advanced Settings link and click the Adapter tab to see the type of graphics card is installed. (Going through the Control Panel to the Appearance and Personalization settings also starts you on the path to the display adapter box.)Some graphics cards may also have their own control panel that can be reached by right-clicking on the computer’s desktop; look for a Graphics Properties option to see specific settings and information about the card. You can quickly see more general information about your PC — like the amount of memory it has installed, the processor speed and the version of Windows it is running — by pressing the Windows key and the Pause/Break key to call up the System control panel.On a Mac that’s running a fairly recent version of OS X, click the Apple Menu icon in the upper left corner of the screen and choose About This Mac. The Overview tab lists the computer’s basic hardware information — like the amount of memory installed, the type of processor and the graphics card specifications. For more details, click the System Report button, and on the next screen, under Hardware, click Graphics/Displays. Apple makes its own hardware, so it has more control over the types of cards in its Macs, and you can read more about the integrated graphics cards it uses on its Intel-based Macs on Apple’s support site.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement