
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 3, 2016
Q. I can see my step count for the day, week, month or year on the graph in the iPhone 6 health program, but does it store the amount of past recorded steps by specific day?A. The Health app included with iOS 8 and later does indeed save a history of your daily step counts, along with any other fitness and medical information you choose to share with it. To see the information, open the Health app and on the Dashboard screen, tap the orange graph showing your current steps and daily average.On the Steps screen, tap Show All Data. Now, on the All Record Data screen, you should see the amount of steps you took each day, going back to when you first started using the iPhone as a step counter — or enabled the function again after turning it off. Tap a day to see your step count further broken down by the time of day.If you prefer to see your daily distance totals measured in miles, return to the Health app’s Dashboard screen and underneath the Steps graph, tap the graph for Walking + Running Distance and go on to Show All Data and then to the All Recorded Data screen. Likewise, you can see your history of stair-climbing by tapping through the screens from the Flights Climbed graph on the Dashboard.Apple’s Health app (which encrypts your personal data when you have your iPhone secured with a passcode) works with third-party apps and devices like fitness trackers to collect your nutrition and activity information. You can back up the files to iCloud or iTunes in case you are worried about losing or breaking your iPhone.If you have any allergies or medical conditions you want others to know about in case you are injured or incapacitated, you can set up the Medical ID screen within the Health app. Just tap the Medical ID icon at the bottom of the screen and fill in the information, including any medicines you may be taking, your blood type and an emergency contact number. Tap the Edit button to make changes later or to turn on the Show When Locked button — which allows a concerned person to see your medical notes by tapping the Emergency button and then Medical ID in the lower-left corner of the iPhone’s Lock screen.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »