AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Should I update to Windows 10 now that I’ve gotten used to Windows 8.1? How big a change is it?A. Windows 8.1 has more in common with Windows 10 visually than does Windows 7, but there are differences. For one, Windows 10 includes the voice-activated Cortana assistant software, which can respond to commands for web searches, making calendar appointments and more. A new browser called Microsoft Edge is also part of the system. Windows 10 includes Windows Hello, biometric security software that unlocks your computer using facial recognition, iris scans or (if the PC has compatible hardware) your fingerprints.Windows 10 restores a variation of the Start menu, which was a popular desktop destination for many users before Windows 8 arrived. (If you miss having the full Windows 8.1 Start screen experience, you can adjust your Windows 10 settings to make the Start menu behave more like the icon-filled screen in Windows 8.1.) Like Windows 8.1, the newer system includes easy access to Microsoft’s OneDrive cloud storage service and the online Windows Store for downloading apps and games.Microsoft is steadily promoting Windows 10 as a free “optional update” to computers running Windows 7 and Windows 8.1. The company has also stated that early next year, it plans to switch Windows 10 from an optional update to a “recommended update,” which may cause computers configured to automatically install recommended updates to start the upgrade process themselves. You should see an alert before the upgrade proceeds and, as Microsoft points out, you have a month to revert to your old system version if you absolutely hate Windows 10.As with any operating system upgrade, plan to spend some time after you install the software getting used to the new features and tinkering with settings. If you want to see Windows 10 in action before you upgrade, visit Microsoft’s website for videos and tutorials — and then check out the site’s support forums to read about the actual experiences from Windows 10 users.Getting the iMessageQ. I am missing a lot of text messages because they go to my iPad but not my iPhone. I thought Apple’s message app sent everything to all your iOS devices, so why isn’t this working?A. If you have previously set up and activated iMessage without errors on your iPhone, open the Settings icon. Go to Messages and make sure iMessage is enabled.Apple’s Messages service is separate from the SMS (Short Message Service) feature on your phone, so the text messages you actually got on the iPhone may have been sent through SMS if iMessage was turned off. The iPhone displays the standard SMS messages as green bubbles, while iMessage notes come in blue.TIP OF THE WEEK: Thanks to the built-in Guest Mode in recent versions of Android, you do not have to worry about children or friends poking around in your personal photos and files if you temporarily lend out your phone or tablet. Before you pass over the device, swipe down from the top of the screen to open the Quick Settings bar, tap it to expand the panel and tap your user account icon at the top of the screen.When the User box opens, tap Add Guest or Guest. The device pauses a moment to switch over from your user account to the Guest account — which can open basic Android apps (like the Chrome browser, YouTube and Google Maps) but none of your personal files. When the other person has finished using your phone or tablet, tap the user icon at the top of the screen and tap Remove Guest to switch back to your own user account and files.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement