
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 9, 2016
 Q. I am an 84-year-old sedentary person and I need some kind of alarm program that reminds me to get up every hour. I could set the alarm on my iPad/iPod every hour, but that is a pain.A. The iOS operating system that runs on Apple’s iPhones, iPads and iPod Touch devices includes a Clock app (as well as a Reminders app) that can be set to ring hourly and automatically repeat each day, but it does take some work to set up the alarm system. If you just want a simple hourly beep or chime, start with a visit to the online App Store and search for “hourly chime” or “hourly alarm.”Many of these apps are free or inexpensive. When browsing for a suitable program, click the Ratings and Reviews link on an app’s description page to see what others have said about it.Apple’s built-in apps can be set to alert you at specific intervals, and once you set the alarms, you can have them automatically repeat daily. In the Clock app, for example, tap the Alarm button at the bottom and then the plus (+) button in the top-right corner of the screen to add a new alarm. On the next screen, set the desired time, tap the Repeat menu and select all the days you want the alarm to ring. Tap the Save button and then tap the plus button again to set an alarm for the next hour. Repeat the process until you have set an alarm to repeatedly ring for every hour and every day you need prompting.You can set up similarly regular alerts in the Reminder app by tapping the encircled “i” on a reminder to get to the time and repeat settings. And if you find all that tapping is too much work, hold down the Home button and ask the Siri assistant to set a daily alarm for a specific hour and repeat your request until you have one for all the times you need reminding.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »