
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 11, 2016
Q. I have Windows 10 and would like to know if I can make Bing Weather my home page.A. Microsoft includes two browsers with Windows 10 — Edge and Internet Explorer 11 — and the steps for changing your home page vary slightly with each program. Start by going to the exact Bing weather page you want and copy its web address at the top of the browser window.In Microsoft Edge, select the More icon (represented by three dots) in the toolbar and choose Settings. Scroll down, select View Advanced Settings and turn on the “Show the home button” option. In the box below, paste in the web address you copied and click the Save button.You can also get the weather forecast and a screen full of news headlines when you open the Edge browser. Go to the program’s More menu, select Settings and in the Open With area, choose “A specific page or pages” and pick “Bing” from the menu. (If you would like the Edge browser to open Bing and a few other pages automatically each time you start the browser, select Custom instead of Bing from the menu and enter the web addresses you want to see.)If you are using Internet Explorer 11 with Windows 10, go to the Bing weather page you want. In the browser’s toolbar, choose the gear-shaped Tools menu icon and then Internet Options. Click the General tab. In the Home Page section, click the Use Current button to save the open weather page as your home page. Click the Apply button and then O.K. (Internet Explorer also has the ability to open multiple pages when you start the browser; just enter each web address on its own line in the Home Page box.)Other Windows-friendly browsers, like Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox and Opera, have settings that can be similarly adjusted to customize your home page. For a quick check of the weather without opening the browser, make sure you have the Windows 10 Weather app (or favorite third-party weather widget) pinned high on your Start menu so you can see the current conditions by simply pressing the Windows key.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »