
Bits By                     
 CONOR DOUGHERTY and
 

 MIKE ISAAC
 
MARCH 13, 2016
AUSTIN, Tex. — Brianna Wu, a prominent video game developer, is no stranger to threats against her life.In a panel at the South by Southwest conference here on Saturday, she held up a picture of an Internet troll in a skeleton mask. This person, whose identity remains anonymous, sent Ms. Wu a message claiming he wanted to end her life by putting a drill to her forehead.“The abuse that I’ve undergone has been extreme,” she said, adding that her husband and dog had both been threatened as well.The experiences of Ms. Wu, who works for the gaming studio Giant Spacekat, are not an anomaly. Other women in the gaming community have faced similar online harassment, which, they say, goes far beyond name calling and has moved into the realm of violent threats and rampant misogyny.AdvertisementMuch of it has centered on the games industry and is associated with a grass-roots movement called “#GamerGate,” a term used by a group of people who are fighting against what they say are unfair portrayals of video game enthusiasts as anti-feminists and misogynists.AdvertisementBut, paradoxically, people associated with the movement have systematically targeted and attacked women online, including women like Ms. Wu and Anita Sarkeesian, a feminist cultural critic who focuses often on video games and game culture.Even events attempting to discuss and curtail the harassment of women online and in the gaming community are targets. In October, planners of the South by Southwest conference canceled two events — “SavePoint: A Discussion on the Gaming Community” and “Level Up: Overcoming Harassment in Games” — citing threats of “on-site violence” related to the panels.After an overwhelmingly negative reaction from the greater online community, conference planners returned with a plan for a daylong meeting at South by Southwest, one dedicated to addressing online harassment and featuring prominent members of the gaming community and employees at the tech companies that are caught in the middle of the online fighting.At the summit’s 15 panel discussions in the Hyatt Regency Austin downtown, security guards checked attendants’ bags on the way into each room. A half-dozen police officers milled about in the hours before the events started, scanning the crowds for any potential problems. Each session was attended by a police officer who sat at the back of the ballroom surveying the crowd and looking for unattended bags.The sessions, though, were sparsely attended, in some cases with roughly 80 percent of the seats empty.As part of a panel discussion called “Is a Safer, Saner and Civil Internet Possible?” Ms. Wu said she has had over 200 death threats in the past few years.She criticized some of the technology companies that acted as meeting hubs for GamerGate supporters — particularly YouTube and Reddit, the online message board — for not doing enough to take down offensive content when it was posted. Reddit does not require users to register real names or any other identifying information to use the site. It is a regular congregation spot for GamerGate activists.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I can’t say this clearly enough: Reddit is failing women in every marginalized community spectacularly,” Ms. Wu said.AdvertisementGiven the scale of these services, policing harassment is a mind-bogglingly large task. Some 1.6 billion people regularly use Facebook, while YouTube users upload about 400 hours of video every minute. Reddit, which has raised tens of millions of dollars in venture capital, sees hundreds of millions of regular monthly users and relies primarily on its users to police themselves.What is difficult for the companies is toeing the line between free speech — a value that many companies in Silicon Valley strongly support — and harassment, which can make the users of these networks feel unwelcome, unsafe or worse.Monika Bickert, Facebook’s head of global policy management, says Facebook tries to distinguish between generalized vitriol and vitriol that is directed at a specific person.“If someone says, ‘This country is terrible,’ that’s O.K.,” she said. “If somebody says, ‘The people of this nationality are evil,’ that we will remove.”But beyond general harassment, a recurring theme across all the sessions — told through chilling anecdotes and statistics — was the extent to which online hatred is disproportionately directed toward women.And, indeed, women made up many of the attendees and panelists. They included video game developers, executives at companies like Google and Facebook as well as politicians like Representative Katherine Clark, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Wendy Davis, the former Texas state senator who ran as the Democratic candidate for governor in 2014.Representative Clark said she was proposing legislation that would increase training for law enforcement officials on investigating and prosecuting online harassment of women.The day’s event ended without incident, but the issues were far from settled. While tech companies have tried much harder to tackle issues of online harassment than in the past — driven largely by the awareness of the GamerGate movement — they all still have a long way to go, Ms. Wu said.“There is this very wide discrepancy between what tech companies say they do and what the outcome is,” she said.Conor Dougherty reported from Austin, Tex., and Mike Isaac from New York.A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: SXSW Takes a Day to Discuss Online Harassment of Women in Gaming.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »