AdvertisementSupported byBy Nick WingfieldSEATTLE — Every month, more than 100 million people go to Twitch, a video streaming service known for airing live matches between people playing League of Legends, Counter-Strike and dozens of other games.An interloper has entered the Twitch fray for a marathon video streaming session — Julia Child, the legendary chef and television personality who died in 2004.On Tuesday, Twitch began to consecutively stream all 201 episodes of “The French Chef,” the groundbreaking cooking show hosted by Mrs. Child, which aired for a decade starting in 1963. The marathon will be spread over four days.The event is a peculiar mash-up of one of the Internet’s leading destinations for gamers and a cultural icon who introduced American television audiences to beef Wellington, crêpes suzette and other dishes. It is part of a budding effort by Twitch, acquired by Amazon in 2014 for nearly $1 billion, to cultivate viewers interested in all forms of creativity, whether sewing, sculpture or cooking, not just those who want to watch virtual orcs getting slain.The Julia Child marathon, which inaugurated a new food channel on the site, also reflects a relatively recent insight by Twitch into its audience. While many Twitch visitors come to communicate with the people they’re watching through chat rooms that accompany the videos, that will obviously not be possible in the case of Mrs. Child. Instead, Twitch is betting that many of its viewers want to chat with each other.“We always had this idea that it’s critical to be able to talk to the broadcaster,” said Bill Moorier, head of Twitch Creative. “There are some cases where the community just enjoys interacting with itself while enjoying prerecorded content. That’s what we’re experimenting more with.”More than 6,000 people tuned in to watch the initial episodes of “The French Chef” on Twitch on Tuesday and the service’s chat room immediately filled with a torrent of Internet slang and joke-making. Viewers marveled at the copious amounts of vermouth, red wine and brandy that Mrs. Child used in a French onion soup recipe (“So much alcohol OMG,” “Drunk soup”).Early on, one Twitch commenter may have captured the moment best by writing “microwave generation watch cooking show on a gaming stream website.”Twitch decided to double down on recorded videos after the improbable success of a weeklong streaming session featuring the landscape painter Bob Ross. Starting last October, Twitch aired the entire archive of “The Joy of Painting,” the show narrated by the honey-voiced Mr. Ross as he completed canvases, more than 400 episodes in all.About 5.6 million viewers in total watched the marathon over the course of the week, with as many as 183,000 people tuning in at the same time, according to Twitch.Equally impressive was how lively the conversation was around the show. Twitch viewers flooded the chat room with running commentary riffing on Mr. Ross’s hypnotic manner, kitschy paintings and guileless expressions like “happy little trees.” In one show, he demonstrated how to shake the paint out of a brush, telling viewers to “beat the devil out of him.”Some viewers jokingly chided Mr. Ross, who died in 1995, for not responding to their chat messages. Others blended gamer jargon with their commentary. Whenever an episode ended, Twitch’s chat room invariably filled with the letters “gg” — slang for “good game,” a valediction online gamers use at the end of a match.There was also a dose of toxic comments of the sort that so often accompanies online discussions. Twitch says it was a minor problem and that it has teams of moderators who police its chat room for misbehavior.In all, Twitch says viewers sent 7.6 million chat messages during the marathon.The community that formed around the Bob Ross marathon was a variation of the social television watching that occurs these days during most major broadcasts. Whether it’s the Academy Awards or the presidential debates, people deluge Twitter and other forms of social media with commentary, from the snarky to the sincere. And before social media, water cooler conversations at the office were the way many people shared their perspectives on television shows.With Twitch, live commentary is much more tightly integrated with the experience of watching video, which makes audiences feel more as if they are in a single place, rather than scattered around the Internet. T. L. Taylor, a professor of comparative media studies and writing at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, believes that makes the discussion around Twitch events especially dynamic.”The community is building memes,” she said. “They’re coming up with their own frames of reference and comedy on the fly."Dr. Taylor said she had watched portions of the Bob Ross marathon and had even bought a T-shirt with the painter on it, part of a wave of merchandise spawned by the Twitch airing of his show. “One of the best things about the Bob Ross week is it really gave this lovely, cooled-out friendly vibe,” she said. “It was just wonderful.”Mr. Moorier of Twitch said the company plans to license more videos featuring well-known chefs for its food channel, though he declined to name them. The focus of the food channel will be prerecorded videos, he said.The Julia Child marathon began on the 65th anniversary of the official date of Julia Child’s graduation from Le Cordon Bleu, the cooking school in Paris where she received her culinary training.Advertisement