
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 15, 2016
Q. How do you write margin notes in iBooks on a Mac?A. When you have an iBook file open on the Mac’s screen, drag the mouse over the text you want to comment upon. A box automatically pops up giving you options to highlight the passage, add a margin note, copy the selected text or do other things with it. Choose the Add Note option from the menu. An electronic Post-It-style note opens and you can type in your annotations. Notes and highlighting also sync with the iOS versions of the book if you are reading it on different devices.You can see all your notes within the book by clicking the title bar of the book window and then clicking the notepad icon on the left side of the title bar. (Not all iBooks support notes, but many do.) You can also open the Notes panel by going to the View menu and choosing Show Notes Panel, or by pressing the Command and 4 keys on the Mac’s keyboard. In OS X 10.11, you can remove a note by selecting it in this same Notes Panel and deleting the note text. To delete the highlighting and note together, just reselect the text and choose Remove Highlight & Note from the menu that appears.In many iBooks, you can also share notes and selected passages with your friends on Facebook, Twitter or by Messages or Mail. To share one of your notes, right-click or Control-click its entry in the Notes panel and select an option from the contextual menu. In many cases, you can even share a selected passage of up to 200 words from the book. When you highlight the text, choose the More option from the menu and pick a platform for social distribution; you can also save your iBook note as an OS X note. The More menu also has search and lookup commands for selected words, as well as a text-to-speech recitation feature.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Marking Up Mac’s iBook Pages.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »