By FARHAD MANJOO and MIKE ISAACMARCH 19, 2016
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Farhad: How’s it going, Mike? I just got back from South by Southwest, which everyone cool calls “South By.” But I’m not cool. I call it “South by Southwest.”Mike: I’m incredibly cool, so I call it “By.” You wouldn’t understand.Farhad: On to this week’s tech news. Sony unveiled a virtual reality add-on for the PlayStation 4, making it the latest in a string of companies trying to get gamers to part with their money this year. The good news for gamers is that Sony wants less money than other virtual reality companies: The PlayStation VR will sell for $400 when it’s released, and it works with the PS 4 that many gamers already have, while the Oculus Rift sells for $600 and requires a $1,000 PC. The bad news: Sony’s ships in October, while the Oculus will be in gamers’ grubby hands by the end of this month.Mike: As with most new tech, I’m pretty sure the first generations of all of these gadgets are going to be bad. I’m doing my usual thing of waiting a few years for the hardware to get cheaper and the tech to get better. Meanwhile, I will bide my time in actual reality.AdvertisementFarhad: That’s bad news for all of us. On another front, Google is giving its war robots the boot. You know those fearsome-looking bots you’ve seen lifting weights and performing other tricks in a series of viral videos? Well, apparently they make for good videos but not good business. According to Bloomberg, Alphabet, Google’s parent company, is looking to sell Boston Dynamics, the military robot subsidiary, because the company isn’t likely to produce any revenue anytime soon. That was the reported reason, anyway; I wonder if Google execs’ real worry was that these robots could one day turn against their masters.AdvertisementMike: Yeah, those definitely were freaky. Still, the “isn’t likely to produce revenue anytime soon” reasoning sounds strange. Doesn’t Google lose money on most of the wacky things it tries out? I’m suspicious.Farhad: Also, a V.C. was sued by a woman claiming sexual abuse and a lot of unsavory details came spilling out in the legal documents. In other words, business as usual for the venture capital industry.But hey, it’s been at least two weeks since we talked about the Apple-F.B.I. case, so we’re due for an update. Our Apple-obsessed colleagues had a blockbuster article this week — according to their reporting, some of Apple’s most prized engineers would rather quit their jobs than help the government break into the security systems guarding the iPhone.I wasn’t surprised to hear this; security engineers tend to be a principled bunch. But I think nontechies will find this a bit hard to swallow. I bet a lot of people are going to accuse these guys of being divas or simply grandstanding. What do you think?The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mike: Honestly, this kind of idealism seems to jibe with my limited experience with security engineers. It seems as though if you’re into information and computer security, it’s not just a job, it’s a way of life.These people take the principles of keeping information safe incredibly seriously. Think about it: Their job is to make secure a product that holds our most intimate secrets — our texts to friends and family, our emails to co-workers and bosses, our frowny face emojis to our loved ones — and then offer that product to hundreds of millions of people.Moreover, it’s not just another nifty feature on the phone, like 3D Touch or whatever. This is one of the marquee selling points of the newest generations of the iPhone under the leadership of Tim Cook, Apple’s chief since 2011. As our colleagues have written about at length, the idea of personal privacy and the right to hold our information safe against thieves is personally important to him. I imagine he instills that sense of duty in the teams responsible for this.AdvertisementFarhad: Right. And I don’t think it’s just the principles they worry about, but it’s also the practical effect on the security of Apple’s devices. The security engineers who would be tasked with helping the F.B.I. break into this phone probably best understand the dangers of doing so — especially the danger that the code to break into this phone could slip into unwanted hands. It’s like asking a locksmith to create a master key for every house in the neighborhood; sure, you’ll probably be able to find a few who’ll do it, but most will tell you that it goes against their professional code, for the very simple reason that it’s very dangerous.Mike: One other thing: I don’t know how much of this is marketing (probably a lot), but from Apple’s early days, the company under Steve Jobs styled itself as a countercultural influence — products made by and for the “rebellious” lot.Do I think Apple’s campus is flooded with a bunch of radical hippies? Probably not. It’s a corporate behemoth — the most valuable company in the world — so it’s sort of hard to argue for “counterculture” when the iPhone is omnipresent in our society today. Still, that influence, or streaks of it, had to have to trickled down in the organization over the years. Maybe we’re seeing a little bit of that.Farhad: This still leaves the puzzle of what happens if Apple’s engineers refuse to comply. You could compare this situation to that of civil servants who refuse to carry out laws they find objectionable — like Kim Davis, the Kentucky county clerk who felt her religious views prevented her from signing gay marriage certificates. She was jailed for contempt for that refusal; the case was eventually resolved when Ms. Davis said she would not interfere with her deputies’ signing gay marriage licenses.But the Apple case is different because there aren’t a lot of other people who can step in for Apple’s security engineers. This isn’t a matter of simply signing a piece of paper; the people who would have to carry out a court order would need very specific expertise regarding the security of Apple’s phones. If they refuse to comply en masse, what happens? Things are likely to get pretty interesting.Anyway, we’ll see — until then, I’ll be perusing the schedule for next’s year’s “By.” See, I’m cool!Mike: Uh, no. Bye!We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »