
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
MARCH 22, 2016
Like in no other industry, technology companies depend on their claim to the future. They have world-changing products like smartphones, social networks and Internet search, and exuberant bosses who pretend they know where all this is going.That makes it particularly awkward when big tech companies do not exactly seem in charge of their own futures. That is now happening to both Apple and Yahoo, in two very different ways.Apple is, of course, in a courtroom fight with the Justice Department over whether it should help the fed authorities unlock an iPhone that belonged to a terrorist. It has already traded legal barbs with the government over its rights and obligations about privacy and security.As Katie Benner writes, Apple was scheduled on Tuesday to make its case at a hearing in Riverside, Calif., in front of a particularly steely and unflappable judge. On Monday, however, the Justice Department was granted a request to postpone the hearing, saying it might have found another way to get into the phone.AdvertisementEveryone involved thinks that if this case should continue, it could ultimately go before the Supreme Court, as we try to establish law in a new world of instant communications and powerful computing, but first decisions matter. Later courts, along with the lawyers on both sides, will study the way Judge Sheri Pym thinks about the arguments over corporate and federal rights.AdvertisementShould Apple lose, it could affect not just its products, but the kind of talent it employs — some engineers could leave, rather than choose to weaken Apple’s encryption. Even with all that uncertainty about the future, though, Apple is likely to remain one of the world’s premier technology companies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yahoo could wish for such control over its fortunes, or such a near-certain profit outlook. The darling of the Internet’s first generation has for years struggled to define its identity and turn that into returns. Hopes were high when Marissa Mayer came in from Google in 2012, but the stock is off 30 percent from its 2014 highs.Ms. Mayer is exploring a sale of Yahoo, quite possibly along with selling off $1 billion and $3 billion in assets. Now, as Michael de la Merced and Vindu Goel write, it is also contending with an activist hedge fund, which may seek to change Yahoo’s board of directors.That would complicate any sale. Adding to the confusion, Ms. Mayer may also have to negotiate with SoftBank, a large Japanese tech company, about the status of Yahoo Japan, a profitable concern in which they both have shares.Great tech companies may start in garages, but that is hardly where they end up.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »