By STEVE LOHRMARCH 23, 2016
In the cloud computing business, Google’s technology prowess is rarely questioned. Its commitment, however, has been doubted.Google, which trails Amazon and Microsoft in the fast-growing market, hopes to change the industry perception that it is halfhearted about its cloud computing service with product announcements, technology demonstrations and strategy briefings at a two-day conference in San Francisco that began on Wednesday.The company is showcasing its cloud software for machine learning, a branch of artificial intelligence. It has a new speech service: Feed in audio, and the software issues a transcript. Its recently introduced vision service for identifying images also will be more broadly available soon, Google said. And new tools and training aids are available to help developers build machine-learning applications more easily.These are the first significant steps since Diane B. Greene, a respected Silicon Valley technologist, became senior vice president in charge of Google’s cloud business in November. Ms. Greene is a co-founder and former chief executive of VMware, whose software is widely used in corporate data centers. She knows the enterprise computing business, which has not been Google’s strength.AdvertisementThe new cloud offerings after Ms. Greene’s appointment signal the company’s intent, analysts say. “Google finally wants to compete in the cloud for enterprise business,” said Mike Gualtieri, an analyst at Forrester Research.Having technology is only one ingredient in the corporate marketplace, analysts note. Marketing, training and customer service are also important to win businesses.“We’ve got to get really good at communications and training,” Ms. Greene said in an interview.AdvertisementIn the corporate cloud business, Google must address a wide range of customers and requirements, she said. For many, a purely online relationship will be fine, she said, while others want hands-on assistance.For labor-intensive projects, Google will work through partners, she said. The company has no intention of building its own consulting arm. “That’s not what Google does,” said Ms. Greene, who, since 2012, has been a board member of Google and then its parent company, Alphabet, which was established last year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Google plans to step up training and certification programs, again working through industry partners to expand that effort. “We’ll train the trainers,” she explained.Traditionally, technology companies have hired armies of sales representatives who have sold corporations expensive software that resided in their data centers. That business still exists, but it is eroding rapidly as cloud software, with its pay-for-use model, becomes mainstream.Cloud software, Ms. Greene said, is redefining the relationship corporate customers have with technology companies. “Nobody has figured it out yet,” she said. “But it has to span the spectrum from self-service to high touch.”The essence of Google’s appeal to customers and industry partners, is that “you sign up for keeping pace with Google’s technology development,” Ms. Greene said.Wix, an online service for building websites, has been using Google’s vision service recently. It lets users search the many thousands of images Wix has in its database. Creating an online jewelry commerce site? Search the Wix digital library of unlabeled, stock photos for “pearls” and “diamond rings,” and Google software finds those images.“It’s pretty amazing,” said David Zuckerman, head of the developer experience at Wix. “The neat thing is that the users never know they are using artificial intelligence.”Wix runs its sizable business on the cloud, and it uses the cloud services of Google, Amazon and Microsoft. Mr. Zuckerman welcomes vigorous competition among the three, which should insure lower prices and better deal terms.Recognizing it is the underdog, Google is starting to try harder with better support and terms, Mr. Zuckerman said. “I feel a closer relationship with Google, probably because it is not the king in this space,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Google Hosts a Forum to Help It Catch Up in the Cloud Business.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.