
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
MARCH 24, 2016
Got a minute? It may not be worth what you think.Ride-hailing services like Uber and shopping services like Instacart have been booming for the last few years, allowing people to save time without spending a fortune. Now, writes Farhad Manjoo, grim reality is entering the picture: The real cost of convenience appears to be rising.Take Luxe, a valet parking service that charged $5 an hour, or $15 a day, to have someone park your vehicle, saving drivers the hassle of finding a spot in a congested city. As the service has grown in popularity, however, prices have doubled. Complaints about service have increased, too.On the flip side, doing things for other people may be worth less than it used to be. Instacart, which buys groceries and delivers them to its customers, has, like Luxe, raised its prices and has also cut the pay of some of its workers.What we are seeing is, in effect, a rolling auction for the value of personal time: What will we agree to be charged to avoid having to find a taxi, go to Whole Foods or cook dinner? How little can you pay someone else to do these things, with some reliability?AdvertisementSince not all chores are equally onerous, the value keeps shifting. Uber, which vies with protectionist taxi fleets, has done well. SpoonRocket, which made and delivered meals that cost less than $10, closed this month after burning through $13.5 million (and earning mixed reviews on the quality of the food). Apparently more people were O.K. with making their own inexpensive meals.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Certainly, this could just be the shakedown cruise common in tech booms, the point where something that claims to “change everything” ends up changing just a few things.Like taxis — or local trucking. On Wednesday a start-up called Convoy announced it had raised $16 million, on top of an initial $2.5 million, to build a network of truckers who are willing to haul things generally within a day’s drive. A similar company, Cargomatic, has raised $17 million.AdvertisementOf course, auctioning off who is going to haul gravel isn’t about saving affluent people a few minutes. It’s about saving gravel companies money. And the drivers don’t have to worry that the gravel might give them a bad rating on Yelp.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »