
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
MARCH 28, 2016
“I stood alone in an empty room beside a ferocious dinosaur,” writes Brian X. Chen. He isn’t happy about it. Yet.Mr. Chen is reviewing the first games for Oculus Rift, the virtual reality, or VR, system released by Facebook on Monday. He does so with a certain crabby excitement: It requires a $1,500 computer-and-goggles setup that is something of an eyesore, the rig doesn’t fit, and some of the early games don’t feel as if they need this elaborate production.In other words, it feels like the early days in most path-breaking technologies. A little-noticed quality of the future is that it arrives consisting mostly of the past. All innovations consist of things already around us, with a few innovations — and people, even video game designers, interact with them using the rules they already know.It took about 40 years after the invention of the printing press for paper folding to commonly create smaller, cheaper volumes. In the early days of cars, people drove “horseless carriages,” fearful of travel at a ripping 20 miles an hour. The first web pages looked like cluttered magazines. In every case, it took awhile to learn the rules of the new tech, and then embed them into the product.AdvertisementThat seems to be where VR is now, here but not yet at home. Mr. Chen likes what he sees, but is waiting for more content, delivered better, and using features like motion controllers that will show up later this year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other things are also on their way, and could eventually make VR as ordinary a part of life as the iPhone (first released to polite bemusement in 2007, without the apps that made it essential.) Facebook’s work in livestreaming and 360-degree cameras are an attempt to build a network that can easily handle VR globally.As we recently wrote, some of the biggest tech companies are racing to make artificial intelligence part of the ordinary computing platform. This is already reshaping both the architecture of computing, and the kind of start-ups we’re seeing in Silicon Valley.AdvertisementIf the past is any guide, A.I. will be part of VR, once designers figure out how all this stuff should hang together. But that is all in the future. Which is, in a small way, always showing up in tech.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »