
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
MARCH 29, 2016
The Feds solved one mystery, and may have left the rest of us with several more.On Monday, Katie Benner reports, the Department of Justice withdrew a legal action that tried to compel Apple to thwart the security on one of its iPhones.It was not necessary anymore, the D.O.J. said, because it had been able to get at the data in an iPhones used by Syed Rizwan Farook, a gunman in last year’s mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif. The government is not saying whether it found anything of interest to its investigation in the phone, nor the method by which it cracked what was held to be a secure device.Neither of those things are particularly great news for Apple. If it was proved there was nothing of interest on the phone, it would not have mattered legally, but it probably would have made Apple’s life easier in the court of public opinion. Hints that there was vital terror information on a phone that Apple did not want cracked would not help its image.More important, the iPhone now seems less secure than Apple itself knew. As the government will not say what vulnerability it exploited, that means every phone out there will potentially carry the flaw.AdvertisementIt also implies that there are engineers outside of Apple more capable than Apple’s best with Apple products. Earlier reports indicated the F.B.I. was able to unlock the phone with the help of third parties. Nobody ever has a lock on all the smart people, of course, but no company likes having this pointed out, either.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Apple is probably not the only party walking away a little sore from this experience. Most observers were counting on this case to eventually land in the Supreme Court, where we would begin to hash out important issues of personal privacy and public security in an era of strong encryption on consumer devices.Like any good lawsuit, however, it probably does not end here. Apple may sue the government to find out how the phone got hacked, opening the way for a new bout of arguments on corporate needs and state capabilities. If the government is forced to do that, the iPhone will be a stronger, more secure device.AdvertisementOne thing is nearly certain: If a newly secure iPhone is someday at the center of a major crime, we are likely to revive something like the lawsuit that just got killed.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »