AdvertisementSupported byApp SmartBy Kit EatonThe iPhone SE and the 9.7-inch iPad Pro were the two headline-grabbing devices that Apple unveiled last week. The gadgets stand out because they go against a recent trend of larger screen sizes; both devices have smaller screens than their immediate predecessors.If you are tempted to buy one of the new Apple products, which are available in stores starting Thursday, one of the first things you may want to do is download some apps. Here are some excellent options.• Adult coloring books are popular, and my favorite iPad Pro app — Pigment — combines this childlike fun with digital convenience. Pigment lets people choose a coloring page from its archive, select a color and start scribbling on the screen with a finger or an Apple Pencil.The simple interface and realistic pencil-like graphic effects feel a lot like coloring on paper, with the advantage of being able to correct mistakes and use gestures to change the angle of the image or zoom in to see more detail. If you tap on an area, Pigment will only let you apply color there, which keeps your image tidy. You can also choose different pen and brush effects or fill areas with a gradient of color.Pigment is also available for iPhones and is free, with a limited amount of blank templates. A monthly subscription for new templates is $2.• For productivity, Microsoft’s familiar suite of business apps — Word, Excel and PowerPoint — work well on an iPad Pro (and iPhones too). They can be used just as they are on PCs to build documents, spreadsheets or presentations.In some ways, though, the iPad editions are better. That’s because there is seamless backup to the cloud, so there is no need to worry about saving a file in the wrong folder, then having to search for it later. They also work well with a touch screen.PowerPoint, in particular, is very well adapted to the fingertip, with drawing effects that would not work as well with a mouse or touch pad. Best of all, it’s compatible with other versions of the software, so you can start a piece of work on an iPad and finish it on your office machine.Microsoft’s software isn’t perfect, and while the business apps are free to download and use on iPhones, you can only read documents on an iPad Pro. To edit or make new documents, an Office 365 subscription is needed, starting at $7 a month.• Actually, I prefer Apple’s productivity suite of Numbers, Keynote and Pages. The apps are similar to Microsoft’s offerings, though Numbers may not have as many features as Excel.Still, Apple’s interfaces are more intuitive than Microsoft’s, and the apps are more relaxing to use. They can also save files in Microsoft-compatible formats if your office uses PCs. Best of all, they cost a one-time payment of $10 each.• To show off the gaming power of your new devices, one excellent option is Super Arc Light. This is an arcade-style game with minimalist graphics and one single control. Players control a gun turret orbiting a zone that must be protected. Tapping the screen shoots a weapon; once it’s fired, the direction of the rotating gun turret changes.The gameplay is weirdly tricky and compelling. Super Arc Light costs $1.• I’ve also been playing a lot of _Prism, on both iPad and iPhone. This is an abstract puzzle game in which colored spots are moved into place on the outside of 3-D prisms hovering in space. There are almost no instructions and yet the game is hugely absorbing. It’s $3.• To explore the graphics power of your iPhone or iPad, check out Assassin’s Creed Identity. This is a first-person role-playing game set during the Italian Renaissance, pitching you into combat with enemies in an incredibly detailed cityscape. You can customize your character and go on quests.The graphics look as good as on a console game and the fighting and exploring actions are fun. This is a complex kind of game, not a casual one to play in a spare five minutes. The complexity means that the game costs $5 and requires an always-on Internet connection, but it’s worth it.• Finally, here are a few staple apps to try: Manual (a camera app that lets you take control via manual settings, $3); Pocket (for saving long Internet articles to read later, free); Strava (for tracking fitness habits, free); Shazam (to identify music automatically, free); and the amazing GarageBand for creating different types of music ($5).Feedmesh is a news aggregator fresh on the Android app store. The aim is to make it simple to discover new and interesting news in a glance, which is why it keeps things in reverse chronological order and makes the source of each story clear. It’s free.Advertisement