
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
MARCH 30, 2016
William Hewlett, the Silicon Valley pioneer who was a co-founder of Hewlett-Packard, once said, “You cannot manage what you cannot measure.” Today’s technology entrepreneurs seem out to prove that the better you measure something, the more you can manage is an equally powerful truth.Take UberPool, which Farhad Manjoo writes about in his latest column. Uber is, of course, the ride-hailing service that enables most anyone with a car to be a paid driver, and anyone with the Uber smartphone app to hire a car instead of looking for a cab. UberPool takes the idea one step further by enabling multiple people heading in something like the same direction to share their ride.It’s cheaper than regular Uber. The company says UberPool rides cost less than half a standard Uber ride. A trip takes longer, though, and of course means you’re agreeing to spend time with other Uber customers.Uber makes less on UberPool rides than on its regular service but seems happy to pick up new customers, who might become Uber regulars over time. It is also going out of its way to show that UberPool takes extra cars off the road. Uber says that since it started, UberPool has saved 21 million road miles, with a substantial savings in emissions and less congestion and wear on roads.AdvertisementIt’s nice publicity, for a company that has a substantial inventory of negative stories.Let’s set all that aside, though, and marvel at the tech that enables UberPool (and Lyft Line, a similar service from the Uber competitor Lyft).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Uber and Lyft work because the location sensors in smartphones can precisely measure the whereabouts of drivers and riders and the companies’ software can efficiently match cars and customers. Later, mutual rating systems are supposed to provide a human measure of the experience, which since good ratings have rewards, is supposed to encourage better behavior. UberPool and Lyft Line take it a step further, by measuring multiple riders and matching them with vehicles in motion.Similar breakthroughs in measurement are at the heart of Google’s traffic maps, which warn of congestion by tracking how fast other users’ cars are moving. New kinds of measurement are how Airbnb matches people to empty rooms in apartments. Insurance companies that reward clients for wearing personal health trackers are using new measurement to lower their risk, and possibly inducing people to be more active.AdvertisementAs a culture, we fret about being observed too closely. As consumers, however, we love the benefits of this kind of surveillance, if successes like UberPool are anything to go by. That guarantees a future in which we’ll measure and manage ever more things.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »