AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike IsaacSAN FRANCISCO — Throw a rock in any direction in Silicon Valley and it may strike a start-up incubator, one of the now-ubiquitous programs aimed at helping entrepreneurs nurture their ideas into full-fledged businesses with funding and advice.Garrett Camp, a co-founder of Uber, and a few of his partners think that model may need tweaking.On Wednesday, Mr. Camp and his colleagues took the wraps off Expa, a start-up studio in San Francisco that claims to take a smaller-scale, more hands-on approach to helping new companies grow from idea to prototype to marketable product.Expa has been operating since 2013, but the group announced that it was opening up Expa Labs, a new six-month program for start-ups based in New York and San Francisco wherein the companies receive $500,000 in backing, office space and mentoring from a five-person team. Expa also said it had raised $100 million from investors to put into new start-ups and expand the firm.“Do you want a class size of 100, or a class size of eight?” said Mr. Camp, Expa’s chief executive and general partner. “What we’re offering is something for founders who want a bit more guidance than they may find somewhere else.”The timing for Expa’s grand unveiling is hardly fortunate. Over the last six months, there has been a sharp pullback in venture deals in the United States, according to CB Insights, a firm that tracks venture capital. Some pockets of start-ups — namely the youngest companies — are still raising money, but those trying to drum up investor interest in later rounds of funding are facing a tougher time, according to data from the National Venture Capital Association.Expa said the shift in the funding environment would actually help because the thinner the crowd of start-ups, the easier it was for the most successful ones to shine.“It’s just easier in these times for us to see who’s serious about building a company,” said Hooman Radfar, an Expa partner and founder of AddThis, a marketing technology company that was acquired by Oracle in January.In setting itself up as a smaller start-up studio, Expa is drawing a distinction between itself and Y Combinator, the most visible Silicon Valley incubator. Y Combinator often takes a large class of 100 or more start-up concepts and gives entrepreneurs time, money and advice. Many of the ventures fail, though some — including Airbnb and Twitch — have flourished. The “Y.C.” stamp of approval now carries a certain pedigree in Silicon Valley.Expa’s model is different. The firm focuses on a handful of start-ups at a time every six months. That way, one of Expa’s five partners — Mr. Camp, Mr. Radfar, Naveen Selvadurai, Roberto Sanabria and Milun Tesovic — can devote personal attention and resources to the founders on a project, based on their particular area of expertise. Each partner claims “ownership” of a particular start-up, something the firm claims can be difficult for investors who put money into dozens of companies and so have little time to spend with each.The Expa team also helps with practical services — like handling the paperwork of establishing a Delaware C-Corp company or dealing with payroll for a team of engineers — along with access to what it says is an extensive network of personal advisers.And because the Expa companies share office space, the start-ups can easily bounce ideas and experiments off one another, the Expa partners said.So far, Expa’s model is mostly unproved. The Expa partners point to Uber as a model for how they would like to build other companies. Mr. Camp helped generate the idea for Uber and provided early funding for the ride-hailing service before handing the reins to Travis Kalanick, Uber’s chief executive. (Uber was last valued at more than $62 billion.)Some Expa start-ups like Reserve, a company that deals with restaurant reservations, and Operator, a personal assistant application, have received modest early attention.Y Combinator, which last had 126 companies go through its program, said its members still got one-on-one attention from advising partners, and the start-ups continue to benefit from being a Y.C. graduate. Justin Kan, a partner and spokesman for Y Combinator, said several successful start-ups — including the T-shirt printing company Teespring, the on-demand delivery start-up Instacart and the crowdfunding start-up Tilt — had emerged since Y.C. began funding larger class sizes.Expa faces competition far beyond Y Combinator. Traditional incubators like TechStars and 500 Startups also abound, and large corporations like Samsung, Disney and Microsoft offer internal start-up acceleration programs.Expa said its focus on “quality, not quantity” would make a difference. “We are not playing the odds and investing in volume,” the company said.Advertisement