AdvertisementSupported byTech FixBy Brian X. ChenA dream of science fiction, which is how Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg describes virtual reality, is about to come true.Oculus, the virtual reality company that Facebook acquired for $2 billion two years ago, released its much-hyped Oculus Rift system on Monday. With a headset, camera and game controller, the system, which costs $1,500 when bundled with a powerful computer, is the first virtual reality product of its kind to reach consumers, before similar ones coming this year from HTC and Sony.“People who try it say it’s different from anything they’ve ever experienced in their lives,” Mr. Zuckerberg wrote in a Facebook post when he announced the Oculus acquisition. “But this is just the start. Imagine enjoying a courtside seat at a game, studying in a classroom of students and teachers all over the world or consulting with a doctor face-to-face — just by putting on goggles in your home.”Over the last week, I tested the Rift and many pieces of content for the system to see how true Mr. Zuckerberg’s words might ring. I can report that while the Rift is a well-built hardware system brimming with potential, the first wave of apps and games available for it narrows the device’s likely users to hard-core gamers. It is also rougher to set up and get accustomed to than products like smartphones and tablets.Here’s a tour through my early experiences of the Rift:The Rift works with technology that some might find anachronistic: a Windows PC, monitor, keyboard and mouse. With many people shifting away from desktop computers toward laptops, tablets and smartphones, finding a place to install the Rift and those other components may be a challenge. In my modest San Francisco apartment, I set up the system in the living room next to my television set. What an eyesore.On first use, the Rift felt sturdy and well made. The adjustable straps made it easy to fit around my head, and the built-in headphones create deep, high-quality sound. My main issue, which I suspect had to do with my face shape, was that I could not adjust the headgear to block out a small space right beneath my nose — I resorted to taping a piece of paper over it.Emil Rodriguez, an Oculus spokesman, said the headset is designed to take weight off the nose, which is why some people see a tiny space at the bottom of the headset.Getting started with the device took about an hour. Oculus instructs you to run an app that walks you through the process, which includes plugging in the headset and camera, synchronizing an Xbox controller and strapping on the headset.The biggest holdup was finding and downloading content through the Oculus app store. Many games are large downloads of more than 6 gigabytes, so a game took up to half an hour to download.After the “install” button was clicked to enable Windows to finish installing a game, there was another hangup: I couldn’t run a game and download another one simultaneously. Instead, I had to quit whatever I was doing in the Rift to download something new. That means it will take many hours to start a nice collection of Rift games.Gamers who play on PCs, PlayStation or Xbox are familiar with these more demanding setups. But those used to unwrapping, say, a smartphone, and getting started after a few taps may find the Rift’s setup laborious.Mr. Rodriguez said only some apps needed to be installed using the computer mouse; most should be able to be installed directly through the headset. He said downloads were paused while apps were running on the Rift to avoid compromising performance.I stood alone in an empty room beside a ferocious dinosaur. A few seconds later, I was crowding around a campfire with a fox, a deer and a rabbit. Then I was perched atop a skyscraper, looking down.These are some of the environments that Oculus places you in in a simulation it calls Dreamdeck, which serves as an introduction to virtual reality. As in an incoherent dream you might have after consuming a batch of special brownies, you jump from one disconnected scene to another.The Dreamdeck app is symbolic of the state of content for the Rift. The first batch of apps and games added up to a confusing, disjointed virtual reality landscape. In my tests, my reaction was more often “Why would I want to be here?” or “Why is this in virtual reality?” rather than “Wow.”One example was the Rift’s most prominent game, EVE: Valkyrie, in which you take on the role of a spaceship pilot killed in battle. Since your consciousness was captured when you died, it gets injected into a new body for every fight. The game, which involves steering a spaceship and shooting guns and missiles at other online players, was impressive and stimulating, and dying was appropriately stressful.But a reality in which you are a dead pilot enslaved to fight and die over and over? Hard-core gamers may love this, but I prefer to be in a less depressing place when escaping from actual reality. Put me on a beach where I can look at whales.Another game, Adventure Time, based on the children’s cartoon of the same name, took place in a more lighthearted atmosphere. It involved moving the protagonist, Finn, through a three-dimensional space, with the goal of jumping around through multiple levels in pursuit of a bad guy, Magic Man, to break a curse. The game was cute and fun, but it could easily have been played on a television set. The virtual reality headgear didn’t provide clear benefits.A better use of the virtual reality headgear was Farlands, a game that involved visiting foreign planets to gather information about alien creatures and plants by taking photos of them. Stepping toward the Oculus camera moved me closer to an alien so I could tighten the frame of the photo. Looking at a place and pressing a button on the game controller teleported me to that location.If you purchase the Rift, you had better have thick skin. The aesthetic of the headgear — it looks like a pair of black ski goggles with air traffic controller headphones built into the sides — is not designed to get you a date. And since wearing the Rift makes users less aware of the outside world, videos and photos of them donning the contraption — and taken without their knowledge — may end up on Instagram or Facebook. I became a subject of ridicule when my partner was watching TV and I crouched in the middle of the living room while playing the dead space pilot game.The Rift has other consequences for the mind and body. I felt mentally drained after 20-minute sessions. My eyes felt strained after half an hour, and over a week I developed a nervous eye twitch.Oculus recommends Rift owners ease into the headset: Use it a few minutes at a time initially, then gradually increase the amount of time. All Rift users should take short breaks after every 30 minutes of use, the company said.The headset may also leave lasting impressions, or what I call “nerd paint,” on your face. After a long session, the Rift left two sets of parallel horizontal lines under my eyes.The Rift’s graphics, sound and head tracking, which is the device’s ability to follow where the viewer looks, do feel like something out of science fiction. While the system’s setup is somewhat complex, the smoothness of the graphics and the high-quality design of the headgear make virtual reality feel ready for prime time.And yet there may be a higher reward for those who wait to buy the Rift.For one, Oculus has delayed the release of its motion-based controllers, called Touch, until later this year. In my experience, the motion controllers felt much more natural to use in virtual reality applications than a game controller.It would also be wise to see what games become available when PlayStation VR, Sony’s virtual reality headset that connects to a PlayStation, arrives in October. Analysts say PlayStation VR has an edge partly because of its lower cost — about $800 when combined with accessories and a PlayStation 4, or nearly half the price of a full Rift system.When it comes down to it, I don’t disagree with Mr. Zuckerberg that this is just the beginning of virtual reality. With about 30 games and a few apps available at Rift’s introduction, there isn’t much to do with the system yet. Oculus will eventually need a larger, more diverse set of content to transcend its initial audience of gamer geeks.I, for one, will be waiting.Advertisement