AdvertisementSupported byBy Eric LichtblauWASHINGTON — The epic fight between the F.B.I. and Apple over a locked iPhone is now over, but a central question in the case has remained unanswered: What secrets did the phone, used by one of the attackers in the San Bernardino, Calif., rampage, actually hold?The question has persisted with all the anticipation of Geraldo Rivera’s ill-fated unlocking of Al Capone’s secret vault on live television 30 years ago — which produced only a few empty liquor bottles and a stop sign.On Tuesday, the F.B.I.’s top lawyer shed a bit more light on the question, a week after the Justice Department announced that it had gotten into the iPhone without Apple’s help. The lawyer, James A. Baker, the bureau’s general counsel, told an audience of privacy professionals in Washington that the F.B.I. had extracted data and was putting it to use.He would not say, however, whether he considered the data — the subject of a monthlong legal battle between Apple and the F.B.I. that ended when an undisclosed outside firm helped investigators unlock the phone — to be “useful.”“We’re still working on that, I guess is the answer,” he said.But he added: “It was worth the fight to make sure that we have turned over every rock that we can with respect to the investigation. We owe it to the victims and the families to make sure that we pursue every logical lead.”Mr. Baker would not say for certain whether the content would be made public.“If and when it becomes appropriate to disclose it, we will,” he said.After Apple fought the F.B.I.’s efforts to force it to help unlock the phone, the bureau paid the outside firm an undisclosed amount to demonstrate for its investigators how to get around two defensive mechanisms that had kept them out.The technology company has been locked in a major legal battle against law enforcement officials over privacy and security.While the results were good news for the F.B.I., they have concerned privacy advocates, who say that Apple’s vaunted encryption methods may now be vulnerable.F.B.I. officials have been talking with Apple executives about the issue since they unlocked the phone, Mr. Baker said. But he added that “we have not shared the solution with Apple to date.”For weeks, law enforcement officials have played down expectations about what might be found in the phone, which was used last year by Syed Rizwan Farook before he and his wife carried out the California attack, in which 14 people were killed.Mr. Farook and his wife destroyed several other mobile devices, and it was seen as unlikely that he would keep sensitive information related to the December attack on an intact phone issued to him by the San Bernardino County government.Investigators have hoped that the phone might help them answer two lingering questions: where the couple went in the minutes after the shooting, and whether any unidentified people in the United States or overseas may have been involved in the plot.The only person charged criminally so far in connection with the attack is Enrique Marquez, a friend and former neighbor accused of providing the couple with the assault weapons used in the attack, and of conspiring with Mr. Farook in an earlier, unexecuted plot. The F.B.I. has executed search warrants at the homes of the attackers’ family members, but no relatives have been charged.Mr. Baker’s comments came at a public appearance before the International Association of Privacy Professionals. Michael Sussmann, an electronic privacy lawyer who interviewed Mr. Baker for the event, said afterward that the F.B.I.’s ability to extract any data from the phone after such a prolonged struggle was significant, even if the information did not prove particularly eye-opening.“If there’s more information in the phone — more contacts, more communications, more of anything — that’s a success for the F.B.I.,” he said.Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.Advertisement