By VINDU GOELAPRIL 6, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — As Yahoo asks potential bidders to submit first-round offers for its core business next week, it is also warning them about a troubling decline in revenue and profit while obscuring the costs and cash flow of various business units.Yahoo is projecting revenue of $4.4 billion this year, down from $5 billion last year, according to two people close to the bidding who have seen the confidential data the company has shared with potential bidders. That figure is on the low end of the revenue estimate the company shared publicly with investors in February.Even that revenue is coming at a cost, with Yahoo expecting to pay other sites about $1 billion this year for sending traffic to its advertising services.The company’s cash flow is also declining. Yahoo has reaffirmed to bidders its February projection that adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization would be about $750 million this year, down from $952 million in 2015.AdvertisementPerhaps more important to potential bidders is that Yahoo executives, including the chief, Marissa Mayer, are offering little detail about the costs and realistic growth prospects of various parts of its business.The financial projections being shared with bidders were first reported by the technology news site Recode.AdvertisementIn addition to its home page, Yahoo operates sites dedicated to news, sports, finance and other topics. The company also owns the Tumblr social network, operates a search engine and sells ads on thousands of other websites and apps through its Flurry and BrightRoll businesses.Potential bidders wanting to meet with Ms. Mayer or her executives are first directed to listen to a recording from the management team laying out the basics, said one of the people close to the bidding, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of confidentiality agreements surrounding the process.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bidders who get a meeting with management hear the same upbeat story of growth coming sometime in the future that Ms. Mayer has been repeating to Yahoo’s stockholders. When pressed on the strengths and weaknesses of specific businesses and projects, however, Yahoo executives have been closemouthed.Sarah Meron, a Yahoo spokeswoman, said on Wednesday that the company publicly disclosed many of its projections to investors in February and would provide an update during its first-quarter earnings call, expected this month. She declined to comment on the bidding process.Initial bids are due at the end of next week, but that deadline might be pushed back.Starboard Value, an activist hedge fund that is seeking to replace Yahoo’s entire board of directors at the next shareholders’ meeting this summer, has repeatedly accused the company of running a halfhearted sales process. That sentiment has been echoed by some potential bidders.For example, Yahoo has told private equity firms and other financial players considering a bid that it considers them to be second-tier bidders, compared with so-called strategic bidders like Verizon and AT&T that would integrate Yahoo into their existing businesses.A version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Yahoo Paints a Grim Financial Picture as a Deadline for Bids Nears.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.