
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
APRIL 8, 2016
Q. I want to start a blog at home but would like to update it while I travel. Is this possible to do from an Android tablet or do I have to bring a laptop? Do I need to use a specific blogging program?A. Several desktop blogging platforms have their own mobile apps, so using the same company’s desktop and Android offerings may make the experience feel more consistent. You can also find third-party apps that work with common web-based blogware in the Google Play store.If you are already invested in Google’s ecosystem with Android, the company’s own free Blogger software is fairly easy to use and has a Getting Started guide on Google’s support site. You can use the same Google Account user name and password you already have for your Android device, and you can compose, edit and update posts on the go with the free Blogger app for Android.The WordPress app for Android is another option for mobile posting and blog management. The app can tap into blogs living on the WordPress.com site or those that are created with the stand-alone WordPress.org software and independently hosted on other servers. The software is open-source and has a lengthy set of Frequently Asked Questions in the Support area of WordPress.com if you want to know more.Although it includes tools and subscription plans for building websites and e-commerce storefronts on mobile devices, Weebly also has a blogging component and an Android app. The service is free to use as long as you do not have more than 500 megabytes of data stored in your account — which may get eaten up quickly if you post a lot of photos. Weebly plans start at $8 a month for unlimited space and other features.And, if it is mostly photos you want to post from the road, the Tumblr service and corresponding Android app may also suit your needs. You just need to sign up for a free Tumblr account.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »