
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
APRIL 11, 2016
Q. I see that Windows 10 now lets you “write” on web pages. How does this work, and who can see what you’ve written?A. Microsoft’s Edge browser, new with Windows 10, adds a few features not found in the older Internet Explorer browser, and “web notes” is one of them. When you are in editing mode on a web page, you can highlight parts of it, create a typed note or write directly on a copy of the page with a stylus or a fingertip. Your personal annotations do not affect the actual live web page.To mark up a page, open the Microsoft Edge browser and click the Make a Web Note icon in the upper-right corner; the icon looks like a pen poised over a notepad. Once you are in the web-note mode, several icons appear in the upper-left corner of the screen, including a pen for writing directly on the page, a highlighter tool for emphasizing selected passages, an eraser to delete your markings and a button to click for entering typed text into an area of the page.When you are finished, you can choose the Save or Share icons on the right side of the toolbar. You can save your marked-up copy to your Edge bookmarks or reading list, or store it in the Microsoft OneNote program. Choosing the Share option gives you the opportunity to email an image of the page to someone, or post it to social media and other places. Clicking the Exit button while in web-notes mode discards all your changes and returns you to regular browsing.Web notes could be useful for tasks like marking up listings on a real estate site or modifying cooking instructions in an online recipe, and the feature may be easiest to use for those with touch-screen devices. Microsoft’s planned Windows 10 Anniversary Update this summer is expected to add more pen-based input opportunities within the operating system.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on April 14, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Making Your Mark on Web Pages.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »