By KATIE BENNERAPRIL 12, 2016
Max Levchin, the chief of Affirm, discusses raising $100 million for expansion as well as his views of online lending.Affirm, a San Francisco-based consumer lending company, said on Tuesday that it had raised $100 million in new funding, at a time when start-up fund-raising has become more difficult.The financing pushes the company’s valuation to $800 million, according to data from PitchBook, which tracks venture capital financing data. The new round follows $275 million worth of equity and debt fund-raising less than a year ago. At the time, Affirm was valued at $576 million, according to PitchBook, which added that more of that round was debt than equity.In total, Affirm has now raised $425 million in equity and debt. The company declined to comment on its valuation.Affirm’s new funding stands out because nine-figure rounds of fund-raising have been on the wane this year as investors have pulled back from putting money into privately held tech start-ups. Some companies are instead raising money at lower valuations than in the past, a phenomenon known as a “down round.” Yet Affirm’s valuation has grown by nearly 39 percent in this climate.AdvertisementAffirm was founded in 2013 by Max Levchin, a co-founder of the payments company PayPal; Nathan Gettings, a co-founder of the data analytics company Palantir; and Jeff Kaditz, the former chief data officer of the video game publisher Ngmoco.AdvertisementThe firm is at the forefront of start-ups that are using data science to more accurately assess credit risk than traditional scoring systems, which rely heavily on a person’s credit history. Affirm targets millennial shoppers, who typically have short credit histories and may find it tougher to get a lower-interest loan.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Affirm does not charge compound interest or other fees that are often difficult for credit card users to understand.Affirm said the new funding was led by Founders Fund, a venture capital firm. Previous investors include Andreessen Horowitz, Lightspeed Venture Partners, Khosla Ventures and Silicon Valley Bank.The new money will be used by Affirm to make more loans, as well as to increase the number of online retailers that offer its products. Over the last year, the number of retailers that use Affirm has grown to 700 from 100, the company said.Affirm also plans to create products and services that are offered directly to consumers instead of through retailers, with those set to be released this year, the company said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.