AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. When I turn on my Mac, I notice the Dock shows Google Chrome always open, even though the browser window doesn’t appear on screen and I’m not opening the program myself. Why is this and how do I turn it off?A. The OS X operating system can have your favorite applications open and waiting for you when you log into your Mac each time, so the Google Chrome browser is most likely on your computer’s list of programs to start automatically. (As you install them, some programs ask if you would like to open them when you start the computer. If you say yes, the program sets itself up that way.)In recent versions of OS X, one way to check whether a program is set to automatically open is to right-click (or Control-click) on its icon in the Dock, select Options and see if Open at Login is selected on the menu. If it is, you can turn it off there.You can also stop programs from opening when you log in by clicking the System Preferences icon in the Dock, selecting the Users & Groups icon and then choosing the Login Items tab. The Login Items tab lists all the programs set to open after you type in your user account password when you log in to your Mac.If Chrome is set to open — but not open any windows on the screen — you should see the box checked in the Hide column next to the program name. Click a program’s name in the list and then click the minus (-) sign to remove it from the list. (Some programs may add themselves back to the Login Items list when you update the software, so you may need to revisit the settings.)You can also designate programs, files, folders and servers you want to open when you log in. Click the plus (+) button under the list of Login Items and choose them in the next window. You can temporarily prevent any applications from starting when you log in by holding down the Shift key after you have typed your password but before you click the Login button; stop holding down the Shift key when you see the Dock appear.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement