
Bits By                     
 MIKE ISAAC and
 

 QUENTIN HARDY
 
APRIL 16, 2016
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Mr. Manjoo is still off this week, so Quentin Hardy, a Times technology reporter, is filling in.Mike: Ahoy, Quentin! I appreciate you filling in for Farhad on his third and last week of vacation. Let me just take a moment to say I haven’t taken three weeks off work in a row since my last visit to the hospital. That Farhad sure knows how to lounge.Quentin: Farhad has been away three weeks? Wow, he’s missed like five new versions of iTunes.Mike: Indeed. So, on with the week’s news!Microsoft decided to sue the government over the gag orders the Department of Justice puts on companies after they’ve received user data by obtaining a warrant. It’s been a practice for a while, blown wide open — or at least more widely noted — by the Snowden revelations a few years ago. Gutsy, Microsoft!AdvertisementQuixey, a deep-linking start-up that had a lot of hype in its earlier days, just gave its C.E.O. the boot after, uh, not living up to the hype.AdvertisementIn our insular media world, BuzzFeed — the digital journalism darling of the last three years — has had a few problems with hype as well. The Financial Times reported that BuzzFeed missed big on its revenue targets last year, and as a result it had to scale back its 2016 projections drastically. That sounds like a “FAIL,” but I am hardly inclined to “LOL.”Quentin: No LOLs here, when you consider, too, that Mashable also had a “rebranding,” and possibly also a “pivot,” seemingly away from news and analysis and toward video-centric lifestyle fun.It’s the kind of fun that begins with a bunch of reporters getting the sack. Online media turns out to be pretty twitchy stuff — the public seems to like really light and snacky content over reporting. Lots of us feel like BuzzFeed hit problems just as it was turning toward more substantive content.Mike: Right. There’s this tendency to engage in schadenfreude among media circles — particularly from “old media” types who enjoy seeing digital upstarts get their comeuppance. I think it’s bad when new approaches fail, because we’re all just trying to figure out what works. So, uh, I guess it’s a bummer.Moving on, Yik Yak — the anonymous messaging and chat app for the kids — seems to also be in a bit of a free-fall after raising oodles of money in 2014. It was last valued at $400 million, which is kind of a lot to pay for college frosh trash talking their professors in class. But what do I know, I’m a guy who decided to go into journalism in an era when its future is more fraught than ever.Quentin: You are also known for a Twitter avatar of a jovial cartoon bear usually associated with toilet tissue. I’m sure you’ll be fine.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mike: So, sticking with the theme of hype but perhaps inching away from the whole failure aspect, I want to talk about Facebook. This week at F8, Facebook’s developer conference, Mark Zuckerberg basically took to the stage to lay out the next 15 years of how he thinks the world will — or at least should — play out, technologically speaking.AdvertisementWe had 360-degree open-source cameras. We had the bot revolution. We had antennas connecting the unconnected. It’s all sort of smoke and mirrors right now, but Facebook at least seems to be making this real much faster than anyone would have ever thought.I mean, Zuck had guys on stage taking selfies inside a virtual reality environment — the most harrowing part of which was that there is such a thing as a “V.R. selfie stick.”But I digress. Facebook seems pretty optimistic on this future. Are you?Quentin: This is optimism with a lot of focus, too. Facebook may have had some smoke, but it held the mirrors up to itself: Facebook is now sending 60 billion messages a day, three times mobile phone SMS traffic at its peak. People are watching hours of video a day, and the camera will make cheap virtual reality videos a likelihood. I think Zuck purposely told the world precisely where he wants to be in 10 years so the developers can get him there in seven. Google and Microsoft before him used outside developers to get huge — it’s that playbook again.Mike: I’m particularly interested in the technology they will use to make me not look like a complete goober while I’m using virtual reality. I figure that’s at least 50 years out.Quentin: It’s amazing how far along V.R. is, when (ahem) virtually no one is using it yet, besides a few gamers. Yet Microsoft had interesting demos of its Hololens goggles. HTC, the Taiwanese phone maker that crashed in smartphones, is counting on V.R. gear for a revival. The Times is doing stuff close to V.R., with the aid of Google Cardboard. Facebook is even hiring anthropologists to figure out the right body language of avatars. There must be something there.Mike: Yeah, I guess.What I was told by someone who knows Zuck well is that he is particularly driven to “own the next platform,” and that he believes virtual reality is it.Look at the smartphone, the unquestionably dominant platform of contemporary society, for instance. Apple and Google have divvied up that platform all to themselves, and it has been unbelievably lucrative for their respective businesses. Amazon, Microsoft, even Facebook all tried — and failed — to compete for a measly third-place seat at the table. That chance is gonezo.So what does Zuck do? He goes for what he thinks the next platform will be and tries to own it before anyone really even uses it. It will take years to seed, and many factors for it to go mainstream. But I think he’s probably right in that it’s going to be similar to how we use consumer tech today — perhaps it will become our next console, like the Xbox, if not a more integral part of our daily lives, like the smartphone.AdvertisementQuentin: It will take years, but I think that was why he delivered a keynote that was pretty precise about the next 10 years, then backed it up with stuff in artificial intelligence, networking and devices that showed where they are focused. He’s hoping if lots of outsiders get interested and start working on this, it will happen faster. Ten years turns into six or seven.Mike: Anyway, all this freewheeling, optimistic talk about the future and platforms no one uses yet that are hugely hyped must be making Farhad jealous. I can hear him itching to get back to his column already.Thanks for pinch-hitting, Q!Quentin: It was a pleasure basking in your virtual presence, bathroom tissue bear.An earlier version of this article misstated the parts of Facebook that are now sending 60 billion messages a day.It is a combination of services owned by Facebook, not just Facebook Messenger.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »