
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
APRIL 15, 2016
Q. Now that I know how to check my smartphone’s cellular data usage, what can I do to conserve more of my monthly allowance?A. Restricting data-heavy activity (like uploading photos and videos) to Wi-Fi connections is one way to start saving megabytes. Storing documents, music and videos locally on your phone for offline use — instead of streaming them over your cellular connection — is another way to preserve more of your carrier’s data allowance.Using the mobile versions of sites like Facebook (instead of the app) may also trim your data use. Recent versions of the Android, iOS and Windows Phone mobile operating systems all have settings you can adjust to use fewer cellular megabytes, and they also show you which apps are the biggest data hogs.For example, in the Android Settings under Data Usage, you can restrict apps like weather and news widgets that download information even when you are not using them by turning on the Restrict Background Data option. You can also stop apps from automatically downloading updates to themselves over a cellular connection by opening the Google Play store, opening its Settings from the menu on the left side, selecting Auto-Update apps and choosing the option to update only over a Wi-Fi connection. You can use Android’s Data Usage settings to set up warnings — or even limits — on your cellular downloads, too.Apple’s iOS software has similar settings to tweak. In the Settings area under General, you can turn off the Background App Refresh option, and in the iTunes and App Store settings, turn off “Use Cellular Data” for automatic downloads; you can also turn off cellular data use for iCloud Drive in the iCloud area. The Cellular area of the iOS Settings has controls for limiting the apps that can use your cellular connection, as well as the option to turn off the data-guzzling Wi-Fi Assist setting if it is enabled.Some versions of Microsoft’s Windows Phone have a Data Sense app to help you track your data use and conserve where possible.Some apps may even have their own settings for easing up on their cellular demands. Google’s Chrome browser for Android (but not iOS) has a Data Saver function that reduces the amount of data the app downloads. Alternative browsers like Opera Mini (for Android, iOS and Windows Phone) also have data-saving tools; the separate Opera for Android browser also offers video compression.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »