
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
APRIL 19, 2016
Q. Is there any desktop program that allows you to enter data on a PC and synchronize it with multiple Android devices? I tried Palm Desktop and it doesn’t work so well.A. If you are using Google’s own personal information management apps for Android — namely Gmail, Google Contacts and Google Calendar — your data should sync to the phone and the tablet automatically when you enter information into the corresponding areas of Google’s website (Gmail, Contacts and Calendar) in your computer’s browser. The information you enter on your computer synchronizes to your Android devices over a network connection.Likewise, new contacts and calendar events you enter on your mobile devices sync back to your desktop and can be viewed in the web browser when you are logged into the same Google Account you use with the phone and tablet.Some of Google’s other apps can also sync data wirelessly with your computer’s equivalents. For example, you can sync your bookmarks from the desktop version of Google Chrome to the Android edition. Documents and files you store online with the cloud-based Google Drive service also sync online, and you can get to them through the Google Drive app for Android. (Third-party apps like Autosync Google Drive can even help make syncing easier and automatic.)If you prefer not to use Google’s own apps, solutions from other developers can also work. CompanionLink is one company that sells software for syncing Palm Desktop or Microsoft Outlook data to Android devices over a Wi-Fi or USB cable connection. Another option, the MyPhoneExplorer Client app, works over a local Wi-Fi, USB or Bluetooth connection to sync data from Microsoft Office and other programs to an Android device; the PC on the other end needs to be running the MyPhoneExplorer desktop software.You can also use one program as a personal information manager and another for syncing photos, videos and other files between the computer and mobile devices. Online file-storage sites like Amazon Cloud Drive, Dropbox and Microsoft OneDrive are just some of the services that have Android apps and a good chunk of free server space.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Syncing a Computer and Android Devices.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »