
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
APRIL 20, 2016
Q. I keep getting Windows 10 upgrade messages on my Windows 7 system. I don’t want to leave Windows 7 yet, but I’ve heard the upgrades are not free later on. Is this true and how much will it cost? A. According to Microsoft’s previously announced offer, compatible devices running authentic copies of Windows 7 Service Pack 1 or Windows 8.1 Update (the latest versions of both systems) are eligible for the free upgrade to Windows 10. The free upgrade is available until July 29, 2016, and comes in the form of a three-gigabyte installation file downloaded from Microsoft’s servers.The free upgrade is Microsoft’s attempt to move users from older versions of Windows to the latest edition of the operating system, which has newer features and better security. Microsoft charges about $120 to buy the full Windows 10 software for computers that do not meet the upgrade requirements, but the company has not yet released information about future pricing and what will happen after the time limit on the free upgrade offer expires.However, expect an announcement on Windows 10 upgrades by midsummer at the latest. When asked, a Microsoft representative said the company “will have more details to share as we get closer to July 29.” (A major update to the Windows 10 software is also due out this summer.)If you are happy with Windows 7 and your computer and peripherals all work well together, you can keep using it. Microsoft will provide security patches for Windows 7 until Jan. 14, 2020, and you may be ready for a new computer by then anyway. But if you are considering the free Windows 10 upgrade before the offer ends, make sure your PC is fully compatible with the new system, read up on the various Windows 10 online support forums around the web (to get an idea of technical issues you may encounter) and back up your Windows 7 system fully before installing the upgrade.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »