
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
APRIL 21, 2016
Automating friendship may be a laudable goal, but that doesn’t mean it’s going to be pretty.As Vindu Goel writes, a pair of Stanford graduates have developed an app called Down to Lunch, or DTL, that has been a huge hit with high school and college students. The idea is relatively simple: Bring a network of friends together, and one can signal to the rest interest in having lunch (or going to the gym, or going to church — probably not all three at once.) Friends, now signaled, are free to join in if they want to.It seems like an innocent piece of software, if limited to people of an age with fairly open schedules. But as the app has grown in popularity, it has hit problems very much of our time.Most troubling were a series of messages on Twitter that falsely accused DTL of engaging in human trafficking. There has been no evidence of that. On the DTL website, the founders say they are victims of a smear campaign that “someone paid thousands of dollars” to create. Twitter has apparently blocked some of the originating accounts, but the founders still hope fans will support the app by using a supportive hashtag. Good luck with that: Between posting the request on April 16 and late on April 20, it was used fewer than a dozen times.Another problem for the app is of its own making. Earlier this month, DTL added a feature that enabled the app to raid a user’s contacts, leading to lots of complaints about spam. It was discontinued after a couple of days, but again, Twitter is full of complaints.AdvertisementThat kind of unthinking irritation is a common enough problem in the consumer web. Facebook once introduced a feature that announced what people had purchased. Amazon deleted from its Kindle readers copies of novels it had improperly sold them. In both cases, the founders of the companies apologized.The charitable view is that much of online life is still new territory, and sometimes it’s only possible to learn where the boundaries are by overstepping them. It’s also possible to see these kinds of things as a function of living in a viral business — the hunger to catch millions of users can obscure the facts that customers are having individual experiences.AdvertisementWe’ll see in time if the kids are still down to DTL.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »