
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
APRIL 26, 2016
Q. What is the difference between muting and blocking someone on Twitter?A. Mute and Block are ways to better control what you see in your Twitter feed, but they differ in how your account appears to others on the service. Which one you use typically depends on the level of annoyance you are getting from the Twitter user in question.Invoking the Mute command on an account stops that person’s tweets from appearing in your Twitter timeline, but it does not alert the other user that you have stopped receiving the posts. You still appear in that person’s list of followers. Muting an account can be useful for tuning out political screeds from relatives or employers, ignoring obsessive posts about a topic you do not care about, avoiding spoilers from “Game of Thrones” and similar situations. You still see mentions and replies made by that person in your Notifications area.When you use the Block command on an account, you stop following that user and that user cannot follow you. The person is not notified of your move but can see the blocked status on your Twitter profile page. You do not get notifications when the blocked account mentions you, nor can the blocked account do things like send you direct messages. Blocking an account is often a way to deal with focused harassment on Twitter.Twitter also includes a Report command under the menu button on individual tweets and account profile pages. That option should be used for violations and intrusions like abusive behavior, harmful content and account impersonation. You can also use it to contact Twitter concerning suicide threats. The site’s online Help Center has a guide for reporting specific types of violations, including spam.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Mute Annoyance, Block a Harasser.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »