
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
APRIL 28, 2016
Q. Can I save and print highlights from books I use with Kindle for PC (running on Windows 10)? I also read these books on my iPad.A. Thanks to Amazon’s e-reader hardware and the apps it makes for other gadgets, its Kindle e-books can be read on numerous devices. The highlights and notes you make in your Kindle books, no matter which screen you have been using, are all synchronized over the Internet — and you can see all those annotations online when you log into your Amazon account.On the Your Highlights page, the highlights and notes you have made in all your Kindle books are listed according to the most recently updated. Here, you can also add, edit or delete notes to your books, copy and paste the text, and print the list from your web browser. (If you are proud of your markup on the book, you can make your highlights and notes visible to other readers by clicking the Your Books link at the top of your personal Kindle page and turning on the checkbox for Public Notes next to the book’s title.)Going through Amazon’s site is perhaps the most direct way to gather highlights and notes you have made on different Kindle apps, but you can also find several third-party browser extensions and other tools for pulling out and printing your notes. Bookcision and Clippings.io are two of the many Kindle-notes converters around the web.A Clippings.io extension for the Google Chrome browser that imports Kindle notes into the Evernote organizer program is also available for a $3 monthly fee, as is the Kindle to Evernote Chrome extension, which costs $1 a month, for those who do not use Clippings.io. The $5 Print My Kindle Highlights extension is another tool for Chrome users.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »