By CECILIA KANGAPRIL 29, 2016
WASHINGTON — The federal government is ready to set off a huge land grab for valuable spectrum, the last of its kind for the foreseeable future.The Federal Communications Commission on Friday said it reached its greatest hopes for the amount of spectrum it would be able to offer to wireless carriers in an auction scheduled to begin in late May. Television stations flocked to provide the spectrum, promising to sell enough of the valuable airwaves they use for broadcast programming to reach the agency’s maximum target for the auction. The airwaves will be reconfigured for the next generation of wireless services for mobile phones, cars and other devices that will connect to the Internet.The auction is drawing attention because of the kind of spectrum that is becoming available: low-band spectrum that is valuable for its robust qualities and capacity to penetrate thick walls and travel far distances. The sale of such choice spectrum is rare; the last auction in this band category was in 2008, and there are no plans for similar offerings in the near future.“Today’s announcement reflects the voluntary decision by many broadcasters that this auction truly is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity,” Tom Wheeler, the F.C.C. chairman, said in a statement.AdvertisementThe auction will be a multistep process aimed for completion in the late fall. Some analysts put the potential proceeds from the auction at tens of billions of dollars, but the final amount won’t be disclosed — nor will the sellers and buyers — until the auction is complete. All proceeds beyond what is given back to television stations will go to the Treasury.AdvertisementThe announcement was significant because there had been doubts as to whether television stations would want to provide enough spectrum for the auction. The great interest to cash out highlights the pressure on broadcasters, which face competition from the Internet, a dwindling advertisement market in nonelection years and aging audiences.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As a consequence of the auction, some television stations may close. Howard University, for example, has applied to sell airwaves used by its television station, though it has not said whether it will close its station. If it does, the move will dismay public interest advocates who fear the decline of diverse programming on television.Stations do not necessarily have to shut down if they sell airwaves. They may agree to stay open in their markets by channel-sharing with other local stations.Carriers are set to use the airwaves to build fifth-generation, or 5G, wireless networks that will bring Internet surfing speeds that rival the fast download speeds available through fixed-wired cable services to the home.The auction may also bring fresh competition to the wireless industry, which has been dominated by four national carriers: AT&T, Verizon, T-Mobile and Sprint. AT&T and Verizon together control more than 65 percent of the wireless market. Surprising new entrants may emerge with Comcast and the venture-capital firm Social Capital, which have expressed their intent to bid.Meredith Baker, president of the wireless trade group CTIA, said the organization was “encouraged to see so much interest in the F.C.C.’s incentive auction, which will play a critical role in making spectrum available” for next-generation wireless networks.A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: TV Stations Meet F.C.C.’s Goal on the Sale of Spectrum.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.