AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I want to move my iTunes library from my old Windows computer to my new computer, which runs Windows 10. Which method is the easiest?A. Migration software that transfers files from your old computer to your new one (like Laplink’s PCmover line), can move the iTunes library, but you may need to “authorize” the new PC to play purchased iTunes content by providing your Apple ID user name and password. You may be prompted to provide this information when you first try to play a purchased song or video. You can also press the Control and B keys to activate the iTunes menu bar so you can go to the Store menu and select Authorize This Computer before you try to play anything. (Your Apple ID credentials can also be used to download past purchases from the iTunes Store to the new PC free.)If you are not using a migration program, installing a new copy of the iTunes software on the Windows 10 PC and then copying the iTunes folder over from the old computer might be one of the easier alternatives for moving your collection. However, before you move the folder to the new computer, you may want to consolidate your library to make sure everything you play through iTunes is actually in the iTunes folder before you move it.If the iTunes menu bar is not showing, press the Control and B keys to display it. Go to the File menu to the Library submenu, choose Organize Library and turn on the checkbox next to Consolidate Files before clicking the OK button.Next, you need to locate your iTunes folder on the old computer. By default, it should be in your PC’s Music folder. Depending on the size of your iTunes media collection, you can move the iTunes folder to an external hard drive or to an online storage drive connected to your old computer. Once the iTunes folder has been copied, connect the external drive or log onto the online storage drive on the new computer and copy the iTunes folder into the Music folder on the Windows 10 machine.To make sure the new copy of iTunes sees your old library folder, go to the Edit menu, choose Preferences and click the Advanced tab. In the iTunes Media Folder Location area, click the Change button and navigate to the place on the PC where you moved your older iTunes folder.Lastly, if you do not plan to use the old PC any longer or want to erase the drive before getting rid of it, be sure to deauthorize the computer from your iTunes account so it no longer counts as one of the five computers that can play your iTunes purchases. In iTunes on the old computer, go the Store menu and choose Deauthorize This Computer.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement