

      By BRIAN X. CHEN

MAY 4, 2016

The technology shift in payments is gaining momentum.In the last two years, Apple, Samsung Electronics and Google have released mobile wallets. To combat fraud, merchants have also been moving away from accepting credit card payments with the magnetic stripe and instead are requiring chip cards.We decided to test how well these new technologies work. We found that mobile wallets were more convenient than chip cards. While all the mobile wallets generally work the same, they each have pros and cons. Here is a rundown of how the mobile wallets compare and where they are accepted.Who accepts it: 90 percent of the top 250 retailers, including Walgreens, Walmart, Best Buy and Target.Banks that support it: About 130 banks and credit unions, including Bank of America, Citi, Chase, U.S. Bank, American Express and Wells Fargo.Compatible devices: Samsung’s Galaxy Note 5, S6 and S7 devices.How it works: Add your credit card to the Samsung Pay app. To pay, swipe up on the screen, hold your phone to the terminal and scan your fingerprint or enter a PIN.Who accepts it: 2.5 million United States locations. Retailers include Walgreens, Dunkin’ Donuts, BevMo, Best Buy, Bloomingdale’s and Crate and Barrel.  Banks that support it: More than 2,500 banks in the United States, including Wells Fargo, Chase, American Express and Bank of America; banks in Britain, Singapore, mainland China and Australia.  Compatible devices: iPhone 6, 6S and SE devices; Apple Watch. How it works: Add your credit card to the Wallet app on iPhone. Hold your iPhone or Apple Watch up to the terminal. On iPhone, register your fingerprint to make a payment; on Apple Watch, enter your passcode. Who accepts it: About 64 retailers, including Chevron, McDonald’s, Jamba Juice, Bloomingdale’s and American Eagle.Banks that support it: 48 banks in the United States, including Wells Fargo, Citi, Discover, U.S. Bank, American Express and Bank of America.Compatible devices: Any Android phone that includes Google’s Play services and near-field communications.How it works: Download the Android Pay app from Google’s Play Store and set up the wallet with your credit card. Tap the phone on the terminal to pay.Advertisement