AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Can you recommend a better image viewer than the one that comes with Windows 10? The old Windows Photo Viewer was fine — maybe it is possible to get that back? A. The Photos app for Windows 10 automatically sorts your pictures into albums and comes with image-editing tools to improve and enhance your shots, but if you prefer the older Windows Photo Viewer program, you may be able to revive it. If you upgraded your computer from the Windows 7 or Windows 8.1 operating system, Windows Photo Viewer may still be lurking out of sight on the computer after being benched by the Photos app.One way to check if you still have Windows Photo Viewer is to right-click on a photo file, select the Open With command from the contextual menu and see if Windows Photo Viewer is in the list of programs to use instead of the default app. If it is, you can use it to open the file at this point, or go to the System area in Windows 10 Settings app and select Windows Photo Viewer in the Default Apps area.If you installed a fresh version of Windows 10 on the computer instead — and did not upgrade from an older version of Windows — getting Windows Photo Viewer is possible, but harder to do. Several Windows-oriented sites (including TenForums.com) have posted instructions for restoring Windows Photo Viewer to prominence, but you do need to fiddle with the Windows Registry to do it. Back up your system and proceed at your own risk.Should you decide to move on without Windows Photo Viewer, Microsoft’s Windows app store has several image-editing programs, including Fhotoroom and Adobe Photoshop Express, which are free with some in-app purchases for additional features. If you prefer a more nimble photo-viewer program, (typically used to open and browse images in a wide variety of file formats), well-reviewed apps include XnView, Imagine Picture Viewer, IrfanView and FastStone Image Viewer.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement