AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I changed my Mac’s user password for security reasons and ever since, I have been getting messages about programs wanting my “Login Keychain Password.” What is this and why is it happening?A. The OS X operating system comes with its own password-management utility program called Keychain Access that stores your account names and accompanying passwords for file servers, programs, websites and other services you use with your Mac. (Apple also has a similar feature called iCloud Keychain that syncs usernames, passwords, credit-card numbers and other information for sites and services between Macs running OS X and mobile devices using iOS.)You may not have realized it at the time, but you created this login password keychain when you first went through the assistant programs that opened automatically and guided you through the setting up your new Mac for the first time.The information you store in the keychain is encrypted and locked with its own password — which is usually the same password you use to log into your computer. As you recently changed the login password, the Mac is probably pestering you with messages about your login keychain password because it is still trying to use your old OS X login password instead of the new one.To get the login keychain up to date with the new password you are using for your OS X account, go to the Mac’s Applications folder, then to the Utilities folder within and open the Keychain Access program; from the Mac’s desktop Finder, you can also press the Shift, Command and A keys to open the Applications folder. When the Keychain Access program has opened, go to the Edit menu and select the “Change Password for Keychain ‘login’” option.In the box for Current Password, put in your old OS X login password. In the New Password box, enter your current OS X password and verify it. Click O.K. when you are done.If you are still having trouble with persistent messages, you can start over with a fresh, empty login keychain. In the Keychain Access menu, open Preferences and select Reset My Default Keychain. You can find additional information in the Keychain Access program by going to the Help menu and opening the guide.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement