AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — The Federal Communications Commission confirmed on Friday that it had approved Charter Communications’ acquisitions of Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks.The deals, which would create the second-largest broadband provider and third-largest video provider in the United States, now need approval from regulators in California. A state administrative judge there recommended last month that California’s public utilities commission approve the deal. That decision is expected at a hearing on Thursday.The Justice Department gave antitrust approval to the acquisitions with conditions on April 25, and Charter and Time Warner Cable shareholders have already agreed to the deals.Charter has valued its deal for Time Warner Cable at $56.7 billion, excluding debt, and the acquisition of Bright House at $10.4 billion.Thomas M. Rutledge, president and chief executive of Charter, said in a statement on Friday that the transactions had “significant benefits,” including greater competition, broader access to affordable broadband and new American jobs. He said the conditions imposed by the F.C.C. were “largely extensions of the longstanding consumer-friendly values and practices of our company.”The Justice Department said Charter had agreed to refrain from telling its content providers that they could not also sell shows online as conditions of its approval.A majority of the five-member F.C.C. voted to approve the deals earlier this week. The agency said in a statement on Friday that an “order detailing the commission’s reasoning and the conditions will be issued in the coming days.”The commission’s conditions would require Charter to extend high-speed Internet access to another two million customers within five years, with one million served by a broadband competitor, the F.C.C. chairman, Tom Wheeler, said.Charter, backed by the billionaire John Malone’s Liberty Media, has pursued Time Warner Cable since 2013. The two companies had acrimonious exchanges in 2013 and early 2014. That ended with Time Warner Cable rejecting unsolicited approaches by Charter and instead pursuing a deal with Comcast, the No. 1 United States cable provider. That transaction was ultimately abandoned.In addition, the commission on Tuesday approved the European telecommunication group Altice’s acquisition of the United States cable company Cablevision Systems in a $17.7 billion deal that includes assumption of debt.Altice still needs approval from the State of New York and New York City. If the deal is approved, Altice would become the fourth-largest cable provider in the United States. Cablevision has 3.1 million subscribers, mostly in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.Advertisement