AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike Isaac and Leslie PickerJack Dorsey’s appointment as permanent chief executive of Twitter leaves the other company he runs, Square, in a thorny situation.On Monday, Mr. Dorsey, 38, was named Twitter’s chief while remaining in charge of Square, a payments start-up. That means he will divide his time between Twitter and Square, just as Square is preparing  for an initial public offering that could come before the end of the year.A Square spokesman, Aaron Zamost, declined to comment on whether the company planned to file for an I.P.O.It is a difficult moment for Mr. Dorsey, who considers both companies to be his children, according to three people close to him. But the situation is even trickier for the employees of Square. Some of them are concerned about how Mr. Dorsey’s split attention will be received, according to more than a dozen current and former employees of Square and Twitter. Some said it seemed as if Mr. Dorsey was choosing his favorite child, Twitter, over the second-born, Square.Mr. Dorsey sought to quell Square employee concerns in June at a town-hall-style meeting in the start-up’s airy San Francisco headquarters. He told the gathering that he would not step down as chief executive of the company, which he co-founded five years ago, until he was “old or dead.”But confusion among Square’s rank and file has persisted. In late August, when a Square employee asked Mr. Dorsey on an internal company forum if he was also going to be permanent chief of Twitter — the social networking company that Mr. Dorsey had co-founded and where he was interim leader — he could not give a straight answer, according to people who saw the exchange and asked not to be named because the details were private.How Mr. Dorsey’s dual chief executive positions look to investors just as Square prepares to go public will also be a question mark. Taking a company public requires constant communication with regulators, as well as a breakneck pace of meetings with potential shareholders, and Mr. Dorsey risks losing some investors who might otherwise have participated in the offering.Square may need to accept a lower price as a consolation to investors who are worried about his ability to spend the time necessary to maximize value for shareholders, said several Wall Street money managers.“The market would assign a discount associated with him being head of two companies,” said Michael Scanlon, a portfolio manager at John Hancock Asset Management, who oversees $4.5 billion in assets. “It poses a challenge to him, in terms of management, with two companies that are in different life cycles of their business.”Mr. Zamost, head of communications at Square, said in a statement that Mr. Dorsey remained devoted to the company. “Jack has never wavered from his commitment to leading Square as C.E.O.,” he said.Square filed confidentially for its I.P.O. this year and it is unclear when the company will make the filing public. Advisers and underwriters are closely watching the volatility of the public markets and the direction of interest rates, according to people involved in the process. If conditions are not optimal, these people said, Square may delay an offering for the near term.Square already faces plenty of detractors. Founded in 2009, the company offers credit card processing for small and midsize businesses, and has expanded into other subscription services like employee payroll and scheduling. It has raised more than half a billion dollars in venture capital; at the time of its last fund-raising in 2014, it was privately valued at $6 billion by investors.Yet the company has repeatedly dealt with reports in the last few years that questioned its viability and business because of what some industry watchers consider its small margins. Square takes a 2.75 percent cut of most transactions, but must hand some of that over to credit card networks and other intermediaries.Insiders who have worked at Square say Mr. Dorsey has divided his time well among projects at the company that he deemed as needing the most attention — those currently being Square Capital, the company’s cash advance program; Square Cash, a peer-to-peer payments app; and a new card and contactless payment reader. He also delegates responsibilities where his product expertise and vision are not needed.“I’ve seen this before, once a team is superstrong and operating well, Jack moves on to the next thing,” said one Square director, who has been at the company since its early days. “It’s not realistic for him to be around all the time on every single project.”Insiders also cite Square’s executive leadership, many of whose members hail from Google, Facebook, Amazon and Salesforce, as a strong team that can support Mr. Dorsey on day-to-day operations as he runs both Square and Twitter.Some specifically point to Francoise Brougher, Square’s business lead and a former Google advertising executive, and Sarah Friar, the chief financial officer, who has a background in financial analysis at Goldman Sachs and McKinsey. As C.F.O., Ms. Friar will play a large supporting role to Mr. Dorsey in an initial public offering.Mr. Dorsey is not the first chief executive to encounter the challenge of being in multiple jobs when one company heads to an I.P.O. When Elon Musk took Tesla public in 2010, he was also chief executive of SpaceX, the rocket company, and chairman of SolarCity, a solar-equipment installation company.Tesla, the electric-car company, listed Mr. Musk’s inability to devote “full time and attention” to the company among the risk factors in the I.P.O. prospectus. The offering did not suffer — instead, based on greater-than-expected demand, Tesla priced its shares above the marketed price range and they surged more than 40 percent on Day 1.Mr. Zamost, Square’s spokesman, said in a statement that Mr. Dorsey’s multiple roles would not hurt that company, either. “Jack has built a deep bench of talented senior executives,” he said, and “he has shown for the past several months he has the ability, passion and commitment to lead both companies effectively.”Advertisement