
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MAY 10, 2016
Q. Does the Touch ID sensor on the iPhone work with more than one fingerprint? If so, can the other fingerprint be from someone else, like a spouse?A. You can use up to five different fingerprints with the Touch ID sensor that comes with certain iPhone and iPad models, so one of those fingers could be from a spouse. Apple’s support site does warn, “Each new print might make fingerprint recognition take slightly longer,” and keep in mind that certain circumstances require the numeric passcode instead of Touch ID to unlock the device.Opening the Touch ID & Passcode controls in the iOS Settings is one of those situations where you do need to enter the four- or six-digit numeric passcode for the device. Once you tap in the number to unlock the Touch ID & Passcode settings, scroll down to the Fingerprints section and tap the Add a Fingerprint option.The next few screens guide you through placing the new finger on the Touch ID sensor in several ways so the fingerprint information is collected and stored on the phone. By default, the fingerprints will be listed as Finger 1, Finger 2 and so on in the settings, but you can name them something more helpful by tapping an entry and typing in a new name on the next screen. (You can also delete a fingerprint here if needed.)If you have not renamed the fingers yet, you can see which one is listed under what name by placing a finger on the Touch ID sensor; iOS highlights the name in the list that matches the digit. Press the Home button to close the iOS Settings app when you are finished adding and editing fingers.Make sure your spouse also knows the iPhone’s passcode. Those numbers are needed after the device restarts, if a fingerprint is not recognized after five tries, or if the phone has not been unlocked in 48 hours.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on May 12, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Five Fingers on the iPhone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »