By NATASHA SINGERMAY 14, 2016
Harry Brignull, a user-experience consultant in Britain who helps websites and apps develop consumer-friendly features, has a professional bone to pick with sites that seem to maneuver people into signing up for services they might not actually want.He even has a name for the exploitative techniques: “dark patterns.” To him, these are debased versions of the typical sign-up, sharing, shopping, checkout and download processes that are standard practice online.“It’s a term for patterns that are manipulative, that you are doing on purpose to get one over on users,” Mr. Brignull said when I recently called him.A few years ago, Mr. Brignull started a site called darkpatterns.org to call attention to the practices.AdvertisementThere’s the “sneak into basket” technique, where a retailer automatically adds products — like a magazine subscription or travel insurance — to consumers’ shopping carts and makes it hard for them to remove the unwanted items. There’s the “roach motel” or “walled-garden” technique, in which sites offer fast-and-easy sign-up processes but make it much more cumbersome for consumers to close accounts.AdvertisementThere’s also “misdirection,” in which prominent marketing come-ons may distract users from seeing check boxes that by default, say, sign them up for a newsletter or membership, spam their contacts or alter their home pages.And then there’s scarcity inflation: “Only two hotel rooms left at this price!”“If it’s real scarcity, that’s fine,” Mr. Brignull says. “If it’s fake scarcity, that’s taking advantage of people’s natural biases. It’s a blurry line.”Persuasive design is a longstanding practice, not just in marketing but in health care and philanthropy. Countries that nudge their citizens to become organ donors — by requiring them to opt out if they don’t want to donate their body parts — have a higher rate of participation than the United States, where people can choose to sign up for organ donation when they obtain driver’s licenses or ID cards.But the same techniques that encourage citizens to do good may also be used to exploit consumers’ cognitive biases. User-experience designers and marketers are well aware that many people are so eager to start using a new service or complete a task, or are so loath to lose a perceived deal, that they will often click one “Next” button after another as if on autopilot — without necessarily understanding the terms they have agreed to along the way.“That’s when things start to drift into manipulation,” said Katie Swindler, director of user experience at FCB Chicago, an ad agency. She and Mr. Brignull are part of an informal effort among industry experts trying to make a business case for increased transparency.Ms. Swindler and Dennis Ellis, a user-experience strategist at her agency, gave a recent talk titled “Checkbox That Ruined My Life: Manipulative Design” at the South by Southwest Conference in Austin, Tex. They described the reputational and financial risks to online services that employ confusing strategies.Among other companies, they mentioned LinkedIn. Last year, the professional network agreed to pay $13 million to settle a class-action suit in which plaintiffs accused the company of sending unwanted emails to their contacts.AdvertisementSteve Johnson, LinkedIn’s vice president for user experience, said the company had worked over the last two years to make it clearer to members how the feature that imports their contacts works and to give them more control over it.“We need a way for them to build a network on LinkedIn quickly and efficiently without tricking them into doing things they don’t want to do,” Mr. Johnson told me.The presentation in Austin also cited Ryanair, a low-cost airline with headquarters in Ireland, which changed its checkout process after customers publicly complained about its practice of automatically adding travel insurance policies with their airfares. Whereas Ryanair once placed the insurance opt-out option in a drop-down menu of passengers’ home countries — between Denmark and Finland — it now simply gives passengers the option of adding insurance.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Everyone is pushing the envelope all the time,” Ms. Swindler said. “That just erodes the relationship between the consumer and the brand.”To help companies gauge where their techniques fall along the persuasive-to-manipulative spectrum, Chris Nodder, a user-experience consultant in Seattle, has developed guidelines for ethical conduct. Systems that nudge people to act in the public interest are “charitable,” he told me, while products like Fitbit, which may help people develop better habits, are “motivational.”“If the company benefits more than the consumer, I would call it ‘evil design,’” said Mr. Nodder, who wrote a book on the topic called “Evil by Design.” If an approach benefits the company and the customer equally, he added, “you are probably in the realm of ‘commercial design.’”For instance, when ride-hailing apps run promotions offering customers free rides to sign up their friends — and the friends get free rides as well — both the company and consumers benefit.And then there’s JustFab, an e-commerce start-up that runs subscription apparel sites including Fabletics.com, which sells fitness clothing. BuzzFeed has pilloried the site’s practices.Last week, Fabletics was offering a “new V.I.P. membership exclusive” in which it discounts various outfits to $25. When first-time shoppers choose clothing and check out, the site gives them a pricing choice that highlights the discounted V.I.P. membership offer in black and red — while displaying the regular, non-V.I.P. price in gray.AdvertisementBut this initial choice page does not inform consumers that the membership involves a $49.95 monthly subscription fee for clothing. That disclosure comes at the bottom of a subsequent membership page, where the site explains that it emails members a personalized selection of clothing on the first of every month.To avoid the $49.95 clothing fee, members must opt out online by the 5th of each month. To cancel their membership, they must call customer service.These kinds of subscription continuity plans are legal in the United States if the marketing is truthful and the terms and conditions are prominently displayed.In an email, Shawn Gold, a spokesman for JustFab, said Fabletics provided 14 different notices on the site about the subscription model, including two points where consumers must actively opt in. He added that the company was currently pilot-testing an online cancellation option.“Customers who accidentally sign up for membership are costly to the business,” Mr. Gold wrote. “So we do everything we can to avoid that from happening.”Other online patterns seem more puzzling to me.When I’m on the desktop computer at the office and finish ordering books on Amazon.com for an article I’m working on, for instance, I can never find a simple log-out button. Instead, I scroll down a column marked “Hello, Natasha — Your Account” and then click on an option that reads: “Not Natasha? Sign Out.” But the notion that in order to sign off, I have to deny that I am me always gives me pause.“It’s really clever — they want you to do something that is counterintuitive and maybe a little freaky to you,” Mr. Nodder said. “There’s an element of ‘Maybe I just won’t sign out this time.’”I subsequently ordered Mr. Nodder’s book on evil design from Amazon and then I logged out, my unease notwithstanding.A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2016, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: When Websites Won’t Take No for an Answer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.