AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. When trying to decide on a monthly data plan, how much should I allow for using streaming apps?A. Using your mobile-carrier’s network to stream audio and video files from a server to your device can definitely eat into your monthly data plan. Keep in mind that the quality of the streaming files and any compression used by your network provider may factor in, but you can get rough estimates by using the online data calculator offered by your mobile-network provider.For example, AT&T’s online data calculator estimates that streaming 30 hours of music a month (an hour a day or so) would burn about 850 megabytes of your data plan. Streaming 10 hours of video in standard definition can eat about 2.44 gigabytes of data, and 10 hours of high-definition video can chomp through 8.47 gigabytes. If you factor in other online activities you do each month on your phone — like web browsing, gaming, sending photos by email, video chatting — exceeding a monthly two- or five-gigabyte data allowance is all too easy.AT&T is not the only carrier offering rough usage estimates to help figure out the monthly data plan that works best with your online lifestyle. Sprint, T-Mobile and Verizon Wireless all have data calculators on their own websites and may try to entice you into signing up with special offers. T-Mobile, for instance, has partnered with many popular services such as Pandora and Netflix for unlimited audio- and video-streaming from those sites — streaming that does not count against your monthly allotment.If you want to stream less and save more of your allowance, look for services that let you temporarily download tracks to your device so you can listen without an Internet connection. In general, downloading music and video directly to your phone or tablet over Wi-Fi connection before you go is one way to cut back on your mobile data consumption, as is trying to stream over a Wi-Fi network as much as possible. Apple Music, Google Play, Microsoft Groove, Slacker Radio, Spotify and TIDAL are among those services with “offline listening” options, although you may have to pay for a premium membership to get that perk.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement