AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ.  I don’t see an option to print to a PDF in Windows 10. How can I set that up?A. If you are missing the Microsoft Print to PDF option in the Print dialogue box, it is possible that the driver software is not showing up because it is disabled as a feature, or needs to be reinstalled entirely on your Windows 10 system. To see if the option is merely hidden from view, press the Windows and R keys on the keyboard to open the Run box. When the Run box appears, enter “optionalfeatures” (typed as one word, but without the quotation marks) and click the O.K. button.The Windows Features box opens and displays a list of apps and tools you can use (or turn off) within Windows 10. Scroll down the list, check the box next to Microsoft Print to PDF and click the O.K. button to restore the feature. If Microsoft Print to PDF is not listed, you can try reinstalling it.To do so, go to the Windows 10 search box and enter “Advanced printer setup.” In the box that opens, click “The printer I want wasn’t listed” and then select “Add a local printer or network printer with manual settings.” On the next screen, go to “Use an existing port” and on the drop-down menu, choose “FILE: (Print to File).” Click the Next button.A box with a list of manufacturers and printer drivers will open. From the list of manufacturers on the left side, choose Microsoft. In the Printer column on the right side of the box, scroll down and select Microsoft Print to PDF. Click the Next button.When asked, choose the current driver selected and click Next again. You can rename the driver or stick with its default name. Click the Next button again to install the software. Once you have finished installing the driver, you should see the Microsoft Print to PDF option available on the Windows 10 Print dialogue box.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement