AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Quentin HardyOn Thursday I stepped into an elevator at the federal courthouse in San Francisco, smack into Larry Page and his retinue. Mr. Page is the chief executive of Alphabet, the parent company of Google. We were headed to the same court.Oracle Corporation is suing Google for copyright violations that could cost Alphabet $9 billion. Considering the sum, Mr. Page seemed pretty jolly while on his way into court.The copyright concerns Android, the operating system now used in 84 percent of the world’s smartphones. One of those phones was in Mr. Page’s hands, and he showed his crew a photo of a quote from the writer Jill Lepore: “I Google, therefore I am not.”It is part of an essay Ms. Lepore wrote about the way that facts have become increasingly elusive in a time where “data” is seen as identical with truth (it isn’t). Someone asked who Ms. Lepore is, then said, “Oh wait, we could just Google it.”Not a bad joke. Even Mr. Page’s personal assistant laughed.At the same time, Ms. Lepore makes a point that everybody in the elevator should consider. The Oracle-Google trial, a case I write about in the Times, creates a logical narrative out of selective facts. As with the facts one gets on Google, this often willfully ignores the larger context in which things happen.In part, this is the theater of the law. On the witness stand, Mr. Page was a less voluble man, uncertain and disputative in the face of questioning by an attorney for Oracle. In earlier testimony, Safra Catz, the steely co-chief executive of Oracle, appeared more sad than incensed at Google’s behavior.But then there are the facts obscured or omitted in the trial. Much of both sides’ story, for example, involves the collapse of Sun Microsystems, the inventor of the open-source Java code used in Android, which Oracle acquired in 2010. Neither side, however, talks about how Linux, another open-source project, was the real undoing of Sun. Linux was also one reason Google was able to get big so fast.If there are differing views on open source at the two companies, it has much to do with two different generations of software makers, which were essentially divided by the Linux experience. In life, if not in law, such context matters.There are other such omissions in this history. Like friendship: Sun was co-founded by Scott McNealy, a friend of Lawrence J. Ellison, the co-founder of Oracle. Mr. McNealy long disparaged Linux, before making a late-stage conversion that did not save his company.Mr. Ellison was also close friends with Apple’s chief executive, Steven P. Jobs, who believed Google copied the iPhone from Apple, and vowed to fight Google with his “last dying breath” over the offense. Through this prism, Mr. Ellison’s motives in bringing suit against Google become more complex and human.Though, as Ms. Lepore notes, being human may be changing as we move under the dominion of data.Advertisement