AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. How can I see who is connected to my home Wi-Fi network?A. Depending on your interest in technical fiddling, you can see what other devices are connected to your network in several ways. For one, you could log into your wireless router’s administrative page and check its DCHP Client Table (sometimes called the DHCP Client List or Attached Devices, as some router companies use different terms) to see the roster of computers, smartphones, tablets and other gear currently connected to the wireless router.The manufacturer’s support site or manual for your router should have instructions for logging into your router. The task is typically accomplished by typing the router’s Internet Protocol address into your web browser and logging into the page with the administrator name and password.You can also find out the router’s I.P. address using text-based commands in Windows or OS X. One way to do this on a Windows PC is to type “cmd” in the Start menu’s Search box, open the resulting Command Prompt (cmd.exe) program and enter “ipconfig” to see the router’s address — called the Default Gateway here. On a Mac, one quick way to find the router’s I.P. address is to open the System Preferences icon in the Dock, click the Network icon and look at the number listed next to “Router.”If that sort of thing seems like way too much work, you can also get a program or app that scans your network for connected devices. Your router maker may have its own app, like Netgear’s Genie, Linkys Connect or Apple’s AirPort Utility for iOS.You can also find software from other developers that is designed to reveal the devices connected to your wireless network. NirSoft Wireless Network Watcher. Who’s on my WiFi for Windows and the Fing network scanner for Android and iOS are among the options.Sophisticated network moochers may have ways of disguising themselves while snitching your bandwidth. However, if you have any suspicions — or see more devices connected than you own — consider changing your network’s password.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement