AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Jim KerstetterThe tale of a tech industry billionaire seeking to punish an online-tabloid editor who also ran afoul of a professional wrestler who slept with the wife of a friend who goes by the name Bubba the Love Sponge has — incredibly — shined a light on how Silicon Valley interacts with the press that writes about it.Throw in some questions about how rich people can secretly fund lawsuits and what that means for a free press and you have a very ugly example of what happens when New York tabloid sensibilities crash into Silicon Valley entitlement.In case you missed it, the story goes something like this: Nick Denton, the founder and boss of Gawker Media, was sued by Hulk Hogan, the well-muscled and well-mustachioed former professional wrestler whose real name is Terry G. Bollea, after Gawker published a video of Mr. Bollea having sex with the wife of the radio host Bubba the Love Sponge (who legally changed his birth name, Todd Clem, in 1999).In a decision startling for its size, a Florida jury found in favor of Mr. Bollea, and ordered Gawker to pay him $140 million. On Monday,  Andrew Ross Sorkin, a columnist for The New York Times, wrote that Mr. Denton wondered if someone in Silicon Valley was bankrolling Mr. Bollea’s legal case. That’s not illegal, but it is troubling to people who worry that it is a way for the wealthy to secretly promote an agenda or punish their enemies.On Tuesday evening, Forbes reported that Peter Thiel, the billionaire co-founder of PayPal and early investor in Facebook, was the man behind the curtain. Valleywag, one of Gawker’s websites, ran an article in 2007 that outed Mr. Thiel as gay, though he is now open about his sexual orientation.Mr. Thiel is a patient man, and he says he is not motivated by  revenge. Mr. Hogan’s victory in the courtroom happened more than eight years after the Valleywag story about Mr. Thiel’s sexual orientation.The tech press gets plenty of criticism — much of it deserved — for being too cozy with the people it writes about. It’s hardly unusual for tech writers or editors to become venture capitalists, public relations officials or some other eager supplicants to the industry they were supposed to be scrutinizing.The arrival of Valleywag turned that dynamic on its head. Fawning became mocking. Glad-handing turned into digging into personal lives. Much of it was cruel, some of it disreputable. But it was almost always attention-grabbing.Mr. Thiel is not done. He told Mr. Sorkin on Wednesday that he was funding other lawsuits against Gawker, though he would not identify them.For the rest of the press, Mr. Thiel’s crusade could be a scary example for other rich people who want to get even with a publication.Advertisement