AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Farhad Manjoo and Mike IsaacEach Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Mike: Ahoy, Farhad. I can’t wait for the holiday weekend, when I plan to abscond from my life of doing absolutely nothing in the city to doing absolutely nothing in the country.Farhad: Wait, it’s a holiday? I couldn’t tell — I still have to chat with you, which isn’t much of a holiday. Oh, snap!Mike: Indeed. Onto the news.So, Amazon stopped honoring partial refunds on most items that drop in price after you buy them, probably a reaction to the many start-ups that track that sort of thing and alert users to when they can get a refund from Amazon. Probably smart, although I am bummed that I now have to buy toilet paper full price, no matter what.Volkswagen invested a bunch of money into Gett, a ride-hailing app that’s big in Europe. Not to be outdone, Uber quickly put out a news release saying that it, too, had raised money from an automaker, Toyota — which is classic Uber, ruining someone’s victory lap.Also, Alibaba said its accounting practices were under investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission, which reminds me, I should probably do my taxes.Farhad: You do know the deadline has passed, right? Anyway, speaking of huge federal court cases, Google won a long-running dispute with Oracle over the legality of the code in its Android operating system. Parts of Android use the open-source language Java, which Oracle owns.Oracle claimed it was entitled to $9 billion in royalties from Google. The case was supercomplicated but many programmers worried that a win for Oracle would cast a shadow over the legality of using open-source code, which is at the center of a lot of the technology that modern computing relies on. A jury sided with Google.Do you understand any of this? I’m guessing no. The upshot for you is, thanks to this win, your phone won’t get superexpensive and will probably still keep getting better. And that’s probably pretty much all you care about.Mike: Farhad, please. I use an iPhone.Let’s talk about the big news of the week, or month, in tech and media land: #Thielgate.I’ll make this quick: Our colleague Andrew Ross Sorkin spoke to Nick Denton, founder of Gawker Media, which was embroiled in a lawsuit with Hulk Hogan, née Terry Bollea, after Gawker published a tape of Mr., er, Hogan, having sex with another man’s wife on camera. It finally got out that Peter Thiel, a billionaire Silicon Valley figure of Facebook and PayPal fame, was the one funding Mr. Bollea’s lawsuit — along with a few others, who have not been disclosed — an apparent vendetta for what Thiel considers nasty, vindictive coverage from the outlet for more than a decade.The story is sort of unbelievable, in and of itself, but also hits a sweet spot within all the crazy things that editors love: tech, billionaires, tech billionaires and, of course, media.Farhad: Man, what a crazy story. And it’s been interesting to see the reaction to the whole situation online. Predictably, everyone lined up with their tribes — people in the media seem overwhelmingly on Gawker’s side, while tech people have been roundly supportive of Thiel.The basic argument of those on the tech side was that Gawker was singularly bad. They said that Gawker abused its journalistic platform, it routinely invaded people’s private lives, including outing their sexual orientation, and in other ways made life very difficult for wealthy coastal techies.I’ve certainly not been a fan of everything Gawker has done. But I’m struck by the inability of techies to consider both the proportionality of this punishment and the chilling effects this case could induce on the media generally. First, to me, it doesn’t make sense that a small excerpt from a sex tape should result in a company-ending decision. And I don’t see how techies could support that.Mike: I remember tech versus the F.B.I. squaring off a few months ago. The government said that the iPhone they wanted to hack was a special, one-off case and that it wouldn’t force Apple to hack its own phones again in the future. Apple, and techies, said they feared the precedent it could set. Déjà vu!Farhad: Right, it’s a strange twist. And imagine if this same kind of punishment — the idea that a single post could lead to damages of $140 million — were applied to to the rest of the tech industry. It would be ruinous to a business whose mantra is to move fast and break things. For example: The blood-testing start-up Theranos just had to invalidate two years of blood tests because of alleged lab mismanagement. The adult meetup site Ashley Madison protected its user database so poorly that its whole collection was leaked after a hack, ruining many lives. Facebook, Google, Twitter, Snapchat and several other tech companies have been forced to sign 20-year legal agreements with the Federal Trade Commission over their reckless privacy standards.All of these examples are potentially far more damaging to the world than a leaked sex tape. But none of these companies were fined anywhere near hundreds of millions of dollars for their recklessness. Do tech venture capitalists really want to support a system in which moving fast and breaking things results in company-ending lawsuits?Mike: Here’s the flip side of that argument: I’ve had quite a few tech workers tell me via Twitter that the reason anti-Slapp laws — or those that protect against frivolous lawsuits — exist is because of this very thing. If the system is doing its job, then the news organization has nothing to worry about, and the frivolous will be sorted out while those cases with merit will soldier on.I’m not sure I quite believe that. But it’s fair to say that Gawker had its day in court — with a lot of caveats over jurisdiction and judge and jury, Gawker supporters would say — and that the company lost the case. This should be a deterrent to “bad” journalism.That’s a rosy view, but again, I don’t quite buy it wholesale. Do I agree with every story Gawker chooses to publish? No. Do I think they do good journalism? Absolutely. Do I think people with money will use a tactic such as Thiel’s for only its “proper” and intended purpose of eliminating the wrong in the world? No way, José.Farhad: That’s Mr. José to you, pal. Anyway, sure, Gawker had its day in court and it lost (and it is appealing). But as the journalist Felix Salmon has argued, if Thiel-like litigation financing becomes widespread, it could place burdens on all publications, even ones that aren’t as reckless as Gawker was. It essentially forces media companies to put more of their articles through legal review, an idea that doesn’t scale to the kind of freewheeling media that tech types are themselves financing — sites like BuzzFeed, Vox, Business Insider and Vice.But I don’t want to get too carried away with this. Because, taking a cue from Wired, I should add here that I love Peter Thiel! He’s a gentleman and a scholar, a first-rate chap. Peter, I have two children and a mortgage. Please don’t sue me.Mike: You could always pawn some of your gadgetry to post bail. Until next week!Advertisement