AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Facebook has taken it upon itself to notify me of “memories” of my past posts, but some of these updates are painful, especially when photos of people or pets who have died appear on my computer screen. Is there any way to turn this off?A. According to Facebook’s Help guide, you can turn off the “On This Day” notifications for your newsfeed — or you can keep the notifications coming but filter out memories of specific people or days. To do so, log into your Facebook account and go to facebook.com/onthisday. Click the Notifications button at the top of the page and choose Off from the menu to disable these reminders.If you would prefer to keep the overall notifications on but screen out mentions of particular people or calendar dates, click the Preferences button (to the right of the Notifications button) at the top of the On This Day page. In the box that appears, click the Edit button next to People and enter the names of those tagged individuals you would rather not see in your feed.Likewise, click the Edit button next to Dates in the On This Day preferences box and pick the days you would rather forget. Click the Save button when you are finished.Even if you turn off the regular notification alerts for On This Day posts, Facebook may occasionally insert one of your old photos into your newsfeed, much like a sponsored post or advertisement to get your attention. To help eliminate these, click the small arrow icon in the upper-right corner of the post to get the option to hide it. When you do, Facebook says it will show fewer of these posts in your feed. However, if you would rather not see any of them, go back to your On This Day preferences page and put in a wide range of excluded dates — perhaps from the month before you joined Facebook to a day several years in the future.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement