
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
JUNE 1, 2016
Virtual reality is all fun and games, until your avatar gets strip-searched at the border.Things haven’t gone that far yet, but it might be time to get ready. As Farhad Manjoo reports, the biggest American technology companies appear to be headed for a global clash with governments that want to curb their practices.The most familiar controls have to do with the storage and movement of personal data, which compelled Amazon to build data centers in Germany to abide with laws on keeping personal information inside that country. At the time, an Amazon executive called German law “a form of customer demand.”New types of control go into things like perhaps compelling Netflix to offer local content in Europe and forbidding Facebook to provide a limited type of free internet access and refusing Apple’s attempt at selling refurbished iPhones in India.The Indian government wants smartphones that have 30 percent local parts, but the big global conflict here is equally about the way that technology is now overtly steering culture, something nations often protect as vigorously as their borders.AdvertisementThat is ironically fitting. As the late Benedict Anderson pointed out, the nation-state came about as a result of technology: The printing press created the mass market of vernacular literature, including (thanks to the likes of Martin Luther, the first best-selling writer) translations of the Holy Bible. Marketing directly to speakers of French, English and German created a new kind of language and cultural consciousness that hadn’t existed before. Over time, that turned into the ideas of a nation and a people. No Gutenberg, no nations.AdvertisementThe new borderless technologies appear to be having much the same effect, at lightning speed. Bitcoin, the currency backed by no government, creates a belief in a kind of transnational society of Bitcoin holders. Google Translate collapses the barrier of language, so a Finnish and a Chinese speaker can converse with just a smartphone between them. Facebook’s 10-year plan to put enough bandwidth in the world for virtual reality anywhere indicates that even cultural gestures will be shared with everyone.At first pass, the spread of these seemingly limitless freedoms seems akin to the spread of American products like Hollywood movies and rock ’n’ roll across much of the world (much to the consternation of many governmental, cultural and religious leaders.) Or maybe they seem like the less-remarked-on spread of Western democratic tropes after World War II, so that even a totalitarian state like North Korea holds sham elections to declare its government the people’s will.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That seems to be the case, since places like Europe worry about the big computers of Google and Amazon, but not so much about similarly sized systems inside the Chinese giants Alibaba and Tencent. The Chinese companies tend to stay inside China.In fact, it may be something newer and more threatening to the state: the triumph not of American values but of algorithmic ones, designed to engage the largest audience, to understand the most about a person and to infer the greatest number of patterns in nature and society in order to exploit them.For now, one or another intelligence agency may snoop on an American tech company’s findings, but as the recent Apple-F.B.I. conflict shows, that doesn’t mean interests are allied anymore.There is no allegiance to any government, perhaps, but to something we don’t yet understand. It could be maximizing scientific discovery or ensuring the most consumer pleasure, or connecting with people who matter most. Big as they are, the new systems are still only partly built out.Even the chief executives at the biggest of them don’t know where all this will lead, any more than Gutenberg could have foreseen Martin Luther and the nation-state.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »