AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. The thought of ransomware aimed at the Mac makes me nervous. What other Mac threats are out there and who makes OS X antivirus software?A. While generally much less of a target than the Windows operating system, Apple’s OS X system for the Mac has experienced a few dedicated attacks from malicious software over the past several years, including Flashback and Xcodeghost. Keeping your Mac updated with the latest security patches from Apple and using strong passwords (that are frequently changed) can help protect your system.In addition to offering its own suggestions for safer computing to Mac users, Apple promotes the security features it builds into OS X, including malware detection and the ability to encrypt data with the FileVault tool. To avoid malware, the company also advises users to install software from the Mac App Store or other trusted sources only.For another layer of protection, adding a security suite or antivirus program could help detect threats that may emerge against the Mac. Depending on what you want and how much you want to pay, you can find free basic virus scanner programs as well as comprehensive security suites.Independent software evaluation sites like AV-Test and AV Comparatives do annual reviews of most major security programs for the Mac, and are a good place to start reading about what products are available. Avria, Avast Software, BitDefender (which also has a free Virus Scanner app), Intego and Malwarebytes are among the increasing number of companies now making Mac security software.However, keep in mind that many security problems for OS X and Windows start with phishing and other forms of social engineering attacks. Through fraudulent email messages, tainted web links or rogue file attachments, criminals try to fool the user by deceptively wheedling out passwords, credit card numbers and other personal information.The United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team has an extensive online guide to protecting oneself, as does the consumer-oriented OnGuardOnline.gov site from the Federal Trade Commission.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement