AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Farhad Manjoo and Lydia PolgreenEach Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Mike is off this week, so Lydia Polgreen, associate masthead editor, filled in.Farhad: Hello, Lydia! I’m thrilled to be chatting with you this week in Mike’s absence (he’s gone on a spiritual journey to find himself, last I heard; I worry that he’ll be horrified if the search is successful). Anyway, I believe your official title at The Times is editorial director of New York Times Global, but I think of you as the person in my Twitter feed who’s always posting interesting stuff about places outside of America — for which I thank you.Lydia: So great to be here! I know the usual mode here is mocking banter, but if you’ll allow it, I’ll gush a tiny bit about your column this week.Farhad: O.K., reluctantly, I’ll allow you to gush about me. Wow, you’re already more fun than Mike.Lydia: Your piece touched on a topic near and dear to my heart: the increasing fragmentation of the (lowercase, at last) internet. Countries around the world are taking very different approaches to shaping the online experience of their citizens, and it threatens to take the first W out of the world wide web. Or maybe even the first two. If the web is neither world nor wide, the ambitious global strategies of companies like Netflix, Facebook, Apple and even The little old New York Times face serious bumps on the information superhighway.Farhad: Yes, it’s an odd time, because one of the seminal ideas of the internet was that it would transcend borders. That is turning out to be not quite true.O.K., on to tech news. Let’s start with social apps. On the one hand, there’s Twitter. According to an article in Vanity Fair by our former colleague Nick Bilton, who might be the world’s leading expert on the dysfunction at the 140-character company, Twitter’s newish chief executive, Jack Dorsey, isn’t having much luck reviving the company’s fortunes.One of the juiciest details: To satisfy Wall Street’s desire for higher user numbers, Twitter goosed activity on the site by sending lapsed users an email claiming that there might be something wrong with their accounts. They log on to fix the problem and voilà — they’re counted as active users!Lydia: Nick suggested that Twitter isn’t doing that anymore, which I suppose is an improvement under Mr. Dorsey’s leadership. But the point remains — the company is still in search of an elusive path to user growth.Farhad: Then there’s Snapchat. Last week it raised $1.8 billion from investors. This week Bloomberg reported that the picture-based social network has passed 150 million active users a day, meaning that it’s more popular than Twitter.Do you use Snapchat? I see its appeal, but I spend so much time on Twitter that I haven’t really had time to cultivate this new place to waste time. So basically I’m spending all my goofing-off energy on the wrong platform. And I gather you are, too? Boy, we media people sure know how to pick ‘em.Lydia: I keep meaning to ask Jenna Wortham for a tutorial. I have played around with Snapchat a bit, but its ephemeral nature doesn’t really give me the same sense of time-wasting achievement as knowing that I’ve sent 28,500 messages since I joined Twitter, enough to fill that book I keep telling myself I’ll write many times over.Farhad: Moving on from social apps to the internet of things: Tony Fadell, head of Alphabet’s Nest, left the company after lots of reports of management tumult. He spoke to our Steve Lohr about his departure.And let’s talk politics: Donald Trump, Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton were all in California this week campaigning for next week’s primary. This got folks thinking about tech and the election, and our colleague David Streitfeld had an important, if unsurprising, update: Almost nobody in Silicon Valley supports Donald Trump.Sure, there are exceptions like the Gawker-hunter and venture capitalist Peter Thiel, who is a Trump delegate, but for the most part, Mr. Trump turns people in the Valley off. HP Inc. also said this week that it would not contribute financially to the Republican National Convention.Mr. Trump has attacked Apple, Facebook and Amazon, so his unpopularity in Silicon Valley is no surprise. But David’s report also suggested that Hillary Clinton, who hasn’t really championed the tech industry in her run, is also greeted with mild skepticism here. In the Obama era, tech companies have been revered — Google has easy access to the White House, and many Obama staff members have gone to work for the tech industry. But both Mr. Trump and Ms. Clinton seem destined to view tech more skeptically. So I wonder: Is that good?Lydia: One of the most genuinely interesting strains in recent political life, in my book, is techno-utopian libertarianism, which runs so counter to Trumpism. Few people embody it more than Mr. Thiel, making his support for Mr. Trump a bit of a head scratcher. But he’s an outlier.Don’t you think that the tech skepticism among the major candidates reflects the bloom coming off the tech rose in general, and a yearning for a pre-internet era when everyone had good jobs and the future seemed so bright?We’ve long feared that technology would eat our jobs, but platforms like Uber and TaskRabbit offer a dystopian look at what a future of fragmented employment might actually look like. And with wages and jobs at the center of much of the campaign for both Democrats and Republicans, there isn’t much to love there. Data breaches scare the bejesus out of everyone. And in an anti-establishment moment, it has become clear that tech has matured into the establishment.Farhad: I think that’s right, tech has become the establishment. In my columns, I’ve been harping on the dominance of the Big five American tech giants — Apple, Amazon, Facebook, Microsoft and Google’s parent company, Alphabet. These companies are so deeply embedded in people’s lives that they seem inescapable, and their very ubiquity makes them obvious targets for politicians. Whoever wins, tech is going to become a target, I think.Anyway, great to chat with you, Lydia. See you on Twitter!Lydia: Thanks for having me, Farhad. Maybe Mike never finds himself and we can do this again sometime!Advertisement