By FARHAD MANJOOJUNE 7, 2016
At the climax of “Ace Ventura: Pet Detective,” the 1994 comedy that vaulted Jim Carrey into superstardom, our rubber-faced hero has a showdown with a woman who he suspects was once a man.Not that she’s called “transgender” in the movie. The term was not in widespread use at the time, and there was little culturally suspect then about playing gender identity for laughs. Instead, as in many fictional depictions of transgender people in that era, the scene’s prevailing emotion is of nose-holding disgust.Though there are still controversies about how the media treats gender identity, it’s fair to say that no major studio today would release a film that depicted transgender people so cruelly. Movies and television shows now abound with trans characters who are real people, not the convenient targets of gross-out jokes — see “Orange Is the New Black” or “Transparent.”How, in the span of just two decades, did transgender people go from being an acceptable target of movie bigotry to being a group whose rights are now championed by presidential order? People in the movement for transgender equality cite many reasons for rising acceptance, among them the spillover effects of the gay rights movement and a sustained effort by transgender activists, entertainers and ordinary people to make themselves and their lives more visible.AdvertisementBut there has also been another force at play: Facebook.Many in the trans community will tell you that the social network has played an indispensable role in changing for the better what it’s like to live as a transgender person in America. Despite much to be wary of about Facebook — its ubiquity, its invasiveness, its capacity to alter much about the national mood — it has also become a critical tool for visibility and equality, and may be one reason that mainstream attitudes toward transgender people are shifting so rapidly.“Television made a huge different to the civil rights movement. Absolutely, for this community, it’s been Facebook. Now we have something that’s even more rapid than TV,” said Aidan Key, a transgender rights organizer who runs an annual conference on gender identity issues. “Now you can see real-life transgender people. You can hear their stories. You can see the parents who have transgender children. Just imagine what kind of impact that has had.”The idea of a social network prompting tolerance may sound more than a tad dreamy in an election year marked by interminable online strife, in which Twitter and Facebook sit at the center of a daily five-alarm fire of outrage and recrimination.AdvertisementThere is now widespread concern that online news is pushing people toward adopting more polarized points of view, not to mention indulging acceptance of baseless ideas and conspiracies. Interacting on the internet, it is usually assumed, dehumanizes us all; it can deaden our capacity for understanding other people. Every day brings fresh horrors from our dystopian online life, whether it’s terrorist recruitment efforts, illegal gun sales on Facebook or the special symbol created by neo-Nazis to target Jews for attack. In other words: Yes, the internet on most days feels like a cesspool.But the experiences of transgender people on Facebook suggest that many of these assumptions aren’t so open-and-shut. Scholars who study online interaction say that humans do feel empathy online. We can be moved by what happens on the internet and we carry what happens there to our interactions beyond it.Sometimes, unexpectedly, the internet redeems itself.Though the numbers aren’t precise, researchers estimate that about 0.3 percent of the United States’ population, or about 700,000 adults, identifies as transgender.That’s about a tenth of the number of Americans who identify as lesbian, gay or bisexual — a population so small it defies any obvious efforts to form a community based on proximity. What the numbers mean for transgender people and their families is geographical isolation: It’s hard to find others nearby who are like you, and it’s hard to get people who aren’t like you to understand what it’s like to be you.“There was no information, and it was very difficult for my husband and I to find out what was going on,” said DeShanna Neal, the mother of a 12-year-old transgender daughter, Trinity, who began showing signs of discomfort with her gender when she was a toddler.Ms. Neal, who lives in Wilmington, Del., said she felt at sea. “I honestly had no idea children could be transgender,” she said. Neither did the experts she consulted. “For every doctor and therapist we took her to, she was the first trans person that they had ever dealt with at that age.”Bridging people who are spread across vast geographies into a single community is of course the sort of problem the internet was practically created to solve.For lesbian, gay and transgender people, online interaction afforded another luxury besides mere connection. It fostered a middle ground between being secretive and being out, a safe space for testing out a new way of living.AdvertisementIn the last few years, the number of Facebook groups for transgender adults and teenagers and for the parents of young transgender children has grown rapidly. One Facebook support group that Mr. Key belongs to has doubled from 2,000 members to 4,000 in the span of a few months, he said. A private group for the families of transgender children in the San Francisco Bay Area has grown to about 60 families in the last year, according to the group’s founder, Lara, who asked that her last name not be published to protect the privacy of her 10-year-old transgender daughter.Parents say the online groups have also helped them look out for and intervene in difficult situations. Transgender people face an alarmingly high rate of suicide. Many times, people on the verge of a suicide attempt will hint at it online.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“And now that we have these groups, we immediately go into action,” said Debi Jackson, whose 9-year-old daughter, Avery, “socially transitioned” when she was 4. “We’ll ask, ‘Is anyone nearby? Can we get someone there? Who can call the police?’ It’s become a lifesaving tool.”But little happens on Facebook without everyone else seeing it. So as more transgender people came to the social network to find others like them, other people on Facebook began to notice transgender people there, too. Mere visibility has had a positive effect.“It’s not all about activism,” Ms. Jackson said. “It’s just being out there as a regular person, and being known as a normal person — to show that it’s not salacious, that trans people are really just normal people who talk about movies and music and who post silly cat pictures, as normal as everyone else.”There have been no academic studies on the role that the increased visibility of transgender people online has played in helping to shift views about them. But there are clues from other research.According to a study published last year by L. Mark Carrier, a psychology professor at California State University, Dominguez Hills, and several colleagues, online interactions can produce a sense of empathy in people. The researchers found that you can identify and gain a feeling of understanding for another person’s emotional travails online just as you would in real life.“What we found is there is a different kind of empathy produced online,” Mr. Carrier said in an interview. In general, this “virtual empathy” is not as strong as the sense of empathy we experience in face-to-face communication.But the internet affords us the opportunity for many more interactions than we might be able to handle off-line. A recent study that tracked Dutch teenagers’ social-media use for a year found that using sites like Facebook improved people’s ability to understand and share the feelings of others.AdvertisementEmpathy is often considered a baseline necessity for prompting social change. Sometimes, this process creates a kind of meme that spreads across the network, not unlike the “Chewbacca Mom” video.Researchers at Facebook found that something like this occurred in March 2013, when people began to change their avatars to the equals sign in support of same-sex marriage rights. Expressing your support for gay marriage may present some social cost; many people might have been reluctant to make their views known if they feared others would disagree. So the change happened in a cascade: The more friends you saw changing their avatars, the more likely you were to do so, too.Changing your avatar to support a social cause has often been criticized as “slacktivism,” a lazy man’s protest that doesn’t induce real-world change. That could be true in geopolitics: the mullahs in Iran aren’t going to alter their governing philosophy because lots of American teenagers on Twitter turned their avatars green.But on domestic social issues, the perceived prevalence of a viewpoint changes the politics of it. The more visible gay people became in the culture and in straight people’s personal lives, the more accepting the outside world became. That made it easier for more gay people to come out, which increased acceptance, and on and on in a feedback loop.A similar dynamic now seems to be influencing transgender acceptance. Since 2014, the advocacy group Human Rights Campaign has commissioned an annual survey on how Americans feel about transgender people. Each year, the percentage of people who say they personally know or work with trans people has gone up. And each year, Americans have reported higher “favorability” toward transgender people.That sentiment is not always obvious online. Transgender people and especially the parents of transgender children say that they see a lot of ugliness on Facebook directed at them. “Those in the limelight in the LGBT — and especially T — world have to endure the worst of the internet: its comments sections,” said Ina Fried, a transgender technology journalist who works for the technology news site Recode.But Ms. Fried, like many trans people, says that the costs of online visibility are far outweighed by the accelerating social acceptance.Ms. Neal, the mother of the 12-year-old Trinity, said that an elementary school classmate of hers had recently reached out to her on Facebook. “He was on the other side of this issue,” Ms. Neal said. “We had never really talked to each other in school. But knowing me, and knowing that I had a trans child, that connected us. And me being vocal and advocating for my trans child made him realize, ‘Maybe I’m on the wrong side of history.’”A version of this article appears in print on June 9, 2016, on Page F6 of the New York edition with the headline: Change, Powered by Facebook.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »