AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie RogersAn entrepreneur said she wanted to create an app that would allow people to be reviewed, the way restaurants or vacation spots are, and you’ll never believe what happened next.(Unless you’re familiar with the social web’s climate of Internet shaming. Then you probably can.)In what was perhaps a speed record for attempting to dismantle a product that doesn’t exist yet, angry people circulated an online petition to prevent the project, called Peeple, from ever making it to an app store. Sleuths at the website Snopes, known for debunking rumors, tried to figure out if the whole thing was an elaborate ruse. And the woman behind the app, Julia Cordray, insisted that Peeple was the real thing, and that it would proceed despite receiving a viral heap of negative reviews.We do not want to be a part of #Peeple.On Monday, Ms. Cordray, an entrepreneur who previously founded a recruiting website, wrote in an email that, despite the backlash, her project “will not be shamed into submission.” She said that she still planned to release the app on iPhone and Android in November, though the app’s Twitter account and website appeared to be offline.A day earlier, Ms. Cordray published a post on LinkedIn saying that she received hateful messages and death threats after her project was referred to as a “terrifying Yelp for People” by The Washington Post.The Post’s article, which used the idea for Peeple as basis for a wider commentary on the ethical boundaries of rating humans online, did not go into specifics about how Ms. Cordray’s app would work — perhaps because there appears to be no existing prototype — but did say that users could submit others for review as long as a user had a Facebook account and the subject’s cellphone number.The piece ended with what turned out to be a prophetic line: “In Peeple’s future, Cordray’s saying, the way some amorphous online ‘crowd’ sees you will be definitively who you are.”For Ms. Cordray, the future arrived pretty much right away. Her reviewers used more established platforms to leave feedback about Peeple, and about its creator. Among the printable messages left on Ms. Cordray’s personal Facebook page, a commenter gave her “a 0 out of 5 as a human being.” In the comments under her LinkedIn post, someone wrote, “You received death threats, insults, and so much more because people had finally decided to review YOU.”Though it appeared to be offline Monday, a cached version of Peeple’s website offered people the chance to sign up for beta testing of the app. Illustrations showed users with number and star ratings, in the manner of Yelp, and comments under a user’s profile. On Monday, Ms. Cordray did not say whether a prototype was available or whether it had been made available to journalists.The cached site’s terms also say that users cannot remove themselves from the app. In the LinkedIn post, Ms. Cordray attempted to scale back some earlier assertions about the concept of Peeple: “You will NOT be on our platform without your explicit permission,” she wrote. “There is no 48 hour waiting period to remove negative comments. There is no way to even make negative comments.”In that case, the app would fall in line with a plethora of platforms that offer users the ability to opt in to the service and then review one another, making the app more like LinkedIn than Yelp. Comparisons have also been drawn to Lulu, an app that allows women to rate prospective male dates using hashtags like #motherslovehim (positive) or #longnails (negative). Lulu has seen its share of criticism, receiving complaints from men who say they don’t want to be rated without their permission.On Monday, Alison Schwartz, Lulu’s co-founder, said in a telephone interview that the app was created with tools in place for men to be removed at their request, but that a third of them signed up again. For Lulu, she said, the key was community moderation — and, to an extent, limiting free speech.“You cannot say whatever you want on Lulu,” Ms. Schwartz said. “It’s a highly structured environment.”A day before publishing her essay on LinkedIn, an upbeat Ms. Cordray published a video detailing the widespread reaction to her project, which she has said would aim to be a platform for positivity. (Not, as many have feared, a place for open comment.) In the video, she is shown eagerly responding to reporters, producers and anyone else who reached out to her.“It’s not a hoax,” she tells a person who calls her while she is driving, “but that’s an interesting theory.”Whether Peeple sees the light of day or not, Ms. Cordray will try to use the attention to her advantage. In the email on Monday, she said that she was planning a talk show to “expose our concept to the world.”Advertisement