
Tech Fix By                     
 BRIAN X. CHEN
 
JUNE 13, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Apple customers have a lot to digest this summer.The iPhone maker kicked off its annual conference for software developers on Monday with major upgrades for the operating systems powering its computers, mobile devices, smartwatch and TV box.Technology enthusiasts and gear heads are usually excited about big upgrades, but for average consumers, the changes can be overwhelming. Will devices get better or worse? Will the software change so much that it will disrupt the tools we use for work?Thankfully, Apple’s four upgraded operating systems — iOS, tvOS, MacOS and WatchOS — are due out in the fall, so there is plenty of time to research and prepare.“At Apple, we believe that technology should lift humanity and should enrich people’s lives in all the ways they want to experience it — whether it’s on their wrist, in the living room, on the desk, in the palm of their hand,” Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, said during Monday’s keynote presentation.AdvertisementHere is a guide to how your devices will change if you install the software upgrades in a few months.AdvertisementApple’s next version of its mobile operating system, called iOS 10, will have an impact on how you communicate and potentially reduce the amount of time you spend fiddling with the phone.Among them, the Messages app that iPhone and iPad users primarily rely on for sending text messages will get a major overhaul. In the app, you will soon be able to draw sketches and hand-write notes to others, as well as attach animations, like confetti or fireworks. Apple is also letting third-party software developers offer modifications to the Messages app, meaning you might be able to add special messages, like stickers, special emoji or animated GIFs.Apple is also making major changes to its photo app included on iPhones and iPads. Similar to Google Photos, Apple’s Photos app will automatically scan your photo album and organize the photos based on when and where the photos were taken. In some cases, it may automatically combine images from an occasion, like a trip to Japan, into video montages called Memories.Another significant change is the evolution of Siri, Apple’s voice assistant. Third-party app developers can take advantage of voice commands, so you should be able to use voice commands to summon an Uber car, send a message through WhatsApp or map a jog with a fitness app, among other tricks.Other changes will not require a significant reset. With iOS 10, the iPhone screen will wake up when you raise it up — no need to press a button anymore. Apple also redesigned its music app with new colors and navigation features. Its default maps app will let outside developers integrate their services into the mapping app, so you might be able to book a restaurant table by tapping on a restaurant inside the map, for example. Apple is also adding the ability to search for nearby points of interest, like gas stations and coffee shops, similar to Google’s Waze app.Apple’s Macs will soon work more seamlessly with other Apple devices. Among other changes, the Mac operating system, called MacOS Sierra, will gain access to Siri. So most of what you can do with Siri on your iPhone should also be doable on Mac computers.Sierra will also have tighter integration with other Apple devices. If you are wearing an Apple Watch, you can log into a Mac computer without typing in a password. When shopping on the web, you can use an iPhone to pay with Apple Pay, the company’s mobile wallet service, by taking out the iPhone and registering your fingerprint to complete the purchase.AdvertisementAny owner of an Apple Watch is familiar with this situation: Try to open a third-party app like Instagram or Twitter on the watch, and it takes at least five seconds to load. At that point, you might as well just take out your iPhone and open the app there instead.Apple is now trying to address this problem with WatchOS, the next version of the operating system for Apple Watch. The company says third-party apps will open instantly with the new update.Another important change is coming to the fitness portion of Apple Watch. With the update, you will be able to see the fitness activity of other friends wearing Apple Watch, like the number of hours they have stood up and calories they have burned. Apple also added some new watch faces, letting you tailor the look to your liking.The next version of tvOS, the Apple TV’s software system, caters largely to sports fans. A new feature called Live Tune In will let you immediately access a live broadcast. Speaking a command like “Watch ESPN2” can load a live sports game.Other than that, Apple made several improvements to areas that were the most frustrating about Apple TV. For one, it will support a feature called Single Sign-On. If you have multiple apps that offer programming from the same pay-TV provider, you can log in just once and all of those apps will be authenticated. That will spare you the headache of entering the same user name and password repeatedly for each of those apps.Apple also expanded its Apple TV remote-control app that it offers for iPhones. Basically, the remote app will gain the same capabilities as the physical remote for the Apple TV, which includes a button for accessing Siri. So in the event that your remote control vanishes between your couch cushions, you can launch the remote app on your iPhone and use Siri to find something to watch, or swipe around on the phone screen to select an app.When the upgrades are released this fall, consumers would benefit from a somewhat cautious approach. Often with big software upgrades, bugs creep into earlier versions, so it’s wise to wait at least a few weeks to assess whether the coast is clear before jumping in.A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Rundown on Apple’s Latest Software Upgrades.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »