
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JUNE 17, 2016
Q. With all the complaints about Windows 10 and OS X El Capitan out there, I’m wondering if it is worth it to just skip big operating system upgrades. Is it?A. Every computer user should evaluate his or her situation in regard to upgrades, but there are some general pros and cons to consider.From a security standpoint, skipping an upgrade could make your computer more vulnerable when the older operating system is not updated with protections against the latest viruses, malicious software and human intruders lurking on the internet. Third-party antivirus and anti-malware tools can shield your computer to some degree, but inherent vulnerabilities in older software may leave parts of your system open to attacks.Depending on how many versions behind the current system you choose to stay, you may find some applications on your PC or Mac no longer receiving periodic updates from developers because the developers themselves have moved on to newer versions. Hardware manufacturers may also stop creating driver software that allows their peripherals to work on operating systems they deem too old.AdvertisementWhile newer features, better security and improved performance can come with a successful upgrade, upgrading to the latest version of Windows or OS X can be also a titanic aggravating hassle — and can lead to weeks of fussing with the computer to get it working as it once did. On the flip side of the compatibility conundrum, your older programs and devices may not function properly on the newer system unless their makers update their own software. You may have older programs that will never work on the newer system, which can be problematic if you depend on those applications in your daily computing life.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In addition to breaking your stuff, an operating system update can also move things around on you, based on the new user interface and the way it organizes your files. The new system might even run like a turtle if you have an older computer.The learning curve becomes easier as you become more familiar with the new system. If you do not have any hardware or software incompatibilities in the mix, biting the bullet and upgrading should pay off with better overall security and a longer life cycle of program updates.AdvertisementIf you want to make an informed decision, make a list of all the hardware and software you rely upon and check with those companies about compatibility with the new operating systems. Microsoft and Apple have technical support pages with some useful information, but crowd-sourced databases like the Roaring Apps site let you look for the answers to a lot of compatibility questions at once. No matter what you decide, back up your computer regularly and keep its security software up-to-date.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »