
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO and
 

 MIKE ISAAC
 
JUNE 18, 2016
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Farhad: How’s it going, Mike? Isn’t summer wonderful? The sun’s out, there’s no traffic and our boss is about to go on vacation. You know what that means? Party at the office!Mike: One thing I miss about working in the New York office is the wealth of treats we had there. Our business editor, Dean Murphy, is practically a master of cupcakes and cider. In San Francisco I mostly scavenge for leftover tech protein shakes. I guess we can party by spiking the Soylent?Farhad: On to tech news. Let’s start with money. Didi Chuxing, the Chinese rival to Uber, raised a gigantic pile of it — $7.3 billion, putting to shame the $3.5 billion that Uber reported raising earlier this month. Uber is also looking to raise a couple of billion more through something called a leveraged loan — which, to me, sounds like one step away from asking for money from a guy on the corner with a baseball bat. And to think, just a couple months ago people were saying the tech bubble was over.AdvertisementMike: Maybe there’s money to be made in an on-demand loan shark app. The tagline: “We’ll kneecap your insolvent start-up founders, anytime, anywhere.”AdvertisementFarhad: Also, in a big win for regulators and consumer advocates, a federal court ruled this week that the F.C.C.’s network neutrality rules were kosher. Most of our readers are opening this up early in the morning, so I won’t risk putting them back to bed by going over the details of the regulations, but basically the decision means that internet service providers like Verizon can’t unfairly monkey with the content coming over your line.And, really, in most cases, a good rule of thumb for internet users is: If it’s bad for AT&T and Verizon, it’s probably good for you.Mike: I think I read that underneath a Snapple bottle cap.Farhad: Then there was Apple, which held its annual developer conference in San Francisco this week. The iPhone maker announced a blizzard of new features, including lots of nice updates to its messaging app and some less-than-stellar improvements to Siri. Also, the Apple Watch will be a little faster now, and Apple Music won’t be as confusing. That’s good, right?Mike: Two things I never use — Apple Watch and Apple Music — are improving, so I guess I shrug at that news. But 15 million people use Apple Music, so they must be doing something right, or right-ish. I’m not a watch guy, so I’m probably the wrong audience there.Farhad: And the biggest news of the week came early. On Monday, Microsoft announced it would spend $26.2 billion to buy LinkedIn, the online résumé-posting social network. I have to say, I don’t really get this deal; I can see how the companies’ user bases are similar, but I don’t see the justification for spending this much on it. Also, personally, I find LinkedIn to be very annoying. But maybe you can defend this deal?Mike: The explanations I’ve read thus far seem to amount to that meme of a guy shouting “haha! Business!” and asking me to just accept that these two companies know what they’re doing.Here’s my best guess: Microsoft is buying a social graph. That’s a Valley term for a loose web of interconnected people, essentially a treasure trove of data and interaction. Microsoft has considered buying other so-called graphs in the past, like Twitter, which purports to be the key to our interests, or Facebook, which holds the key to our interpersonal relationships.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To my knowledge, Microsoft’s only real ownership over a graph has been through Xbox Live, itself a social network of gamers, but that business is ancillary and not central to what drives its core products, which Microsoft C.E.O. Satya Nadella has made clear are all about the cloud and business and getting things done. (Haha! Business!)AdvertisementSo what does Microsoft buy with LinkedIn’s graph? One possibility: Microsoft could use LinkedIn as a giant sales intelligence platform, mining the wealth of data LinkedIn has on how people and companies connect to one another, and use that to sell more of their enterprise products. Perhaps that gives Microsoft’s sales teams far more leads, or a jump on competitors like Google or Amazon’s sales prospects.Is all of that boring? Yes! But, like, we’re talking about Microsoft buying LinkedIn. It’s not going to be an action-packed affair. It’s going to be about — haha! — business.Farhad: Ben Thompson of Stratechery mounted the best defense of this deal: He thinks some of LinkedIn’s tools could improve Microsoft’s customer relationship management software, making it a better rival to Salesforce. And he argues that LinkedIn allows Microsoft to create a direct relationship with employees who will ultimately decide what kind of technology to use at their offices — and selling such technology is, of course, Microsoft’s main business.Mike: So I’m on par with Ben’s thinking, and Ben is very smart, so I feel better about myself.Farhad: But I’m very skeptical. I think LinkedIn’s long-term position in all of our work lives is in doubt. Sure, today, lots of people use it. But as The Verge’s Casey Newton argued this week, LinkedIn is not very useful: “in practice it’s not much more than a way for white-collar workers to field occasional inquiries from recruiters and vendors who pay dearly for the privilege.”There are two problems with that kind of system. First, it’s annoying for users — unless you’re actively looking for a job, there’s no reason to look at LinkedIn, which means that the site must constantly spam you to keep your interest in it alive. Second, because it has no reason for being other than recruitment, LinkedIn risks getting replaced by all kinds of more useful online networks.For instance, software developers have GitHub, an online resource where people can share and talk about code — and where, crucially, recruiters can see exactly what programmers have done in their work lives. People in the media, meanwhile, have Twitter — a place to show our work and engagement in the news, making it far more useful than simply a list of past workplaces. (See, Twitter is good for our careers!)Granted, not every profession has such a place online, and maybe sales and marketing people will always have a special affinity for LinkedIn. But for most people, I think, LinkedIn will grow less significant over time, not more.Oh, and one more thing, Mike. Will you please never join my professional network on LinkedIn? Thanks.Mike: I have just endorsed you for “being a jerk.” See you next week!We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »