AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. How do you draw with the iOS Notes app? A. To use the drawing function in Apple’s built-in Notes app, your device needs to be running at least iOS 9, which was released last fall. Although iOS 9 itself runs on older models, Apple’s notes on Notes say the sketching feature is available only on the iPhone 5 and later, sixth-generation iPod Touch, iPad models released from fall 2012 and beyond, and the 2013 iPad Mini 2 and later. (The Notes app works with the Apple Pencil and other compatible stylus tools for iOS gadgets.)If your Apple hardware meets the system requirements but you have not updated your device to the iOS 9 software, you need to do so if you want the most current version of the Notes app. In addition to drawing tools, the app now lets you add web links, maps, photos and videos to notes; create checklists; and format text.To sketch in the iOS 9 Notes app, tap the New Note icon, or tell Siri to make a new note for you. When you have the new blank note in front of you, tap the plus icon that appears above the keyboard and then select the icon that looks like a squiggle. The keyboard disappears and you should see a set of onscreen drawing tools. Tap the pen, marker or pencil tool and start drawing.You can change the color of the “ink” by tapping the black circle next to the drawing tools and switching to another hue. Tap the curved arrow icon to undo your work, or use the eraser tool at the bottom of the screen to remove certain sections of the drawing. When you are finished, tap the Share icon to send a copy of the sketch by mail or message, post it on social media sites or save it to an online file-storage folder.If you cannot upgrade to iOS 9, plenty of third-party sketching and drawing apps are available in the iOS App Store. Just check each app’s details page to make sure it runs on whatever version of iOS you are using.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement