By FARHAD MANJOO and MIKE ISAACJUNE 25, 2016
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Mike: Hello, Farhad! How is your week going? Mine was a whole lot better until I found out that “Brexit” was not, in fact, a delicious cereal.Farhad: I was just trying to think of a snappy joke about Brexit, but I’m too worried about a global financial apocalypse. While I peruse various urban survival kits on Amazon, you should watch John Oliver’s hilarious — and, now, very scary — take on Britain leaving the European Union.Mike: Yeah. Thankfully all of my money is in Dogecoin. On to more pressing matters, like commodity technology news.AdvertisementI missed half of this week because I was super sick, but it seems like I didn’t miss much. Most of the world’s news was more geopolitical and less, uh, technopolitical.AdvertisementHere’s one thing: Twitter bought an artificial intelligence start-up called Magic Pony, because apparently the company’s turnaround strategy is primarily based on listening to old Ginuwine albums. Seriously though, machine-learning recruiting is intensely competitive, and Twitter no doubt publicized the move to try to raise its profile and help recruiting, which is hard when you’re facing off against Facebook and Google for the same candidates.It’s VidCon and Cannes Lions, big advertising industry events in our world, so a bunch of tech companies announced metrics and small ad-related product updates. Instagram hit half a billion monthly users, while Spotify is at 100 million-plus regular visitors, with more than 30 percent of those folks subscribing to the monthly paid service. Twitter and Vine will also let “creators” produce 140-second videos, which is particularly un-Vine-ish but probably good for ad revenue.Farhad: Why 140 seconds? Did they choose that because Twitter allows 140 characters in its tweets? Man, tech companies really like to be cute, don’t they? Maybe after the world collapses we’ll all grow up.Also: I liked BuzzFeed’s investigation into Uber’s pay. For years the ride-hailing company has been talking up how much its drivers make, but drivers have long complained that Uber’s declining fares lead to very low wages. BuzzFeed found that they were right, at least in three large cities: After expenses, the average Uber driver in Denver makes about $13 an hour, while those in Houston make $11, and those in Detroit make close to $9. That’s not nothing, and surely for lots of people Uber’s flexible hours make the platform an important way to earn extra money, but the numbers are far smaller than the company has long led people to believe.Mike: Yeah. As it turns out, driving your car is, uh, tough on the car, and is an expense one must account for in the long run. Who knew?Also, Twilio debuted on the public markets and did rather well, but it’s a telephony company and not a dramatic unicorn death, so no one in news media land cared. Sad!The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Farhad: Very smart of Twilio to time the I.P.O. to the Brexit. Now if its stock crashes, there’ll be something to blame.AdvertisementMike: But I’d like to talk about something that really chaps my burgers. We’ve heard about this for months, but now that some of the highest-profile Apple commentators are writing about it, I’m pretty sure it’s coming: Apple is probably going to ditch the regular headphone jack in a coming release of the new iPhone, opting to go with a proprietary jack or a Bluetooth-enabled version of earbuds. Speculation posits that the company will do it to either further slim down the device or to make room for a better battery, or perhaps some combination of the two. Or some other thing I haven’t anticipated.My gut reaction: pure and utter contempt. I’m seriously considering switching to Android, that’s how annoying this is to me. O.K., now you go and tell me why Apple would do this. It seems like a real strong way to alienate users.Farhad: I’m pretty much with you on this score. As The Wall Street Journal reported, it’s not just that Apple is removing the headphone jack from the next iPhone — it’s also not making many other big changes, including changes to the phone’s design, which it usually does every couple years.So basically it looks like the new iPhone will be roughly the same phone we have now, with one major thing missing. What is Apple thinking? We won’t know exactly until it releases the new phone later this year, but this seems bad to me. Sales of the iPhone are already flat. The company needed something big this year. Now it’s creating a device that many might consider a downgrade rather than an upgrade.Mike: Part of what I like about headphone jacks in literally every audio-based device of the last 20-plus years is the intercompatibility. I don’t want to buy special earbuds when I’m going to the gym, I want my crummy $12 ones that will get sweaty and break and I can easily toss in the garbage.Farhad: I know what the Apple boosters will say: But what about the floppy drive? That is, Apple has a history of removing dying tech standards from their products, and despite short-term grumbling things always work out in the end. You need to get rid of stuff for progress to happen.Yeah, sure, but that argument doesn’t really hold for the audio jack, because it is basically perfect in its current state, and honestly I can’t see any reason for upgrading. As you point out, today’s headphone jack works on just about every device you have (including airplanes). One based on Apple’s proprietary Lightning connector will work only on iOS devices and not anywhere else — not even current Macs, which lack a Lightning port. So guess what? You’ll need to get a little adapter, or dongle, to carry with you all the time. And what about wireless headphones? Well, those work on today’s iPhones, and getting rid of the headphone jack doesn’t somehow make them better.Mike: The floppy drive argument is so stupid. Manufactured public relations spin. I’m not buying it.AdvertisementFarhad: As The Verge’s Nilay Patel writes, this whole thing is “user-hostile and stupid.” Welcome to the dongle!Mike: O.K., so help me out, tech columnist. What Android phone do I buy when I make the switch?Farhad: The Samsung Galaxy S7 is pretty good. But I’m not joining you. Despite everything, I still love iOS, so I’m not leaving the iPhone. I guess Apple knows what it’s doing. O.K., till next week!Mike: Cheerio! I’ll be at the bank, transferring the rest of my Dogecoin into gold.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.