AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Is there a way to back up the contact files that I sync between my computers and iCloud?A. You can export a copy of your contacts from Apple’s iCloud as a vCard file and then store that file in a safe place in case of a server-related emergency. Just select some or all of the contacts you want to back up, then click the cog-shaped Action menu icon in the bottom-left corner of the browser window to get to the Export vCard option.Later, if disaster strikes and your address book gets wiped from the web, you can use the Import vCard option on that same iCloud Action menu to pull in the backup copy of your contacts file. You can also archive your iCloud contacts from your computer by using the Contacts app on Mac OS X or Microsoft Outlook for Windows.If you are having trouble keeping your iCloud contacts in sync, Apple has a help page for dealing with several related issues, as well as instructions for backing up data from other iCloud-synced apps like Calendars, Mail and others. Server issues may sometimes be the problem if you cannot get to your files, so you may also want to bookmark the System Status page for iCloud Contacts (and all Apple’s other online services) to make sure it is them — and not you — having a problem.Saying Howdy to Windows HelloQ. Does Windows Hello send your biometric data to Microsoft?A. Windows Hello, the new security feature in Windows 10 that lets you log into the machine with your face, iris or fingerprint, keeps your personal biometric data on your laptop or tablet. The information is not sent to Microsoft or third-party companies, according to the Windows Hello privacy questions page.However, Microsoft says it does collect information on how you use Windows Hello, like the number of times you tried to sign in using the software and how many times you successfully logged into your device by using a body part instead of a password. The company says this information is stripped of anything that can personally identify you and is encrypted before it is uploaded to Microsoft servers.When you go through the Windows Hello setup, the software does not actually take pictures of your face, eye or finger that could be vulnerable to misuse if your computer is compromised. Microsoft’s Frequently Asked Questions page describes the data as “a representation based on the unique qualities of your face, fingerprint, or iris” that is more like a graph than an image and cannot be used to reconstitute an image of your physical features.To use Windows Hello in the first place, your computer or tablet needs to have a fingerprint reader that is compatible with the Windows Biometric Framework software, or an illuminated infrared camera for facial recognition and iris detection. Microsoft’s new Surface Book and Surface Pro 4 devices are among those that work with Windows Hello, as do some other devices that come with Intel’s RealSense camera.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement