AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie Benner and Mike IsaacSAN FRANCISCO — Zenefits investors are getting a larger piece of the troubled human resources start-up because they overpaid for their stakes, unaware that the company’s sales teams flouted regulations to enhance growth, Zenefits announced on Thursday. The move will cut the company’s valuation in half, to about $2 billion.The unusual agreement comes after months of turmoil at Zenefits, once a high-flying company that helps small businesses buy insurance. The company, based in San Francisco, failed to comply with health insurance regulations in some markets. Parker Conrad, co-founder and chief executive, stepped down in February after admitting that he created the software employees used to bypass insurance brokerage regulations.David O. Sacks, who replaced Mr. Conrad as chief executive, said in an email to employees that the decision stemmed from discussions with a number of the company’s major investors, and that Fidelity, TPG, Andreessen Horowitz and Insight Venture Partners had all agreed to the deal.Under the new terms, the stake owned by investors in the company’s Series C funding round will increase to 25 percent, from 11 percent. That group invested about $500 million in May 2015. Earlier investors will soon be offered an opportunity to own more of the company to offset the dilution of their stakes.“At some point, this company will want to sell its shares again, and future prospective shareholders will look closely at how we treated our current shareholders,” Mr. Sacks wrote.“Over the last six months, in the face of very significant challenges, David Sacks has shown incredible leadership,” said Bill McGlashan, the founder and managing partner of TPG Growth. “He and the board have held the company accountable and done the right thing by customers, employees, regulators and investors.”Zenefits was once a celebrated Silicon Valley start-up. The series C investors granted the company a $4 billion valuation largely because its revenue was growing so quickly.When it came to light that Mr. Conrad had created software, called the Macro, that allowed sales representatives to get around regulations, they maintained that they had overpaid for a piece of a company whose fast growth was built on false pretenses, according to two people with knowledge of the deal who spoke on the condition of anonymity.Mr. Sacks, who has personally invested more than $12 million in Zenefits, stepped into the role of chief executive shortly after.“We self-reported the issue to regulators, brought our licensing into compliance, changed our leadership and governance, instituted new company values, and began to transform the culture,” Mr. Sacks wrote in an email to employees on Thursday. “In many ways this is a different company than the one they originally joined, but our employees have embraced our new values and our mission to make small-business ownership easier and more accessible to everyone.”Zenefits laid off 17 percent of its work force in February, and announced another round of layoffs in its Arizona office in mid-June. It is working on what it calls “Z2,” effectively a reboot of the company under new leadership and oversight.“Z2” is expected to start in October, the company has said.Given how much Zenefits has changed under Mr. Sacks’s leadership, a few weeks ago employees were given the opportunity to take a voluntary two-month severance package. Mr. Sacks said in his email that 90 percent of the employees chose to stay.Common shareholders, including employees, will see about a 20 percent dilution in their stakes, “about the same as a typical financing round,” Mr. Sacks wrote.To make sure their ownership stakes did not lose too much value, nonexecutive employees who stayed received a stock grant equal to 25 percent of their current number of shares.Advertisement