AdvertisementSupported byBy Farhad Manjoo and Mike IsaacEach Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Farhad: Ahoy, Mike! It’s almost Thanksgiving! I’m not the cooking columnist, but I wanted to share a tip on how to make the perfect turkey: Use chicken.Mike: I just bought a Griswold cast-iron skillet for like two hundred bucks and sort of hate myself for doing it. Also I probably can’t afford to buy a turkey now. Hope the family likes Hot Pockets!Farhad: Given the impending holiday, little is happening in tech land. Case in point: Google relaunched Google+ this week. What’s new about it? Don’t really care, sorry; in my opinion the best way to redesign Google Plus would have been to have the whole site redirect to Facebook.Mike: More like Google minus, am I right? Man, I slay me.Farhad: Also, Eric Schneiderman, New York’s attorney general, seems to be expanding his fight against daily sports sites. He is seeking an injunction to prohibit FanDuel and DraftKings from operating in the state on the grounds that they are basically enabling gambling on sports, and apparently he might be going after Yahoo’s sports site, too. FanDuel and DraftKings insist that they’re shocked, shocked that there’s any gambling going on in their establishments. (By the way, did someone forget to tell these guys that InterCapped TechCo names went out of fashion in 2001?)Mike: I was sitting next to a guy on a flight from New York to San Francisco a few months ago, and he was glued to the Yahoo sports app the entire way. It was sort of sickening to watch. That said, I basically only use Twitter all day.Farhad: Also, Square had a down and then up I.P.O. Finally: Google is trying to get better at cloud, Microsoft is trying to get better at security, IBM is trying to get better at design and Tinder’s C.E.O. is trying to get better at love. I bet two out of those four things will happen, but I won’t say which two.Mike: Why can’t you just once root for love, Farhad? Love is all we need. That, and enterprise-level security for corporate intranet-connected devices.Farhad: I wanted to talk about how the Internet reacted to the terrorist attacks in Paris last week. I’m a news junkie; I got into this business because I absolutely cannot resist following along with what’s happening in the world, especially as a story is unfolding, and even if the story is horrible.So I was naturally glued to Twitter during and after the Paris attacks last week, trying to get every new detail as fast as possible. But, man, was it a trudge. The Internet in the aftermath of a big, complicated, unfolding news story is a maelstrom of unsupported knee-jerk opinion and out-and-out lies. This time, there was so much misinformation that several publications, including The New York Times, had to run stories telling people about all the fake stuff floating around social media.This is no surprise, of course. In 2013, after the Boston Marathon bombings, I wrote a piece for Slate arguing that when news happens, avoiding the Internet and TV for a day or two would actually help make you better informed.I think things are slightly better today in that misinformation is corrected a tad more quickly, but my general advice still stands: When news breaks, unplug, go for a walk, and read the news tomorrow when everyone has gotten the story right. But I have a hard time following that advice, as does the rest of the world.So, my fellow Twitter addict, I wanted to ask you: Is there any hope of getting the truth online during breaking news events?Mike: It’s funny you give that advice. Last week when the attacks went down, I was actually in San Francisco on a reporting trip, running around most of the day with little time to check my phone on what was going on. I initially had a vague notion that something bad was happening, but I couldn’t tell you what specifically.Only later in the evening — and really, after I got back from my trip — did I have a full sense of the gravity and horror of what was happening in France. And most of that came from the photos taken by our photographers at The Times, the stories I read from our reporters and those who work for French outlets and, yes, even from commenters on cable news later on.We give Twitter — and to some much lesser degree, Facebook and Instagram — a lot of credit for their ability to capture what’s happening “in the moment.” But in an Internet-connected age where anyone with a smartphone can become an impromptu journalist, sometimes “in the moment” provides far more confusion than it does clarity. And the stakes are even higher when it’s a life-or-death situation, and misinformation only makes everything worse.Farhad: Right. The basic problem is that technology allows for the collection and dissemination of information much more quickly than people can comprehend it. When news happens, even if you discount all the intentionally fake stuff, you’re still left with a collection of disparate-seeming facts that keep coming in — and it takes reporters time to figure out how the facts fit into a coherent narrative. Until that happens — and it usually takes hours, at least, often days — you’re just drowning in a sea of information without context.Mike: On a more personal note, I can empathize, to some degree, about the urge to participate when all this stuff is going down. When I was finally back online and reading tweets, I felt a sense of helplessness — kind of like I wanted to do something, but couldn’t.What really made me feel better was intentionally not diving into the Twitter scrum, sitting back and not tweeting and adding to the utter chaos just because I didn’t like the feeling inside of me.I think I’m growing up? Or something.Farhad: You know what they say: The more you grow, the less you tweet. That’s what I’m teaching my kids. Have a nice Thanksgiving!Mike: Can I come over? I’m sort of, um, short on turkey funds right now.Farhad and Mike are off next Saturday after eating their turkey and Hot Pockets. The Saturday tech newsletter will resume on Dec. 5.Advertisement