
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JULY 4, 2016
Q. How do I stop Windows 10 from using my laptop’s location?A. Like other software systems and services, Windows 10 uses location information — gleaned from a device’s network connection, GPS function or other sources — to provide more accurate results for things like maps and web searches for nearby businesses. Certain Windows 10 apps may also tap into the location services data.To control the Windows 10 location services, go to the Start menu and to Settings, then choose Privacy; if you use the Cortana virtual assistant, you can also ask it to “open privacy settings” to get there. In the Privacy settings box, select Location from the list on the left side.The Location screen contains the controls to turn off location services for the computer, as well as for individual apps that may have previously requested to use the laptop’s coordinates. Here, you can also clear the location history file that Windows 10 and certain apps may have been saving from your travels.To turn off the location information for the laptop, tap the Change button. In the box that pops up, tap the button from On to Off under “Location for this device” and then tap or click elsewhere on the screen to dismiss the box. You need to be using an administrator account to make this change to the settings.If you want to let Windows 10 use your location some of the time, you can use the Location button in the Action Center to switch the service on or off as needed. To open the Action Center, click its taskbar icon (which looks like the outline of a pop-up notification) or press the Windows and A keys on the keyboard. Those with touch screens can swipe in from the right edge to open the Action Center.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on July 7, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: How to Hide From Windows 10.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »