AdvertisementSupported byBy Farhad Manjoo and Mike IsaacEach Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Farhad: How’s it going, Mike? I’m very excited because the 4th of July is my favorite holiday. It’s summer, you’re outside, you grill stuff — how can anything beat that? (Thanksgiving comes a close second, IMHO.) So, how are you celebrating America’s birthday?Mike: Gas station burrito, sitting in my car.Farhad: Oh, so the same as every year. Anyway, speaking of fireworks, this was a surprisingly busy week in tech news. Let’s start with Zenefits, the beleaguered human resources start-up, which did something almost unheard-of — it gave up more of its equity to existing investors as a way to compensate them for its recently terrible behavior.In 2015, several large investors poured $500 million into Zenefits, which was then growing faster than you at an all-you-can-eat buffet. But last year it emerged that Zenefits was actually a garbage fire of unruly and potentially illegal behavior. Its founder, Parker Conrad, was pushed out, and the new chief executive, David Sacks, has since been trying to save the sinking ship.Under the new deal, some of Zenefits’ existing investors will get a much higher ownership stake, and the company’s overall valuation will plummet from $4 billion to $2 billion. That sounds like bad news — and some of the company’s biggest investors aren’t really happy about it — but to me the deal seems better than a lot of other potential outcomes for the company, and could shore up its long-term future. Also, $2 billion is not nothing.Mike: It’s probably a better deal than investors pulling their cash, or perhaps suing the company for investing under false pretenses. What a complete nightmare for employees — at least, the employees who didn’t cheat to beat compliance exams.At the same time, maybe some employees respect the hustle it takes to grow at all costs? Or maybe they sympathize with Conrad, who was undoubtedly under pressure from the board to have his company live up to the incredible hype. Who knows?Farhad: There were some sparks between Spotify and Apple. According to the music streaming start-up, Apple recently rejected a Spotify update in the iOS App Store. Apple apparently didn’t like that Spotify was giving users a discount if they signed up for Spotify’s subscription outside of the app, on Spotify’s own site — which allowed Spotify to avoid paying the 30 percent cut that Apple takes when an app uses Apple’s in-store payment system.Now Spotify has written a legal letter to Apple decrying the “grave harm to Spotify and its customers,” and it cleverly sent out copies of the letter to lawmakers in Washington — a suggestion that Apple might get in trouble with lawmakers over its rejection. Given that Apple has its own music streaming service that directly competes with Spotify, its tactics could raise antitrust issues.I can’t speak to the legal nuances here — antitrust cases are difficult to mount, and Apple has defended its practices. But as a Spotify user, I’m looking forward to the fight. I understand that Apple should take some cut for the infrastructure it maintains to support its app store, but 30 percent sounds way too high. Also, other Apple maneuvers — like not giving Siri the ability to control music apps other than Apple’s own one — seem deliberately unfair.Mike: I’ll stay out of legal commentary for now, but just as a regular consumer, Apple prohibiting me from an app update for a service I subscribe to rubs me the wrong way.Farhad: Spotify wasn’t the only media company getting pushed around by giants this week. Lots of news companies got bad news from Facebook, which announced that it would lower the ranking of news stories in its News Feed, and instead boost posts from people’s friends and family. As I argued in my column, the end game here won’t be pretty — Facebook and news companies are now on a collision course, and I can’t see how the news business emerges unscathed.Mike: Yeah, we’re all freaking out. But we freak out over everything, and Facebook changing its algorithm is like saying the sun will rise in the east. We need to get used to it and adjust accordingly, every time.Farhad: Also, you know what these Apple-Spotify and Facebook stories really drove home to me? Independent media is just becoming an impossible business. If you’re trying to run a content business and you’re not named Apple, Google, Facebook or Amazon, good luck to you. You’re going to need it.Mike: I still think Spotify will be O.K. in the long run. But maybe I’m dumb.Farhad: But the big thing I wanted to talk about this week was whether we should be scared of our self-driving future. Tesla said this week that the driver of one of its Model S cars was killed when the car crashed while it was running on Autopilot mode — a feature that allows the car to drive “semi-autonomously,” without the driver actively controlling it.According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, the crash occurred when a tractor-trailer made a left turn in front of the Tesla. The car was supposed to stop, but it didn’t. The traffic safety administration is now investigating the crash.What do you think of this case? Does it give you pause about self-driving cars?Mike: So I was with a friend who owns a Tesla the other day — no, he was not a venture capitalist — and we were on a stretch of road in San Francisco in light traffic, when he decided to show me the feature. It worked fine, but I couldn’t help but feel freaked out that something bad was going to happen.That’s probably to be expected, because it’s a new type of behavior that we’re not used to. Time and conditioning normalizes things, like not steering my car when I’m driving it. All of tech, and really much of the automotive industry, speaks of driverless cars with the gravitas of inevitability: In the future, driving yourself will be more foreign than you think.That’s why something like this isn’t just bad for Tesla, it’s bad for everyone betting on this future. Go listen to the leaders at Lyft, Uber or General Motors talk about driverless. Things like this inhibit this vision.What I sort of question is the response from Tesla on this one. The company blog post started out sympathetic, but then flooded us with a bunch of numbers and statistics. I’m not sure that strikes the right tone after a guy just died.Anyway, how does the industry recover from this? Just keep marching toward inevitability?Farhad: I actually appreciated the numbers in the piece. Tesla is right: Cars driven by humans kill lots of humans every year. Cars driven by computers tend to kill fewer — even at this point, when they’re not even especially good — and the better they get the safer they’ll become in comparison to the human drivers.Mike: Fair enough. Maybe the timing was off to me. Seemed a bit too defensive too quickly. Whatever, I don’t do PR for a living.Farhad: Now, none of this means they’ll be crashproof anytime soon, and we’ll most likely see many more deaths in cars driven by computers. But am I crazy to think that people will respond to this mostly rationally? Today, death is a handmaiden to automobile travel. Every time you get in a car you’re playing Russian roulette. The way we deal with it is the way humans tend to deal with everything — we just sort of forget about it and pretend everything is O.K.So I bet that’s how we’ll deal with these self-driving cars, too. They’re still gonna kill us, but they’ll kill us less often than the killing machines we use now, We’ll mostly forget about all the death, and we’ll live happily ever after.Anyway, happy 4th!Mike: I’ll be spending it watching Bill Pullman give a motivational speech. Cheers!Advertisement