By PAUL MOZURJULY 5, 2016
HONG KONG — It sends short, self-destructing messages. It has a place to share videos called stories. It has camera filters that transform a person into a koala, a fried egg, a police officer or any number of foods, animals and figures.But this is not Snapchat. This is Snow, a popular South Korean Snapchat clone that shows how even the most popular American smartphone apps face an uphill battle in fast-growing Asian countries.Snow focuses on Asian consumers. Like Snapchat, it offers users an array of filters that can add dog ears, glowing eyes and bulbous foreheads to selfies. But Snow also lets users add bottles of soju, the Korean liquor, or images of Korean pop stars. Another filter adds a rain of fried chicken, a favorite South Korean nosh. For Japan there are sumo wrestler and sushi filters.As a result, a significant part of Snow’s roughly 30 million downloads have been from Asia since the app’s September introduction, according to Han Dong-keun, a spokesman for its parent, the South Korean internet company Naver. Notably, it is also gaining traction in China, where the country’s 700 million users make up the world’s largest internet market. There, Snow has a major advantage: Snapchat is blocked in China.Advertisement“We usually use Snow when drinking tea together or eating a meal together to take pictures together, because the app is really truly interesting,” said Sun Yuying, a Shanghai university student who said she discovered Snow a month ago when she saw on social media that a number of Chinese celebrities were using it. “Sometimes when it’s a friend’s birthday or you have to send some congratulatory message, you can make a short Snow video or image and send it to the other person.”AdvertisementSnow’s popularity in Asia underscores a new reality for American app makers. Previously, popularity in the United States often led to corresponding growth overseas. Today, well-established internet firms in Japan, South Korea and China can move quickly into those niches.For Snapchat, the biggest social network success out of America in recent years, the success of Snow shows that any original advantage it may have had in East Asia’s vast and lucrative markets is fading.“A lot of start-ups are thinking if they build a product, they’ll be able to go global, but that’s just not the case anymore,” said Tim Chae, a partner at 500 Startups, who heads a venture capital fund focused on Korean start-ups.Snapchat did not respond to requests for comment. Snapchat does not list any Asian offices on its website but is advertising for freelancers working remotely to help it develop local-language versions in South Korea and Japan as part of a “language ambassador program.”Mr. Han, the spokesman for Snow, acknowledged it was similar to Snapchat, but said Snow had unique features like video chat. Like Snapchat, its primary user demographic is teenagers and young adults.East Asian countries have provided a ready market for new social networks centered on video, selfies, animations and entertainment. The new social networks are largely used on smartphones — a transition that established social networks like Facebook are trying to make. Japan has Line, which like Snow is owned by Naver. China has WeChat, a messaging and social media app that has become nearly ubiquitous on Chinese smartphones.Ivy Zhou, another Chinese Snow user, attends university in Hong Kong, which does not have China’s internet censorship and where she is free to use Snapchat. Snapchat’s social network is far more vibrant than Snow’s, she said, but in China, Snow could fill a fun niche.Advertisement“In mainland China, because they can’t use Snapchat, I’m sure people will use Snow more,” she said.“Whereas WeChat is really a communication tool, Snow has a lot more of an entertainment element, and more young people use it,” she saidSnow’s initial success could offer a road map for Asian social media networks, many of which have struggled to break out of their home markets. While South Korea boasts a mobile and tech-savvy market, its internet companies suffer from doing business in a relatively small market.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even Line, Naver’s biggest international success, with a major presence in Japan and Thailand, has ultimately seen its success fall short of other chat apps like WeChat or Snapchat, in part because it does not have a large home market.Naver still has plans to bring Line to United States, according to the company, but Mr. Chae, the venture capital investor, said Korean companies were now looking at China instead.“For the longest time, the holy grail for a lot of Korean founders was to get U.S. market share,” he said. “They all failed, and failed because there were so many issues. There was no American working culture, they didn’t have a network in America, they didn’t speak English.”“With the rise of China and China’s infatuation with Korean culture, it’s breathed new life into Korean start-ups and founders,” Mr. Chae said. “This is a market that happens to be a lot bigger than the U.S., that seems to be more welcoming for Korean technology and culture than the Western world ever was.”Follow Paul Mozur on Twitter @paulmozur. Emily Feng in Beijing and Choe Sang-Hun in Seoul contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on July 6, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Copycat App Takes Aim at Snapchat in East Asia.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.