
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JULY 5, 2016
Q. How do I make my Instagram photos also post to Facebook and Twitter simultaneously?A. To have the photos you upload to Instagram appear on your other profile pages around the social web, you need to go into your Instagram settings and connect your account with the account credentials you use to log in to Facebook and Twitter. In addition to those networks, you can also link your Instagram account with Swarm, Tumblr and Flickr. Instagram can share posts with several international social networks, too, including VK (also known as VKontakte, which is popular in Russia and parts of Europe) and Japan’s Ameba blogging platform.To link your Facebook and Twitter accounts, open the Instagram app on your phone or tablet, and select the Profile tab in the bottom-right corner of the screen. In the top-right corner of the profile screen, tap the gear icon on the iOS or Windows Phone version of the Instagram app; Android users should press the three vertical dots for the app’s Options menu. On the Linked Accounts screen, select Facebook and follow the instructions.Repeat the process by selecting Twitter on the Linked Accounts screen and entering your login information. When you link each account, Instagram displays a list of permissions it needs in order to work with the other services, like the ability to update your profile page, and asks you to authorize it to do so.After you have connected your Facebook, Twitter and any other services to your Instagram account, if you want to post a photo to all (or some) of them select the photo and apply your filters. When you get to the caption screen, tap the Facebook and Twitter buttons to include them in the upload.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on July 7, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Post One Photo in Many Places.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »