By NICK WINGFIELD and ALEXANDRA STEVENSONJULY 7, 2016
SEATTLE — A top Microsoft executive, Kevin Turner, is leaving the company to join Citadel Securities as its new chief executive, continuing a wave of executive departures of technology industry leaders to financial firms.Mr. Turner, Microsoft’s chief operating officer, oversaw Microsoft’s large sales organization, but Microsoft said he would not be replaced. His duties will instead be distributed among several other company executives.Mr. Turner was widely known to have ambitions of being a chief executive himself, so his departure was little surprise. When Microsoft’s previous chief executive, Steven A. Ballmer, announced his retirement, Mr. Turner was among several internal candidates at the company vying to replace him.The job eventually went to another internal candidate, Satya Nadella, who became chief executive in early 2014.Advertisement“He was not chosen as Ballmer’s successor, and it’s interesting that it has been this long that he chose to leave,” said Frank Gillett, an analyst at Forrester Research.AdvertisementIn an email to Microsoft employees, Mr. Nadella said that Mr. Turner’s decision to leave had prompted him to weave the organization he oversaw into the rest of Microsoft. Mr. Turner had the broadest portfolio among executives at the company, overseeing 51,000 people in sales, information technology and services.“He built the sales force into the strategic asset it is today with incredible talent, while at the same time more than doubling our revenue and driving customer satisfaction scores to the highest in company history,” Mr. Nadella said in a statement.In the two biggest executive promotions that will result from Mr. Turner’s departure, Mr. Nadella said Judson Althoff will lead the company’s worldwide commercial business and Jean-Philippe Courtois will run global sales, marketing and operations. Both men will report to Mr. Nadella and join the company’s senior leadership team.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Nadella said that Mr. Turner, who was with Microsoft for 11 years after spending nearly two decades as an executive at Walmart, will be at Microsoft through the end of July.Several prominent Silicon Valley executives have been hired by hedge funds in recent years. Bridgewater Associates, the world’s biggest hedge fund, hired a former senior Apple executive, Jonathan J. Rubinstein, this year. Mr. Rubinstein, who earned the nickname “the Podfather” for his work leading Apple’s iPod team, joined Bridgewater as co-chief executive in May.And Two Sigma Investments, a quantitative hedge fund based in New York, hired Alfred Spector, a senior executive at Google, to be chief technology officer last year.Citadel Securities is owned by the billionaire Kenneth C. Griffin, who also founded a $25 billion hedge fund called Citadel. Mr. Griffin founded the hedge fund 25 years ago as a young graduate after successfully trading bonds out of his Harvard dorm.In recent years, Mr. Griffin has made a big push into market, making and electronic trading with Citadel Securities, disrupting a business that was once the domain of banks. It operates dark pools — platforms to match buyers and sellers of securities off public exchanges — and places trades for both retail and institutional investors, processing more than a billion shares each day. It also claims to have 35 percent share of daily retail stock trading in the United States.Citadel appears in Michael Lewis’s book “Flash Boys,” which tells the story of technology firms that have contributed to the breakup of central stock exchanges.A version of this article appears in print on July 8, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Top Microsoft Executive Decamps for a Wall St. Firm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.