AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I am a heavy user of the Podcasts app on my 16-gigabyte iPhone 6. In Settings, I can see that the Documents & Data used by the app are taking up almost a gigabyte of space. What can I do?A. Apple’s own Podcasts app is meant to let you discover, subscribe to, download and play free audio and video from the iTunes Store on an iOS device. But unless you have adjusted the app’s settings to delete old downloaded episodes after you have listened to them, all those old shows pile up and gobble storage space.To reclaim some of that turf on your phone, you can remove the old or unwanted episode downloads. If you are already looking at the Podcasts app from the Storage screen, you can remove stored shows from the phone right there. If you are not on the Storage screen, tap the Settings icon on the home screen, select General, then Storage & iCloud Usage and finally, Manage Storage.Tap the Podcasts icon and on the next screen displaying the list of shows, swipe from right to left on a podcast title to get a Delete button; you can also tap the Edit button in the upper-right corner to tap and delete several podcast episodes at once. (If you have subscribed to the podcast’s feed for automatic downloading, dumping old stored episodes here does not affect your subscription.)You can also delete old shows in a similar way from the Podcasts app itself, by swiping on shows or editing the list from the Unplayed or My Podcasts tabs. A cloud icon next to an episode title means the show is available to stream, but a downloaded copy is not on your phone.If you want the Podcast app to automatically manage how many episodes it downloads or to delete episodes you have already played, tap the Settings icon on the iPhone’s home screen, scroll down the list to Podcasts and then use the controls in the Podcast Defaults area.You can also apply specific settings for downloading and deleting to individual podcasts. Open the Podcasts app, tap My Podcasts at the bottom of the screen and then tap the gear-shaped Settings icon near the show’s title to get to the controls. Tapping the three-dot icon next to a show in the app’s Unplayed Episodes lists offers a Remove Download option you can use for cleaning up, too.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement