AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Am I using more data by using my iPhone as a hot spot for my computer when browsing the web than by just browsing on my phone?A. The iOS “personal hot spot” feature allows your computer to link to your iPhone so you can use the phone’s cellular connection to get on the internet; the practice is also called “tethering” and other mobile platforms (including Android) support it as well. But whatever your device, the computer is probably burning through more of your mobile data plan than if you were browsing the web on the phone. First, the full desktop versions of most websites generally require more data to load all the graphics, photos, ads, video and other multimedia elements, compared with the more streamlined mobile versions.Depending on your settings, your computer may also be downloading other files in the background, like system and program updates, shared purchases from the iTunes Store and security patches. Online backup services may also be copying files over the internet connection.If you need to regularly use your iPhone as a hot spot for your computer, you may want to make a few software adjustments to cut down on data usage. Some browsers, like Opera and Google Chrome, have “data saver” modes that compress or block large images from web pages. You should also temporarily turn off any cloud-sharing services that might be syncing files, and keep an eye on app and system updates.Recent versions of Windows have a “metered connection” setting that can limit the amount of data the computer automatically transfers. To activate the setting in Windows 10, go to the Start Menu, to Settings and then to Network & Internet. Select Wi-Fi, then Advanced Options and choose “Set as metered connection.”Apple’s OS X does not have a “metered connection” setting built in, but you can monitor and manage network connections and downloads with third-party tools like the $8 TripMode or the $35 Little Snitch utilities.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement