By MIKE ISAACJULY 11, 2016
Twitter said on Monday that it would partner with CBS to live-stream the Democratic and Republican National Conventions later this month, as the social media company works to be a leader in broadcasting live news and entertainment.Under the terms of the partnership, Twitter will air convention video across its desktop and mobile apps using a live feed from CBSN, the broadcaster’s digital streaming news service. Alongside the video, Twitter will feature a stream of tweets related to the conventions, highlighting the service’s ability to provide real-time commentary.Twitter will make the stream available to people who have not signed up for the service, an audience that the company points to as a part of its total reach. Twitter declined to disclose financial terms of the deal.“Twitter is the fastest way to find out what’s happening in politics and to have a discussion about it,” said Anthony Noto, Twitter’s chief financial officer. “By bringing the live discussion of the Republican and Democratic National Conventions together with CBSN’s live video stream of the proceedings, we believe we’re giving people around the world the best way to experience democracy in action.”AdvertisementThe partnership is part of Twitter’s renewed push to be known for its live, on-the-spot content surrounding news, which is often indispensable to journalists or viewers when major televised events happen. The San Francisco-based company has long courted events like the Oscars and the Grammys, during which online conversations across Twitter are regular occurrences.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Over the last year, Twitter has been the focus of criticism that it lacks product direction and a coherent strategic plan to attract new users to the service. The company’s stock price has fallen by half over the last 12 months, and user growth has stagnated at roughly 310 million regular monthly visitors.AdvertisementTwitter also faces competition from Facebook, which has doubled down on its efforts to increase engagement among its 1.65 billion users with more real-time content. Facebook Live, the company’s newest feature, allows viewers to live-stream themselves and broadcast directly to their friends and family on Facebook.To reignite Twitter’s live video efforts, the company struck a deal with the N.F.L. to stream 10 Thursday night football games on Twitter later this year. Twitter also partnered with Wimbledon on streaming coverage of the popular tennis tournament last week.The Twitter CBSN stream of the Republican National Convention will occur July 18 through July 21, live from Cleveland, while the Democratic National Convention will be broadcast July 25 through July 28 from Philadelphia.A version of this article appears in print on July 12, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Both National Conventions Will Air Live on Twitter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.