AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian X. ChenSAN FRANCISCO — Nest, the division of Alphabet that makes internet-connected household devices, has recently grappled with the resignation of its chief executive at a time of upheaval over his management style, as well as criticism that its products are unreliable.But don’t worry. The company is trying to send a message that everything is fine as it introduces Nest Cam Outdoor, a new version of its smart security camera, this week.The new camera is a waterproof, rugged model of the Nest Cam, which Nest developed after acquiring Dropcam, the security camera maker, for $555 million. The new camera includes a mounting system with a magnet so it can easily be installed outdoors.Nest has a complicated relationship with its camera division, which is largely made up of Dropcam employees. In March, Greg Duffy, the founder and former chief executive of Dropcam, publicly attacked Nest’s chief, Tony Fadell. Mr. Duffy, who had left Nest, described how Mr. Fadell’s leadership compelled dozens of Dropcam employees to resign. “It was my mistake to sell — but that’s a story for another day,” Mr. Duffy wrote in a blog post.A few months later, Mr. Fadell, who had founded Nest and sold it to Google, said it was time to move on from Nest. Nest is owned by Google’s parent, Alphabet.In an interview, Maxime Veron, a director of product marketing for Nest, said the harsh portrayals of working at the company did not reflect reality for most employees.“A few disgruntled people can create a lot of noise, but if you ask the majority of people, they can tell a different story,” he said. “The majority of the Dropcam people are still at Nest, and they’re very happy here.”Mr. Veron added that Mr. Fadell was a “driving force” behind the new outdoor version of the Nest camera.The camera will cost $199 when it is released this fall. Customers who subscribe to Nest’s paid online service for storing video recordings will also get a new feature called Person Alerts, in which the camera sends an alert to your smartphone whenever it detects someone.Advertisement