
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JULY 13, 2016
Q. How do I stop Mac OS X El Capitan and the Safari browser from using my computer’s location?A. As with Windows 10, Android, iOS and other operating systems, Apple’s OS X software has a Location Services function that gathers information from surrounding Wi-Fi networks and other sources to roughly pinpoint your computer’s position. The location feature is a vital part of the Find My Mac tool for tracking down lost or stolen computers, and is also used by the OS X Maps program and the Spotlight app for searching weather and movie information. The Safari browser uses your location information to provide more targeted results, and certain third-party apps and sites, like Facebook, can also make use of your location if you allow it.Apple’s privacy policy states that the company collects the location data from its customers in a way that does not personally identify anyone, but if you would like to turn off the feature entirely, you can do so in the OS X system preferences. To do that, click the System Preferences icon in the Mac’s Dock or open the Apple Menu icon in the Mac’s upper-left corner and choose System Preferences.In the System Preferences box, click the Privacy & Security icon in the top row. In the Security & Privacy box, click the Privacy tab. Click the Location Services option in the left pane of the box to see the apps that have been given permission to use your location.If the padlock icon on the bottom-left corner of the box appears to be closed, you will need to enter the administrator name and password to make changes to the settings here. When the padlock icon appears unlocked, turn off the checkbox next to “Enable Location Services.” Close the Security & Privacy box.To disable location services in the Safari browser so that websites cannot ask where you are, open Safari. Go to the Safari menu in the upper-left corner of the screen, select Preferences and click the Privacy tab. Next to “Website use of location services,” click the button for “Deny without prompting” and then close the Preferences box.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »