AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Quentin HardyIn 1992, Bruce Springsteen recorded a song about media overload and its discontents. He called it “57 Channels (And Nothin’ On).”How quaint.In 2016, Brian X. Chen writes, it’s possible to save money by ditching traditional cable providers, and instead subscribing to nonstandard broadcast services offering 55, 70, or 100 channels. But you probably won’t like it.It’s not that there ain’t nothin’ on, either. The reasons these other services can’t match traditional expensive cable packages tell us much about a seldom-examined question: Why, in this day and age, do we still watch so much TV?After all, with the internet, cheap DVDs and all sorts of streaming services, we have many other choices. Much may be of questionable quality, but nowadays there is always way too much to watch or read.Certainly, there is way too much television to watch. In 2014, Nielsen reported that the average American home received 189 television channels, up almost 50 percent from 2008.Over that same period, the report said, the number of channels consumers regularly watch rose too. It went from 17.3 to — wait for it — 17.5.My 17 may not be the same as yours, exactly, and audiences are clearly fragmenting: The 21.3 million average weekly viewers of “The Big Bang Theory,” the most popular show of 2015, pale against the 100 million-plus viewers of things like the finale of “M.A.S.H.” or the “Who Shot J. R.?” episode of “Dallas,” back when there were smaller overall audiences.We are, however, clearly creatures of habit, filtering down our abundant choices to a handy 17.And while we might find a list of 17 channels among 100 in the big alternative package, we want access to premium shows everyone else is watching. Access to well-known stuff was one reason that Brian found the alternatives still lacking.That may be because talking with your friends about favorite programs is a big part of the television experience. We may watch alone, but in that sense television is also very social.This is particularly true when it comes to big sports events. The final episode of “M.A.S.H.” may have been big, but it is eighth over all in viewership, behind the all the Super Bowls since 2010. In this digital, stored and repurposed age, certain live events are more popular than ever.One reason is something new that’s happened to broadcast: We often leverage the popularity to comment on social media like Twitter, making ourselves part of the immediate performance.That means being right in the moment: Another of Brian’s problems with the alternative services was their sometime lag in live sports of an excruciating 30 seconds.Tweet about something that late, and you’re old news.Advertisement