
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO and
 

 MIKE ISAAC
 
JULY 16, 2016
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Farhad: Good morning, Mike! How was your week? I was in Aspen, Colo., for a tech conference. I mostly hung out with millionaires and billionaires, but as is tradition for New York Times columnists, I also visited some of the local cannabis establishments. It’s legal there! What a place.Mike: Funny you mention that. I’m in Seattle this week, where it’s also acceptable to walk around blazed out of your mind and buy fresh nugs from local dispensaries. I hope I got all that slang right. I’m such a square, all I’m doing here is drinking coffee and listening to Nirvana, nug-free.Farhad: Yeah, I’m just saying no to nugs, that’s my policy.O.K., so pretty much only one thing happened in tech this week: A game called Pokémon Go suddenly went supernova. But before we get into a serious philosophical discussion about Pidgeys and Mankeys and all your other friends from this juggernaut, let’s run through a quick list of non-Pokémon news.AdvertisementMike: Ugh, fine. I’ll be upgrading my Rattatas in the meantime.Farhad: First, politics. A group of 145 people in the tech industry published an open letter this week in opposition to Donald J. Trump. The presumptive Republican nominee for president “would be a disaster for innovation,” they wrote. Though the letter was powerful in its specificity, it wasn’t that surprising — tech leaders have been coming out against Trump for months now, and reporters who have gone looking for tech supporters of Trump have come up mostly empty-handed.AdvertisementMike: I think the effort is noteworthy, as I don’t think there has been a real organized pitch from tech workers who want to clearly state their opposition to Trump. But yeah, not terribly surprising.Farhad: The one exception is Peter Thiel, the billionaire investor who was last in the news for his vendetta against Gawker. Thiel confirmed that he’ll be speaking in support of Trump at the Republican National Convention next week. This caused a headache for Facebook, where Thiel sits on the board. The social network told Kara Swisher, the executive editor of Recode, that Thiel was “not attending on behalf of Facebook or to represent our views.” In other words, nothing to see here.Mike: Thiel is literally the only person I’m interested in hearing speak at the R.N.C. I’m fascinated to hear his rationale for his support of Trump while so many of his contemporaries are against him.Farhad: There was also some interesting legal news this week. Microsoft won a big court decision involving the government’s access to users’ data stored within server farms. As part of a drug investigation, the Justice Department had obtained a warrant seeking a Microsoft customer’s email. Microsoft challenged the warrant because the customer’s data was held in servers outside of the United States — the data was actually in Ireland, where the company said the United States government had no jurisdiction. A lower court ruled against the company, but this week an appeals court overturned that decision.Mike: I’m going to go to sleep now. Don’t mind me, keep talking.Farhad: Seriously, though, the implications here could be big. Tech giants have been battling governments across the globe over a range of issues, including privacy, antitrust and free trade. One persistent question has been the scope of any one government’s reach. When one country imposes rules on a company with operations across the globe, should those rulings apply everywhere? This court, at least, says no. Your secrets are safe, Mike — what happens on a server in Dublin stays in Dublin.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mike: Hey! You swore you wouldn’t allude to my terrible secrets in our newsletter. That’s for when I release my tell-all best-seller after failing out of journalism.Farhad: Finally, Pokémon Go. I downloaded and played the game for about 10 minutes this week, so I’m no expert. You, on the other hand, became an addict, like tens of millions of others, apparently. I’ve seen lots of tech fads over the years but I can’t remember anything else getting so big so quickly. Can you? Why do you think this game has been such a hit?AdvertisementMike: A few things. One, everyone I spoke to when reporting this story out — and by reporting I mean running around San Francisco catching Pokémon — was of a certain age, usually in their 20s or 30s, like myself. They all said the same thing: They grew up with Pokémon as this sort of cultural touchstone, a shared moment of nostalgia that was instantly accessible to them in ways that other, newer franchises may not be. I don’t really care about Angry Birds, for instance, but I sure as hell love me some Charizards.Second, the social bonds around this game are fascinating, mostly because they have almost nothing to do with the software itself. As I ran around the city to different landmarks, I found myself striking up conversations completely at random with the other people catching Pokémon, sharing tips and helping each other out on finding the best rare Pokémon nearby. Walking my dog the other day, I found a group of twentysomethings in the park I usually visit, huddled around a wellspring of Pokémon. We all stood around and chatted for 15 minutes.Some would call that sad. I call it fun.But can you think of any other game with such a real-world social bonding element? Most of the social aspect of gaming involves online multiplayer matches and cooperation, with almost no physical element to it. This is something entirely different.Farhad: I’m glad you referred to the interesting social bonding and the brand power of Pokémon. Even though I haven’t really played, from afar, those looked like the most important reasons this game took off. Some others in tech pointed to the fact that this game uses augmented reality — that is, you see digital Pokémon superimposed on real-world images from your phone’s camera — but to me that seems like a minor part of the fascination here. I would not be surprised if this game marks some huge turning point for augmented reality in computing generally.I do wonder about the longevity of Pokémon Go. Successful mobile games usually see a spike in interest, and then lots of people quit and the game settles into a long-term plateau. I suspect that will happen here too — and some video game experts agree — but I wonder if you think the game makers could figure out ways to keep up the initial burst of popularity?The question matters to Nintendo, which has invested in both Niantic, the start-up that built the game, and in the Pokémon Company, which owns Pokémon’s intellectual property. Nintendo has long been in decline, but maybe this game could represent a turnaround, especially if it remains popular. Do you think it will? How long will you be catching these guys?Mike: I don’t know. I’m thinking of joining a gym to get in better shape to catch Pokémon. Maybe I should hold off and see if it sticks around?Anyway, got to go. I hear there’s a Pikachu in Japantown, and everyone is flocking to the area. I’m not even joking.Farhad: You are too far gone. Mike, remember, your friends and family are here to help whenever you’re ready to admit you have a problem. Until then, happy hunting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »