
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
JULY 15, 2016
Yahoo, we hardly knew ye.But then again, ye hardly knew yourself.Vindu Goel and Michael de la Merced write that the auction for the internet company’s core services like email, search and advertising is about to close. With that, a company that led the first wave of the internet, the onetime feel-good portal to a billion online adventures, will still exist, but it will almost certainly never again be what it was.It is hardly a surprising turn. Yahoo is 21 years old, and for more than half its life people have wondered if the company could get the magic back. More than anything, that is a mark of the good will Silicon Valley long held for the company, and its seemingly boyish founders, Jerry Yang and David Filo.That good will leached out over years, with sad stories like the chief executive who padded his résumé, the end of Yahoo’s independent search business, or the current chief’s many poor business deals. The most recent example of those deals: Yahoo may owe Mozilla — which, for goodness’ sake, is an open source foundation — $1 billion.For many, not least shareholders, Yahoo would have been better off taking Microsoft’s $44.6 billion bid in 2008, which is almost $50 billion in today’s money. The company is now valued at $35 billion, and the figure is that high only because in February Yahoo decided to sell its core assets (around the same time it announced a big layoff).AdvertisementWhen so much has gone wrong to something once so seemingly wonderful, one ascribes bad luck, and bad management. When it happens over so many years, under so many different leaders, however, it’s also worth asking whether there wasn’t also some flaw of character, or what in corporate terms is called culture.The Apple co-founder Steven P. Jobs reportedly told Yahoo early in the millennium that it had to decide whether it was a tech company or a content company. This was a sensible and profound point, and something Yahoo never accomplished.AdvertisementThat may be because content and tech were always contending at Yahoo. Mr. Yang and Mr. Filo, two engineers, started out by pointing out cool sites on the young World Wide Web. Human taste, meet high tech.Tim Koogle, the company’s first chief executive, was a mechanical engineer, and was succeeded by Terry Semel, a Hollywood guy who bragged that he didn’t use email. Thereafter, “What are we?” was a question Yahoo’s leaders seemed to be perpetually addressing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Human curators at Yahoo, eventually an entire building full of them, tried to apply taste and by-hand content organization of the web even as the web exploded. The two companies Yahoo most famously missed buying — Google and Facebook — were far more successful bypassing human organization, and finding algorithms that worked on things like page links and social posts.If you had to choose between tech and content, clearly tech was the superior way to go (if for no other reason than there was no great content company in Silicon Valley). But that implies that Yahoo could have chosen.Maybe Mr. Jobs was wrong, inasmuch as Yahoo couldn’t actually make the kind of choice he demanded of it. It was always a bit of both things, and seems to have collapsed under this, and many other contradictions.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »