Among privacy groups in the United States, Jonathan Mayer is known as a vocal advocate who has defended the right of consumers to turn off online tracking of their browsing activities.Among digital security experts, Mr. Mayer is known, among other things, as the Stanford computer scientist who reported in 2012 that Google was bypassing privacy settings in Apple’s Safari browser by placing bits of code in digital ads that tracked the sites users visited. Google subsequently agreed to pay a $22.5 million fine to settle charges by the Federal Trade Commission that the company had misrepresented its privacy practices.Now Mr. Mayer, 28, has a new handle: federal regulator. On Tuesday, the Federal Communications Commission said it had hired Mr. Mayer as chief technologist in the agency’s enforcement bureau.Mr. Mayer joins the agency as it is developing new privacy rules for online providers, like AT&T and Verizon, that could limit their tracking of consumers’ web activities. His hiring is an indication that the F.C.C. is bolstering the enforcement team that investigates data breaches and other consumer protection cases. This year, for instance, the F.C.C. announced a $100 million fine against AT&T Mobility, which the agency said had misled customers who signed up for unlimited data plans. The agency charged that AT&T had failed to notify consumers adequately that the company could reduce their data transmissions to speeds that were much slower than the company had advertised.“That’s not overly aggressive; that’s basic consumer protection,” Tom Wheeler, the chairman of the F.C.C., said of the enforcement bureau’s work last week at a congressional hearing. “Whether it’s preventing cramming, improving Wi-Fi access in hotels, or protecting consumer data, the commission will not hesitate to act to protect consumers’ interests.”Mr. Mayer has previously investigated similar issues as an independent researcher and lawyer.In his personal blog in January, Mr. Mayer  said Verizon Wireless used unique online customer identification codes that could make consumers vulnerable to covert tracking and profiling by third parties. Verizon subsequently announced that it would allow mobile customers to opt out of being tracked using those identifiers.In August, Mr. Mayer reported that AT&T was injecting extra ads onto websites when consumers used its Wi-Fi hot spots at Dulles International Airport outside Washington — without, he said, adequately notifying consumers of the practice,  a story covered by Ars Technica. A spokesman for AT&T subsequently told the publication that the company had ended a trial ad injection program at two airports.The F.C.C. declined to comment on whether its enforcement bureau had opened investigations into reports by Mr. Mayer before he was hired by the agency.