
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
JULY 19, 2016
Last month, Britain voted to leave the European Union. This week, that looked like pretty good news for at least one acquisitive company, when SoftBank of Japan announced it would buy the British firm ARM Holdings for $32 billion. Could more foreigners move on British tech?Leslie Picker, Mark Scott and Jonathan Soble report  on some good reasons to think the ARM deal is a special case.ARM, a decades-old spinout of a British personal computer company, specializes in low-power semiconductor designs, popular in wireless devices. Little of its market is actually in Britain, so it won’t be affected if the United Kingdom has a recession. It doesn’t have higher raw materials cost, something affecting other British companies as the pound fell after the decision to exit from the European Union. The company is well run and doesn’t need fixing.That does make ARM something of a special case. But with the pound down and the dollar and the yen up after the so-called Brexit, it’s almost certain that plenty of bankers working for tech companies are looking to buy. And there are more British assets that could go to foreign hands.AdvertisementIf the issue is tech companies that don’t rely on the British economy, there is also Inmarsat, a 37-year-old operator of a global satellite communications network. Its customers are global. ARM’s future, and one reason SoftBank bought ARM, is the growth prospects of the sensor-rich internet of things. Satellite communications, and the communications spectrum that Inmarsat has, also look strong.AdvertisementPerhaps the greatest British tech assets are big phone companies like BT Group or Vodafone, which both operate across scores of countries. Those would be enormous acquisitions, of course; at a dinner with AT&T executives last week, I was told that the telecommunications firm, one of the few that could afford such an acquisition, is not interested.There are other British businesses with large foreign presences, like Shazam, the music service; SwiftKey, which uses artificial intelligence to make phone keyboards easier to use; or a number of companies in cloud computing. Of course, pretty much any company that lives primarily on the internet has no need to depend on a country’s local market, and can easily move many of its assets to another location.There is one more British asset that can easily slip the British market: people with good tech skills. Those are not companies, but they have no problem taking their most valuable skills somewhere else. Of course, many of them already have, at the British offices of companies like Google, Facebook and Apple.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »