AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. When I’m on my computer and I click links on web pages, sometimes the links open in new windows and sometimes they don’t. Why is this, and is there a way I can get links to open in new tabs so I don’t lose my place on the original page?A. Some pages include a bit of code that forces links to open in new tabs or windows when clicked, but not every website does this. If you want certain links on a page you are reading to open separately, check the settings in your browser to see if there is an option to have clicked links open in new windows or tabs.If your browser does not offer that option, you can also use mouse clicks and keyboard shortcuts to open the linked pages in separate tabs or windows. For instance, in many browsers, clicking the middle mouse button (the scroll wheel on some models) opens a link in a new browser tab, where you can read it after you finish with the page you are currently reading.You should also be able to right-click (or hold down the Control key while clicking) to see a contextual menu; this menu shows options to open the selected link either in a new tab within your current browser window or in a new browser window by itself.Apple Safari, Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge (and Internet Explorer), Mozilla Firefox and the Opera browser all have lists of shortcuts posted on their websites for opening links in tabs and windows. Many Windows browsers will open a link in a new active tab if you press the Control and Shift keys while clicking a link, and Mac users can get the same results by pressing the Command and Shift keys while clicking.If you do not want to fumble around with the keyboard, your browser may also have add-ons or extensions you can install to automatically open clicked links in separate tabs. The Open Link in New Tab add-on for the Firefox browser is one example.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement