By KATIE BENNERJULY 20, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Airbnb has hired former United States Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. as an adviser to help create the company’s new anti-discrimination policy, adding a big name to its battle to prevent people on its service from refusing minority and transgender customers.In a blog post on Wednesday, Brian Chesky, chief executive of the company, which helps arrange short-term rentals, wrote that the fight against bigotry is “the greatest challenge we face as a company.” He added, “While we have a policy that prohibits discrimination, we want this policy to be stronger.”Mr. Holder said in a statement, “Airbnb is committed to building a community where everyone can belong. I’m eager to help them craft policies that will be the model for companies who share Airbnb’s commitment to diversity and inclusion.”Airbnb has been grappling with a discrimination controversy since December, when Harvard researchers said it was harder for guests with African-American-sounding names to rent rooms through the service. That led to a spate of bad publicity for the company, including reports that some Airbnb hosts had rejected African-American and transgender travelers. The company has since removed some hosts for discriminatory behavior.AdvertisementAirbnb is also fighting a class-action lawsuit filed this year that claims the company violated civil-rights laws related to housing discrimination. In court filings, Airbnb has argued that the suit should not go forward because the plaintiffs waived their rights to sue and agreed to arbitration when they accepted the company’s terms of use.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Airbnb has taken other steps to blunt the discrimination issue. In June, the company began a review on the subject led by Laura Murphy, former chief of the American Civil Liberties Union’s Washington legislative office.Airbnb said Mr. Holder is joining as the company is halfway through the review process. Mr. Holder will work with John Relman, a civil rights lawyer, to design Airbnb’s new anti-discrimination policy, the company said.AdvertisementAirbnb, based in San Francisco, is valued at around $25 billion and has recently been in talks for a new round of financing that would value the company at about $30 billion. The company has grown rapidly from a couch-surfing service to a hotel alternative available in nearly 200 countries and more than 34,000 cities.A version of this article appears in print on July 21, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Eric Holder Will Advise  Airbnb on Anti-Bias Policy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.