
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JULY 22, 2016
Q. I can check the app on my smartphone to see if I’m getting too close to my monthly data allowance, but how can I tell if I’ve almost hit the limit for my internet provider at home?A. As unlimited monthly data service has given way to consumption-based pricing — tiered plans based on the number of gigabytes of data you think you may use each month — the need to keep an eye on the meter has become more of an issue. Tracking your data use is fairly straightforward if you are the only one using the broadband connection, but if you have a network router set up to share the service with multiple devices and other members of the household, it can be a little more complicated.Most internet service providers now have a page on their websites where you can see your current data use. For example, Time Warner Cable (soon to be known as Spectrum when it fully merges with Charter Communications) has an internet use tracker on its site for customers, Comcast has its own data use meter and AT&T has tools to check data use for its U-verse broadband service.You need to have a user name and password with the company so you can log in and see your account information. If you have not set up a user name and password, go to your provider’s site and look for a place to sign up. (In addition to letting you manage your account online, signing up gives you the credentials you need to watch a lot of streaming content on third-party apps and devices, and you can even program your DVR remotely.)If you want to track your monthly statistics on your own without using your internet service provider’s tools, free programs like GlassWire for Windows or Bandwidth+ for Mac can give you an idea of how much your computer itself is using. To track the use by multiple devices, your network router may also be able to monitor the amount of data being used each month.Software utilities can vary based on the router model, so check your manual to see what is included. If no use-tracking features are available, installing a third-party program like DD-WRT to monitor use may also work for your model, but do so at your own risk.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »