By MIKE ISAACJULY 29, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — After Sheryl Sandberg, chief operating officer of Facebook, lost her husband last year, she wrote a moving post about her grief that prompted questions about whether she might write a book that would help people cope with their own losses.Now Ms. Sandberg is moving ahead with the project.Ms. Sandberg, author of the best seller “Lean In,” which helped women think about their careers, plans to write a book titled “Option B” about resilience, according to her co-author, Adam Grant. Mr. Grant and Ms. Sandberg have previously collaborated on articles about women in the workplace.“‘Option B’ is about how we can face the adversity in our lives, find meaning and bounce back stronger,” Mr. Grant, a professor at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, said in a post to his Facebook page on Friday. Along with resilience, the pair will touch on themes of hardship, finding comfort after marriage, raising children and experiencing suffering, he said.A spokeswoman for Ms. Sandberg confirmed her plans for the book and declined further comment. Recode earlier reported news of Ms. Sandberg’s plans.AdvertisementMs. Sandberg has not announced the publisher of her new book, and her agent did not immediately respond to a request for comment.AdvertisementFor years, Ms. Sandberg has been in the public eye for her technology roles, including leading Google’s early ad sales efforts and later building Facebook into a booming business. She became better known beyond Silicon Valley with the publication of “Lean In” in 2013 and is often talked about as a possible political candidate, though she has long denied that she has plans to leave Facebook.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But she was thrust into a different role in May 2015 when Dave Goldberg, her husband of more than 10 years, died suddenly while the couple were on holiday at a resort in Mexico. In the months that followed, Ms. Sandberg began to speak publicly about how she was handling Mr. Goldberg’s death, including in the 1,700-word Facebook post in June of last year that resonated widely.“I have learned that resilience can be learned,” Ms. Sandberg wrote in the post, adding that resilience requires three qualities: “Personalization, permanence and pervasiveness.”In a speech delivered to the 2016 graduating class of the University of California, Berkeley, Ms. Sandberg also touched upon the idea of doing more writing on the difficulties that women who do not have a partner face in their daily lives.The book’s tentative title, “Option B,” springs from a motivational poster plastered around Facebook’s campus in Menlo Park, Calif., one of many displayed on the company walls. The phrase, Ms. Sandberg said, was uttered by Philip Deutch, a friend and managing partner of NGP Energy Technology Partners, when she was struggling after Mr. Goldberg’s death and said she wanted her husband, her “Option A.”Mr. Deutch’s response: “Option A is not available.” Instead, he said, they would make the most out of Option B.An earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of a friend of Sheryl Sandberg. He is Philip Deutch, not Deutsch.A version of this article appears in print on August 1, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Sandberg’s Grief Inspires a Book About Resilience.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.