AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Quentin HardyTo get a good sense of tech in China, it’s useful to think about the last 5,000 years, particularly as they relate to a big event this week.China has 50 centuries of history, which along with its huge population can make the rest of us seem like something of a rounding error. That’s one of several things that often makes China’s market unique in the world, along with a strong nationalist streak, local innovation and good old-fashioned protectionism.Whichever of these you consider paramount, they create a strangely familiar outcome in Uber’s decision to sell its China operations to Didi Chuxing, the local version of Uber’s ride-hailing service.As Paul Mozur and Mike Isaac write, Uber’s $2 billion investment in China will yield a stake in the new Chinese company worth $7 billion.That may not be what Uber’s leaders had in mind, but it’s a pretty good outcome. Google walked away from China after run-ins with the authorities, and it sold early its small stake in Baidu, the Google-like search engine that dominates the Chinese market. As Farhad Manjoo writes, eBay and Amazon didn’t even manage to get a piece of their Chinese version, Alibaba.In the business of technology infrastructure, China has also been a tough market. Cisco Systems manages to sell some products, but it has lost much business to Huawei, a Chinese maker of internet gear. Cisco once sued Huawei, accusing it of copying Cisco’s stuff, but it now says relations are fine. They are, except Huawei executives privately fume at the difficulties they have entering the American market.Amazon Web Services, the leading cloud computing company, has gone it alone across the world but partnered in China with a local company. Alibaba is also emerging as a cloud player, but so far it has little cloud business outside China.The way Cisco and Huawei dominate their home markets and the way local Chinese cloud companies are likely to have a big role in China but little elsewhere for now suggest a likely fate for Didi-Uber: The Chinese company gets its big market, and the Americans get theirs, and much of the world besides. Don’t expect to see a big push by Didi in, say, Europe, where Uber already has operations.For now. After all, China is a huge market. When you’ve got 5,000 years of history, it’s easy to play a long game.Advertisement