
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
AUG. 5, 2016
Facebook isn’t ending spam. It just wants better labeling on the can.As Mike Isaac and Sydney Ember report, the world’s largest social network is changing the rules for how outside content is listed on Facebook. Clickbait, or headlines that “withhold or distort information,” will be featured much farther down.It’s an interesting change, because Facebook is moving beyond ranking other outlets’ stories based by how much traffic they’re getting. Now, it cares whether that traffic was obtained somewhat deceptively.Two of the examples Facebook offered are telling. They were headlines that said “The Dog Barked at the Deliveryman and His Reaction Was Priceless,” and “When She Looked Under Her Couch Cushions and Saw THIS … I Was SHOCKED!”You know the kind of thing: The delivery guy’s reaction will probably not be beyond price, and you’ll probably recover pretty quick from whatever is under the couch cushions. But part of you may be (like me) a little bummed you didn’t get to click on those titles to find out, even if (in my case) it does mean I’ll probably hate myself a little bit for giving in. Again.AdvertisementAnd that feeling of letdown, and not the arguably inane content itself, is what Facebook is aiming at. A headline like “Deliveryman Reacts to Barking Dog” will probably face no penalty under Facebook’s new rules, though the number of readers who come upon a story like that on the 1.7 billion-member network might be lucky to exceed 100. It’s dull.Facebook doesn’t really care what you read. It cares about how you feel while you are on Facebook. The content it links to is a part of its brand. It’s a little like how you may change your view of a serious news story, or the site that publishes it, when you see that at the bottom there’s a link to the unbelievable fate of 10 childhood TV stars. The link is part of the overall aura.AdvertisementGood news sites feel that they have to link to things like that, given the tough times in the media business. It’s a mark of Facebook’s power and scale that it can be more choosy. It’s also an indication of how serious it is about keeping us all in Facebook as much as possible that it’s taking steps like these.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »