
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
AUG. 5, 2016
Q. I found some free old movies in the Internet Archive to download, but how can I copy the files to my iPod Nano, which does not have internet access?A. If you have been using Apple’s iTunes program to manage the music, video and other files on your Nano, you can use that same software to copy over videos downloaded from the web. First, though, make sure the video files you want to use are in formats that work on the iPod. The latest version of the Nano can play H.264 or MPEG-4 video in the .mp4 and .mov formats (as well as the .m4v format that Apple uses for copy-protected video from its iTunes Store).Once you find and download a compatible video file, import the movie into the iTunes program on your PC or Mac. Go to the File menu in iTunes, select Add to Library and find the video file on your hard drive to pull it into iTunes.Once the video is in your iTunes library, you can connect your Nano to the computer with its USB cable and transfer the movie in the same way you copy music and other videos to and from the computer to the player. (If you do not see it immediately, check in the Movies area under Home Videos.) When the transfer is finished, the movie should be in the iPod Nano’s Videos library.While iTunes is the free software Apple provides for managing content between computer and iPod (especially for iPod models that do not have internet access), several alternative applications can also copy files between devices. CopyTrans, iMazing and iExplorer are just a few of the relatively inexpensive iPod-management tools around.For those who are unfamiliar with it, the Internet Archive is a free 20-year-old online library of digital text, audio, video, photos, games and more. The site has thousands of files available for streaming and downloading. Much of the material in the archive’s video collection is in the public domain and includes shorts by Charlie Chaplin and the Three Stooges, moody film noir productions, extremely outdated public-safety movies from the Prelinger Archives and the 1940 romantic comedy “His Girl Friday” formatted especially for the iPod.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »