
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
AUG. 8, 2016
Q.  When I downloaded the new Windows 10 update, I just clicked the Use Express Settings button during the installation. But what exactly are Express settings, and can I change them after the fact?A. Like other major upgrades, the Windows 10 Anniversary Update that was released this month has a few configuration screens for you to set your system preferences. On the blue “Get going fast” screen, Microsoft presents a pageful of text that describes all the things the company would like to do with your data if you click the Use Express Settings button, but reading it can take some time.Many of the Express settings are intended to make using Windows 10 as convenient as possible. If you click the button, you agree to let Microsoft collect data about how you interact with Windows for adding information through voice, typing or stylus — which the company says is to “improve the suggestion and recognition platforms.”Among other things, using the Express Settings button allows Windows and its apps to request your location data, see your location history, target you with personalized advertising, share your browsing data and let Skype calling software use your contacts list. “Automatically connect to suggested open hot spots” is another setting you get if you go Express, despite the next sentence, which notes, “Not all networks are secure.”Even if you clicked the Express Settings button — instead of the smaller Customize Settings link in the lower-left corner of the “Get going fast” screen — you can go back into the main Windows 10 Settings app from the Start Menu and change things. Microsoft’s site has a collection of articles about Windows 10 and privacy at support.microsoft.com/en-us/help/12456, including explanations and a how-to guide for adjusting individual settings.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on August 11, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Slowing Down Windows Express.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »