By KATIE BENNERAUG. 10, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Bill Maris has stepped down as chief executive of GV, the onetime venture finance arm of Google, in another prominent departure for its parent company, Alphabet.Mr. Maris will be replaced by David Krane, an early public relations executive at Google who is now a managing partner at GV, formerly known as Google Ventures, the firm said Thursday.“I looked around at how well GV has done and said mission accomplished,” Mr. Maris said in an interview. “If you’re a chef and you have the finest ingredients and work in a beautiful kitchen and bake the cake, it’s time to go cook something else.” He added that he did not know what he would do next, but plans to spend more time with his wife and 11-month-old child while he creates his next project.In a statement, GV said that with Mr. Krane, “GV will continue to expand our mission to find and fund great entrepreneurs.”AdvertisementMr. Maris’s departure comes one year after Google, the company founded by Sergey Brin and Larry Page, announced it would reorganize itself as a holding company named Alphabet. Google’s core online ad business was separated from businesses like GV, self-driving cars and life sciences, all of which now go under an umbrella called Other Bets. As part of the reorganization, Alphabet asked for more financial accountability and cost consciousness from the various businesses.AdvertisementIn recent months, Alphabet has had two other high-level departures. Tony Fadell, the chief of Nest, Alphabet’s connected hardware division, left in June after reports of management issues. Last week, Chris Urmson, a roboticist and a linchpin of Alphabet’s self-driving car project, exited over the direction of the effort.Mr. Maris, 41, said his move had nothing to do with the Alphabet corporate overhaul.”GV was more of a spectator to that change,” he said, adding that the investment firm had been a success and operated in a cost-conscious way.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Before starting GV, Mr. Maris founded an internet start-up in Vermont. He got to know Mr. Brin and Mr. Page through a longtime friend, Anne Wojcicki, a founder of the genetics company 23andMe who was married to Mr. Brin.When Mr. Maris founded GV in 2009, some Silicon Valley investors were skeptical that a venture arm of a large corporation could become a major player in start-up investing. Corporate venture capital firms have traditionally had a spotty record of success.Mr. Maris has described how he pushed executives at Google to let him run GV as a traditional venture firm, with little input from corporate executives, so that it could compete with independent venture firms such as Benchmark and Sequoia Capital.In its statement, GV said Mr. Krane was instrumental in building the firm. Mr. Krane led GV’s investments in Uber, the ride hailing behemoth now valued at $62.5 billion, and Nest, which was acquired by Google in 2014 for $3.2 billion.In addition to Mr. Krane, GV has a dozen investment professionals and dozens of employees who advise start-ups on engineering, design, marketing and recruiting. The firm, which invests money provided by Alphabet, oversees around $2.4 billion.Mr. Maris’s departure from GV was earlier reported by Recode.“I don’t think I could leave GV in a better place or in better hands,” Mr. Maris said. “I’m excited for the team.”A version of this article appears in print on August 12, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Another Executive Exits in Overhaul at Alphabet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.