By MIKE ISAACAUG. 18, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — A federal judge on Thursday struck down a proposed class-action settlement between Uber and a group of its current and former drivers, potentially continuing a protracted lawsuit that questioned a key tenet of the ride-hailing company’s business.Under a settlement forged in April, Uber had been set to pay up to $100 million in reimbursement damages to nearly 400,000 drivers. The drivers first sued Uber in 2013, claiming that they should have been classified as employees rather than independent contractors of the company. Uber has opposed having its drivers be categorized as employees, a more costly designation that would require the company to pay payroll taxes and ensure that drivers earn at least the minimum wage.In documents filed in Federal District Court for Northern California on Thursday, Judge Edward M. Chen ruled that the April settlement was “not fair, adequate, and reasonable” as grounds for denial. He also said a small portion of the $100 million amount reflects only 0.1 percent of the potential full verdict value of the case.The decision is a blow to Uber in a longstanding battle with its drivers, many of whom have argued that the type of control Uber exerts over them constitutes conditions of employment. As employees, Uber drivers would be entitled to reimbursement for expenses and vehicle maintenance, costs that as independent contractors they now pay themselves.AdvertisementAs part of the settlement agreement, Uber also made other concessions, like recognizing and speaking with quasi-unions of its drivers in California and Massachusetts. It also allowed drivers to accept tips at the end of each ride.AdvertisementUber had hailed the settlement as a victory for drivers who wanted to maintain flexibility in their roles. But others said the reimbursement amount was far too low. Uber is valued at $62.5 billion, and  in June it raised $3.5 billion from Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund; the company also recently agreed to sell off its China operations to the Chinese ride-hailing company Didi Chuxing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The settlement, mutually agreed by both sides, was fair and reasonable,” Matt Kallman, an Uber spokesman, said in a statement. “We’re disappointed in this decision and are taking a look at our options.”Shannon Liss-Riordan, the lawyer who filed the driver lawsuits, said in an email that she was disappointed by the judge’s decision on the settlement “but I understand and I have heard him.” She said it was possible that both sides could reach a revised agreement, but that if not, she planned to take the case to trial “and fight my hardest for the Uber drivers.”Bhairavi Desai, he president of the National Taxi Workers Alliance, a union of drivers with chapters in New York and California, which helped a group of 200 Uber drivers formally object to the settlement, said her group was “pretty elated” by the judge’s overturning of the agreement.Ms. Desai said that because the California case was one of the earliest prominent cases against Uber involving misclassification, the settlement “could have slowed down the process for everyone else” intent on challenging their status and leave drivers to wonder whether there was any real upside in bringing cases.She added that while the initial lawsuit did not seem to attract much interest from the Uber drivers her members were in contact with, the settlement terms provoked widespread outrage. “The drivers felt so scorned by the settlement that many came forward at that point,” she said.An article on Friday about a federal judge’s decision to strike down a proposed class-action settlement between Uber and a group of current and former drivers referred incorrectly to the states in which some of Uber’s concessions would have applied. The company had agreed to recognize and speak with quasi-unions only in California and Massachusetts — not in “New York and other states.”Noam Scheiber contributed reporting from Evanston, Ill.A version of this article appears in print on August 19, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Overturns Uber’s Settlement With Its Drivers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.