By QUENTIN HARDYNOV. 24, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  Hewlett-Packard ended its life as one public company with a whimper.HP, considered the grandfather of Silicon Valley, began November as two separate entities. One, called HP Inc., sells primarily personal computers and printers. The other, HPE, sells computer hardware, software and services that are used by large companies.Meg Whitman, who was chief executive of the old HP and now runs HPE, split the entity in the hope of increasing efficiency and growth. After months of planning, the two companies began operating separate financial reporting systems in August, although they were legally one company until Oct. 30.“The cake is not baked, but we are feeling really good,” Ms. Whitman said in an interview Tuesday. In particular, she said, her business could sell a lot of computing gear to the cloud-computing companies that undid the old HP.For the quarter that ended Oct. 30, Hewlett-Packard had net earnings of $1.32 billion, or 73 cents a share. Revenue was $25.7 billion, down 9 percent from a year earlier.AdvertisementThe earnings were below Wall Street’s expectations, which used nonstandard accounting popular in analyzing tech companies. By the nonstandard formula, HP earned 93 cents a share. Analysts had expected HP to make 96 cents a share, on revenue of $26.4 billion, according to a survey by FactSet.AdvertisementShares of HP Inc. were down more than 7 percent in after-hours trading Tuesday, while HPE shares were up more than 2 percent.Of the two firms, Ms. Whitman’s HPE drew more attention, as she is trying to remake a business that sold things like computer servers and data networking into something with more software and high-value services, which can compete in the era of cloud computing.Her big bet is that major corporations will not move wholesale to cheap providers of computing power like Amazon Web Services. Instead, she hopes, they will create hybrid systems, in which they run their own computers, have other computing inside companies like AWS and Microsoft’s Azure, and subscribe to yet other cloud-based businesses, like Salesforce or Box.com.There are reasons to think this is true. “A typical large enterprise has on average 24 cloud services from nine different providers,” said Thomas Bittman, an analyst with Gartner. “HP is in a good position to be the company that handles merging all that stuff.”HP sold companies many of the computers they own, but lost ground in the transition to a world of cloud computing and mobility.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Whitman’s strategy now is led by high-value consulting, in particular helping customers in planning, managing, protecting and using hybrid cloud and on-site systems to get and analyze more data, faster.Next week HPE and Microsoft are expected to make a joint announcement that Microsoft is a “preferred partner,” meaning they will make sales calls together and recommend each other to customers.It is a plausible plan, Mr. Bittman said, that only needs revenue and profits. “It’s a good series of slides, but we need to see it in action,” he said.In the case of HP Inc., both PCs and printers are competing with both cloud and mobile devices for much of what they used to do.AdvertisementRevenue in both businesses fell by 14 percent, compared with a year earlier. Dion Weisler, the chief executive of HP Inc., said in an interview that lower sales of both items were likely to continue. “The industry and the markets are challenged,” he said. “It doesn’t surprise us or intimidate us.”A version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Last Report From Old HP Still Misses Wall St. Forecasts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.