AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Quentin HardyWith little notice, Google just told us a lot about our world.On Monday, the company announced the general availability of its newest Android smartphone operating system. Looking at how it got here and what is inside the new OS reveals much about how different tech works now, when compared with just a few years ago.Google first talked about the new OS, called Nougat, last March, and gave people the opportunity to download an early version of the software. Google appears to have used that feedback heavily in the final version.What’s the single best question about money that anyone has ever asked you — or that you’ve asked of a spouse, family member or loved one? And what was the conversation that ensued?Not so long ago, a new computer OS was a huge deal, developed in secret and released with a marketing thunderclap. That was when personal computers were the rule, or PC-type thinking dominated phone marketing. Now speed, feedback and continuous upgrades are the rule.Nougat will appear as an update on a handful of Nexus phones over the next few weeks, and later on a new phone. It is said to have 250 new features, but is unlikely to require a lot of new learning, unlike new versions of Windows on a PC.People don’t have time for that now; if things aren’t more intuitive, they are discarded.Personalization is also a big feature of these mass-market devices, so the phone can do things like provide polyglots with search results in multiple languages, ways to reconfigure Quick Settings controls or 1,500 different emoji for nonverbal communication.Besides feedback and customization, speed is another design principle that has become paramount. Apps can run side by side, notifications can open apps directly and previously used apps can be easily reopened.If saving seconds sounds like a big deal, it is: Google long ago discovered that even a 200-millisecond delay can make a search seem too slow. That impatience is now a consumer norm.So much for the present state of tech design. Nougat also has a couple of indications about what’s next, in the form of augmented reality and virtual reality functions. A lot of that will be dormant for now, until new games, and hardware like headphones and game controllers, become available.It’s O.K. if you start getting impatient for that stuff. After all, by the time you read this, Nougat will have been out for an entire day or more.Advertisement