
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
AUG. 25, 2016
In one sense, Gawker is gone. In another, it’s all around you.At least it is according to Farhad Manjoo, who memorializes this week’s death of the influential website that traded in news, gossip, ridicule, opinion, fast-moving insight and much else that seems to define the current phase of online publishing.Gawker was destroyed by a lawsuit secretly paid for by a Silicon Valley billionaire, a matter that has led to some fear of a muzzled media. It was a plan that was executed over years, with a careful choice of case and venue that only someone of means could afford.The billionaire was motivated by having his sexuality exposed, and the case he paid for involved the publication of a stolen adulterous sex tape. The trial included an editor’s deposition that included the statement that he would not publish a sex tape of a child, provided the child was under 4 years old. One might argue that what wealth purchased was really a jury of normal Americans judging such stuff.Mr. Manjoo sets aside those issues to talk about how Gawker’s “sensibility and influence on the rest of the news business survive.” In essence, he sees it as the first site to fully embrace the emotionally charged, frenetic quality of communication on the internet. As such, it took us to a place from which we’re unlikely to return.AdvertisementThe dominant values appear to be that any topic is fair game, a story can be no more than a well-written line, and reader engagement — through comments, tips or anything else — is a critical part of the process.The very nature of that fast, transactional engagement invited writers to punch hard, be extreme and value outrageousness as much as informing people in anything like the traditional sense of news.AdvertisementIn Gawker’s case, the results varied. On the one hand, a Gawker property would lampoon someone barely in the public eye. On the other, they ran images of then-Toronto mayor Rob Ford supposedly on crack. That, arguably, was a public service that fostered further investigation of a very troubled politician.Mr. Manjoo is somewhat conflicted about the meaning of Gawker, and he’s not alone: Our reader comments praise and condemn the site in almost equal measure.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Gawker’s mourners praise the sensibility, but generally skirt the reality that its biggest successes usually traded in vulgarity. That is too bad, not simply because of the selectivity. Acknowledging that takes us into the biggest and most troubling lesson of all.Check out this rundown of the most popular 2015 Gawker posts. Most definitely lean to the prurient variety. The talented staff wrote lots of stuff, and this is the people’s choice among them.Which may be the point. The internet is a place where everything is permitted, and in this ultimate democracy Gawker gave millions of people what they wanted.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »