
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
AUG. 25, 2016
Q. Can you process RAW images in Apple’s OS X Photos program?A. Photos, Apple’s free image-editing program now included with the OS X operating system, can handle picture files in many digital camera RAW formats, as did Apple’s previous iPhoto software. For those unfamiliar with it, some digital cameras have a setting that allows them to capture images in an uncompressed format called RAW, along with the standard compressed JPEG format used by just about every smartphone and stand-alone camera around. (Apple’s coming iOS 10 operating system will also let people collect RAW image data from the device’s camera.)RAW images take up more room on the memory card than JPEG files because they contain all of the data from the camera’s sensor. Many serious photographers prefer to work with RAW images because they have more control over how the photo ultimately looks. As the RAW file contains more data to manipulate than a JPEG, experienced users can download the image to a computer and process it themselves instead of having the camera do it. For example, a RAW file typically contains a greater dynamic range of highlights and shadows, which can produce bright, luminous photos with sharp contrast when adjusted in an image-editing program.After you set your camera on its version of the RAW and JPEG setting to capture both a RAW and a high-resolution JPEG version of each photo, connect your camera or memory card to the Mac and import the images into the Photos program. By default, Photos will present the JPEG version of the image when you double-click on a picture to open it. To get to the RAW copy, click the Edit button in the upper-right corner, go to the Image menu and choose Use RAW as Original. (If you used the camera’s RAW-only setting for your pictures, or if your camera has slots for two memory cards and the option to store RAW files on one card and JPEG on the other, just upload the card full of RAW images to the computer.)With the RAW version open, click the Adjust icon in the editing window and make the changes you wish to the photo’s light, color and other properties. RAW files in your Photos library can be backed up to Apple’s online iCloud Photo Library as well.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »