
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
AUG. 30, 2016
Q. Why do companies stop supporting older phone hardware in their system updates?A. While it may seem like encouraging new hardware purchases is the sole reason older phones are thrown off the upgrade bus, every company has its own internal reasons for not including all models in annual operating system updates. In many cases, the newer system software is written to take advantage of more recent processors and other hardware components that older hardware lacks.Additionally, as mobile operating systems mature with each release, the storage space required to install and run them may also exceed the available room on some early-model phones. Having fewer phone models to troubleshoot and support for each operating system update is also appealing to some developers.With Apple’s iPhones and Google’s own Nexus line of smartphones, you should get at least two years of system updates for your device once you buy it. The expiration date for Android-based hardware from other manufacturers varies, though, as it does for Windows Phone.Google released its Android 7.0 (Nougat) software on Aug. 22, but it dropped official support for two devices released in 2013, the Nexus 5 phone and the second-generation Nexus 7 tablet. Android 7.0 is available for the Nexus 6, 5X, 6P and General Mobile 4G smartphones, the Nexus 9 and Pixel C tablets, and the Nexus Player set-top box, which was recently discontinued. (Android enthusiasts may soon find a way to install unofficial updates on the older devices, but tinker at your own risk.)Apple’s iOS 10 system, expected to arrive within the next few weeks, works on a larger number of devices from the company’s hardware archives. The new software will support the iPhone 5 (released in 2012) and later, last year’s sixth-generation iPod Touch and the fourth-generation iPad (also released in 2012) and later — including the iPad Mini 2, iPad Air and iPad Pro variations.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on September 1, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Phone Hardware, Often Orphaned.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »