
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
SEPT. 2, 2016
Q. How do you get the dark background on the Twitter phone app? It seems easier on the eyes.A. Twitter’s “night mode” reverses the standard color scheme to display white text on a dark gray background. The mode can be useful for those who find the bright glare of a white screen more difficult to read or harsher to view, including those situations where one spouse is trying to sleep while the other is tweeting in bed.To use the night mode, make sure you have updated your phone with the latest version of the Twitter app so you have all the latest features. (Night mode differs from Night Shift, a setting Apple included in iOS 9.3 and later that gently changes screen colors from cooler to warmer tones after sunset.)On the Android version of the Twitter app, go to the upper-left corner of the screen and tap your profile photo, (or depending on where you are within the app, on the three-lined Menu icon). In the panel that opens on screen, tap the switch next to Night Mode to enable the darker background for your Twitter feed. If tire of the dark, you can always return to this menu and switch back to the light.In the iOS edition of Twitter, tap the Me icon in the lower-right corner of the screen. On your Twitter profile screen, tap the gear-shaped Settings icon. In the menu that pops up, tap the option for “Turn on night mode.” The night mode setting can be switched off by returning to this menu.A similar “dark theme” is also available in the Twitter app for devices running Windows 10 Mobile.If you find bright white screens generally hard to read in any app, your phone’s operating system probably has a high-contrast setting, magnification tools and other features to make the display easier to see. On an Android or iOS device, tap the main Settings icon on the home screen and select Accessibility to see what is offered by your version of the software. Windows-based phones keep similar controls in the Ease of Access settings.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »