
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
SEPT. 5, 2016
Q. Some of us like our older phones and want to keep them. I know for many just getting a new battery will be enough, so what resources are available for those of us who want to keep our older iPhones, Android phones and other gear going for as long as possible?A. If your older smartphone has aged out of getting the latest operating system software from its maker, you can still find sites selling replacement parts and online tutorials to help you maintain the hardware. However, if the phone is your sole means of communication and cracking it open to upgrade or fix it makes you nervous, consider finding a local repair shop or mail-in service with a fast turnaround to handle the job.If you feel up to the tasks yourself, iFixit is one good site to visit first. Since it began in 2003, iFixit has grown into a large resource hub that provides free illustrated tutorials for all kinds of gadget repairs along with discussion forums and a store for buying tools and replacement parts for many devices. The iFixit store sells replacement batteries and other parts for just about every iPhone model ever released, and parts for different Android phones made by HTC, LG, Motorola, Samsung, and other manufacturers. Parts and guides for some Windows Phone models are also available.Although you may just get brief installation instructions, the web has plenty of other sites selling smartphone replacement parts like front and rear cameras, speakers, iPhone Home buttons and more. Repair Universe and Global Direct Parts are two such sites. Amazon also sells smartphone parts and repair kits.Operating system upgrades also bring security updates. If your phone has reached the end of its upgrade life and you are worried about vulnerabilities, check your app store for a compatible third-party security app.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on September 8, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: A New Life for Old Phones.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »