AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I want to start a podcast and make it on my Windows PC. What kind of microphone and software do I need?A. Cheap or inappropriate microphones will likely make for a podcast of poor audio quality. Stay away from the inexpensive hardware sold for gaming or smartphone chatting and look for a solid external model designed for audio recording.Microphones labeled “condenser” or “dynamic” are often used for live voice and instrument recording, but many talk-show podcasters favor dynamic microphones for their sturdy construction and ability to pick up the voice without a lot of background noise. Condenser microphones are more sensitive to sounds and good for recording instruments, but are typically more fragile and expensive.Since you want to record your podcast on your PC, a microphone that plugs right into your computer’s USB port may be the easiest option. Audio-Technica and Shure are two microphone makers with USB models available for less than $200, but you may have to purchase cables and adapters separately.Blue, another audio company, sells a wide selection of microphones, including the $70 Snowball condenser microphone and the Yeti series of condenser mics that start at about $130. (If you want to use multiple microphones in your recording, investing in a sound-mixing console and microphones like the $99 Shure SM58 or the $150 Audio-Technica AT2035 are options, albeit more expensive and technical.)As for recording software, commercial programs like Adobe Audition or Magix Sound Forge Audio Studio are relatively inexpensive applications to consider. Free software like Avid’s Pro Tools First or the open-source Audacity are other options. (Mac users can add Apple’s free GarageBand to the list of potential recording programs.)If you do not want to buy everything separately, you can find podcast studio kits with hardware and software at places like Amazon and B&H. And if you want advice on how to make and distribute your finished podcast, Buffer, EOFire, Shopify and The Podcast Method are among the many sites out there offering tips and advice.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement