AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Quentin HardyThe automobile is known as the machine that changed the world. Now the world is changing automobiles — in a big way.The New York Times offers two good examples. In one article, Mike Isaac is taken for a ride on the streets of Pittsburgh in one of Uber’s self-driving cars. On Wednesday, Uber will introduce a small fleet of these vehicles, each with a human minder to make sure things don’t go haywire in these early days.Then Farhad Manjoo takes a spin in a Chevrolet Bolt EV, a $30,000 electric vehicle from General Motors that the company says will get 238 miles on a single charge. That, along with G.M.’s ability to market and deliver cars at scale across America, makes it a more plausible mass-market vehicle than anything the flashier Tesla Motors has been able to introduce so far.There is much to learn from both articles. For one thing, riding in a self-driving Uber car is kind of boring — it goes the speed limit and closely obeys all traffic rules, something apparently out of the ordinary in Pittsburgh. The real thrill is being a momentary celebrity for being inside one, as Mr. Isaac found out when people pointed and stared at him while he was riding in the robot car.Uber seems to be taking advantage of that celebrity, and hoping that its early riders help with the company’s marketing. After each ride, Uber will send each passenger a text message with an animated GIF of the route in 3-D, plus a picture of the car. Facebook and Twitter, brace yourselves for a lot of these posts.Uber has a long way to go before truly autonomous vehicles are widespread — and will truly mess with the company’s current business model of persuading people to drive for it in their own cars.Mr. Manjoo’s ride may be more consequential, at least in the near term.As he tells it, this Chevy has nailed something often important in the car business: excess. Even though the average American drives only about 30 miles a day, electric cars that go 100 miles on a charge still feel as if they might leave someone stranded. The Bolt’s ample range should ease that.In addition, Chevy seems to be making an effort to make the Bolt feel like a luxury vehicle, at a lower price than the very luxurious Tesla. Feeling like a boss on less money — that is car marketing.The next thing for electric-car makers to tackle, in both marketing and engineering, is to make charging seem fast, or fun. An auto futurist I spoke with last year pointed out that filling a tank with gasoline takes about five minutes, once a week or so. Electric vehicles require more time and planning.That may be the next hurdle, as driving becomes more futuristic, and the futuristic becomes more normal.Advertisement