AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. My PC’s Chrome browser blocks pop-up windows automatically, but I have sites I regularly visit where I actually need a pop-up window to fill out a form. How do I allow the windows to open without having to fool around in the browser settings each time?A. Because of abuse and misuse by overzealous advertisers and malicious software, pop-up windows are often quashed by default in a web browser’s settings. However, most programs let you add a list of exceptions, like sites for financial or medical services where forms are routine. When you add a domain name to the browser’s exceptions list, pop-up windows from that particular site will open, but pop-ups from addresses not on the list will remain blocked.To always allow pop-up windows from specific sites with the Google Chrome browser, select the Chrome menu in the top-right corner and choose Settings. At the bottom of the Settings screen, click the “Show advanced settings” link and go to the Privacy area on the next page. Click the Content Settings button. When the Content Settings window opens, scroll down to Pop-Ups and click the Manage Exceptions button. In the Hostname Pattern box, enter the address of the site you wish to use with pop-ups and make sure the menu is set to Allow. Click the Done button.The steps for adding sites to your pop-up exceptions list are similar for other Windows browsers, including Mozilla Firefox, Microsoft Internet Explorer and Microsoft Edge. On some browser versions, holding down the Control key while clicking a link may also allow a pop-up to open, but this varies by browser and version.Running Windows 10 on Mac OS XQ. The Boot Camp feature of Mac OS X is helpful for running an occasionally necessary Windows 8.1 program, but does Boot Camp work with the new Windows 10 system?A. Apple has updated Boot Camp to work with Windows 10; Apple’s guide to using Windows 10 with Boot Camp has all the details and full instructions for upgrading.In a nutshell, though, if your Mac software and hardware meet the system requirements and you were using the 64-bit edition of Windows 7 or Windows 8.1 with Boot Camp, you should be able to upgrade your existing copy of Windows. You need at least 10 gigabytes of free space on your Mac’s Windows partition, along with the time and patience needed to get everything working properly. (You can also upgrade from a 32-bit version of Windows, but you need to redo the Book Camp partition on the Mac and install the 64-bit version of Windows 10 in the space.)Before you get started, check your Mac’s hardware and software to make sure they meet the requirements: You basically need to be running OS X Yosemite or OS X El Capitan on a Mac from mid-to-late 2012 or later. You should also fully back up your computer with Time Machine (or your backup program of choice) before you start, and make sure your Mac’s own OS X software is up-to-date.Once you have the Windows 10 upgrade installed, you will probably need to run the Apple Software Update program to download fresh Windows drivers. A troubleshooting guide is also available if things do not go as planned and you have issues with things like keyboard input or audio output.For those who find rebooting the Mac each time to switch between the Windows and OS X partitions on the hard drive, software like the $80 Parallels Desktop for Mac lets you run a virtual version of Windows 10 on OS X without all the restarting. You do need to buy the Windows system separately and have a Mac that meets the Parallels system requirements.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement