
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
SEPT. 16, 2016
Q. Which Samsung Galaxy phones are affected by the battery problems? A. Samsung’s Galaxy Note 7 device is the only model currently involved in the battery situation, and the company says it has stopped selling that version of the device. The Galaxy S7 and Galaxy S7 Edge models and older members in the Galaxy S line are not affected.Since the Galaxy Note 7’s release last month, Samsung has received 92 reports of batteries overheating in the United States, including 26 reports of burns and 55 reports of property damage, according to the United States Consumer Product Safety Division. A manufacturing defect in the particular lithium-ion battery used by that model is believed to be the cause of the combustibility.Although not initially part of an official government recall (which may have led to some confusion) the situation prompted Samsung to set up a voluntary safety recall program for all Galaxy Note 7 owners to swap out their current phones for new ones. As of Sept. 15, the Consumer Product Safety Commission made it a formal recall.If you have a Galaxy Note 7, Samsung advises contacting the wireless carrier or retail store where you originally purchased the phone for details about making the trade. Those who bought the model directly from Samsung’s website should call the company at 1-844-365-6197 or visit www.samsung.com/us/note7recall.AdvertisementWithin the exchange program, Galaxy Note 7 owners can either trade in their phones for a new version of the same model or trade in the Galaxy Note 7 for a different type of Samsung smartphone. The company will refund any price difference between models. In both cases, Samsung is also handing out a $25 gift card or bill credit to participants. A full refund for the phone is also possible.A statement on Samsung’s website confirms that the replacement Galaxy Note 7 models have now been approved by the C.P.S.C. and will be headed to stores for the exchange by Sept. 21.AdvertisementBoth the Federal Aviation Administration and the C.P.S.C. have issued warnings advising Galaxy Note 7 owners not to use, charge or pack their phones in checked baggage. The C.P.S.C. site has its own information about Samsung's recall and a form to report incidents with the device.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on September 22, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Samsung’s Recall: A User’s Guide.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »