
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
SEPT. 20, 2016
Q. Is there any way to make the overall text on screen in Windows 10 less fuzzy?A. Since the days of Windows XP, Microsoft has been using a systemwide technology called ClearType to make text sharper and easier to read on screens. Windows 10 also includes ClearType support, which is usually turned on by default. If you are finding the text on a screen blurry, make sure the ClearType is setting is turned on, then fine-tune.To do so, go to the Windows 10 search box in the bottom-left corner of the screen and type “ClearType.” In the results list, select “Adjust ClearType text” to open the control panel. When the ClearType Text Tuner control panel opens, make sure the box next to “Turn on ClearType” is checked and then click the Next button.Windows 10 then checks your monitor resolution to make sure it is set properly. Click the Next button again.Over the next five screens, you are presented with several text blocks and asked to select the one that looks best to you. (The process is not unlike an eye exam). Once you click the Finish button, your ClearType settings are tuned accordingly.If you want to make further adjustments, go to the Start menu, select Settings and open System. Select Display from the list of system settings on the left side of the box. Here, you can adjust the size of the text you see on screen and change the brightness level. Select the Advanced Display Settings link at the bottom of the box and choose Color Calibration to fine-tune the colors on your display, or the “Advanced sizing of text and other items” option to bump up the text size in window title bars, menus and other screen elements.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on September 22, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Sharper Text on Windows 10.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »