AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. How important is it to have a strong password, change a password and/or use two-step verification on websites that require a login? I certainly understand how critical it is to maintain security on websites that contain my personal and financial information such as medicare.gov or banks, but what about other websites or cloud data where I do not care about the information that is stored there? A. Passwords protect various parts of our online lives and — as the widespread Yahoo hack shows — you are right to keep your government, medical, financial and e-commerce accounts locked up behind as many layers of security as you can. Accounts that lead to your money and identity are the most valuable to online thieves, and they will work diligently to steal them from you.Two-step verification (also called two-factor authentication) requires an additional one-time code along with your typed password. It can stop a lot of basic theft and should be used wherever it is available if you want to keep the account secure. It may seem like a hassle, but an extra minute of logging in is quicker than hours on the phone with customer service if your plain old password is compromised.Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Google, Microsoft and many other multiservice sites offer two-step verification. If your email provider offers the two-factor feature, consider adding it there.Even if you feel like your mail is mostly spam or unimportant messages, things like receipts from online purchases, your address book and personal messages could give a hacker valuable information to use for impersonating you to unsuspecting friends or institutions, especially through social engineering. Likewise, information about you found on social media accounts and cloud-storage sites can also be used to more convincingly impersonate you.Quick passwords created for websites you use once or rarely are probably less important to secure. However, if you use the same password across multiple sites and someone grabs it from a site with weaker security, your other accounts that use the same password could be at risk.If you find it tedious to create (and remember) passwords for all the sites you use, an inexpensive password-manager program like 1Password, Dashlane or LastPass can lock them all up behind a master password. A cheap notebook, as long as you keep it secure, is a simple analog alternative — as long as no one with bad intentions stumbles upon it.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement