
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
SEPT. 27, 2016
Q. The Share menu in the Safari browser would be even more helpful if I could send links right to the Evernote program on my Mac. Is there a way to do that?A. If you have the Evernote desktop software for Mac installed and do not see an Evernote option in the menu when you click the Share button in the Safari toolbar, you should be able to add it. In most recent versions of the Safari browser, just click on the Share menu and choose the More option. This opens the Extensions box in the System Preferences area. (You can also get there without going through Safari by opening the System Preferences icon from the Mac’s dock and clicking the Extensions icon.)When you are in the Extensions box, click Share Menu on the left side. The right side of the box displays a list of apps and sites you can add to the Share menu for Safari and other programs on your Mac, like Mail and Photos. Scroll down until you see Evernote in the list and turn on the checkbox next to it.In addition to Evernote, you can add other sites that may not be switched on by default, like LinkedIn and Vimeo. Close the Extensions box when you are finished. The next time you are using Safari and want to save a link to an Evernote notebook, click the Share menu and choose Evernote.If you want a more versatile tool for stashing away articles, pages, screenshots and other items you find around the web, Evernote has its own free tool called the Evernote Web Clipper. The Web Clipper extension works with Safari and several other browsers, including Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox and Opera. You can download it at evernote.com/webclipper.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on September 29, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Sending Safari Links to Evernote in Mac.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »