The techie culture of coders and coding has spread across the globe as Internet companies have become ascendant and usage of computers and mobile devices has become an everyday habit for many. Yet that culture is far from uniform and has evolved differently in different places.In Silicon Valley, commonly known as the world’s tech capital, the culture has become a caricature of itself. For the last few years, some of Silicon Valley’s biggest companies — Apple, Alphabet’s Google, Facebook and Twitter — have become even bigger and more powerful. Cash has been flowing, and numerous venture capitalists and other investors are throwing money into hundreds of new start-ups. Valuations of some of these start-ups have ballooned to stratospheric heights. To spread the tech gospel, venture capitalists have taken to Twitter to dispense advice to entrepreneurs in the form of 15-part compositions, which sometimes include well-timed barbs at one another. That culture has now spawned an 18-page satirical book called “Iterating Grace,” written by anonymous authors. The book, to be published on Tuesday by Farrar, Straus & Giroux, skewers Silicon Valley’s navel-gazing mentality by telling the tale of a programmer named Koons Crooks who overdoses on the wisdom of tweets by top venture capitalists, writes Alexandra Alter.In Argentina, more than 6,000 miles south of Silicon Valley, techie culture has developed in a dissimilar way, writes Nicole Perlroth. With no large tech companies and little in the way of tech money pouring into start-ups, many Argentines have taught themselves how to code and hack, drawing on a history of rule breaking in the face of a legacy of military rule.As a result, Argentina has now become one of the planet’s best places to recruit those with hacking skills to work with corporations and governments. That was amply demonstrated last month when more than 1,600 people attended EkoParty, the largest hacking conference in Latin America, in Buenos Aires. In many ways, the cultures of Silicon Valley and Argentina are opposites. In one area, the tech and tech money came easily; in the other, neither the tech nor the money came easily at all. 