
OCT. 7, 2015

Related Article
Picking a Wi-Fi router is difficult because you can't judge a router by reading its box. Consumers can't assume every new router is better than an old one: A solid old router could give a better signal at a longer range than a cheap, brand-new router, for instance. Splurging on a fancy new router isn’t the wisest solution, either. You may pay too much for something that is overkill for your needs; by the time you upgrade all your gadgets to be up to speed with your new router, you could buy something even better for cheaper.To make picking a router easier, The Wirecutter tested dozens of the devices for hundreds of hours and chose a handful for different living situations and budgets. Price: $100Best for: Most people. The Archer C7 is a fast 802.11ac router with incredible range. It's better than many routers that are twice as expensive. Special features: Price. The Archer C7 has an unbeatable price-performance ratio. Faster routers exist, but you’ll be spending more than it's worth for the slight speed increase.What you don't get: A simple interface and useful features found in more expensive routers. It also does not have USB 3.0, an iTunes server, quality-of-service settings, remote access and a VPN server. Price: $199Best for: Apple households. If the majority of your devices start with “i” or “Mac” and you value ease of use over everything else, the AirPort Extreme is a great choice.Special features: AirPort Utility makes router setup and management super easy on Apple devices. Other features include Time Machine backups via USB 2.0 port, easy integration into an existing Apple network as a Wi-Fi extender and remote USB drive access via “Back to my Mac.” Prettier than most routers.What you don't get: Performance that justifies the price. It does not have audio port for AirPlay streaming to speakers, a decent management app for Windows, parental controls and remote router management, and it has only three Ethernet LAN ports (most routers have four).Price: $150Best for: People who want a router that can also be used as a media server or virtual private network server or people who want something easier to use than the Archer C7 but just as fast.Special features: This has great performance at long range. It also has Time Machine and ReadyShare backups, iTunes streaming, USB 3.0, parental controls, OpenVPN server for securing your public Wi-Fi browsing, remote access to connected storage and an access point mode for extending your existing wireless network.What you don't get: The ability to also use the router as a Wi-Fi extender or repeater. The setup is more complex than for an Apple AirPort Extreme.Price: $60Best for: People with one- or two-bedroom apartments or small homes who need just a simple wireless connection for their devices.Special features: Decent last-generation 802.11n performance for a low cost. It also has four gigabit Ethernet ports; two USB 2.0 ports for file or printer sharing, built-in DLNA server for media streaming and guest Wi-Fi networks.What you don't get: There is no simple user interface, support for wireless-ac speeds, user-friendly parental controls, USB 3.0 ports, quality-of-service settings, iTunes server.Price: A deposit of up to $25Best for: T-Mobile subscribers, who can get this router from a T-Mobile store for anywhere from nothing to a $25 deposit. (Call ahead to check availability.)Special features: It’s a modified version of an Asus RT-AC68U, a high-end 802.11ac router that doesn't quite have the long-range performance of the Archer C7 but has an easier-to-use interface and better features, like a VPN server and the ability to act as a wireless extender. At its full price ($180), the RT-AC68U isn't a great deal, but for under $25, it's astonishingly good. What you don't get: A free router forever. If you leave T-Mobile, you’ll have to pay the carrier $99 or return the router (still a great deal).Two tests were carried out with ad blockers: one to measure how much loading times were improved and the second to study battery life.AdvertisementTwo tests were carried out with ad blockers: one to measure how much loading times were improved and the second to study battery life.