
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 1, 2015
Q. My MacBook has been nagging me to update to OS X El Capitan for the last few months, but I have read a lot of negative feedback about the system. How bad is it and is it worth upgrading?A. Most major operating system updates have their share of unsquashed bugs at their debut, and Apple’s OS X 10.11 (El Capitan) was no exception when it was released in late September.Although the system included numerous adjustments and enhancements to programs like Mail and Notes, new window-management tools, improved search functions and mass-transit directions in its Maps app, early adopters were quick to report problems.Major complaints from users focused on system slowness, severe errors with Microsoft Office, iTunes issues and printing woes. Apple released an OS X 10.11.1 update a few weeks later to address a number of the problems (including compatibility with Microsoft Office 2016), apply a security patch and add 150 new emoji characters.AdvertisementAnother update aimed at fixing additional problems with Wi-Fi, Mail, Photos and other apps is in the works, but official community forums for El Capitan complaints are still fairly active. (The company has an area of its website devoted to OS X support and an online user guide for El Capitan, but these may not address specific bugs.)If you are on the fence about updating your MacBook, make a list of all the programs and peripherals you rely on, and check the websites of those manufacturers for compatibility information. Some may suggest updating your drivers — or installing patches for their own programs — for smooth running on El Capitan; the Roaring Apps site collects crowd-sourced reports that can help get you started.AdvertisementIf you have hardware or software that you really need and problems using them with El Capitan have been noted, postpone upgrading until you find reports that the issues have been resolved.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »