AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I can see the advantages of getting a laptop with a flash storage drive, since these drives are lighter weight and more durable, but is it worth the extra money to get an internal flash drive for a desktop computer?A. For a desktop system, speed is the main advantage of using an internal solid-state drive — one that uses flash memory instead of traditional motorized magnetic platters to store data. Because it does not have to rely on a read-write head to access files on the spinning platter, a computer running its system from a solid-state drive will start up quicker, open programs more rapidly and generally zip along faster than a computer with a mechanical hard drive.Without moving parts, solid-state drives are typically quieter, lighter and more durable than hard drives, making solid-state drives a natural fit for mobile computing. However, solid-state drives are more expensive and offer less storage capacity for the money compared with hard drives. If you are looking to store a large number of files or a huge media library on the desktop computer, it will not come as cheaply with a solid-state drive as it would with a hard drive. While prices have decreased over the years, switching from a standard hard drive to a solid-state drive, when configuring a new computer before purchasing it, can add several hundred dollars to the cost of the machine.Both types of drives have their disadvantages as well. In addition to cost, solid-state memory eventually wears out, even though it may take a long time to do so. A mechanical hard drive creates a bit of noise and vibration when operating; it also needs to be defragmented to work efficiently and could potentially break down, taking years worth of data with it.A hybrid drive tries to combine the two for the best of both worlds; Apple calls its version a Fusion Drive. Hybrid drives use some flash memory to store frequently used files and to start up the system quickly, and have a large-capacity hard drive to park the rest of the computer’s contents. While not as cheap as a regular hard drive, a hybrid does cost much less than a solid-state drive of equal capacity.Advertisement