AdvertisementSupported byCompiled by The New York TimesMark Zuckerberg, the co-founder and chief executive of Facebook, and his wife, Dr. Priscilla Chan, made a bold statement on Tuesday: In honor of the birth of their daughter, they said they would give 99 percent of their Facebook shares to charitable purposes. That amounts to about $45 billion.While philanthropy by the rich is not a new concept, Silicon Valley’s newer billionaires appear eager to spread their wealth while they are still young. Yet Mr. Zuckerberg, 31, and his wife, 30, are entering largely uncharted waters with a charity effort of such scale. Other than noting that their initial focus would be on education, curing disease, connecting people and building communities, their announcement was vague on specifics.It made us wonder how others would use that money, so we put the question to readers. If they had $45 billion to spend, what charities or causes would they support? We received hundreds of responses from readers around the world. They ranged from ideas for stemming the effects of climate change to providing homes to the homeless to fostering mental health. Below is a selection.■ Casimir Guzowski, 38, Reading, Pa.If I had the $45 billion to donate to any cause, I would start a renewable energy business that paid for people in need to install solar or wind generation on their homes. This would allow them to heat and light their homes while generating green credits. The extra money from the energy production could be sold to the power companies, lowering the nation’s carbon footprint. The money from the sale of this surplus energy could be either used to pay back the initial investment to install the green technology so the program could continue on or allow the families in these homes to have a small amount of extra pocket cash to help them with whatever they need.■ Annemarie Latimer, 71, Columbia, N.J.The Salvation Army, because they give most of their contributions to the people that need it.Research for pancreatic cancer because it took my mother.Addiction research because I work with addiction clients.Any effort to get rid of Monsanto because they are destroying America.Domestic violence centers because I know and knew so many people who were affected by it.Any public health agency who is nonprofit, whose C.E.O.s don’t get the most benefit.All the children in poor families, because I have seen children suffer when the parents spent their money foolishly on themselves.Dental care for the people who need it and are unable to afford it.Emotional and physical care for all rape victims, because so many people stigmatize them.All child prostitutes and adult prostitutes because no one wants to be in that position because it is abuse. This includes trafficked victims.All torture victims because they need so much counseling.Tax credits for single people because they are too heavily taxed, proportionately.Counseling for children of divorce because they are heavily impacted.Counseling for abused people, regardless of the type of abuse.All single mothers and fathers who have difficulty providing for their children.■ Daniel Mokrauer-Madden, 29, Bangalore, IndiaI would invest in education in communities around the world. Philanthropy has tended toward short-term measurable impact. This is an improvement over the past, but it also means that some sectors that see change over the longer term are seriously neglected. Investments in human capital are one of the most important ways to shift countries’ growth curves upward. This means formal and informal education, working with rural primary schools, setting up research facilities at universities, establishing training programs for adults and much more.■ Rashaad Denzel, 24, New YorkI would give away my $45 billion to improve the mental wellness among Americans. Oftentimes when we think of one being “sick” we think of a common cold, stomach flu or some sort of terminal illness. Hardly ever do we recognize depression as a sickness. I would pump resources into brain research and increase the funding for mental health facilities.■ Ahmed Al Bayati, 25, Miami, Fla.I would use the money to improve the education system in impoverished areas as it is my believe that doing so would solve many of the challenges our society faces. There’s a lack of access to opportunity that has crippled poor communities. Good education is the ladder that people can use to climb their way out of poverty. I used it myself to escape war-torn Baghdad. Among the poor kids in the United States is the next Steve Jobs, the next Barack Obama, and the scientist who will make a breakthrough in treating cancer. But none of that is possible if we don’t make it easier to join a good school than to join a gang.■ Mitchell Zimmerman, 73, Palo Alto, Calif.I would give billions to (1) basic research relating to global warming and (2) perhaps even more important, a massive educational and public relations campaign designed to force Americans to confront the reality and urgency of climate change.■ Maksim Surguy, 29, Federal Way, Wash.I would spend a few billion to buy patent portfolios of companies in the following industries and make them available to anyone:— Food (agriculture, water desalination, genetics)— Energy (renewables, bio, solar)— Medicine (drugs, chemical compounds, methods)Then I would invest a billion dollars into machine-learning development, specifically hardware that doesn’t exist yet, and create a marketplace of smart algorithms that can learn on their own. These algorithms will be used to further improve methods and processes to grow food, produce energy and help create new medicine. The rest of the money would be used to combat climate change and to automate mining resources on other planets instead of our own.■ Wulin, 40, Calgary, Alberta, CanadaI would use the money to solve the dilemma all humans have: aging and space colonization. If we can extend our human life expectancy to experience more human activities while humans live in the space. As Stephen Hawking said: “The human race shouldn’t have all its eggs in one basket ...”■ Marti Elkins, 62, Flat Rock, N.C.I would build more subsidized housing for seniors who are still trying to pay off their adult children’s student loans living on a fixed income. I would build tiny houses for the homeless. I would provide expensive medicine for veterans who can’t afford it and the V.A. won’t pay for. We owe them everything for our freedom. I would invest in state-of-the-art mental health facilities to treat those poor souls who are on the street and no one helps and everyone ignores unless they kill people. I would provide educational scholarships to underprivileged students. Keep your donations mostly in the United States. People tend to forget how much poverty exists here. This will eventually make our country stronger again. Make free medical and dental clinics available because in spite of Obamacare, lots of people still can’t afford either and just accept the tax penalty. Give money to our National Park Service. They are one of our greatest treasures; do away with expensive entrance fees so everyone can enjoy them. They belong to all of us.■ Randy Rehwoldt, 66, Grand Junction, Colo.I would use existing organizations with proven track records. I would do it this way to avoid the problem Mark had with his first experience in his giving. I think the Salvation Army is one good organization to use, for they have proven themselves.■ Ron Bannon, 58, Newark, N.J.Randomly to individuals on earth. The amount would equal the average local yearly wage. No strings attached.■ Angelo Paraiso-Arroyo, 17, Berkeley, Calif.If I had $45 billion, I would give it to struggling small businesses. They are middle-class Americans and are necessary in order to have a strong economy. If they flourish, we all prosper. Plus, who needs $45 billion? Who needs a million dollars? Money comes and goes but the future is forever. Forty-five billion dollars is a gift, and like all gifts, it is always the thought that counts.■ Dange Cris Bejoc, 21, Cebu City, PhilippinesMainly, I will build two foundations for those who are handicapped and for the homeless abandoned children. First reason is I want to help those who are disabled to see life differently and for them to see their true value despite of being incomplete. Give them training, education to mold their skills and talents. Second reason, for the homeless abandoned children so that they will feel that they are at home, protected by those people who love and respect them.■ Noah Weiss, 13, Los AngelesI would give $45 billion to Alzheimer’s research, because my great-grandma suffers from it, and other organizations around the globe.■ Kate Krauss, 52, PhiladelphiaI would announce a $1 billion prize for a scalable cure for AIDS — we are close, but the funding is not there. I would offer $1 billion in grants to support an eclectic group of AIDS activists, who have been very successful over the years in supporting medical research. The rest of the money should go to other diseases and priorities.■ Patrick Cresswell, 42, United Kingdom1. $10 billion to space exploration, R.&D. — Earth cannot support mankind alone.2. $10 billion on medical R.&D. for terminal illness.3. $10 billion on food manufacturing, distribution globally, to ensure all mankind are fed and hydrated.4. $5 billion on global disarmament, to take away any possibility of thermonuclear annihilation.5. $5 billion on technology infrastructure globally, ensuring all countries are educated and working together to make steps 1-4 work.6. $5 billion as excess savings for any country that needs it, to ensure steps 1-4 are successful.OpinionAlessandra StanleyAdvertisement