By VINDU GOELDEC. 3, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  Mark Zuckerberg wrote a post on Facebook on Thursday to defend his plans to transfer 99 percent of his family’s Facebook stock to a limited liability company that would pursue various community projects.Mr. Zuckerberg, the chief executive and controlling shareholder of Facebook, said that he and his wife, Dr. Priscilla Chan, were channeling their wealth through an L.L.C. instead of a more traditional foundation to give themselves maximum flexibility “to pursue our mission by funding nonprofit organizations, making private investments and participating in policy debates — in each case with the goal of generating a positive impact in areas of great need.”In his post, he addressed concerns that the structure was a way to avoid taxes on the $45 billion block of stock.“In fact, if we transferred our shares to a traditional foundation, then we would have received an immediate tax benefit, but by using an L.L.C. we do not. And just like everyone else, we will pay capital gains taxes when our shares are sold by the L.L.C.,” he wrote.AdvertisementLimited liability companies have been used by some other wealthy philanthropists to give themselves more control over how their money is used. Because they are tax-exempt, traditional nonprofit organizations and foundations face restrictions on for-profit endeavors and political activity — two areas in which Mr. Zuckerberg and Dr. Chan have pledged to be active.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Zuckerberg and his wife have previously used limited liability companies for some of their other community-oriented endeavors. For example, in September, they invested $5 million in MasteryConnect, an education measurement company, through Zuckerberg Education Ventures L.L.C.Mr. Zuckerberg’s latest explanation met immediate skepticism. On the very post in which Mr. Zuckerberg, the Facebook co-founder, defended his plans, one Australian man commented, “just another way to get your billions tax-free.”AdvertisementMr. Zuckerberg quickly responded, “This isn’t correct and the link you shared has a bunch of false information. We will pay tax just like everyone else when the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative sells our Facebook shares.”A version of this article appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Zuckerberg Defends Structure of His Philanthropic Outfit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.