By FARHAD MANJOO and MIKE ISAACDEC. 5, 2015
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Farhad: How’s it going, Mike? I wanted to let our readers know that we probably won’t have anything interesting to say this week because we’ve both been distracted by an all-consuming addiction: Fallout.Mike: I started playing Fallout on the PC back in 1998. My obsession with post-apocalyptical story lines runs deep. Also, I love my video game canine sidekick, Dogmeat.Farhad: All right, let’s talk tech. Yahoo’s board met this week to discuss options for the ailing company, including a plan to sell the firm’s Internet business. It was just the latest in a string of bad news for Marissa Mayer, the C.E.O. who came from Google with great expectations to turn things around, but whose efforts, so far, have mostly failed.AdvertisementSpeaking of celebrated executives, Mark Zuckerberg was in the news this week. The Facebook C.E.O. and his wife, Dr. Priscilla Chan, had a baby, but managed to keep the news off the world’s nosiest social network for many days. I guess you can do that when you run the site. Then, on Monday, the couple said they would celebrate the birth of their daughter by donating 99 percent of their shares in Facebook to the Zuckerberg Chan Initiative, a new organization devoted to the vague goals of “advancing human potential and promoting equality.”AdvertisementIn a development that surprised me, giving away $45 billion turned out to be very controversial. Zuckerberg and Chan have been criticized for the ideas they’ve promised to fund and for the structure of the organization they’ve chosen to use. I found the reaction to be a bit over the top; I kind of think we should wait for Zuckerberg to do a lot of evil stuff with the money before we decide that he’s up to no good.Mike: I’m mostly interested in how tech billionaires are shaping their version of philanthropy in what may be a trend: Treating their billions as investments, on which they expect significant returns in the medium to long term. It’s an interesting approach, and one I’m not comfortable giving any sort of moral judgment on right now.Farhad: O.K., let me know when you are. For now, let’s talk about something much less crass than money: ride sharing! Bloomberg reported that Uber is looking to raise as much as $2.1 billion in its latest round of funding (which followed The Times’s report on Uber’s funding). Uber is spending a lot of that money on an aggressive plan to expand internationally. That plan has spooked ride companies across the world, which inspired the other big industry news of the week — an alliance between Lyft, Uber’s tiny American competitor, and GrabTaxi, Ola and Didi Kuaidi, the three largest ride-hailing companies in Asia.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mike, you cover these ride companies: Can this global alliance really stop Uber?Mike: This is a tough one. On the one hand, you have Uber, a company that will soon have raised in private capital the equivalent of repeatedly winning the largest Powerball jackpots. It seems to have no problem raising money, at increasingly unbelievable valuations. It also hasn’t wasted time expanding internationally, setting up small teams in dozens of countries.This is problematic for a company like Lyft, which is trying not only to gain recognition as a strong alternative to Uber in the United States, but is really only just beginning to dabble in international expansion.The other issue here is a question of cross-border travel. Lyft’s pitch, with this coalition, is that people traveling between, say, China and the United States, will be introduced to the popular ride-hailing services in each other’s countries for the first time. That, in their minds, begets repeat business and new customers.What’s unclear to me is how many international travelers use ride-hailing services. Nor would Lyft tell me how much their expansion abroad costs (if anything).AdvertisementWhat do you think? It may be smart to team up with incumbents instead of fighting them on their own turf, which Uber is literally spending millions every day doing.Farhad: I think I understand Lyft’s strategic theory. If ride sharing becomes a plausible alternative to car ownership (something that both Uber and Lyft believe is happening already) then the industry might be staggeringly large just in the United States alone. So why get greedy and risk lots of money and distraction by going after international markets? By making peace with many foreign rivals, Lyft gets to concentrate on fighting Uber here — and the others get to do the same in their own countries.I can see the logic in this, and I even think there’s a pretty good chance it could work. Lots of American tech companies have tried to conquer China and India, and almost all have failed. Uber could squander lots of money trying. And maybe, just maybe, Lyft could emerge as a strong No. 2 here. In a market valued at hundreds of billions or possibly more than a trillion dollars, that’s not a bad play.But it’s a very optimistic scenario. Here’s what could happen instead: Uber creates a near-monopoly in the United States, gets a foothold in other markets, and slowly expands that position to become dominant everywhere. So, sure, it’s risky and expensive, but if it works, there’s a big reward. And that gets to Uber’s big advantage: Operationally, so far, Uber has proved to be masterful. So while I think Lyft’s defense is smart, I would bet on Uber continuing to win.Mike: I want to try and see what it’s like to do a cross-continental trip and ride in an Ola cab using the Lyft app. Maybe if the experience isn’t terrible, it’ll alleviate at least a little bit of my skepticism.O.K., enough business. Time to get back to slaying ghouls on my Xbox.Farhad: Have fun, and please take good care of Dogmeat. After all, he is your only real friend.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.