Twitter has long argued that its reach and influence extends far beyond the 320 million people who log into its social media service at least once a month. Tweets are embedded on thousands of other websites and apps, emailed, displayed on television and published in newspapers.Now the company plans to start making money from the vast number of people who are not signed in to the service but may click on a tweet they find through a web search or that is sent to them via email or text — an audience Twitter estimates at more than 500 million people worldwide. In a blog post on Thursday, the company said it has begun showing advertising to some of those casual viewers when they click on the link to a tweet or visit a Twitter user’s profile page. About 60 advertisers are participating initially, with the ads, known as promoted tweets, aimed at people in the United States, Britain, Japan and Australia. But the program, which has been in development for more than a year, is expected to ramp up quickly.These ads, which will be on the desktop web version of Twitter at first, won’t be quite as finely targeted as typical Twitter ads, relying on context, like other pages people have recently browsed, for targeting. Twitter estimates that each of these “logged out” users could be worth $2.50 a year to advertisers, compared with about $4 a year for active users.  Wall Street, which has been focused mostly on Twitter’s lack of growth in active users, sees lots of potential in the program, and Twitter’s stock rose almost 7 percent on Thursday. The reaction underscores the two very different views of the company that have competed ever since its initial public offering: Twitter the promising ad platform, versus Twitter the niche social network that can’t attract new users. (There is a third — Twitter the dysfunctional organization — that also rears its head from time to time.) Twitter the advertising platform is reasonably healthy. In the third quarter, advertising revenue grew 60 percent compared to the previous year. And in November, Twitter says, it had 100,000 advertisers, double the number of a year ago.Although the rate of advertising growth has slowed, Twitter has continued to introduce new products that refine the ability of marketers to target potential customers by demographics and interests, both on and off the service. “We’re thinking about all the different ways that we can increase reach for marketers,” said Ameet Ranadive, the Twitter vice president who oversees revenue products.In September, for example, Twitter made it easy for millions of merchants to include buy buttons in tweets, something that competing services are only testing.Advertisers say that Facebook and Google remain more appealing to them over all, but Twitter is still the favorite platform for real-time marketing and they are intrigued by the possibilities of newer technologies such as Twitter’s Periscope live video streaming app. Still, Twitter continues to be bedeviled by the second issue: the image of it as a niche social network that can’t pull in new users. User growth matters for Twitter’s ambitions to become the central place for public conversation online — and to investors, who value social media companies, in large part, based on the number of people who use them.Twitter recognizes that its product is too difficult to use and has been making a series of incremental changes to simplify it. Last month, for example, it changed its “favorite” button, represented by a star, to a “like” button, represented by a heart. Many longtime Twitter users were upset, since the favorite had a much more ambiguous meaning than like, with its syrupy Facebook connotations. But Twitter noted that old-timers actually clicked on the button 6 percent more frequently after it was changed, and new users clicked on it 9 percent more frequently.Recently, Twitter began testing the insertion of important missed tweets into the normal reverse chronological timelines that power users love. The company said it’s too early to judge whether that will increase engagement.Ultimately, the company needs to do both — grow the amount of advertising and the number of people using the service.“We have the best real-time aggregated content in the world,” Anthony Noto, Twitter’s chief financial officer, said on Tuesday at a technology conference hosted by Barclays. “The opportunity for us is to make it simple, so when someone comes to the product they instantly get the value.”