
App Smart By                     
 KIT EATON
 
DEC. 9, 2015
The Santa’s Bag app can help organize holiday shopping, IBM Watson Trend keeps track of the most popular gifts and Elf Yourself can liven up any gathering.THE holidays are approaching, meaning gifts, budgeting, parties and other events — in other words, a hefty dose of stress. Fortunately, there are many apps that may help restore some holiday cheer.One excellent way to entertain friends and get yourself into the holiday mood is to download the ElfYourself app. To use it, snap photos of as many as five faces — yours and those of friends and family. Then center the faces in a special frame, add a custom text message and press “O.K.” ElfYourself pastes the faces onto animated dancing elves in a short, funny musical cartoon — for example, a Christmas countdown song that includes kittens popping up in unexpected places. You can share the resulting video on Facebook, Twitter or elsewhere. Be prepared for giggles.The app is free on iOS and Android, but comes with just one video — the kitten one. Unlocking more video themes costs $6, for which you get different music styles like hip-hop or an “Oh Hanukkah” video.Next up: Tackling the task of choosing gifts. If you’re like me, you may struggle for great ideas. But one of the planet’s finest digital brains is available to help via the IBM Watson Trend app.AdvertisementIBM has set its intelligent Watson machine scanning through thousands of social media websites, shopping sites, review sites and more to work out what gifts people are talking about buying this year. The app is an interface into Watson’s findings, where you can see top trending gifts or find out more about different categories like toys. Tapping on an item in the list will take you to detailed information, including a graph of how popular Watson thinks the item is, related quotes and images that have been shared online. Watson also tries to show products that are rising as trends. The app is easy to use and is free on iOS.AdvertisementFor organizing your gift selection, check out the Santa’s Bag app. Santa’s Bag is my favorite gift organizer app because its design is cheerful, modern and bright, and it’s flexible.When you’ve thought of a gift for someone, you simply enter details into the app including price, the store you’re planning on buying the item in and the recipient’s data. Once all the information is entered, you can view your holiday gift list sorted in different ways, such as by recipient or by store. There’s a useful summary page that details your budget breakdown and tells you how many items on your list you have already purchased.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Santa’s Bag is free and is iOS only. While it’s not the most full-featured list-making app available, it does the job for the holiday season.Another iOS-only option with similar functions, plus a few extras like being able to keep track of delivery and order numbers, is Gift Planner by Andrew Milham. This app also has an Apple Watch extension that shows coming events like birthdays. Because Gift Planner is not themed for Christmas, it can be useful throughout the year. The app is free but costs $2 to use all of its features.If you’re an Android user, check out Christmas Gift List by engApps, which is a free gift planning app that has many of the same features that Santa’s Bag offers, along with a similarly cheerful and modern interface.This is also the time of year I fire up the famous NORAD Tracks Santa app, which purportedly uses advanced defense technology to spot and show where Santa is as he speeds round the globe delivering presents. The app is sure to thrill children with its cute “real time” animations on Christmas Eve. It’s also useful before the holidays as a countdown timer. The app is free on iOS, Android and Windows 10. Google has a similar Santa tracking app for iOS and Android if you’re not a fan of NORAD’s program.Lastly, there are many charity apps through which people can donate money to those less fortunate this holiday season. That includes Google’s One Today, which is a kind of social network for making small charitable gifts. The app is free on Android and iOS, though for Apple devices you will need to set up a payment process through Google’s systems. Quick Call The popular “to-do list” app Wunderlist has undergone a big overhaul on iOS. The app’s interface has been simplified and cleaned up so it’s easier to see what tasks you have planned. The developers have also added support for 3D Touch on the latest iPhones, which makes it easier to control to-do items on your lists. Wunderlist is free.A version of this article appears in print on December 10, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Making a List, and Swiping It Twice .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »