By KATIE ROGERSOCT. 6, 2015
The death of a 13-year-old boy who had broadcast much of his life on YouTube prompted an outpouring of grief from his fans, and their curiosity was so intense that his relatives and the authorities were pressed to release further details surrounding how he died.“Due to a large number of inquiries, we can confirm that the juvenile was known as Caleb Logan Bratayley from the popular YouTube episodes ‘Bratayley,’ ” the police in Anne Arundel County, Md., said in a statement about responding to a medical emergency involving the boy on Thursday. The statement also said that the authorities did not suspect foul play in his death, and that the police were no longer investigating.For the authorities, it was a relatively unusual disclosure, but for the 1.7 million people who followed the everyday activities of “Caleb From Bratayley” and his two sisters, on YouTube, it was another update about a family made famous by the edited stylings (and trappings) of vlogger stardom. Yesterday at 7:08PM Caleb Logan Bratayley passed away of natural causes. This has come as a shock to all of us. Words cannot describe how much we will miss him. His incredibly funny, loving and wonderful spirit made us all fall in love with him as a YouTuber, friend, brother and son. We know you tune in to watch each day and eagerly anticipate new videos, but ask that you bear with us while we deal with this tragedy as a family. Please help us honor our, baked potato.A photo posted by Annie Hayley Caleb Bratayley (@officiallybratayley) on Oct 2, 2015 at 4:58am PDTCaleb’s death came at a time when the Bratayleys were growing a mini social Web empire that hinged on the family being constantly accessible, and they kept the content flowing: On various platforms, the family posted hundreds of videos that often showed three laughing children flipping on trampolines, playing with the family dog, modeling new glasses or rolling around in the yard.AdvertisementUnder videos posted on Facebook, fans would congregate to discuss the video or ask for more — “When are you going to post today’s video?” one commenter wrote on Facebook; “can i get a shout out ?????” wrote another. The family was represented by Maker Studios, the digital media company co-owned by Walt Disney. In a statement on Friday, the company said it was “heartbroken at the tragic loss of Caleb from Bratayley,” Reuters reported. The news service also reported that his real name was Caleb LeBlanc.AdvertisementThe family’s online following is devoted. In one case, a fan had used YouTube to post a video edited with text and music to mourn Caleb’s death months before he died.After his death, fans posted similar musical tribute videos, but others chose to broadcast their thoughts directly. In the hours following his death, “Bratayley” viewers, many of whom are teenagers, logged on to film themselves and post their reactions. In many cases, the fan videos and comments served as a breeding ground for rumors surrounding the death: In the video below, viewed more than 31,000 times, fans theorized that a hurricane, a heart attack or a panic attack could be the culprit, among other causes.On Monday, a post seeking to dispel some of the questions about his death was sent to some 520,000 followers on the family’s Instagram account, which is managed by his mother, Katie:“Caleb’s death has raised many questions about how and why this could happen to a seemingly healthy boy. Sadly, tests have confirmed today that Caleb passed away from an undetected medical condition.”The outpouring of support, emotion and curiosity has also prompted the family to leave another part of Caleb’s death open to fans: His mother said his memorial service would be broadcast live on Facebook and Periscope on Tuesday evening.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.