Apple is introducing its mobile payments platform, Apple Pay, in China early next year, a move that will significantly broaden the service’s audience.The company announced a partnership on Thursday with China’s primary credit card network, China UnionPay, and 15 Chinese banks. Chinese consumers will be able to upload their UnionPay card information to Apple Pay and use their iPhones, iPads and Apple Watches, Apple said. Apple Pay will become available to China UnionPay cardholders “as soon as early 2016 after relevant tests and certification required by Chinese regulators,” the company, which is based in Cupertino, Calif., said.“China is an extremely important market for Apple and with China UnionPay and support from 15 of China’s leading banks, users will soon have a convenient, private and secure payment experience,” said Eddy Cue, Apple’s senior vice president for Internet software and services.The deal may give a boost to Apple Pay, which lets users pay for goods by holding a mobile device near a credit card reader; Apple Pay can now support credit, debit, store and loyalty cards. The service was begun in the United States in September 2014. Apple recently added Starbucks, KFC and Chili’s to the merchants that support Apple Pay, which is now accepted in 1.5 million locations in the United States.Many American consumers are still getting accustomed to mobile digital payments. Internationally, many consumers are more habituated to mobile payments, especially in countries where smartphone usage became the norm first instead of PCs. In China, many consumers are used to mobile payments, and the country is one of the world’s largest digital markets.“This deal is significant because of the massive number of people in Apple’s demographic who have a UnionPay credit card, which is accepted everywhere in China,” said Ben Bajarin, an analyst at Creative Strategies. “This deal says that we, Apple, embrace that China is moving toward a new payment terminal infrastructure. Like in this country the transition will take some time.”It’s unclear how many stores in China will accept Apple Pay when the service begins in early 2016. China is in early days when it comes to installing the types of terminals that can accept Apple Pay. “China UnionPay is dedicated to promoting payment innovations and providing secure, convenient mobile payment experiences for its hundreds of millions of cardholders,” said Chai Hongfeng, executive vice president of China UnionPay.Elsewhere, Apple Pay was introduced in over 250,000 locations in Britain in July. American Express said in October that it would bring Apple Pay to card members in global markets including Spain and Singapore; and American Express members can already use Apple Pay in Canada and Australia. 