AdvertisementSupported byTech FixBy Brian X. ChenEVERY week, Matt Spaccarelli, the owner of a heating and air-conditioning business in Savannah, Ga., follows a precise routine with his iPhone: He goes into the device settings to check how much cellular data he has used.Mr. Spaccarelli uses his smartphone for everyday tasks, like sharing photos with friends, streaming music or using maps. Yet he almost always surpasses the 5-gigabyte cap on his iPhone’s monthly plan by the third week of each month, which leads his service provider, Straight Talk, to slow his data speeds to a crawl, an industry practice called throttling.“It adds up so quick,” said Mr. Spaccarelli, 43, who won a small-claims fight against AT&T over data throttling three years ago, arguing that the constriction made his supposedly unlimited data almost unusable. “It’s the 21st century. I just don’t understand why it’s so difficult to track your data usage.”This holiday season, consumers should be alert to their ballooning mobile data use, especially since many people will unwrap gifts of shiny new smartphones that are faster and more capable than older devices — and which are generally heavier data guzzlers. So even if you recently determined how much cellular data you normally use, your consumption may soon increase, leading to extra charges on your bill or a slowdown in your wireless speeds.The average amount of mobile data consumed, or the bytes transferred over a cellular network, keeps growing every year. In 2014, American wireless subscribers consumed an average of 1.9 gigabytes a month, up from 1.2 gigabytes in 2013, according to Cisco, the networking company. That number is expected to rise to 11 gigabytes in 2019.Heavier use comes with higher costs: Some carriers, like AT&T and Verizon, charge overage fees of $15 a gigabyte. Others, like T-Mobile and Sprint, offer some plans that include unlimited data at reduced speeds, meaning when you burn through your high-speed data bucket, you get slowed down.Several trends keep driving up mobile data traffic. For one, the data networks offered by big carriers like AT&T, Verizon Wireless, T-Mobile and Sprint have sped up tremendously over the last few years. Smartphone screens also keep getting bigger and cameras keep getting better. All those factors enable and encourage people to do more data-intensive tasks, like downloading higher-resolution images and videos.The changing behavior in how consumers use mobile data “brings up the average amount of data used per month, even if they’re not increasing their minutes of use,” said Arielle Sumits, an analyst for Cisco. “The growth has really been incredible.”That means the new year will be a good time to check data consumption and decide if you need to pick a new phone plan soon. But how do you do that? Measuring the amount of cellular data used on a regular basis is not as easy or intuitive as counting the minutes you spend on a phone call.I looked into a number of different approaches for calculating cellular data use. Each of the big American carriers offers an app or web tool for monitoring data consumption. But I recommend against those solutions because in my testing, they were generally time-consuming or poorly designed.Instead, the quickest way to monitor your data use is by simply using your phone. Each carrier has a hidden code that you can punch into your phone to get an update on data use.For AT&T subscribers, the method is simple. You place a phone call to *DATA# (*3282#). AT&T will send a text message showing the amount of megabytes you have used out of your monthly allotment. It showed that so far this month I have used 464 megabytes out of 3 gigabytes.(What’s in a gigabyte anyway? A gigabyte is roughly 1,000 megabytes, which is the equivalent of about 1,000 photos taken with a decent digital camera, or 17 hours of music.)I also tried Verizon’s code on a Samsung phone. Place a call to #DATA (#3282) and Verizon will show a report of your data use, both domestically and internationally.Similarly, Sprint customers can send a text message containing the word “Usage” to the number 1311 and get a text message with a data report. T-Mobile subscribers can place a call to #WEB# (#932#) to receive a quick data summary.Kristin Wallace, a Sprint spokeswoman, says the company sends text messages to consumers as they approach their data allotments, to help prevent surprises. Clint Patterson, a T-Mobile spokesman, says the company does not charge overages and it offers online tools for customers to be notified as they approach their high-speed data limits.Gretchen Schultz, an AT&T spokeswoman, said customers could monitor data with the myAT&T app and receive text messages and emails alerting them as they get close to using all their data for the month. A representative for Verizon did not respond to a request for comment.I recommend checking data use at the end of your billing cycle several times a year. After you upgrade to a zippy new phone, also check your data patterns after the first three months of use. The first month with a new phone will probably be the honeymoon phase, with data gorging likely, but data use should settle in the following months.When checking data consumption, you might notice that you’re getting awfully close to your monthly limit, which could lead to the carrier charging those overage fees or slowing down Internet speeds. Consider upgrading to a bigger data plan, or try reducing your data consumption by doing data-hungry tasks like streaming video or downloading apps over a Wi-Fi network instead of cellular.Or you might find that you’re using nowhere near your data limit. Consider downgrading to a smaller plan because you are paying for more than you actually need.After making the assessment, you can pick a phone plan with the right number of gigabytes — a task that is also daunting. Fortunately, companies like Cinch Financial offer a web tool to make choosing a plan easy.On Cinch’s website, you answer a few quick questions about the type of plan you’re looking for, what type of phone you have (or plan to buy) and which networks are poor in your neighborhood. The tool recommends the best phone plans based on the total cost over two years of service and the number of lines on the plan.I tried the Cinch tool to research a new phone plan for my partner, who is ditching T-Mobile USA soon and taking her iPhone to a different carrier. Her average data use is 2 gigabytes a month, so the tool recommended a 2.5 gigabyte plan offered by Cricket Wireless, AT&T’s wireless service for prepaid phones. It has a monthly service cost of $35 and an activation fee of $10, bringing the total to $850 over two years. That compares to $1,335 over two years for AT&T’s 2-gigabyte plan.“It’s kind of crazy that we have to micromanage our data like this,” said Joe Ranft, co-founder of Cinch. “Are you supposed to check your data every day?”Email: brian.chen@nytimes.com;
Twitter: @bxchen
Advertisement