AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I know Apple will not let you customize the iOS control center screen, but is Android more flexible with its shortcut panel of settings at the top of the screen?A. If you are using Android 6.0 (Marshmallow), Google has quietly included a tool called System UI Tuner that can change the icons you see in the system’s Quick Settings box and status bar. However, System UI Tuner is not visible in your Android system settings by default, and Google warns that it is an experimental feature, so you should “proceed with caution.”If this does not damp your enthusiasm, the first step is to make System UI Tuner visible. To do so, swipe down from the top of the Android screen to open the Quick Settings box as you normally would, but then press and hold the small gear-shaped Settings icon for several seconds until it rotates and you see an alert box announcing that System UI Tuner has been added to your Android settings.Next, open your main Android settings icon by tapping the gear icon from the All Apps or Quick Settings box. In the System area of the Settings screen, open the new System UI Tuner option that has now appeared. Tap Quick Settings on the next screen. You can now press and drag icons into new positions on the screen, or drag them onto the Delete icon to remove them from the Quick Settings box. Tap the Add Tile button to restore icons to Quick Settings, or tap the three-dot menu icon in the upper-right corner to use the Reset command to put the menu back to its default view.Back on the main System UI Tuner settings, tap Status Bar to change the icons you see at the top of the Android screen. System UI Tuner also has a setting to show a numerical percentage in the status bar’s battery icon, as well as a Demo Mode that developers can use to take screenshots of an uncluttered Android interface.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement