By BRIAN X. CHENDEC. 23, 2015
While it may be tempting to save money by buying cheaper Android devices for children, parents who want tight control over their children’s activities on smartphones will be better off buying iPhones for the family. Apple’s parental controls were detailed and took a while to set up, but they accomplished all of the restrictions that I wanted. The Android system was sorely lacking in features for regulating minors and offered only incomplete solutions for a small number of restrictions.Here is a guide to setting up smartphone parental controls::On an iPhone:1. In the Settings app, tap Restrictions.2. Tap Enable Restrictions.3. Set a four-digit passcode.4. Tap on Websites.5. Tap on Limit Adult Content.On an Android phone:1. In the Settings app, tap Data Usage.2. Select an app — YouTube, for example — to restrict.3. Tap on App Settings.4. Tap General.5. Check the Restricted Mode box.On an iPhone:1. In the Settings app, tap iCloud.Advertisement2. Tap Setup Family Sharing.3. Tap Get Started.4. Follow the on-screen instructions to invite family members to the account.Advertisement5. Select the child’s account and select Ask to Buy.On an Android:1. Open the Google Play Store app.2. Tap the Menu icon. Tap Settings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.3. Tap Require Authentication for purchases.4. Follow the on-screen instructions.On an iPhone:1. In the Settings app, tap Restrictions.2. Swipe the toggle for Deleting Apps toward the left to turn it off.On an iPhone:1. In the Settings app, scroll down and select an app to restrict — Netflix, for example.2. Swipe the toggle for Cellular Data toward the left to switch it off.On an Android:1. In the Settings app, tap Data Usage.2. Scroll down and select an app you want to restrict — YouTube, for example.3. Tap App Settings and tap General.4. Tap the box next to Limit Mobile Data Usage.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.