AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWELLINGTON, New Zealand — A New Zealand judge ruled on Wednesday that the colorful Internet entrepreneur Kim Dotcom and three of his colleagues could be extradited to the United States to face copyright infringement charges.Judge Nevin Dawson’s ruling came nearly four years after the United States authorities shut down Mr. Dotcom’s file-sharing website, Megaupload, which was once one of the Internet’s most popular sites. Prosecutors said the site raked in at least $175 million, mainly from people using it to illegally download movies.The United States has charged the men with conspiracy to commit copyright infringement, racketeering and money laundering. If found guilty, they could face decades in jail. Judge Dawson presided over a nine-week extradition hearing in which lawyers outlined the case against the four men. In his ruling, Judge Dawson wrote that the evidence “establishes a prima facie case to answer for all respondents on each of the counts.” The judge was required only to decide whether the United States had a valid case and not on whether he thought they were guilty or innocent.Mr. Dotcom’s lawyers said they would appeal the decision. The case could have broader implications for Internet copyright rules. One of Mr. Dotcom’s lawyers, Ron Mansfield, has said that if the United States prevails, websites from YouTube to Facebook would need to more carefully police their content.The case also raises questions about how far American jurisdiction extends in an age when the Internet has erased many traditional borders. Mr. Dotcom says he has never set foot in the United States.“Justice was not served today,” said Ira Rothken, another of Mr. Dotcom’s lawyers, on Twitter. He said he looked forward to having the decision reviewed in court.Justice Minister Amy Adams of New Zealand is required to sign off on extraditions. In a news release on Wednesday, Ms. Adams said she would wait for the conclusion of any appeals before making a decision. Along with Mr. Dotcom, who founded Megaupload and was its majority shareholder, the United States is seeking to extradite the former Megaupload officers Mathias Ortmann, Bram van der Kolk and Finn Batato. The men remained free on bail after Wednesday’s ruling pending their appeals.Before the ruling, Mr. Dotcom said on Twitter: “This is my weirdest Xmas ever.” Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement