
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
DEC. 24, 2015
Q. My Gmail app on my phone has suddenly started to show suggested responses when I write back to someone. What is this? Can I turn it off?A. Google began to roll out the Smart Reply feature to users of its Inbox by Gmail app for Android and iOS last month. The Smart Reply technology is meant to scan and recognize the types of messages that need responses, and then suggest brief answers in natural-sounding language. If you like one of the suggested phrases, tap to select it — and then hit the send button to reply to the sender without having to manually type your thoughts.Smart Reply is meant to be a timesaver, much like the canned phrases you can use to respond to text messages on the go or when your hands are full. Unlike the typical canned response phrase, though, Google’s research team describes the Smart Reply technology as a “deep neural network that writes email.” In much simpler terms, Smart Reply analyzes the contents of the message and applies a complex set of programmed rules to craft a response — using a form of artificial intelligence called machine learning to make its own decisions.Some people will find the feature helpful, some will find it creepy and some will find it a mixture of both. Google’s researchers say Smart Reply abides by strict privacy standards and that only the computers — and not the humans — are reading your messages to create the responses.Smart Reply is built into the Inbox by Gmail app and currently cannot be disabled. If you do not want to see or use any of the suggested responses displayed on the screen, just tap into the message’s reply area and write your own response to dismiss the suggestions. In case you choose to use one of the suggested replies, you can edit it after you add it to the message, if you want to elaborate on what Smart Reply has started.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »