SEATTLE — Robbie Bach has felt the highs and lows of the video game business.Mr. Bach, a former Microsoft executive, helped create the Xbox, and with it arguably Microsoft’s most successful new consumer business of the past 15 years. But there have been serious missteps for the Xbox along the way, notably a wince-inducing $1 billion charge that Microsoft took in 2007 to cover the cost of repairing or replacing defective game consoles.That happened on the watch of Mr. Bach, who retired from Microsoft in 2010 after 22 years at the company and recently published a book about some of the life lessons he learned running the Xbox business. I was curious, then, what he thought of Microsoft’s current position in the game business, which he says resulted from a misstep that occurred well after he left the company.At the moment, it looks as if Sony’s latest game console, the PlayStation 4, is going to outsell Microsoft’s, Xbox One, by a landslide. Even before the holiday shopping season kicked into high gear after Thanksgiving, Sony said it sold 30.2 million PlayStation 4s. Nintendo has said it sold 10.73 million Wii U’s as of the end of September, and that is with the benefit of an additional year on store shelves.Microsoft, which is widely believed to be in second place with the Xbox One, has tellingly stopped revealing sales figures entirely for the console, emphasizing more amorphous measures of success related to “user engagement.”The reason for Microsoft’s deficit, according to Mr. Bach, is simple: Microsoft charged too much for the Xbox One when it was introduced. When the latest Sony and Microsoft consoles came out in November 2013, Microsoft’s product was $499 — $100 more than Sony’s because of the Kinect camera and microphone device included with the system.“People have never bought a console at premium,” Mr. Bach, 53, said. “That’s never worked very well.”Microsoft has since eliminated Sony’s price advantage by offering the Xbox One without a Kinect controller. Sales have seemingly rebounded. Mr. Bach sounded doubtful that Microsoft would be able to catch up to its rival during this generation of consoles, though.There are obvious financial consequences to that for Microsoft. Having fewer Xbox Ones in homes means Microsoft and its publishing partners have a smaller audience than Sony to sell their games to, which in turn limits the opportunity for Microsoft to earn royalties on Xbox game sales.But there is still plenty of room for Microsoft to thrive in the console business, Mr. Bach believes. Part of the reason is that the console business, for the moment, is a two-horse race between Sony and Microsoft, with Nintendo much weaker than it was in the last generation of consoles.“Nintendo is not really in the game,” Mr. Bach said. “Sony is leading on the hardware side so far, with enough of a lead that we’ll see how that plays out. They have a measurable lead. At the same time, the market has gotten so big, I think both companies can be very successful from a business perspective.”One devastating possibility with Microsoft falling behind Sony is that independent game publishers could decide not to release their titles for Microsoft’s console. That is unlikely to happen though. Xbox One sales have been strong enough that developers can still make money with games for it.Nintendo, which is lagging Sony even more, has never relied on independent developers to the extent its rivals have, since Nintendo-made games tend to dominate sales for Nintendo systems.“The fear we always had is, if you don’t get to critical mass you lose developer support,” Mr. Bach said. “Neither Sony nor Microsoft are going to have that problem.”He is not alone in this view. “Microsoft is doing good,” said Michael Pachter, an analyst at Wedbush Securities. “Sony is just doing better, and it’s O.K. to be No. 2.”Mr. Bach’s new book, “Xbox Revisited: A Game Plan for Corporate and Civic Renewal,” draws on his experience in the corporate and nonprofit worlds to provide practical advice for people facing organizational challenges in their communities and work. Mr. Bach is on the national board of governors of the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, the board of the United States Olympic Committee and the board of Sonos, the maker of connected speakers.An important part of his philosophy is that overcoming difficult obstacles requires thinking about the challenges in the simplest terms possible. The group that brought out the original Xbox in 2001 did not take that approach.“The first version of the Xbox did pretty well in the marketplace, but financially it was a mess,” he said.Eventually, the Xbox team did establish a clear set of priorities that everyone could rally around, including eliminating the losses Microsoft had on the sale of every Xbox. It fixed problems, like the oddly shaped packaging for the original Xbox that prevented Microsoft from filling containers transporting the consoles from China.Mr. Bach calls the $1 billion charge that Microsoft took for Xbox 360 repairs the low point of his career in the group. But he said the incident offered an important lesson in perseverance and customer care. The company promised Xbox customers it would repair any defective systems and extend their warranties if their consoles failed in the future.“Once you’re there, it’s a test of leadership,” Mr. Bach said. “What do you do about it and how do you fix it?”A version of this article appears in print on 01/04/2016, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Inside the Battle of the Consoles.