By HIROKO TABUCHIDEC. 30, 2015
Two decades after Jeffrey P. Bezos started Amazon in his Bellevue, Wash., garage, his e-commerce juggernaut could be forgiven for letting up on its rapid growth.Not Amazon, though, which steamrolled through 2015, capturing an ever-growing share of United States retail sales. Of every additional $1 Americans spent for items online this year, Amazon captured 51 cents, according to a recent estimate by analysts at Macquarie Research.And of the expected $94 billion growth in all retail sales this year — both in stores and online — Amazon took a staggering $22 billion, or almost a quarter, Ben Schachter, a retail analyst at Macquarie, calculated.And this year’s holiday shopping season served to solidify the notion that the Internet is increasingly Jeff Bezos’s world and the rest of us are just shopping in it.AdvertisementAmazon capped its blockbuster year by reporting what it said was a record-breaking holiday season, shipping 200 million more items through its Prime subscription service, which offers free shipping and a host of other benefits, during the period from Nov. 1 through Dec. 19, compared with last season.Advertisement“It’s remarkable. Amazon is truly in a league of its own,” Mr. Schachter said. “It’s going to be extremely challenging for anyone else to catch up.”Amazon’s strong results have led to a meteoric rise in its share price, which has more than doubled this year. Its market capitalization of about $325 billion now dwarfs that of Walmart, which shrank by a quarter to just below $200 billion.Despite that dominance, Amazon’s actual profits are still tiny — or at least they were in the company’s most recent quarterly report in October. The company earned just $79 million on $24.5 billion in total revenue in the quarter, and leaned heavily on its surging cloud computing business, Amazon Web Services, for profit.Amazon Web Services’ operating income was $521 million, up more than fivefold in a year. Without its cloud business, the company, now based in Seattle, would have had a much more difficult time turning a net profit, something it has not often done.And at times, Amazon has seemed to be in danger of getting trapped in a race to the bottom that it brought on with its steep discounting.“They were just trying to sell more by underpricing everybody,” said Craig Johnson, president of Customer Growth Partners, a retail consulting firm.“But they realized they would never make any money that way. They evolved,” he said. “It’s much a different company than it was five years ago.”For one, this year’s surge has made investors increasingly confident that Amazon’s retail business is maturing, following years of heavy investment in infrastructure and logistics. Amazon has blanketed the country with more than 100 warehouses, and is building more, speeding up shipping times.AdvertisementThat investment is now paying off in the steady growth in users of its Prime fast-shipping membership program, which now covers an estimated 25 percent of all American households. Amazon picked up three million new Prime members during the third week of December alone, the retailer said this week. Some analysts estimate that half of all American households will be Prime members by 2020.Amazon has also focused on bolstering the benefits of its Prime membership beyond free expedited shipping. It has aggressively marketed its music and video streaming offerings, and has invested in a growing catalog of original content, including the TV series “Transparent,” which won critical praise this year for its focus on a transgender character and her struggle for acceptance and equal rights.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All the while, Amazon has continued to surprise competitors with unconventional promotional efforts. In July, typically a slow month for retailing, Amazon created a whole new sales holiday, called Prime Day, prompting Walmart to match many of Amazon’s deals.(Prime Day also came shortly before the introduction of Jet.com, billed by Silicon Valley investors as an Amazon competitor — though the start-up has yet to make a perceptible dent in Amazon’s growth.)“It just keeps raising the bar,” said Traci Gregorski, vice president for marketing at the retail research firm Market Track. “They’re driving people to their Prime service,” she said, “and once they’re hooked, they’re hooked.”Amazon’s competitors, meanwhile, have found themselves fighting over a smaller and smaller piece of the pie. Walmart, in particular, committed $2 billion to its e-commerce efforts, and this year announced its own subscription delivery program.This spring, Walmart opened four new centers dedicated to filling online orders, and its San Bruno, Calif.-based e-commerce team has grown to more than 2,500 staff members from just 500 employees four years ago.But its online sales still amount to less than one-sixth of Amazon’s, and they are slowing, too. In its latest quarter, e-commerce sales grew only 10 percent from a year ago, compared with a 20 percent rise in Amazon’s retail sales during the same period.AdvertisementOver all, Amazon’s share of United States e-commerce sales jumped to 26 percent this year from 22 percent last year, and 16 percent in 2011, according to Macquarie estimates.Four percent of all retail purchases in the United States, excluding cars, gas and sales at food and beverage stores, were made through Amazon this year, double its share two years ago.And with Amazon expanding into new segments — this year it introduced a crafts market to challenge Etsy, and is also trying its hand at groceries — some analysts ask: Is anybody in retailing safe?Sellers of branded goods, like the Disney store, are still able to offer what Amazon cannot. Luxury is another area in which Amazon has little presence.Mr. Johnson struggled to come up with further examples. Restaurants?“You can’t eat food on the Internet,” he offered. “Though with Amazon, nothing seems impossible.”An article on Thursday about Amazon’s increasing dominance in American e-commerce misstated the number of items the company sold through its Prime subscription service during the holiday season. The company sold 200 million more items than in the same period last year, not 200 million items over all.A version of this article appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: In Online Race, It’s Amazon and Also-Rans .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.