AdvertisementSupported byApp SmartBy Kit EatonMANY thousands of apps flicker before my eyes and dance beneath my fingers each year on the screens of my phones, tablets, smartwatch and TV. That gives me some insight into emerging trends in the apps world. Here’s what I think will shape apps in 2016:SIMPLE AND MINIMAL Those are words that I’ve used a lot to describe apps in 2015, and I will most likely be using them even more next year.Developers are increasingly using simplified interfaces and clean graphics that don’t distract from the main purpose of the program. Hyperlapse, Microsoft’s recent free offering for Android, is a good example. The app has only a few, very clear controls to make eye-catching time-lapse videos.Simplicity of purpose is another thing to watch for in 2016. The trend used to be to jam all sorts of functions into an app, which can make using it and even adjusting its settings complicated; users had to sort through confusing layers of menus. Many of the most interesting apps of 2015 were single-purpose.Consider Boomerang, which is free on iOS and Android and comes from Instagram. Boomerang makes short-looping films that last just a few seconds to share on social media. The app does what it’s designed to do and no more. Instagram could easily have included this capability inside the Instagram app itself, but chose to keep things clearly defined.PROXIMITY-AWARE TECH When I walk into my local shopping mall, I get an alert on my iPhone prompting me to turn on the app for the nearby Zara clothing store. The alert comes from Bluetooth beacons in stores sending signals to nearby phones.The use of such beacons grew in 2015. Earlier in the year, Target revealed that it was testing beacons in its stores to connect to users of its iPhone app. More recently, Knomi, the shopping discovery iOS app, teamed with high-end fashion stores in London and elsewhere to enable location-aware shopping on a micro level. Users were sent alerts about popular clothing items when they were near a partner store; the alerts were cleverly based on previous purchases.We should see more proximity-aware shopping apps like this in 2016, not least because they let stores precisely target consumers with offers that may be less irritating than typical ads. The Epicurious app, which is free on iOS and Windows, has long been beacon-enabled and users may see pop-up recipe suggestions when they walk into participating retailers, depending on their phone.FITNESS APPS These are the apps that let you record your exercise habits, like taking more than 10,000 steps a day, or log your bicycle rides or your heart rate. Strava, free on iOS and Android, is a good example of this sort of app. Strava uses GPS and other sensors in your phone, and even heart rate monitors, to log your cycling or running, then lets you share your activities on social media. Apps like Strava were increasingly popular in 2015 and the trend may continue in 2016, fueled by the rise of wearable devices.Such devices, like the Apple Watch, seem likely to spread in 2016 as more manufacturers offer next-generation devices. Strava already has an Apple Watch app you can use to log your exercise sessions with just a few taps — more convenient when exercising than digging your phone out of a pocket.Expect more apps for wearables — from social media through shopping and even games — to appear in this column in 2016.THREE MORE Three other kinds of apps are likely to appear more often in 2016. The first is financial apps to help manage your spending and bank accounts, a category that reflects wider adoption of mobile payments.More and varied messaging apps will also appear to rival the SMS, which is already under threat, especially as messaging apps become a dominant form of communication. Some programs layer in other functions, like the ability to hail a ride. These digital Swiss Army knives are a counterpoint to the growing category of single-purpose apps.Finally, election-based apps will be big news in the United States — for the obvious reason that 2016 is an election year.That’s it for me for 2015. Here’s to a happy and healthy new year.Advertisement