AdvertisementSupported byGadgetwiseBy Michael D. ShearTHERE was never any doubt that I would buy an Apple Watch on the day it was released. I’m a White House correspondent for The New York Times, but I’m also that early-adopter guy.Buying the watch has led to the inevitable questions from friends and family: “What do you think? Should I get one of those?”My search for an answer reminds me of a similar period nearly a decade ago, in the months after I stood in line for several hours at an Apple Store in Arlington, Va., to be among the first to spend $599 on the original iPhone. The Apple employees cheered as I emerged with the phone.The next day, I was on a Southwest flight to New Hampshire to cover Fred Thompson, the late actor and senator, who was then running for president. As I sat in my aisle seat, playing with the phone, a crowd formed. First the flight attendants. Then passengers. They all wanted to see the crazy new device in action.But back then, it was hard to recommend to my fellow reporters on the campaign trail that they ditch their BlackBerrys. The iPhone’s on-screen keyboard made typing a clunky business. The phone couldn’t connect with most workplace email systems. Cell service (limited to AT&T) was slow and flaky at best. Battery life was short. There was no App Store. The iPhone didn’t even have a “cut and paste” feature.There was just a sense — largely unrealized at the time — that somehow this device was the future, while using my thumb to scroll through a black-and-white list of emails on my BlackBerry was the past. Surfing the web, reading email, listening to music, checking the weather and stocks — all on one device. It was revolutionary.When colleagues asked, I was honest about the limitations even as I gushed about the technological potential. Most of my friends listened politely, tried to type on the screen with their thumbs, and then stuck with the BlackBerry.The watch feels as if it is at a similar place.For the same $599, which gets you a model with a 42-millimeter stainless-steel case, the Apple Watch is a slave to a user’s iPhone, relying on the larger device for processing and communications. It has no GPS or cellular capability. It can run apps, but slowly. And without any keyboard, it requires voice dictation, which is still far from perfect. In most cases, opening an app on the iPhone is still a far better experience.Like the original iPhone, the watch also feels like a physical compromise. The case is bigger and bulkier than the ideal device you would want to strap to your wrist. And while battery life is amazing for a device this small — routinely almost 24 hours on a single charge — it still requires that I remember to pop the watch onto a charger every night.And yet, after almost eight months, the Apple Watch feels like the future to me.More than anything else, the watch has changed the way I communicate via email and text messages. Using Apple’s VIP feature, I direct all of the most important messages to my watch, which alerts me with a subtle tap on my wrist or a soft ding. I ignore most after a quick glance. (Sorry, Mom.) Many get a quick “O.K.” or “Sounds good.” I pull out my phone only for the ones I need to respond to at length.The same is true for phone calls, which appear on my watch while my phone remains tucked away in my pocket, or still at my desk on the other side of the office. It’s like Caller ID for my wrist.The watch has also become my first stop for personal scheduling. I use it to check the weather (the current temperature is right there on the watch face) and to see at a glance what my next appointment is. My OpenTable app taps my wrist when a restaurant reservation is coming up. The eBay app lets me know when I’ve won, or lost, an auction — no phone required. Tracking deliveries is effortless.By far, the most futuristic achievement on the watch is Apple Pay, which works flawlessly. Buy something, double-click the button on the watch and wave it next to the cash register. Ding. It’s like magic — where it is accepted. But because that’s a very limited universe of retail stores and restaurants, I still have to carry around my wallet, full of credit cards.A few apps have become second nature now. I regularly use the watch’s timer when I cook: “Siri, set a timer for 45 minutes.” My boarding passes are now on my watch, which means I don’t have to fumble for my phone in the airport security line. When I record the White House press secretary during an Air Force One gaggle, I don’t have to hold my iPhone close to his mouth. I just hold up my wrist. (It looks kind of funny, but works well.) Changing the temperature of my Nest thermostats at home is easier on my watch than on my phone.So what’s the answer? Should you buy an Apple Watch now?I’m tempted to say “no” for most people. Most of what it does, your phone already does better. And the Apple Watch, even with recent sales, is pricier than competing smartwatches that do similar things. By that logic, you should wait until next year, when Apple’s relentless drive to innovate will have improved the watch’s hardware and software. Or wait until 2019, when the fifth generation of the device has unimagined new features.But after eight months, I’m convinced that people will eventually view a smartwatch as an essential purchase. And waiting endlessly for the “next great thing” means missing out on all the small ways that the watch already can improve your life. So unless you want to be one of those people who hang on to their BlackBerrys forever, go ahead and get one. You won’t regret it.Advertisement