AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I am trying to copy the photos on my new Android phone so I can edit them better in Windows 10. Even though I have Windows set to recognize the phone and import the pictures, nothing happens when I connect the two by USB. What might be wrong?A. Even if Windows 10 is ready to go and nothing is happening, you may have to inform Android that you would like to transfer the photos to the PC. Start by connecting the phone to the computer with its USB cable. Make sure the phone’s screen is unlocked and that the cable is one that transfers data and is not just meant for charging.On an Android 6.0 phone or tablet, swipe down from the top of the screen to open the panel of notifications from apps and the operating system. If the device is firmly plugged into the USB connection, you should see a “USB for Charging” notification in the list. Tap it to get a box of additional options.In the “Use USB For” box that appears, select the “Photo transfer (PTP)” option, which lets the computer treat the phone as a digital camera; PTP stands for Picture Transfer Protocol. (The “File transfers” option in the box can transfer other types of media files between devices as well, like music, and use the Media Transfer Protocol, or MTP.)Once you set your USB transfer options on the Android device, Windows 10 should be able to see and import the pictures through its Photos app or whichever image-editing program you use. Once you have copied the pictures to the computer, eject the connected phone from Windows and unplug the cable. If none of these steps work, try using a different USB cable and different USB port on the computer.If you are not using it already, the Google Photos app for Android has a backup feature that automatically uploads copies of pictures taken on an Android device to your Google account’s online storage area at https://photos.google.com. If you do not have the USB cable handy, you can download photos to the computer from there. To turn on the automatic backup feature on your phone, open the Google Photos app, tap the three-lined menu icon in the top-left corner, select Settings and then Backup & Sync to get to the controls.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement