By FARHAD MANJOODEC. 31, 2014
LOTS of cool new technology products come out every year, but usually only a few stand out. These few, though, are often mind-bending — they alter your perspective of what’s possible in the future. There were four such technologies for me in 2014:DJI INSPIRE 1 Imagine taking control of an evil dragonfly that can record everything it sees. Then you’ll have some approximation of what it’s like to fly the Inspire 1, a remote-controlled quadricopter released in the fall by the drone-maker DJI. The machine, which sells for about $3,000, is agile and powerful when in flight and offers a few unusual features. Its attached high-definition camera hangs a few inches underneath its body, allowing it to capture an unobstructed picture in any direction. The bird can be operated by two remote controls — one to control flight, and the other to control the camera.Romeo Durscher, a drone pilot who works at DJI, let me take control of the Inspire 1 during a test flight over the San Francisco peninsula just before Thanksgiving. As he described all the serious uses for the bird — especially for photographers and videographers who’ve long yearned for a cheap alternative to helicopters for aerial imagery — I became hooked. It’s hard to think of a more visceral pleasure in tech than a machine that can dart across the sky at your will. Welcome to the terrifying thrill of the drone age.OCULUS RIFT’S CRESCENT BAY In March, Facebook announced that it would spend $2 billion to acquire Oculus, a start-up whose virtual-reality headset has generated huge interest. The company’s progress since then has cemented the logic of the acquisition: Oculus’s virtual-reality tech just keeps getting more and more realistic.One huge problem in virtual reality is motion sickness. If your eyes see a picture that looks just slightly out of sync with your perception of motion, you’re going to feel a little queasy. In September, Oculus showed its latest prototype, Crescent Bay, that can track a user’s head in a complete 360-degree swivel, allowing for a sense of being immersed in a picture that observers called “mind-blowing.” When I tested an earlier prototype alongside a more sophisticated virtual-reality machine at Stanford University in the fall, I felt pretty much the same thing. Virtual reality sounds like a gimmick, until you try it; then you’ll understand why, in the future, we might often escape reality.SKYPE TRANSLATOR The universal translator that can automatically bridge any language barrier has long been a staple of science fiction. Now it’s almost here, at least in a limited, but still quite impressive, demonstration. Skype, the popular video-calling service owned by Microsoft, unveiled in December a preview version of Skype Translator, which performs near-instantaneous voice translation between people speaking English and Spanish. You can call up a business contact in Mexico and say, “Hello,” and she’ll hear a friendly, Siri-like voice say, “Hola!” on the other end.AdvertisementBut it goes deeper. In Microsoft’s demonstration, students in Mexico City and Tacoma, Wash., were able to understand each other well enough to play a guessing game. After trying out the preview, Peter Bright, a writer at Ars Technica, called it “breathtaking.” He added: “It’s like science fiction has come to life.”AdvertisementSkype Translator is the product of Microsoft’s deep investments in machine learning and natural-language processing. Because those processes only get better as more people use them, services like Skype Translator are bound to get much better.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.GOOGLE’S IMAGE SUMMARIES A few young men in shorts and T-shirts are standing on a wide-open green field, all posed as if they’re in motion, and between then, in midair, is a small white orb that appears to be made out of plastic and seems to be spinning. How would you describe this scene in a few words? If you’re human, it likely won’t take you more than a few milliseconds to come up with a caption: “A group of young people playing a game of Frisbee.”But if you’re a computer, translating such an image into words has long been out of reach. Until now. In November, Google showed off the results of an artificial intelligence project that can look at an image consisting of common items and describe, in comprehensible English words, what’s going on in the picture — often with startling accuracy. Given a picture of two pizzas sitting on a white kitchen stove, the machine spit out, “Two pizzas sitting on top of a stovetop oven.” It did as well identifying a group of elephants, a guy riding a dirt bike and thousands of other such images.The system uses a neural network, an artificial intelligence system that mimics the human brain, and which Google has used, in the past, to identify cats in YouTube videos. It still isn’t perfect, though. Given a picture of a road sign covered in stickers, the computer saw “a refrigerator filled with lots of food and drinks.”A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Innovation in 2014: 4 Standouts in Tech.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.