

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
DEC. 31, 2014
Anil Dash, a longtime tech entrepreneur and blogger, was recently studying a list of the top words he had used on Twitter over the course of a month during the fall. Mr. Dash has half a million followers on Twitter, and like a lot of people in tech and media circles, he uses the social network to chat with colleagues, to pontificate about technology, politics and pop culture, and to participate in a lot of in-jokes.Over the years Mr. Dash has also found himself in the middle of some of the most loaded controversies that have roiled that network. But when he looked at the list of his most-used words for that month, he decided that many of his tweets were too combative, and he wasn’t proud of that.“A lot of it was me dealing with ‘gamergate’ folks,” he said in an interview, referring to this year’s antifeminist activist campaign by some video game enthusiasts. “I’m like: ‘God, I’m wasting my life. Why am I spending time on this? There are so many other things I could be doing.’” But, he added: “Seeing it was a revelation. I decided I’m just not doing it anymore. I immediately blocked five people, and it made my life better in 10 seconds.”Mr. Dash has been thinking about his behavior on social media for a while. Together with Gina Trapani, the former editor of the blog Lifehacker, he is a co-founder of ThinkUp, a year-old subscription service that analyzes how people comport themselves on Twitter and Facebook, with the goal of helping them become more thoughtful, less reflexive, more empathetic and more professional — over all, better behaved.AdvertisementIn addition to a list of people’s most-used words and other straightforward stats like follower counts, ThinkUp shows subscribers more unusual information such as how often they thank and congratulate people, how frequently they swear, whose voices they tend to amplify and which posts get the biggest reaction and from whom.AdvertisementSome of this may sound trivial. But after using ThinkUp for about six months, I’ve found it to be an indispensable guide to how I navigate social networks.Every morning the service delivers an email packed with information, and in its weighty thoroughness, it reminds you that what you do on Twitter and Facebook can change your life, and other people’s lives, in important, sometimes unforeseen ways. ThinkUp is something like Elf on the Shelf for digitally addled adults — a constant reminder that someone is watching you, and that you’re being judged.That is the point. “The goal is to make you act like less of a jerk online,” Ms. Trapani said. “The big goal is to create mindfulness and awareness, and also behavioral change.”She pointed out that people often tweet and update without any perspective about themselves. That’s because Facebook and Twitter, as others have observed, have a way of infecting our brains. Because social networks often suggest a false sense of intimacy, they tend to lower people’s self-control. Like a drug or perhaps a parasite, they worm into your devices, your daily habits and your every free moment, and they change how you think.For those of us most deeply afflicted, myself included, every mundane observation becomes grist for a 140-character quip, and every interaction a potential springboard into an all-consuming, emotionally wrenching flame battle.“There’s a knee-jerk thoughtlessness and lack of empathy that you have because you’re online, because you’re not looking at people’s faces,” Ms. Trapani said.One of the biggest dangers is saying something off the cuff that might make sense in a particular context, but that sounds completely off the rails to the wider public. The problem, in other words, is acting without thinking — being caught up in the moment, without pausing to reflect on the long-term consequences. You’re never more than a few taps away from an embarrassment that might ruin your career, or at least your reputation, for years to come.AdvertisementBeing made aware of that — getting a daily reminder from ThinkUp that there are good ways and bad ways to behave online — has a tendency to focus the mind.Thanks to ThinkUp’s nudging, I tend to amplify more people in my feed — that is, I retweet and share insights from people with fewer followers to expose their ideas to the people who follow me. Because ThinkUp alerts me to changes in people’s profiles and reminds me when people are being congratulated, I’ve found myself more plugged in to what people in my network are up to in their lives.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More basically, though, it’s helped me pull back from social networks. Each week, ThinkUp tells me how often I’ve tweeted. Sometimes that number is terribly high — a few weeks ago it was more than 800 times — and I realize I’m probably overtaxing my followers, so I pull back the next week.But ThinkUp charges $5 a month for each social network you connect to it. Is it worth it? After all, there’s a better, more surefire way of avoiding any such long-term catastrophe caused by social media: Just stop using social networks.But even though “never tweet” became a popular, ironic thing to tweet this year, actually never tweeting, and never being on Facebook, is becoming nearly impossible for many people.For starters, your online profile plays an important role in how you’re perceived by potential employers. In a recent survey commissioned by the job-hunting site CareerBuilder, almost half of companies said they perused job-seekers’ social networking profiles to look for red flags and to see what sort of image prospective employees portrayed online.Mr. Dash and Ms. Trapani argue that the future is increasingly social — that most jobs are going to become more connected, and that online image will become more important.Still, ThinkUp has been a hard sell. In the fall of 2013, the company attracted 1,000 users in a crowdfunding campaign, and since then it has signed up a few thousand more. But growth has been slower than the company had hoped for, and this fall it had to lay off some staff members to stay within its budget. The main issue constraining growth, the founders say, is that it has been difficult to explain to people why they might need ThinkUp.That may change as more people falter on social networks, either by posting unthinking comments that end up damaging their careers, or simply by annoying people to the point that their online presence becomes a hindrance to their real-life prospects. After all, Twitter and Facebook don’t come with a built-in guide letting people know how to do well there.Also, most of the third-party tools that give feedback about your presence online — services like HootSuite — are aimed at companies and professional “social media managers” running online campaigns, and are thus not well suited to individuals who are just looking to learn to tweet better.Advertisement“There’s a big base of people who are not a brand or a company, but who care about their image online, and they’re basically not being served by the networks,” Ms. Trapani said. “Anybody who participates in these networks daily or every other day and who wants to do it well — that’s our audience.”Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Get to Know Your Social Media Persona.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »