
App Smart By                     
 KIT EATON
 
DEC. 31, 2014
Three apps meant to deliver the laughs: Mouthoff, Boothstache and Cheezburger.NEED a good laugh? In 2015, you don’t need to look any further than the numerous funny or silly apps available for your smartphone.One classic silly app is MouthOff. It does one simple and amusing thing: It animates a cartoon mouth on your phone’s screen when you speak into your handset’s microphone. When you speak, your plain, boring lips and chin are replaced with the chattering jaw of a skeleton, the fast-moving metal teeth of a robot, the wobbling curved grin of a cartoon cat, or others. And that’s it.Is it sophisticated? No. Is it funny? Totally, if you’re in the right mood. It is free for iOS (and just $1 on Android). Put it on your phone and you’ll always have it on hand to brighten a dull moment. Warning: Children will adore it, and you may never get your phone back.For similarly lowbrow laughs, check out BoothStache, free on iOS and Android. It superimposes different-style mustaches onto a photo of your face. The app tries to detect where your eyes, mouth and chin are, and you can adjust these locations with a few taps. The enhancement is then automatic.AdvertisementBoothStache is five minutes of fun if you have ever fancied seeing what you look like when you do a Charlie Chaplin impression. And you can easily share the results online from inside the app. There is a small selection of free facial adornments; more are available to buy.AdvertisementFunny Movie Maker — Replace Your Face definitely has a mouthful of a name. But the program also has what it takes to make you laugh. It takes part of your face, like your lips, and superimposes that part on a photo of, say, a strawberry with eyes.It’s more clever than it sounds: You can edit the shape and size of the video effect, and you can use a photo of your choice instead of the built-in backgrounds if you want. This makes it perfect for making your cat talk, on video. There are a number of additional face packs available for $1 each. The app is free on iOS.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cheezburger taps into classic Internet gags, like video clips of cats doing strange things, and Failblog, photos and videos that will make you giggle with schadenfreude at other people’s stories of failures.The app acts a bit like a social network. You can mark favorite items and follow particular users’ accounts, and you can, of course, create and upload your own funny efforts. There is a ton of content here, and the app does a good job of collecting it in one place. But I find the design somewhat awkward, requiring a lot of touch-screen gymnastics to do what you want. Cheezburger is free on iOS and Android.If you have a cat or kitten nearby, then a totally different kind of smartphone laugh is available thanks to the Human to Cat Translator, free on iOS and Android. The app contains a bunch of prerecorded cat meows that are played when you tap on the screen. Each one is meant to prompt a different reaction from your real-life kitty. You can even record a sentence or two of your voice and the app will “translate” it into a string of cat sounds. It definitely makes my cats react in funny ways (depending on their mood, of course — typical for cats).Lastly, check out the official Cyanide and Happiness app, a personal favorite of mine, which is $1 for iOS and Android. (A free Cyanide and Happiness Lite is available for iOS.) It is a way to view the comic strips and animated shorts made by the C&H team, and I promise you’ll giggle. The humor is dark and wickedly sarcastic, and the app lets you note your favorite editions. The $1 version lets you search back through nearly 2,000 previous comic strips.Your sense of humor may, of course, differ from mine, which tilts toward the peculiar. Just try these apps and never forget Robin Williams’s advice: You’re only given a little spark of madness ... you mustn’t lose it. Quick Call Tempo, an intelligent calendar app for iOS, has been updated to add some great features. Tempo integrates with the iOS Notifications feature, so important calendar alerts can be seen at a glance, and now it can try to warn you every evening about what you have coming up the next day, so you can prepare. It’s free.A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Just for Laughs: Fake Mustaches and Cat Translations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »