By J. D. BIERSDORFERDEC. 30, 2014
Managing MailOn the MacQ. How do you block and automatically delete messages from a certain sender in the Mail program for Mac OS X?A. Like email software for other systems, the Mail program that comes with Mac OS X lets you create “rules” for your incoming messages, and you can set up a rule to handle correspondence from the person or site you want to ignore. Open the program and under the Mail menu, select Preferences; as a shortcut, you can also just press the Command and comma keys.In the Mail Preferences box, select the Rules icon and then click the Add Rule button. Using the menus and text fields on the screen, set up the actions you want the Mail program to take if an incoming message meets your specified conditions. For example, if the “From” field contains a certain address, you can have the program delete it on the spot or shovel it directly into the Junk hopper instead of to your inbox.The Mac’s Mail program also has a junk filter that you can use to cut down on some of the spam and mass mailings that clutter up inboxes; click the Junk icon in the Mail preferences box to make sure it is turned on. When it is, you can click the Junk button at the top of your mailbox window to mark a message as spam to be shuttled into the Junk mailbox. (If you find messages that are not spam in the Junk mailbox, select them and click the Not Junk button at the top of the window.) Spammers are constantly trying to thwart mail filters, so you may have to regularly tweak your rules and junk settings to keep the unwanted messages at bay.AdvertisementFinding AnswersFor AndroidQ. Is there any sort of standard Android user guide out there for general help with using the system?AdvertisementA. Google develops the Android software, but since hardware manufacturers and wireless carriers often apply their own modifications to the system, you may want to check with the maker of your device for a dedicated user guide. Consumer technology books, YouTube and Android-focused websites are other sources of information.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Google does have its own Android help page at support.google.com/android and you can find some downloadable user guides there — especially for Nexus phones and tablets. Click the “Other Devices” icon on the page for links to the support sites for several other hardware manufacturers like Samsung and Motorola.TIP OF THE WEEK In case you missed some of Facebook’s recent announcements in the swirl of the holiday season, the company has added new settings for News Feeds to give users more control over what they see when they visit the site. To tinker, log into Facebook and, in a desktop browser, click the menu triangle in the top-right corner and choose News Feed Settings. (On the Facebook mobile app for Android or iOS, tap the More menu and go to News Feed Preferences.) Here, you can see what friends, groups, pages and news sources appear the most in your feed, and make adjustments.In addition, you can change the content of your feed on a post-by-post basis by selecting the gray arrow in the right corner of the item and choosing one of the menu options like “I don’t want to see this.” The site’s Help guide has details at http://on.fb.me/YWuBCq.Facebook announced in November that it was updating its data policy as well. The new policy goes into effect on Jan. 30. It is posted at www.facebook.com/about/privacy/update. J.D. BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on January 1, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.