By J. D. BIERSDORFERJAN. 2, 2015
Q. If I post photos to my Flickr page, can anyone on the web download them? If so, can I stop them?A. The Yahoo help guide notes that if a photo is publicly visible on the site, anyone who can see the image can find ways to download it. If this sort of thing bothers you, adjust the privacy settings for your Flickr account so that only people you have designated as “friends” and “family” can see your pictures posted there.When you are logged into the site, you can designate your Flickr contacts as friends and family by going to the People menu at the top of the page and choosing List. You can also send “Guest Passes” to people who do not have their own Flickr accounts, but would still like to see your posted photos.If you do not want to change the privacy settings on your account, Flickr has suggestions for hindering strangers from downloading your photos. While these steps involve limiting access to the original image or the photo size displayed, these measures only discourage (but do not fully prevent) downloading.Pictures posted to Flickr can also be licensed for download through Creative Commons, so you may want to check your account settings to make sure your license is set to “None” if you do not intend for your images to be shared. Click on your profile photo in the top-right corner of your Flickr page and choose Settings from the menu to see the overall preferences for your account.AdvertisementSyncing Files Between Macs and PCsQ. I got an error message about “characters that aren’t allowed” when I tried to sync a file from my Mac to the OneDrive cloud. What are all the characters that aren’t allowed on OneDrive?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. Microsoft’s OneDrive and Windows systems have certain restricted characters that cannot be used in file and folder names because those characters are reserved for system commands and functions. OneDrive is not the only site that can have syncing problems with certain file names; Dropbox and others are not immune, either.AdvertisementAlong with the question mark (?), these forbidden characters include the forward slash (/) and back slash (\), the mathematical greater- and less-than signs (>, <), inch/straight quotation marks (″), the colon (:), the asterisk (*) and the vertical bar or “pipe” character (|). Spaces at the beginning or end of a file name, names ending with periods or two periods at the beginning of a file name can cause problems with syncing files across platforms.Windows-based computers have a few other rules about file and folder names. For example, you cannot name files AUX, PRN, NUL, CON, COM0, COM1, COM2, COM3, COM4, COM5, COM6, COM7, COM8, COM9, LPT0, LPT1, LPT2, LPT3, LPT4, LPT5, LPT6, LPT7, LPT8 or LPT9.Most operating systems have their own reserved characters, and some have more than others, so it is best to stick with simple alphanumeric names — especially when working across computer platforms. Excessively long file and folder names can cause issues as well. Apple has a guide for file names that outlines the conventions.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.