The head of the Federal Trade Commission on Tuesday offered a prescription for protecting consumer data collected by Internet-connected gadgets like wearable fitness trackers and “smart home” devices, previewing themes of a coming report by the agency on Internet privacy and security.“In the not-too-distant future, many, if not most, aspects of our everyday lives will be digitally observed and stored,” Edith Ramirez, the chairwoman of the F.T.C., wrote in remarks for a speech Tuesday afternoon at the International CES technology industry event in Las Vegas. “That data trove will contain a wealth of revealing information that, when patched together, will present a deeply personal and startlingly complete picture of each of us.”The F.T.C. has been scrutinizing the data collection practices of the technology industry for their effect on consumer privacy. For example, Ms. Ramirez has spoken publicly about the merits of “privacy by design,” in which privacy controls are built into a product from the outset instead of as an afterthought.Notably, she used her speech on Tuesday to expand that principle to data security, warning that, beyond the series of public hacking attacks affecting Sony and other companies last year, 2015 would be the year that “smart-home hacking” became a realistic threat.“Any device that is connected to the Internet is at risk of being hijacked,” said Ms. Ramirez, who added that the large number of Internet-connected devices would “increase the number of access points” for hackers.Ms. Ramirez seemed to be directing her remarks at the start-ups that are making most of the products — like fitness trackers and glucose monitors — driving the so-called Internet of Things.She said that some of these developers, in contrast to traditional hardware and software makers, “have not spent decades thinking about how to secure their products and services from hackers.”Beyond security, Ms. Ramirez said that technology companies needed to pay more attention to so-called data minimization, in which they collect only the personal data they need for a specific purpose and delete it permanently afterward. She directly challenged the widespread contention in the technology industry that it is necessary to collect large volumes of data because new uses might be uncovered.“I question the notion that we must put sensitive consumer data at risk on the off chance a company might someday discover a valuable use for the information,” she said.She also said that technology companies should be more transparent about the way they use personal data and should simplify their terms of use.A spokesman for Ms. Ramirez, Justin Cole, said the speech was intended to set the stage for an F.T.C. report on the Internet of Things. It is expected in the next few weeks.