A former high-profile electrical engineering professor has been indicted on racketeering charges, nearly five years after his career at the Georgia Institute of Technology collapsed over a wireless chip start-up he founded. A grand jury in Fulton County, Ga., last week returned the indictment against Joy Laskar on two counts of racketeering, accusing him of a scheme that robbed Georgia Tech, his former employer, of more than $1 million. If convicted, Dr. Laskar could face between 10 and 40 years in prison and a hefty fine.   Dr. Laskar was the subject of a profile in The New York Times in Nov. 2013. The article examined his ouster from Georgia Tech over accusations that he had misused university funds and other research for the benefit of his start-up, Sayana Wireless.  The downfall of Dr. Laskar was an especially vivid illustration of the volatile reaction that can occur when professors mix academic and entrepreneurial ambitions. Dr. Laskar had been a star at Georgia Tech, who attracted tens of millions of dollars in research money from iconic companies like Samsung, which established a chip design center at the university. Georgia Tech aspired to build its reputation as a hotbed of start-ups that would spin out from the university with ideas and technologies gestated there by students and professors. Dr. Laskar was one of the most successful members of the university faculty in that regard, founding several chip start-ups. But his career unraveled after university auditors accused him of misusing Georgia Tech funds and other resources for Sayana Wireless. In 2010, it suspended him from his job, and agents with the Georgia Bureau of Investigation raided his home and office. Dr. Laskar, a tenured professor, was eventually fired from the university. The accusations against Dr. Laskar shocked many people who knew him in the start-up and academic worlds, with some questioning the severity of the university’s response. Some of the skepticism around the case came from the fact that the Georgia attorney general still hadn’t indicted Dr. Laskar several years after he was suspended from his job.  In a phone interview, Craig Gillen, a lawyer for Dr. Laskar, said that the attorney general had been running out of time on the case due to the statute of limitations. “We’ve reviewed the indictment, and we vehemently disagree with the charges brought against Dr. Laskar,” Mr. Gillen said. “He’s a well-recognized, national pioneer in his field. This indictment came, literally in our view, days before the case would have gone out on a statute of limitations. We will fight every single allegation. We look forward to Dr. Laskar’s day in court.” A spokeswoman for the Georgia attorney general’s office said “the case was indicted within the statute of limitations, but I am not going to discuss our legal strategy.”