Updated, 8:16 p.m. | The insurance industry takes it for granted that Google will soon introduce its Google Compare auto insurance shopping site — available in Britain for two years — in the United States. Some recent moves by the Internet giant suggest the debut could be imminent.Google recently formed a partnership with the insurance comparison shopping site CompareNow.com, which operates like the Kayak travel site only for auto insurance, according to a person with knowledge of the situation. Separately, according to an analyst at Forrester Research, the company is now licensed to sell insurance in more than half of the United  States.The analyst, Ellen Carney, also used the fact that a Google employee recently became a licensed insurance agent on behalf of a presumed Google competitor to speculate that the company is about to buy (or has already bought) a San Francisco insurance agency as a means of greasing its entry into the lucrative California market.Comparison auto insurance shopping has become a lucrative area in recent years, but, for now, it has been mostly relegated to the European market. One of the originals was Confused.com, which is owned by Admiral Group, a large auto insurer in Britain. Admiral has started similar sites in Spain and France, and introduced its United States site, CompareNow, a year ago.Here’s how it works: Users go to a site and enter their driver’s license and other details and within a few seconds receive rates from various insurers. When they buy, the site collects a referral fee from the insurance company. The catch is that, unlike, say, retail referrals, the highly regulated insurance industry requires that these sites be licensed to sell insurance on behalf of the companies that give them quotes.In the United States, this means becoming licensed to sell insurance in various states, or teaming up with companies that already are. Google is doing both.The deal with CompareNow, which was signed late last year, gives Google access to roughly 30 insurers in CompareNow’s network, including many of the biggest insurers in California and Texas – the nation’s largest auto insurance markets. When Google Compare is up and running in the United States, it will send that traffic to CompareNow, and the two will share the royalty, the person with knowledge of the situation said.At the same time, according to a note on Thursday from Ms. Carney of Forrester, the company has done considerable spadework by becoming licensed to sell insurance itself. Google has spent more than two years pitching insurance companies on Google Compare, the note said.“As late as last month the site was expected to launch in California, to be followed in Q1 2015 with likely launches in Illinois, Pennsylvania, and Texas. Last I heard was that California pilot wouldn’t begin until sometime in Q1,” Ms. Carney wrote, speaking about Google Compare’s presumed introduction in the United States.For a sense of where Google’s operation in the United States stands, Ms. Carney, who covers insurance for Forrester, pulled public filings to see which states had licensed the company to sell insurance. The answer is more than half of the states, including most of the big population centers, like California, New York and Texas.The company is authorized to sell insurance for a number of companies, including “Dairyland, MetLife, Mercury, Permanent General Assurance, Viking Insurance of Wisconsin and Workmen’s, meaning that many others were likely taking a wait and see approach before jumping on,” Ms. Carney wrote.Anaik Weid, a Google spokeswoman, said the company did not comment on speculation.The more interesting, but very speculative, part of Ms. Carney’s note involves Meredith Stechbart, whose LinkedIn profile lists her as an employee at Google who is licensed to sell insurance on behalf of Google Compare as well as CoverHound, a San Francisco insurance agency “and presumed Google Compare competitor,” Ms. Carney said in an interview.“As much as I’d like to imagine someone could become so enthralled with the insurance industry that they’d leave a job at Google to become an insurance agent, there’s a more logical explanation for the addition of CoverHound on Ms. Stechbart’s license,” Ms. Carney wrote.“An acquisition of CoverHound gets the Google insurance entity to market faster in the U.S. than they’ve been able to get on their own,” she continued. “It gets them a national full-service independent agency with more insurers that have already signed on; CoverHound’s San Francisco headquarters is conveniently close to Google’s Mountain View Campus; plus CoverHound gets Google the kind of insurance chops that the company will really need should they decide they really like the insurance business. And an acquisition might explain this most recent delay.”She added: “Time will tell.”