
App Smart By                     
 KIT EATON
 
JAN. 7, 2015
You might not realize it, but playing some popular games like Angry Birds can teach you about the laws of physics.LONG before I wrote about apps for a living, I spent many years at university learning to be a physicist, and I worked as a professional scientist for a while. So I get an extra-special kick out of all the physics-based games that can be played on a smartphone.Though you may not think of it this way, every Angry Birds game relies on a little physics: elastic stretching for the catapult and ballistics for the curved trajectory that the projectiles (i.e., Angry Birds) follow as they fly through the air. Angry Birds Space takes it one step further and demonstrates Newton’s laws of motion and gravity.In this game, each bird flies through the zero-gravity environment of space in straight lines, or curves through gravitational fields of moons and planets. Collisions with objects (pigs) also happen in more or less the right way, with both bird and object recoiling with its own momentum.First of all, it’s an entertaining game, but this app is also a great way to bring up science with young children, to gently introduce them to physics. Angry Birds Space is $1 on iOS and free for Android.AdvertisementAnother fabulous game, Gravity Evolved, free for iOS and Android, uses gravitational physics as part of the gameplay. The game is a little abstract, but essentially you are battling with and against planets armed with different weapons.AdvertisementShots fly through space in orbits affected by the planets they pass near. If you see a screen shot of the game, its simple graphics are not visually impressive. But it is satisfying to play, and it is challenging to try to move through its many levels. The physics aspects of the game add to its charm and difficulty.Newton’s laws of motion play an important part in Osmos, an even more abstract game. In this game a tiny bluish blob of life bumps into and absorbs blobs that are like it while avoiding bad guys (reddish blobs).The blob propels itself around the game arena by rocketing out a little bit of material — a process you control by tapping on the screen. This is the physics part. It’s easy to learn but tricky to master because you have to remember to slow the blob down in the right way once it is up to speed. I love the game, although it can feel a little repetitive after a while.Osmos costs $3 for iOS and Android. There is a free test edition on Android.For a more classic game that relies on all sorts of complex physics and materials science, even though you would never think so, check out Jenga, free on iOS and Android. This game simulates the real-life block-stacking game using all the right science, so that as you move your chosen block by gesturing on the screen, you will slowly dislodge some blocks higher up the Jenga pile in just the right way.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It’s difficult, just like the real thing, and satisfying. It’s even fun to watch the simulated pile fall over on the screen, and know that you don’t have to pick up all the blocks and restack them by hand to play again.Freeze!, a free iOS and Android app, is a more puzzling physics-based game that may keep your attention for a little longer than Jenga. In this game, as you rotate the landscape, a hero with one eye and a round body must escape each level by rolling and falling through the air in the right way to avoid bad guys, spikes and other challenges.The trick to winning this game is learning how to gesture to turn the landscapes around just the right amount, and knowing when to use the “freeze” button to overcome the effect of gravity. It has wickedly gloomy but amusing graphics and great sounds. It’s a lot of fun and also definitely a game that younger players will appreciate.Leo’s Fortune is another popular game. In this one, a round hero tries to navigate difficult terrain while falling under gravity. This game, which is $3 on iOS and Android, has a slightly more developed story line than Freeze, and includes a few more physics-based challenges, like spring doors that must be jumped on to open. It’s a game my 4- and 6-year-old love to play, and so do I.AdvertisementWorld of Goo, $3 on iOS and $5 on Android, also incorporates the idea of gravity as part of the game. But in this game you also have to understand the mechanics of how gooey balls stick together like living elastic.You control the goo with gestures on the screen, building structures to bridge gaps and so on. Again, it’s lots of fun, and a great demonstration of how clever use of physics make a game different from any you’ve played before.None of these games are going to help you peek into the mysterious workings of the universe or turn you into Stephen Hawking, but physics lies at the heart of all of them, and you may learn a thing or two. Quick Call The personal goals and motivation app Lift has undergone an overhaul and been rebranded as Coach.me. The app aims to help you achieve personal goals, like losing weight, using motivation through prompts, connection to a community of similar people and connections with online coaches who can answer questions. It’s free on iOS and Android.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Games Played by the Laws of Physics (Though Bent a Little in Some Cases).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »