By J. D. BIERSDORFERJAN. 6, 2015
Moving VideosBetween GadgetsQ. I have some .mp4 home video files in a folder on my Mac that I want to copy to my Android Nexus tablet. The files are too big to email, and when I plug the tablet into my Mac with the USB cable, it doesn’t show up on the desktop as a hard drive. How can I do this?A. With a tablet running Android 3.0 or later and a Mac running OS X 10.5 or later, use the free Android File Transfer program, available from Google at https://www.android.com/filetransfer, to copy files up to four gigabytes between the two devices over the USB cable. After installing and opening the program on the Mac, make sure the tablet’s screen is unlocked and connect it to the computer with the cable; if asked to select a type of connection, choose “Media device (MTP).”The Android File Transfer program should open a window on the Mac’s desktop that displays the tablet’s media and app folders. Drag the video files from the Mac into the Movies folder on the Nexus. Once the files have been copied, they can be played in the Photos, Gallery or other Android apps that play videos.Also use the Android File Transfer window to copy files from the tablet to the Mac. When finished, disconnect the USB cable. The next time the tablet is plugged into the computer, the Android File Transfer window should open automatically.AdvertisementAlternative methods for transferring videos include using an online service like Google Drive or Dropbox as a go-between. Once videos are uploaded to a cloud storage locker, they can be downloaded on a tablet with the Google Drive app or an app from another service. Third-party transfer apps for Android like AirDroid and DoubleTwist, which specializes in syncing nonrestricted iTunes contents, are other options.AdvertisementChecking UpdatesIn Windows 8.1Q. How can I tell what system updates have been already installed on my Windows 8.1 tablet?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. Like previous versions of the operating system, Windows 8.1 keeps a record of the security patches and other software updates Microsoft has delivered to computers. To see what has been installed on your tablet, swipe in from the right side of the screen, tap the Settings icon when it appears and then select Change PC Settings.On the PC Settings screen, select “Update and recovery.” Select Windows Update on the left side of the screen, and tap “View your update history” to see the list of successfully (and unsuccessfully) installed updates.TIP OF THE WEEK The bigger text and simpler graphics often used by the mobile editions of websites are meant to look good on your smartphone or tablet, but there may be times when you want to see the full version of a site for desktop browsers. In the absence of a link at the bottom for switching to the desktop view, a device’s browser may be able to request it anyway.For example, with a mobile site open in the Chrome browser for Android and iOS, tap the “Menu” button on the Chrome toolbar and choose “Request desktop site.” In the Safari browser for Apple’s iOS 8 system, tap the URL at the top of the window. When the box of favorite sites appears, drag down on it with your finger to see the “Request Desktop Site” button. In Internet Explorer for Windows Phone 8.1, tap the “More” button and select Settings, where you can choose “Desktop version” or “Mobile version” in the Website Preference area.  J.D. BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Moving Videos Between Mac and Android Gadgets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.