By J. D. BIERSDORFERJAN. 9, 2015
Q. When I use Facebook on my computer, I want to see the most current posts in my news feed, and not the “Top Stories,” which always seem to be older. When I change the view to “Most Recent,” it always reverts back to “Top Stories” after a while. Why won’t it stay on “Most Recent”?A. Over the years, Facebook has been known to tinker with the algorithms used to compile the stories in a user’s news feed. Certain things, like new comments on a post, may cause it to resurface in the feed ahead of newer posts. Other factors, like trending topics or posts seen as too promotional can also affect the content and chronology of the news feed.The inability of the “Most Recent” setting to stick permanently, however, is by design. Facebook’s help guide even states it: “Your News Feed will eventually return to the Top Stories view.”If you are tired of changing the setting when it flips back to “Top Stories,” you may be able to find a browser extension that lets you customize your Facebook experience. Social Fixer and F.B. Purity are two such add-ons, but keep in mind that software updates, or changes Facebook itself makes, could affect how well the extensions work. In addition, pasting the URL http://www.facebook.com/?sk=h_chr into your browser can force your news feed to sort itself in the order of most recent posts. You can also create a bookmark from the URL and use it when you visit the site.AdvertisementTaking a Mac Off the MapQ. How do I make my Mac stop using my current location?A. Both Mac OS X and your browser can track your current geographical location. While some people find this useful for getting more relevant search results (businesses that are actually close to you, for example), others find it creepy. However, certain programs on the computer you may want to use — like the Find My Mac service, Maps and weather apps — also use the Mac’s location function.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you just want to stop the browser from noting your whereabouts when you search, you can adjust the program’s settings so that it stops using your coordinates. Apple’s site has the steps for turning off location services in its Safari browser. Google has similar instructions for Chrome and Mozilla has information about using (or not using) the location-aware browsing feature of Firefox. Windows users can disable Internet Explorer’s Location Services as well.To go beyond the browser and turn off the location-tracking function at the system level in Mac OS X 10.8 and later, go to the Apple menu in the top-left corner and choose System Preferences, or just click the System Preferences icon on the Mac’s Dock. In the System Preferences box, click the Security & Privacy icon and then select the Privacy tab.AdvertisementMake sure Location Services is selected on the left side of the box and turn off the checkbox next to “Enable Location Services.” If the checkbox is on but dimmed, click the padlock icon in the bottom corner of the box and enter the administrator’s user name and password to unlock the setting, then turn off the checkbox.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.