In the world according to venture capitalists, our daily lives will soon become a lot more convenient.That would be, in large part, because of the so-called on-demand economy, a group of start-up companies that let customers order anything — food, cars, alcohol — and have it delivered directly to their homes in hours.And then there is Instacart, the San Francisco-based start-up aiming to become the king of grocery delivery on demand. On Tuesday, the company announced it had closed a $220 million round of venture capital from Silicon Valley investors like Kleiner Perkins Caufield and Byers, Sequoia Capital and Andreessen Horowitz, among others.The new round brings the total amount of funding raised to $275 million, and values the company at a whopping $2 billion, according to two people familiar with the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of continuing ties to the company.It is an ambitious bet on the future of how we think about grocery shopping and delivery services. The company, which was founded in 2012, allows customers to peruse the online catalogs of their favorite grocery stores — like Whole Foods, a major Instacart partner — and schedule deliveries directly to their homes. The user interface is akin to other consumer tech start-ups, like Pinterest, and lays out everyday grocery items in a simple-to-browse grid. Instacart is currently available in 15 American cities.The concept is not entirely new. Competitors like Fresh Direct, which operates primarily in New York, have offered local grocery delivery services for more than a decade. And even larger technology giants like Google, eBay and Amazon — companies with much more money and vastly greater resources than Instacart — have tried to play in the space with their own same-day delivery services.Apoorva Mehta, Instacart’s chief executive, said his company’s size and structure is why it is likely to succeed.“We have the ability to try new things in a very quick way,” Mr. Mehta said in an interview. “We don’t hold inventory, we don’t own warehouses, we don’t own trucks. The changes we make are software changes.”That, Mr. Mehta said, is in stark contrast to companies like Google and eBay, which are much larger and offer a wider range of delivery items. Ebay Now, eBay’s same-day service, touts its ability to deliver anything from big-screen TVs to hammers and nails from companies like Best Buy and Home Depot. He said Instacart’s focus on one particular type of product, groceries, allows the company to be more nimble than its competitors.The proof, Mr. Mehta said, is in the growth numbers. Instacart would not provide specific financial information, but it said that its revenues grew by more than a factor of 10 in 2014, and doubled in the final quarter of last year alone. While the company employs only around 100 employees, it has more than 4,000 contract employees who do its shopping and delivery.Those contract workers, investors say, is the key to Instacart’s rapid success. Instead of having to hire thousands of full-time employees, an expensive endeavor, Instacart can tap into the vast pool of people looking for part-time contract work — the kind who might, say, drive for Uber, the ride-hailing start-up.“One of the things that’s so exciting is the capital efficiency of Instacart’s business model, which allows them to move into new markets incredibly quickly,” said Will Gaybrick, a partner at Thrive Capital, one of Instacart’s investors. “Like Uber, hypergrowth happens in a matter of months, not years.”Mr. Mehta said the new capital will further advance Instacart’s growth, as the company continues to hire more customer service representatives, business development employees and operations teams for expansion into more cities.