Education technology companies that have pledged not to exploit student data they collect for marketing purposes welcomed President Obama’s endorsement on Monday of the industry’s effort to limit its use of classroom data.But the president’s comments did nothing to alleviate the unease of some parents concerned about potential civil rights issues raised by the increasing use of ed tech in schools, including the possibility that some programs and products might automatically channel or categorize students in ways that could ultimately be discriminatory or detrimental to their education.In a speech on Monday afternoon at the Federal Trade Commission, the president announced new student digital privacy legislation. The proposed bill would be modeled on a student data privacy law passed by California last summer. The California statute prohibits companies that work with schools from using the information they collect about kindergartners through 12th graders for marketing or advertising purposes. It is unclear whether the proposed legislation would make it through Congress. So in addition to pushing for a new law, Mr. Obama has urged ed tech companies to sign on to a voluntary industry pledge on student privacy in which the signers agree not to sell personal details they have collected about students; not to profile students for noneducational purposes; and not to use students’ details collected through educational services to tailor ads to them. “We’re very excited that President Obama is endorsing the pledge and calling for other companies to sign it,” said Jules Polonetsky, the executive director of the Future of Privacy Forum, an industry-financed research group in Washington that helped draft the industry pledge. Mr. Polonetsky’s group has received financing from dozens of companies including Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Google and Microsoft. Introduced last October, the pledge has now been adopted by 75 companies including original signers like Microsoft and Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, the educational publisher. Apple signed last weekend on the eve of the president’s speech. Although Google has its own privacy policy, the company, whose Google Apps for Education software is used in schools nationwide, has not joined the industry initiative.Mr. Obama’s focus on student digital privacy comes at a time when schools across the country are increasingly adopting data-driven learning products — from homework portals to math apps — that can quantify and analyze everything from the time it takes students to complete an assignment to the number of times they incorrectly answer long division problems to the length of comments they post in online classroom discussion forums. The idea behind these ed tech products is to use data analysis to tailor lessons to the needs of each child.But some parents, educators, technologists and education privacy law scholars say there is little evidence to back up the marketing hype over personalized learning technology. While welcoming efforts to curb the use of educational data for advertising purposes, they contend that neither the industry pledge nor the California law that President Obama invoked as a model for federal student digital privacy legislation places any meaningful requirements on companies regarding the accuracy, efficacy or fairness of their novel digital learning products.“We may be serving some kids well, but we may be disserving other kids in a significant way,” said Joel Reidenberg, a professor at Fordham University School of Law in Manhattan who is an expert in education privacy law. Parents concerned about these kinds of fairness issues said they would like to see Mr. Obama push for legislation requiring companies to directly provide parents with comprehensive lists of the details they are collecting about students; to disclose how they use those details to categorize or rank students; and to describe the different treatment students might receive based on those rankings or categorizations. (Companies that sign on to the industry pledge agree to include information in their contracts or privacy policies about the kinds of personal data they collect about students and the purposes for which they use that data.)“Even if the law is passed, parents would still not know which vendors have their kids’ data and what they are doing with it,” said Rachael Stickland, a mother of two in Littleton, Colo., who is a co-chairwoman of the Parent Coalition for Student Privacy. “There’s this veil of secrecy. Parents would really appreciate that opportunity to know what is going on.”