SEATTLE — Many people and businesses haven’t found compelling reasons to buy new personal computers in recent years, and PC companies didn’t discover any new gimmicks to change their minds over the holidays.   In a repeat of the lackluster sales that have become the norm for the business, IDC, a technology research firm, said worldwide PC shipments fell 2.4 percent during the fourth quarter of last year from the same period the year before. On an annual basis, shipments were down 2.1 percent from the prior year, the third consecutive year of declines in the PC business.   Gartner, another research firm, had somewhat rosier numbers, showing 1 percent growth in PC shipments during the fourth quarter. Gartner and IDC measure the PC market slightly differently, with Gartner including and IDC excluding tablets and tablet-laptop hybrids that run Microsoft‘s Windows operating system. Gartner excludes Chromebooks, laptops that run Google‘s Chrome OS software, from its PC shipment figures, while IDC includes them. The good news for the PC market is that the situation is not as grim as it was a couple years ago, when shipments were dropping by double-digit percentage points. The bad news is that it looks like the growth days for the PC are over, at least until some spectacular new innovation materializes to compel people to upgrade their systems en masse. The PC market can’t even blame tablets for its travails anymore. When iPad sales were on fire, it looked like tablets were killing PC sales by giving people cheaper, simpler devices to accomplish a lot of basic computing chores. But overall tablet sales have slowed much faster than anyone expected.In an interview, Jay Chou, an analyst at IDC, said the firm’s user surveys show that many people are simply holding onto their PCs longer because they don’t see great reasons to buy something new. Eventually that will change as PCs get thinner, and battery life gets better. For 2015, though, IDC is still predicting a 3 percent decline in shipments. Individual companies transcended the market’s doldrums. Apple showed the strongest growth of the top five global PC makers, with an 18.9 percent increase in shipments in the fourth quarter, IDC estimated. Hewlett-Packard was the only other PC maker among the top five to show double-digit growth, rising 15.1 percent. 