Are software makers writing themselves out of a good living?Recent trends in the computer business indicate we are about to see a phenomenal growth in computing power and the relative ease with which software can be created to utilize it. In one case, powerful cloud computing companies that are accessible to the public — and often to developers of new software — appear to be quickly expanding. Intel says that in the last five years it has seen a tenfold increase, to 200, in the number of public clouds. There is no sign of that slowing down, with big companies like Google and Amazon offering even more services for software developers to put more things online, including connected household devices, millions of hours of video, and fast-growing start-ups like Airbnb or Khan Academy. In another, that rise in the amount of available computing power is speeding a revolution in how software is written and deployed, with software “containers” like Docker enabling developers to make and update software with unprecedented speed.Containers, along with other kinds of software-making tools for global-scale cloud systems, change the process of making software to a more automated system in which parts can be changed separately. Think of it as a change from an artisan working at a bench to a mass-production assembly line: Things are moved through faster and more uniformly. Putting this in economic terms, a lot more supply of computation is on the market, with an increasingly lower cost of production. As a rule, both of those things tend to keep down production prices, including wages. If it’s cheaper and easier to make software, why pay the same price to the people who make it?That would be bad news for programmers if demand for what they make were not growing so quickly.“There is no shortage of the things we’ll need coders for,” said Andrew McAfee, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who studies how information technology is affecting business. Mr. McAfee compared the situation to John Henry’s fabled losing battle against the steam drill. “The explosion of steam and electricity was great for people who did physical work, they were needed for lots of other things,” he said. In the case of software, “there is a threshold of analytic skills among population that you can keep putting to use.”In other words, even if containers mean that people who write code need not have extensive training in all aspects of software application to make one, their knowledge of how to do one thing very well could make them even more valuable, while the product gets cheaper. In this case, the change is like when Henry Ford paid his mass assembly line workers more, and made even more money by turning out lots of cheap cars that people wanted more efficiently. Because software now even takes on lots of functions that computer hardware used to do, “we’re moving towards a software developer’s view of how computing infrastructure works, instead of thinking about hardware,” said Martin Casado, a senior vice president at VMware, a software company. VMware paid $1.2 billion for his start-up, which turned the computer networking reliant on specialty chips and other hardware into something that could be done cheaper and easier with software.At some technology companies, software developers don’t just code someone else’s vision: They are designing the products themselves, and even the ways the company works.“Our developer teams already manage the software and infrastructure on their own,” said Mike Bryzek, a co-founder of Gilt Groupe, an online fashion site with about 1,000 employees. “We’re seeing the beginning of the end of marketing too, because of customization and personalization in online shopping. The marketing jobs will be taken over by algorithms, and the budgets will shift over to engineering.”In other words, when software can take over other jobs in the company, it owns them.By QUENTIN HARDYThe start-up is in the forefront of a move to package applications much as shipping containers hold physical goods.