
Amber Alerts, which already buzz your cellphone, light up highway billboards and appear on television and radio broadcasts, will now start showing up in your Facebook feed, too.About 200 Amber Alerts are put out by American law enforcement agencies every year to inform people about children who have been abducted and are at serious risk of death or injury. The authorities ask those getting the alerts to keep an eye out for the child or suspected abductor, and typically provide basic information, like a photo of the child and the license plate number of the car driven by the suspect.The Amber program was named for Amber Hagerman, a 9-year-old abducted and killed in Texas 1996, but is also an acronym for its official name, America’s Missing: Broadcast Emergency Response.The alerts are credited with helping recover 728 children since the program started, according to John Ryan, chief executive of the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, which maintains a list of missing children and works closely with law enforcement authorities on the Amber Alert system.One continuing challenge, however, has been to get the alerts in front of people who are in the right geographic area to spot the child — and are willing to help. In 2013, shortly after the alerts were first extended to cellphone users, some New Yorkers were angered at being awakened at 4 a.m. by a blaring alert about a 7-month-old boy who had been abducted by his mother from a Harlem foster care agency.Facebook, a social network used by approximately three out of four American adults, will add its vast reach and high-tech sophistication to the Amber system, the company announced on Tuesday. Facebook already tracks where its users are when they log into the service, and it will aim the messages at people in specific cities or even neighborhoods, depending on what law enforcement requests.It will make the alerts the second post in the news feed of targeted users so they can’t miss it. And Facebook will encourage recipients to spread the word further to some or all of their friends on the service.Emily Vacher, Facebook’s trust and safety manager, who headed the project for the company, said that having the alert show up on Facebook would spare people the trouble of trying to jot down relevant information from an alert they hear on the radio or pass on a billboard and make it much easier to pass along the main facts to others.Although there is no way to opt out of the alerts, Ms. Vacher said that most users probably would not get more than a few per year (unless they have friends who pass alerts along to everyone they know).“We’re really complementing all the information out there,” said Ms. Vacher, who was an F.B.I. agent before joining the company.The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children worked closely with Facebook on expanding the alerts, and Mr. Ryan said that the social network’s involvement would enhance the scope of Amber Alerts and was a “potential game changer.”“We are really mobilizing an army of eyes and ears to be on the search,” Mr. Ryan said. He is also in talks with Twitter about doing something similar.A version of this article appears in print on 01/14/2015, on page B2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Facebook Will Add Its Resources to Amber Alerts.