Silicon Valley, for all its costs and social woes, is still a technology industry paradise, according to a report issued on Wednesday. The comprehensive report, released by a group called the Silicon Valley Competitiveness and Innovation Project, looked at a total of 23 indicators of economic strength and compared Silicon Valley with five other regions across the United States.The group said it was looking for a strategy to enhance innovation, and to ensure that residents had access to the jobs in key industries. Based on the strength of Wednesday’s findings, the strategy should mostly amount to “don’t stop.” The study, which was supported largely by local corporations, did call for some changes, though: more government spending on education, less restriction on immigration and fewer regulations on business. It did not say what local regulations were particularly burdensome.By this group’s reckoning, 26 percent of the valley’s jobs were in “innovation” employment, well ahead of Boston, which came in second with 18 percent of the total. The other areas were Seattle (16.5 percent), Austin (16.4 percent), Southern California, (15 percent) and New York (14 percent.) The region had the greatest concentration of employment in so-called STEM industries (science, technology, engineering and mathematics), the most information-technology patents, and by far the most venture capital funding. It had high areas of investment in research and development, even though the group only counted university research. Many businesses have their own R&D labs in the valley, as well. The valley was at or essentially tied for the fastest growth in both Internet and software businesses, which historically have been less vulnerable to cyclical downturns than industries like aerospace. The region did show a slight decline in employment for integrated circuit manufacturing, but so did all the other regions in the study except Austin.In a departure from previous economic analyses, the group defined the Silicon Valley as the counties of Santa Clara, San Mateo and San Francisco. San Francisco, in particular the city itself, has in recent years undergone a tremendous influx of tech businesses, leading to higher prices for housing and offices, as well as more traffic congestion. These byproducts of a boom, expensive real estate and bad traffic, were seen as two of the region’s biggest challenges in sustaining prosperity. The study did not address factors that might improve costs and traffic, such as people and businesses moving to San Francisco’s East Bay. The other hazard, lousy early elementary education in math and science, may be offset by other positives, such as immigrants moving to the valley from overseas and elsewhere in the United States.Wide income disparity between tech employees and everyone else, seen elsewhere as one of the causes of things like the protests and vandalism of corporate shuttles in and out of San Francisco, was noted.  The study also said, however, that the region had the highest level of economic mobility, or the ability of a poor person to move up, of any of the nation’s 50 metro regions.A version of this article appears in print on 01/19/2015, on page B6 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Economic Study of Silicon Valley.