Investor confidence in the education technology sector suddenly looks a lot more serious — at least for digital learning companies with proven business models.Lynda.com, an online video tutorial service that provides professional skills training to individuals and enterprise clients, announced Wednesday morning that it had raised $186 million in financing. The round was led by TPG Capital, a private investment firm.The sum dwarfs the largest ed tech financing deal of last year; in that deal, Pluralsight, another online training platform for professional skill development, raised $135 million from venture capital and private equity firms. The amount raised by Lynda.com also represents the largest ed tech financing deal in the last six years, according to CB Insights, a venture capital database that has been tracking the sector since 2009. Industry analysts said the Lynda deal was notable for other reasons, too. “It’s interesting, for one thing, that the round was led by TPG, a private investor likely to do more research on the market and revenue model than an early-stage investor focused on growth,” said Matthew Wong, a research analyst at CB Insights. Founded in 1995 as a training program for web design, Lynda.com is hardly a start-up. The company currently offers 5,700 courses online in English and other languages for professionals in business subjects like management; technology skills like programming and web development; and creative fields like video and photography. Lynda.com sells subscriptions to individuals that start at $25 a month and allow unlimited access to the company’s courses. The company also has enterprise clients including companies, state governments and universities that may buy multiple subscriptions or invest in site licenses. Taken together, that amounts to 5.4 million individual and enterprise customers, the company said.“We find that once we get into a company, whether it’s a state government or an academic institution, it tends to be bottom-up,” said Eric Robison, the chief executive of Lynda.com. “We start small and then we expand. Learners are invested in making sure their skills are up-to-date and there’s a lot to stay up-to-date on.”Lynda.com generated more than $150 million in revenue in 2014, Mr. Robison said, and has been profitable since 1997. He added that the company planned to spend the capital it raised on acquiring firms that specialize in technical and business skills training for professionals; on expanding internationally; and on improving the product experience for subscribers.In an ed tech sector rife with enthusiasm for start-ups marketing free learning apps and websites to schoolteachers — in hopes that schools will pony up later for premium services — the size of the Lynda.com deal, along with the Pluralsight deal last year, indicates that longer-term investors see value in learning companies whose business models involve charging directly for their core products.“Both companies have that training angle and that subscription model,” said Mr. Wong, the research analyst, “and they are now two of the most valuable companies in the space.”A version of this article appears in print on 01/15/2015, on page B2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Tutorial Site In Big Round Of Financing.