Wesley Chan, an early Google product manager who helped build Google’s advertising system, along with Google Analytics and Google Voice, has joined Felicis Ventures, a boutique venture capital firm in Palo Alto, Calif. Mr. Chan had most recently been a partner at Google’s venture capital arm, Google Ventures.Felicis was founded in 2006 by Aydin Senkut, another early Google employee who, like Mr. Chan, has gone from making products to investing in them.Compared with Google Ventures — which has more than $1 billion under management — Felicis is quite small. The firm has about $225 million under management, including a $120 million fund raised in 2014. That fund was originally $96 million, but grew after Mr. Chan joined the firm.Companies in which Felicis has made investments include Twitch, the video game streaming service that was sold to Amazon for just short of $1 billion last year. The firm also has a stake in Rovio, the maker of the Angry Birds video game.The addition of Mr. Chan suggests that the firm will be able to make bigger deals than in the past. As an early stage/seed investor, Felicis’s investments had mostly been in the hundreds of thousands of dollars. Mr. Chan said he would be able to make deals in single-digit millions.He would not say what kinds of investments he was interested in, but noted: “If you look at my history, I’m good at finding back office enterprise type stuff. Pretty boring stuff, but it’s amazing how much value is created there.”Today, with even unproven technology companies fetching billion-dollar valuations, venture capital firms have been regularly one-upping each other to prove how committed they are to entrepreneurs. Tactics include trips to an island resort by seaplane, soirees with celebrities and an offer to share in investment profits, with no need to put capital at risk.To that end, Felicis made headlines last year when it instituted an unusual policy in which it committed to always voting its shares with the founders of companies in which it invests.