AdvertisementSupported byBy Julie Hirschfeld DavisWASHINGTON — President Obama on Wednesday will ask the Federal Communications Commission to pre-empt state laws that restrict communities’ ability to expand high-speed Internet access to underserved areas. Mr. Obama will make the announcement in Cedar Falls, Iowa, which has its own cable and high-speed data networks, including a one-gigabit broadband network that is 100 times as fast as the national average.The initiative includes an effort by the Commerce Department to help communities with broadband infrastructure as well as loans and grants from the Agriculture Department to Internet providers in rural areas and the creation of an interagency council to speed up broadband deployment, White House officials said. The administration has also scheduled a meeting on broadband efforts for mayors and other local officials in June.The moves are crucial to Mr. Obama’s plan to nurture innovation, the president’s advisers said, and keep the United States competitive with other nations that have faster and more widespread Internet connections.“Clearly, Americans want and need better, faster broadband because so much of our day-to-day lives and so many of the jobs we want to create depend on access,” said Jeffrey D. Zients, director of the National Economic Council. “High-speed broadband is central to maintaining our global advantage.”The president’s push to remove the roadblocks to Internet competition is likely to face resistance from large telecommunications companies, said Christopher Mitchell, director of the Community Broadband Networks initiative of the Institute for Local Self-Reliance. Nineteen states have laws that restrict cities’ ability to provide broadband coverage. “The telecom companies have spent millions of dollars in state legislatures to promote these limits,” Mr. Mitchell said, “and anything that’s pro-competition from the administration is very upsetting to them.” He said eliminating the barriers and allowing cities to set up their own networks would be an “important first step” in generating competition that would widely expand broadband access.Advertisement