By GREGORY SCHMIDTJAN. 14, 2015
FOUND yourself with a new tablet, smartphone or flat-screen TV as a holiday gift? These handy products and services will help you get the most out of your new electronic device.$60-$110The iXpand Flash Drive from SanDisk was created for a world obsessed with selfies. Photos and videos can hog memory on smartphones and tablets, and the iXpand offers a convenient way to free up space. Available with storage of 16, 32 or 64 gigabytes of memory, the flash drive can automatically synch photos and videos when it is plugged into an iOS device. The files can be stored on the drive or transferred to a PC or Mac. And movies and music stored on the drive can be played through a downloadable iXpand Synch app.$900As TVs get thinner, they have less room for a high-quality audio system. One way to improve things is with an external soundbar. In 2013, Philips introduced the stylish Fidelio HTL7180 soundbar, which also had a wireless subwoofer and detachable rear speakers, creating an easy surround-sound experience. Now, Philips has announced the Fidelio B5, which has the same design but was upgraded internally to improve the sound and add Bluetooth capability to the detachable speakers. The B5, which will be available this spring, also features an integrated calibration algorithm that balances the sound no matter where the speakers are placed.Free-$85Sometimes, operating a new gadget can be daunting. The experts at the recreational retailer REI want to help. The national chain offers in-store classes that will help you learn to use popular outdoor and fitness gadgets like the GoPro camera, the Garmin Forerunner, the Mio Fuse and the Fitbit Flex. The free classes are intended for beginners, whether just starting out or getting back on track. Offerings for more advanced athletes, like 10K competitors and long-distance hikers, are available for a fee.Advertisement$70As gaming moves from consoles to mobile devices, tech companies are stepping in to help smooth the transition. SteelSeries recently introduced a wireless game controller, the Stratus XL, that is compatible with iOS devices and is supported by hundreds of popular apps, including FIFA 15 Ultimate Team, Minecraft, Angry Birds Go and Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas. The Stratus XL is larger and less expensive than its predecessor and more closely resembles the look and feel of an actual console controller. It connects to an Apple smartphone or tablet via Bluetooth and provides 40 hours of gameplay when fully charged.Advertisement$80Mophie products are typically more expensive than those of their competitors, but they also have a longer life span and a better design. Mophie’s latest portable battery, the Powerstation Plus, is no exception. Resembling a sleek business card case, the Powerstation Plus has an aluminum casing with an anodized satin finish and hinged plate that hides an integrated charging cable inside (either Lightning or micro USB, but not both, so make sure you get the one that is compatible with your smartphone). Mophie says the Powerstation Plus will fully recharge a phone up to two times; for those who want more power, three larger sizes are available.$15-$30For devices used at home, cables and docks are crucial, but they tend to crack and fray over time. Ventev has a solution with a line of sturdy accessories that include the Chargedock 2000, a combination desktop stand and portable battery, and Chargesync, a selection of durable, tangle-free cables with micro-USB, 30-pin or Lightning connections. The Chargesync cables come in eight bright colors, which means that you’ll never accidentally leave one behind. For those seeking versatility, the Chargesync 2-in-1 cable offers connectors for both micro-USB and Lightning charging.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Tools to Improve That Christmas Present.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.