By J. D. BIERSDORFERJAN. 14, 2015
Freeing a PC From MalwareQ. How do I find out if my PC has a bot, and if so, how do I fix it?A. If your PC is showing symptoms of having a “bot” (a software robot controlled by another person or application), you should scan it with a reputable security program and remove any malware found. Malwarebytes Anti-Malware and Panda Free Antivirus are among the free options around if you do not have a more full-featured paid program in mind.Malicious software can hijack a computer’s processing power and Internet connection. It does so to send spam, perform remote attacks or do other invasive chores — and it can tax a system’s resources.Your PC may be infected if you notice certain behavior; for instance, that your operating system and Internet-connection speed are slower than usual. Pop-up advertisements littering the screen, frequent system crashes, unexplained error messages or the inability to update software are other clues. Some Internet providers, like Comcast, may also alert you if your computer hosts a bot.Microsoft has a Safety Scanner page and other free malware-fighting tools for Windows at www.microsoft.com/security. The company also has advice for avoiding malware at www.microsoft.com/security/pc-security/botnet.aspx.AdvertisementBacking Up A Solid-State DriveQ. As solid-state drives are very stable and have no moving parts, is it necessary to do backups? If so, how frequently would you recommend doing so? I have no particularly important material except for family photos on the hard drive.AdvertisementA. Solid-state drives — which use a type of memory similar to that found in portable flash drives — lack the motorized magnetic platters and other moving parts used by mechanical hard drives, but they are not impervious to failure. Sudden power losses and other electronic problems can kill a solid-state drive, and data recovery can be difficult. Linus Torvalds, the creator of the Linux operating system, even reported a dead solid-state drive a few years ago.If you want peace of mind about your family photos and other files in your computer, you should back up the solid-state drive just as you would a mechanical hard drive — and as regularly. Although you need to provide a backup drive, your operating system is likely to include backup software to use with it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Windows 8.1 includes a File History program for backing up personal folders and Mac OS X comes with Apple’s Time Machine software, a basic backup program.Plenty of third-party backup programs are also available, as well as online backup services that store data on remote servers.TIP OF THE WEEK Twitter’s built-in search feature lets you use hashtags, names and other keywords to seek out public tweets from other Twitter users around the Internet. The search tool (available at the top of your Twitter account’s webpage or under the magnifying glass icon in the mobile apps) comes in handy when you are following a particular topic or a continuing news story. You can even filter your search results according to people, photos, news and other criteria by clicking the options on the left side of the webpage, or tapping the tiny slider icon in the app’s search-title bar.If there are certain topics you want to check regularly, you can also save your searches and rerun them with a click or a tap.To create and save a search, log into your Twitter account, enter your keywords and click the Save button in the top-right corner of your results page. The next time you click or tap the Search icon, your saved searches (up to 25 of them) appear in a list. Just select the search you want to run again to reel in the latest tweets on that topic.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.