
App Smart By                     
 KIT EATON
 
JAN. 14, 2015
New apps that help you track the data usage on your smartphone can help you save money on your next cellphone bill.THE smartphone in your pocket gives you the power to chat, text, take selfies and a million other things. But it also burns through your data plan with your wireless carrier faster than you think.And who likes to pay that extra fee when you go over your limit?There are, of course, built-in systems on your phone to help you track your mobile data use. But many apps can be even more useful in keeping you on the right side of your monthly data limit.DataMan Next, an iOS app, is an elegant way of monitoring your iPhone’s data-slurping habit. Its modern design presents information clearly and swiftly. To begin, you enter basic information like your monthly data allowance and when your bill is due.The app’s main screen is very simple: In the middle is a big figure showing the percentage of your monthly allowance used, and at the top is a large text alert. When this alert says “safe,” accompanied by a check mark, you’re in the clear. This means the app has estimated that at your current data consumption rate, you’ll not go over your limit.AdvertisementThere’s also a tally of how much total data you’ve used and how much you’ve downloaded over Wi-Fi. Best of all, the app’s backdrop changes color to warn you when you’re using too much; green for good becomes red for bad.AdvertisementYou can tweak several settings in DataMan, including the color scheme. I love its minimal design, but some users have reported that the app occasionally seems to lose track a little of how much data has been used. It costs $2.An alternative is My Data Manager, which is free for both iOS and Android phones. It has some of the same modern, minimalist design ideas as DataMan. But its reports have more detail, which may suit users keen on knowing exactly how they’re using their phone.The app’s main screen has clear graphics and text to tell you how much of your monthly data has been used. A few other screens, accessible with a swipe, show your data consumption habits more visually, with graphs.There’s also a map so you can see where you tend to use mobile data more frequently. In some places, you may think you’re connected to Wi-Fi networks but, in fact, you’re not.In the Android version, My Data Manager advises you about which apps are using more data. This information may help you adjust your phone use habits — such as checking Facebook a little less frequently.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.My Data Manager also has nice features, such as one for setting an alarm to let you know when you’ve reached your daily budget or a target, like 90 percent of the month’s allowance. It also lets you track data use on shared or family plans so you can tell who’s been using the most data.Onavo Count is also popular, and it is available for both iOS and Android phones. It’s also modern in design, with clear displays so it’s easy to understand how much of your data allowance you’re using and how you’re using it.It works in much the same way as its rivals, although it has a few unusual features like a report on your “data life,” which shows you if you’re spending more of your data budget on categories like music or movies. This information may prompt you to think about how you use apps like Spotify to stream music on the go. The app also lets you see how your data habits compare to other users’ averages.AdvertisementThe free Android app Data Usage is another good option. Its complexity is similar to that of My Data Manager, and it offers some of the same features, such as tracking shared accounts. But its design is a little more traditional, relying on plain text and simple visualizations to keep you advised on your mobile data consumption.Data Usage can be customized to suit your particular needs, and this may appeal to people who want to know how much data they use on a daily basis. A few words of caution: This app hasn’t been updated in a while on Android, which could affect how it runs on your particular phone. It costs $1 for iPhones.Individual cellphone networks often also have apps available to help you manage how much mobile data you use, so don’t forget to search the app stores for apps with the name of your carrier.I’ve been stung with high mobile data bills. Perhaps these apps can help you avoid the same problem. Quick Call The team behind the popular note-making app Evernote has just released a new app for iOS devices that turns your phone into an intelligent, on-the-go document scanner. The free Scannable app automatically rotates and enhances the quality of documents you snap with your phone’s camera, and can even recognize and extract contact details from business cards. It is simple, elegant and potentially quite useful.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Tracking Data Use to Avoid Hefty Phone Fees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »