By DAVID STREITFELDJAN. 14, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  One of Silicon Valley’s most embarrassing episodes might be finally drawing to a close.Court papers to be filed as early as Thursday will most likely put an end to a legal battle that has consumed the tech world since the Justice Department revealed in 2010 that several leading companies had conspired against their own employees.The companies were accused of making secret deals not to hire each other’s engineers, which kept the new products flowing but put a brake on the workers’ mobility and incomes. The government investigation prompted private lawsuits, which were rolled up into one big class action that was scheduled to go to trial this spring.To head off a trial and the exposure of reams of incriminating emails, Google, Apple, Intel and Adobe — the four remaining defendants — are offering to pay $415 million, according to a person with knowledge of the negotiations. That sum is acceptable to the plaintiffs’ lawyers. If a judge approves, the case will end.AdvertisementThe settlement money is pocket change to the companies, which include some of the world’s wealthiest. If they let the case go to trial, however, it might corrode their image as forward-thinking, worker-friendly benevolent empires. Steve Jobs of Apple was portrayed in court papers as the mastermind of the deals, but executives from Intel and Google also came off poorly.AdvertisementThis is the second effort at a settlement. Last spring, the two sides agreed on $324.5 million. After legal fees, that would have amounted to a few thousand dollars for each of the 64,000 class members.Michael Devine, a former Adobe engineer who was one of the five named plaintiffs in the case, disagreed with his lawyers and protested the first agreement. It was not enough money, Mr. Devine said then, given the wealth of the companies and the scale of their collusion.In an unusual move for a judge in a class-action case, Lucy H. Koh of United States District Court in San Jose agreed. In August, she said the initial settlement was not “within the range of reasonableness” and rejected it.Judge Koh appeared annoyed that the lawyers for the class were taking the easy way out by settling rather than going to trial.The new settlement, Mr. Devine said, is at least in the right ballpark. “A reasonable person could go either way on whether it is adequate,” he said.The lawyers’ share of the settlement is as much as 25 percent. If the case went to trial, the plaintiffs might lose, in which case the lawyers would get nothing for years of work. On the other hand, a jury could award the plaintiffs billions. At one point, lawyers for the plaintiffs said the damages were $3 billion, which would be tripled after a guilty verdict.Joseph R. Saveri of Joseph Saveri Law Firm and Dean Harvey of Lieff Cabraser Heimann & Bernstein, lawyers for the plaintiffs, did not respond to requests for comment. Google, Apple, Intel and Adobe either declined to comment or did not respond.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Justice Department’s initial investigation resulted in antitrust complaints against Google, Apple, Intel, Intuit, Adobe, Pixar and Lucasfilm. The companies settled without admitting guilt or paying any fines. EBay settled a related case last year.AdvertisementPixar, Lucasfilm and Intuit settled the suit in 2013 before it was approved as a class action, when its legal prospects were much shakier. The companies paid a combined total of $20 million. One longtime employee of Intuit said in an interview that he had received $1,000 — not enough to pay for the vacation in the Caribbean that he had been hoping for.Orly Lobel, a professor of employment law at the University of San Diego who has been following the case closely, predicted that Judge Koh would approve the new settlement.“It still is low, given the egregious violations over a sustained period of time and embarrassing emails from the very top of these companies knowingly colluding to impede their employees’ job mobility,” Ms. Lobel said. “But it’s a good result in that there has been much media attention to the illegality of such retention practices, real monetary consequences and promises to cease all such practices in the future.”Mr. Devine, who now works on a mobile start-up, said that “no amount of money would be punitive to these defendants.” Still, he agreed that after coming up with the settlement and enduring the publicity about the case, “they or any other firms would likely think twice” before doing something like this again.The market for engineers is at least as tight in 2015 as it was in 2005. But there is another reason that such collusion is now unlikely: Silicon Valley itself is disrupting the power of its executives.Tom Leung was a Google engineer when the no-poaching agreements were in force. Last year he created a start-up, Poachable, where employees secretly list what it would take to make them jump. Companies that are hiring use Poachable as a source of talent. About 25,000 tech workers are on the site.“Services like ours increase the liquidity and transparency of the employment market,” Mr. Leung said. “Power is going back to the talent, and a secret handshake between a few leaders is not going to stop it.”A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: New Accord Is Expected in Hiring Ban.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.