Softcard, a mobile payments company developed by the largest wireless carriers in the country, never caught on with the mainstream. Now, the company is on the selling block. Google has made an offer to purchase Softcard for an amount less than $100 million, according to a person familiar with the matter. Separately, PayPal, the e-commerce giant owned by eBay, has also submitted an offer to acquire Softcard, according this person, who requested anonymity because of continuing ties to the company. The talks come just months after the high-profile launch of Apple Pay, Apple’s mobile wallet initiative that has gained the interest of merchants, banks and credit card companies around the world. Apple Pay’s early traction has forced other major Internet companies like PayPal and Google to step up their mobile wallet efforts, this person said. If any deal is made, it is not immediately clear what Google or PayPal would do with Softcard, a joint venture formed in 2010 and backed by Verizon, AT&T and T-Mobile. The interest could lie in Softcard’s intellectual property patents, according to two people close to the company. It could also give Google a closer relationship with the wireless carriers involved in the joint venture, these people said. “We don’t have a comment, background, deep background, off the record steer, nod, wink or any other verbal or non-verbal response to these sorts of rumors,” a Google spokesperson said in a statement. A spokeswoman for PayPal did not immediately return calls and emailed requests for comment. A spokeswoman for Softcard card declined to comment. Softcard’s mobile app, which is available on both iOS and Android smartphones, allows customers to pay for items at more than 200,000 stores across the United States with a wave of their mobile device. But Softcard, formerly called Isis, failed to gain widespread traction with consumers, and has largely floundered in the five years since it has first launched. That has also been the case for Google Wallet, the search company’s failed attempt at offering consumers a way to pay for goods using a touch-free technology embedded in Android smartphones. Acquiring Softcard could reignite Google’s efforts in mobile commerce.News of the talks was earlier reported by TechCrunch. 