AdvertisementSupported byBy Vindu Goel and Sydney EmberJack Dorsey, Twitter’s co-founder and newly reappointed chief executive, has talked a lot recently about how the company’s social network is too difficult for many people to use.But he has said little about the part of the company that actually pays the bills: the advertising.On Thursday, Mr. Dorsey addressed marketers for the first time at an event in New York to show off Twitter’s array of video advertising products — and only vaguely alluded to what Twitter could mean for them.“Today, Twitter can show everything that is happening in the world 10 to 15 minutes faster than any other service,” Mr. Dorsey said. “And that’s not just global events. That’s not just local events. That’s with people. That’s with a brand. That’s with your customers.”Mr. Dorsey’s emphasis on Twitter’s real-time nature highlights the service’s biggest advantage for advertisers: It is still the public square where people gather to discuss live events like presidential debates and the MTV Video Music Awards.But some advertisers say that over all — particularly in the area of video advertising and targeting — Twitter has fallen behind competitors like Google and Facebook, which have aggressively introduced new products and offer ever more sophisticated ways for marketers to target their messages.Matthew Wurst, general manager of social media at 360i, a digital ad agency, said that Twitter had put significant limits on advertisers that want to run ads on video clips of live events like football games. In particular, the ads can be only six seconds long, so advertisers can’t use existing 15- or 30-second spots.“We have to go back and create something new,” he said. “Over all, there are bigger barriers to entry to working with Twitter than there are for Facebook and YouTube.”Last week, during one of the ad industry’s largest annual gatherings, Advertising Week in New York, both Google and Facebook announced new products intended to wrest more ad dollars away from television, and top executives of those companies, like Sheryl Sandberg of Facebook and Susan Wojcicki of Google’s YouTube, were there to woo advertisers. Twitter was largely absent from the conference.Twitter did make one major announcement at Thursday’s event: It will now allow scores of professional video publishers and creators to check a box to allow marketers to run short advertisements before their clips. The publisher will keep 70 percent of the ad revenue, with 30 percent going to Twitter. The program is a major expansion of Twitter’s Amplify program, an early effort that allowed advertisers to sponsor clips around live events such as the United States Open tennis tournament.Mr. Dorsey, wearing jeans and a black shirt, was joined at the video event by a host of Twitter ad executives, including Adam Bain, Twitter’s longtime ad chief, who was promoted to chief operating officer this week when Mr. Dorsey was made chief. As the audience trickled out after the event for cocktails, Twitter executives expressed surprise that so many marketers had attended.In an interview before the event, Mr. Bain said that Twitter wasn’t standing still. He said the company had been churning out new ad features all summer, including the ability to target ads around live events such as holidays or big games.“When you touch Twitter, you get in this mode of what’s hot, what’s new, what’s happening,” Mr. Bain said. “That is unique to Twitter.”Some Wall Street analysts worry that Twitter is already reaching the limit of ads that users will tolerate. In a recent report, Mark May of Citi Research concluded that Twitter would need to see large increases in both ad prices and user engagement to meet investors’ expectations for revenue growth — a scenario that he considered unlikely to occur.Denise Karkos, chief marketing officer of the TD Ameritrade brokerage firm, said that she used Twitter to run short ads before National Football League clips. The company also plans to use Periscope, Twitter’s live-streaming app, to feature some of its experts giving live commentary on the market.But when it comes to targeting specific groups of people with traditional ads, she said, Facebook is often more effective. She added that TD Ameritrade puts “less of a sales effort in Twitter” because consumers do not want their feeds interrupted by marketing pitches.Adam Simon, director of strategy at IPG Media Lab, a unit within the Interpublic Group of advertising agencies that looks at new technology for marketing, said that Twitter’s stream of tweets was not the best place for marketers to get someone’s attention.But he said he sees potential in Twitter’s new Moments feature, which collects tweets on various topics and presents them as a narrative package.Twitter will soon begin selling Promoted Moments, which will allow brands to put together their own packages of tweets and have them displayed at the top of the Moments section of the Twitter app. Twitter hopes to charge as much as several hundred thousand dollars for each day’s Promoted Moment slot — a premium ad slot that would be more expensive than sponsoring a trending topic on the main feed.Ultimately, advertisers say they are looking for platforms that work. If Twitter can deliver better results than competitors, they will use it.“As long as the platform listens and provides service, the C.E.O. doesn’t matter to me,” Mr. Wurst said.Advertisement