By QUENTIN HARDYJAN. 15, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  Intel ended 2014 on a high note, and appears confident that its momentum can continue. But the question is how much the company has to change to keep up the pace.Intel is the world’s largest maker of semiconductors, powering all sorts of devices. Most of its money still comes from putting chips in personal computers and servers, although it is trying to get into other devices, like tablets, smartphones and things people wear.Intel’s revenue for all of 2014 was $55.8 billion. However $49 billion of that was in PC and server chips. Mobile devices, considered an important growth area, had revenue of $200 million and losses of $4.2 billion.The transition to new devices matters, because for decades Intel’s model for success has been to make enough money to invest before rivals in advanced chip-making facilities, with transistors of almost unimaginably small size. If growth and profitably slip, Intel has big problems.Stacy J. Smith, Intel’s chief financial officer, put a positive spin on the loss in mobile and said in an interview that some success with tablets had “eliminated all doubt that it’s a great product line.”AdvertisementIntel, which is based in Santa Clara, Calif., has a solid financial footing to pursue its goal. It ended the year with $14.1 billion in cash, despite paying $4 billion in dividends and buying back more than $10 billion in stock.AdvertisementProfit margins increased over the year and the quarter, ending up at 65.4 percent. Intel reported that net income in the fourth quarter rose 39 percent to $3.7 billion, or 74 cents a share, from a year ago. Revenue was $14.7 billion, up 6 percent. Intel projected revenue in 2015 would grow “in the mid-single digits,” an improvement over some recent years.The earnings exceeded expectations, particularly given the lackluster sales of personal computers recently. On Monday, two popular analyst firms issued reports indicating the PC market was essentially flat in the fourth quarter, compared with a year ago.Intel’s PC business grew 3 percent in the fourth quarter, compared with a year ago. The server business grew 25 percent, reflecting in part the growing influence of large cloud-computing systems in business and personal computing.Still, Intel shares were off about 1.1 percent in after-hours trading, mostly on concerns that the company’s sales outlook was a bit below some expectations.“They continue to outship the rest of the industry in PCs,” said Bill Kreher, an analyst with Edward Jones. “You can’t do that forever.”Intel’s profit was significantly above the expectations of Wall Street analysts, who had predicted it would earn 66 cents a share, according to a survey of analysts by Thomson Reuters.Analysts thought Intel would have revenue of $14.7 billion. That suggests Intel has become relatively more profitable, through sales of products with higher margins or more efficient management.“A big part of any business is picking the right direction, and getting people to execute,” Mr. Smith said.A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Intel Profit Rises 39%, but Losses in Mobile Devices Are Heavy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.