ZestFinance traces its origins to a phone call Douglas Merrill received one winter day from his sister-in-law, Victoria, who needed new snow tires to drive to work and was short of cash. When Mr. Merrill asked what she would have done had she not been able to reach him, she replied that she would have taken out a “payday loan.”Mr. Merrill, a former chief information officer at Google, and earlier a senior vice president at Charles Schwab, knows finance as well as technology. His relative’s call prompted him to study the payday lending market. Payday loans are made to people with jobs, but with poor credit ratings or none at all.The payday market is a niche compared with mainstream consumer and credit-card loans, two markets where start-ups are now applying data science to lending, as I wrote about in an article on Monday.Still, the payday market is a sizable niche. At any given time, there are an estimated 22 million payday loans outstanding, and the fees paid by payday borrowers amount to about $8 billion a year — a lot of money for those in the working population least able to afford it. Mr. Merrill saw a market in need of greater efficiency, a business opportunity — and the potential to lower costs to borrowers.ZestFinance has been practicing big data-style underwriting longer than most other start-ups. Founded in 2009, ZestFinance made its first loan in late 2010 and has increased its lending steadily since, having underwritten more than 100,000 loans. Its loans are called ZestCash, and the company is authorized to be a direct lender in seven states including Texas, Louisiana and Missouri. ZestFinance also handles the underwriting for Spotloan, an online lender that is part of BlueChip Financial, which is owned by the Turtle Mountain Band of the Chippewa Indian tribe of North Dakota.Winning over state regulators has been a slow process. “We’re showing up with a different kind of math,” said Mr. Merrill, who is now the chief executive of ZestFinance. “And that’s going to make it more difficult from a regulatory standpoint.”A healthy dose of caution is in order, policy analysts say. A recent report, by Robinson & Yu, a policy consulting firm, looked at new data methods as a way to make credit available to more Americans. In the report, supported by the Ford Foundation, ZestFinance was the featured example of big data underwriting, which it called “fringe alternative scoring models.”“I have no doubt that they have come up with neat correlations that are predictive,” said Aaron Rieke, co-author of the report and a former lawyer at the Federal Trade Commission. But the concern about ZestFinance and other start-up lenders using big data methods, Mr. Rieke said, is that “we have no idea how to talk about or assess the fairness of their predictions.”Mr. Merrill believes that such qualms will fade as data science lenders build a track record of offering lower costs and greater convenience to borrowers.The typical payday loan, Mr. Merrill explains, is for a few hundred dollars for two weeks, and rolls over 10 times on average, or 22 weeks. In a traditional payday loan, all the fees are paid upfront with the principal paid at the end, in a “balloon” payment.With ZestCash loans, borrowers are paying down principal with every payment, which reduces the cost. It also charges lower fees. In a traditional payday loan, Mr. Merrill said, a person would typically pay $1,500 to borrow $500 for 22 weeks. Using ZestCash, he says, a borrower generally pays $920 to borrow $500 for 22 weeks — still hefty fees, but far less than a standard payday loan.ZestFinance can charge less, Mr. Merrill said, largely because its data-sifting algorithms reduce the risk of default by more than 40 percent compared with a typical payday loan, and the software is being constantly tweaked to improve further.Borrowing candidates are asked to fill out an online form with their name, address, Social Security number, bank account information and a few other questions. ZestFinance then combines that with streams of information from data brokers and online sources, and sets its algorithms to work.The automated risk analysis, Mr. Merrill said, is done in a matter of seconds. The person is informed of the decision online. If approved, a customer service representative soon calls to verify the borrower’s identity, double check on numbers, and go through the loan terms again by phone.The data signals used to assess risk in the payday market are different than for most consumer loans. “In our space,” Mr. Merrill observed, “virtually everyone has a bankruptcy.” In payday underwriting, by contrast, signs of financial stability would include how long a person has had his or her current cellphone number or the length of time on a current job.Angela Pyle, 47, a single mother from Venus, Tex., has worked for a large telecommunications company for 22 years, currently as a facilities coordinator. Her yearly income is more than $60,000.But 16 years ago, Ms. Pyle declared personal bankruptcy. Credit card debt, she said, was her downfall. The minimum monthly payments on credit card balances were small, $50 or $100 at first, but the balances just kept mounting out of control.The money, Ms. Pyle said, went for everything from restaurant meals to gambling debt. “It was for all my wants,” she recalled, “I did it because I could. I learned a lifelong lesson the hard way, and I’m not going to do it again.”Ms. Pyle is an occasional payday borrower. Three months ago, she took out a $700 ZestCash loan to buy the sand, concrete and other materials to build a tool shed in her backyard, which she made herself. She found the online form easy to fill out, the approval came almost immediately, and a ZestFinance representative called within an hour. She also praised the customer service, which included email or phone alerts three or four days before a payment came due.Ms. Pyle is a disciplined borrower. She doesn’t borrow more than she can pay back within a month or two of paydays. The $700 ZestCash loan, she said, was paid back in six weeks. The total cost, she said, was about $975.“If you let it drag out for six or nine months, that’s crazy,” Ms. Pyle said. “That’s how payday loans can end up costing you three or four times as much as the original loan.”By STEVE LOHRNew software is expected to sharpen assessments of creditworthiness, but even proponents acknowledge the potential for inadvertent discrimination.