Updated, 11:02 a.m. | “The past is never dead,” William Faulkner wrote, rather famously. “It’s not even past.” But that was before the Internet, which can shed the past so smoothly that we don’t even notice.Some time ago I acquired a copy of “These 13,” Faulkner’s first collection of short stories. It’s a second printing, published September 1931, battered and worn, with little value as an artifact. The printing is still sharp, however, and the volume fits snugly into the hand. There was nothing to do but read it.The collection contains “A Rose for Emily,” a Faulkner story often taught in high schools, probably because it’s among his simplest. I must have skipped class that day, because the tale of Emily Grierson, who poisons the suitor who will not marry her and then sleeps next to his corpse, was new to me.After I finished I wanted to know more, as readers do, and so I turned to that great resource, the Internet, in the hopes of illumination. And there I saw that Rap Genius, a start-up that has received a lot of funding to annotate lyrics and other texts, had tackled the story. The text was reprinted, and there were annotations throughout.None were particularly interesting. Then I saw this, the moment when the suitor comes on the scene:“The town had just let the contracts for paving the sidewalks, and in the summer after her father’s death they began the work. The construction company came with riggers and mules and machinery, and a foreman named Homer Barron, a Yankee — a big, dark, ready man, with a big voice and eyes lighter than his face. The little boys would follow in groups to hear him cuss the riggers, and the riggers singing in time to the rise and fall of picks. Pretty soon he knew everybody in town.”Riggers? This is not the word in the edition issued by the estimable firm of Jonathan Cape and Harrison Smith that had been handed down to me. Someone had clearly taken it on himself to bowdlerize the text by slightly adjusting one of the most troublesome English words.What’s more, the word “rigger” was annotated, as if it were Faulkner’s choice and needed to be explained: “A rigger is a person or company that specializes in the lifting and moving of extremely large or heavy objects.”That was in May. Rap Genius has since raised another $40 million for a total of $57 million in funding, changed its name to Genius, and just hired a prominent executive editor. The Faulkner text has not changed. I poked around the Internet a bit, and saw that the two versions of the story linked to from its skimpy Wikipedia page — here and here — also talked about riggers.Had I missed a decision by the Faulkner estate to rewrite its author, or was the Internet just indulging in some casual adjusting of texts that are still under copyright?Deborah Clarke, an associate dean at Arizona State who is president of the Faulkner Society, said the revamped story was news to her.“I certainly understand the very painful nature of the word and the desire to shield readers, especially young readers, from its hateful associations,” she said. “It still seems inappropriate to change an author’s text without permission or any indication that a change has been made.”Anyone who needs an anecdote about how the Internet is untrustworthy even when it is asking you to trust it, feel free to use this.Update:  A few hours after this item was published, Genius reverted to Faulkner’s original text and removed the “rigger” annotation. It offered no clue that things had ever been different.  