By QUENTIN HARDY and CONOR DOUGHERTYJAN. 20, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  Google likes its ambitions sky high. This time, it has gone a little further.The Internet giant, along with Fidelity, has invested $1 billion in Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX), the private rocketry company founded by Elon Musk. The move could help Google achieve its aim of bringing satellite Internet to remote corners of the world while giving SpaceX more money for its founder to pursue dreams of going to Mars.In addition to a payoff on its investment, Google may be seeking to put itself into orbit. Last year, Google bought Skybox Imaging, a maker of small, high-resolution imaging satellites, for about $500 million. Google already offers satellite imagery in its Google Earth product, but must purchase these images from multiple sources, often receiving what company executives have said is uneven image quality.Google may also be interested in developing satellites with other kinds of sensors, like infrared detectors that show the health of crops, or lasers that can pierce forest canopies to show underlying terrain.Google’s founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin are both personally interested in space exploration. Early in the company’s history it offered employee lectures on building so-called space elevators that could theoretically launch objects off Earth more cheaply than rockets could.AdvertisementMore practically, the company has been trying to transform the Internet connectivity business with high-altitude balloons that people can use to get online from remote locations. That same transmission technology could conceivably be put on satellites as well. Google is in competition with Facebook, which is also interested in advanced means of connectivity and which last year purchased a drone company whose products are potentially capable of carrying Internet devices.AdvertisementGoogle and Fidelity will collectively own 10 percent of SpaceX because of the investment, SpaceX said in statement.“Space-based applications like imaging satellites can help people more easily access important information, so we’re excited to support SpaceX’s growth as it develops new launch technologies,” Don Harrison, Google’s vice president for corporate development, said in a statement. Mr. Harrison will join the board of SpaceX.With this investment, Google is hopping on a crowded bandwagon. Last week, Virgin Group, along with Qualcomm, a maker of communications semiconductors, announced they had invested in a constellation of 648 Internet connectivity satellites. Also on Tuesday, Planet Labs, a maker of shoebox-size satellites that offer Earth imagery, announced it had received $95 million in financing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.SpaceX grew out of Mr. Musk’s desire to land plants — the green, photosynthesizing type of plants — on the surface of Mars. As Mr. Musk tells the story, he started looking for feasible rockets, but found the pickings to be too risky or too expensive, so decided to start his own rocket company.It almost went out of business. The first three launches of SpaceX’s small Falcon 1 rocket from Kwajalein Atoll, a small island in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, failed. But after a successful launch in September 2008, the company was able to continue development of the larger Falcon 9 rocket, part of a contract from NASA to develop the capability for taking cargo to the International Space Station.Today, SpaceX is sort of the Southwest Airlines of rocket launchers — reliable and cheap. So far, NASA represents the biggest slice of the company’s business. SpaceX has a $1.6 billion contract for space station cargo and last year won a $2.6 billion contract to fly astronauts to the station beginning in 2017. It also has contracts to launch commercial satellites.Recently, the company has come close to innovative breakthroughs, almost landing the first stage of a Falcon 9 rocket on a floating platform in the Atlantic Ocean. The company is also planning the inaugural launch of its much bigger Falcon Heavy rocket this year, two years behind the original schedule.But it is not clear how SpaceX could obtain the financial resources to fulfill Mr. Musk’s more ambitious pronouncement, which is that the company would take people to Mars in a decade.The company could raise a large pot of capital through an I.P.O. — that is, if shareholders would countenance such an extraordinarily expensive venture with uncertain payoffs far off in the future. Mr. Musk has said SpaceX would remain privately held for now.AdvertisementAnd even with its successes, the company has not launched as many rockets as quickly as it promised.The Google investment appears to be a different approach: to bring in an influx of dollars without Mr. Musk yielding ironclad control.Kenneth Chang contributed reporting from New York.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Google Puts $1 Billion Into SpaceX.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.