By STEVE LOHRJAN. 20, 2015
IBM is in the midst of a challenging transition, and its fourth-quarter financial results reflected that reality.The technology giant on Tuesday reported quarterly declines in both sales and profits, though its earnings were above Wall Street’s diminished expectations.Under Virginia M. Rometty, who became chief executive in 2012, IBM has been rapidly shifting its portfolio of businesses. She has initiated multibillion-dollar spending programs for data-analysis software and skills, cloud computing and Watson artificial intelligence technology — fields that promise high profits and strong growth.At the same time, the company has sold businesses that generated several billion dollars in sales but lost money or barely broke even. Units sold recently include its chip-manufacturing operation and its division making smaller server computers. So a falloff in IBM’s overall revenue is, for now, largely by design.AdvertisementThe new businesses are growing. But they are not yet large or profitable enough to offset the erosion of growth and profitability in some of IBM’s traditional hardware, software and services lines. And the new technology, like cloud computing and low-cost data analysis, often adds to the pressure on IBM’s old-line businesses.AdvertisementHow long the transition will take, and how painful it may be, is the question.But it is certainly not one that will be answered by the financial results in a single quarter. And IBM’s fourth-quarter performance provides grist for both the optimist and pessimist camps that closely follow the company.The company said net income in the quarter fell to $5.5 billion, down 11 percent from the same quarter a year ago. The company’s operating earnings declined to $5.81 a share, above the average estimate of analysts for $5.41 a share, as compiled by Thomson Reuters.IBM’s revenue slid to $24.1 billion, well below the $27.7 billion in the year-earlier quarter. Its quarterly sales were somewhat below Wall Street’s consensus forecast of $24.8 billion.In after-hours trading, IBM’s stock price slipped $2.90 a share, or about 1.9 percent, to $154.05. During regular trading, the company’s shares closed down 19 cents, to $156.95 a share.In the conference call and in an interview afterward, Martin Schroeter, IBM’s chief financial officer, made the case that IBM was showing encouraging progress in its transition. The new businesses the company has earmarked for growth — data analytics, cloud, security and mobile apps for corporations — grew at a 16 percent rate in 2014 and contributed $25 billion in revenue, or 27 percent of the company’s total sales. These growth businesses, he said, should continue to expand at a double-digit rate.The size and growth of those units, Mr. Schroeter said in the interview, was “an important sign post” that IBM’s strategy had taken hold.For IBM’s traditional businesses, he said, the goal is to deliver “stable revenue with improving profit margins,” through cost-cutting and efficiency initiatives.But analysts question how well IBM is doing in achieving its objectives. IBM’s reported numbers for its so-called strategic growth businesses, according to estimates by A. M. Sacconaghi, an analyst at Bernstein Research, suggest that revenue for the rest of IBM declined by 8 percent last year. “The fact is the core is not stable,” Mr. Sacconaghi said. “The jury is still out on IBM.”AdvertisementMr. Schroeter said the company expected to report earnings per share for full-year 2015 of $15.75 to $16.50. That guidance is slightly below the $16.53 a share projected by Wall Street analysts and below the $16.53 it earned in 2014, an acknowledgment that this year is one of adjustment.In October, after IBM reported surprisingly weak profits, Ms. Rometty abandoned its previous financial blueprint, which for years had projected that the company would produce earnings per share of $20 in 2015.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That yoke is off,” said Steven Milunovich, an analyst at UBS. “They’re not following the old game plan anymore.”The longer-term target, beyond 2015, Mr. Schroeter said, is for IBM to generate annual revenue growth in “low single digits” and profit increases at high single-digit rates.Despite the decline in revenue and profit, IBM’s profit margins on operations rose by six-tenths of a percent. The backlog of contracts in its big services business, which had declined in the third quarter, stabilized at $128 billion.The profit margins in its services business were better than most analysts expected, which contributed to IBM’s reporting operating earnings per share that were above Wall Street estimates.A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: IBM Sales Slide, Largely by Design, as a Transition of Uncertain Duration Goes On.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.