In the latest sign that the distinctions between the auto and tech industries are becoming more blurry, Ford on Thursday celebrated the opening of a new research center in Palo Alto, Calif., in the heart of Silicon Valley. The company said the new center would help advance new car technologies like built-in Internet connections and eventually self-driving vehicles. It will be led by Dragos Maciuca, a former senior engineer at Apple who has also led research and development at Lockheed Martin. Mark Fields, who became Ford’s chief executive last July, said the new center was meant to make a statement. “We want to be viewed as part of the ecosystem of Silicon Valley,” he said.  Ford, which has had an office in Silicon Valley since 2012, said it hoped the 25,000-square-foot Silicon Valley lab would include up to 125 people — researchers, scientists and engineers — by the end of the year. Company executives could not point to any specific projects that would come out of the center, but Mr. Fields said that the lab would assist with many technologies. Given the pace of car development and manufacturing, any innovations from the development center are likely to take years before showing up in vehicles. Several automakers have opened research and development facilities in Silicon Valley in recent years, including Honda, which has a research laboratory there and in 2014 introduced a developer studio to encourage developers to write apps that can work in cars. Mercedes-Benz, which established its original research facility in Silicon Valley in 1995, opened a large research and development center in Sunnyvale in 2013. BMW, General Motors and Nissan-Renault also have research labs in the area. Under Mr. Fields, Ford has moved aggressively to establish itself as a technological innovator, with a large presence at the 2015 International CES, the giant technology industry event. There, Ford announced what it called a “smart mobility” plan that would tackle problems like global gridlock and even explore so-called flexible ownership models, in which people might share a single car or borrow from a pool of cars instead of owning their own individually. Eventually, Mr. Fields said, Ford could possibly sell cars as a service instead of as individual purchases. The company, he said, should have a plan for surviving when hugely populated cities make car ownership unworkable or even illegal. “It’s important for us to have a point of view on what we see as trends, and to make choices today that will bear fruit five or 10 years out,” he said. “And we have to see if there’s a business model there.” The company also announced Thursday that it would give an autonomous car to researchers at Stanford. The researchers will help test the computer programs used by self-driving cars to make independent decisions on the road. Stanford researchers also work with Google, Audi and others on automotive tech development. The Silicon Valley arm of Carnegie Mellon University will help test speech recognition, as Ford experiments with how people can safely interact with the car while driving, using their voices and even physical gestures. At the research center, Ford showed a remote control golf cart from the Georgia Tech campus in Atlanta; virtual reality driving environments that test self-driving car tech; improvements in speech recognition; and devices that attach to bicycles to help the company figure out how bikes interact with cars on the road.  Ford said it did not intend to compete with Silicon Valley — Google, for example, has most famously been developing self-driving cars along with in-car technology like Android Autos, and Apple last year released CarPlay. “I don’t think it’s a matter of rivalry. I think it’s a matter of partnership,” said Raj Nair, Ford’s global product development chief. However, in response to a question about the list of companies with which Ford was teaming up for its new research center, Mr. Nair said, “Google’s not on the page.”A version of this article appears in print on 01/26/2015, on page B7 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Ford Opens Lab in Silicon Valley.