By AARON M. KESSLERJAN. 21, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The debate on Capitol Hill over the future of the Internet spilled into public view on Wednesday, as a pair of hearings took up a Republican proposal to put the issue in lawmakers’ hands.The two hearings, one in the House and one in the Senate, both addressed the Republican proposal, which would create new rules for so-called net neutrality — the concept that Internet traffic should be open and treated equally. And after a morning of harsh rhetoric in the House hearing, hints of a possible compromise emerged in the Senate.The Federal Communications Commission is set to rule in late February on how it will regulate Internet providers to ensure an open Internet. The commission is widely expected to propose rules that treat the Internet much like a public utility, preventing Internet providers from blocking or slowing any sites.President Obama has publicly endorsed treating wireless and wired broadband service as a regulated public utility, and raised the issue once again in his State of the Union address Tuesday night. His position is supported by a coalition of online retailers and consumer groups.AdvertisementCongressional Republicans have responded by offering their own version of net neutrality, arguing that new legislation, not F.C.C. mandates they say are outdated, should determine how web access is treated. They are backed by cable providers and some wireless companies.AdvertisementThe chairman of the House subcommittee, Representative Greg Walden, Republican of Oregon, called the expected F.C.C. plan the “nuclear option.”House Democrats argued adamantly against the Republican proposal, with one calling it “a march to folly.” They said that the proposal contained major loopholes and that it would diminish the F.C.C.At an afternoon hearing in the Senate, however, the chairman and the ranking member of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, John Thune, a South Dakota Republican, and Bill Nelson, a Florida Democrat, struck a more conciliatory note that suggested a deal later this year was not out of the question.Senator Thune said that he wanted to provide certainty to Americans that they have “unfettered access” to all websites, and that he did not “expect our draft to be a final product,” but rather saw it as a way to “find common ground and forge a permanent solution.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Republican-led effort is unlikely to succeed without the aid of congressional Democrats, as it is widely assumed that Mr. Obama would veto a bill that did not have wide bipartisan support.Mr. Nelson, in a telling comment, said that “congressional prerogative does not cease” just because the F.C.C. is expected to move ahead in February. He indicated that the F.C.C. ruling could coexist with legislative action later in the year.Paul Misener, vice president of global public policy at Amazon, who testified at both hearings, said American consumers want unfettered Internet access. He said legislation that allowed technical ways to get around net neutrality would inflame the public.“The consumer will not care where it occurs, only whether it occurs,” Mr. Misener said.The possibility of lawsuits, almost regardless of the outcome, was also made clear on Wednesday.AdvertisementMeredith Attwell Baker, president of CTIA-The Wireless Association, a trade group, told lawmakers that if the F.C.C. were to act on its own, “the wireless industry will have no choice but to look to the courts.”Michael Powell, head of the National Cable and Telecommunications Association, said that the fight would be protracted, and that a final decision on the rules governing the Internet was probably years away. “It’s not a complete exaggeration to say that 10 years we could still be sitting here,” Mr. Powell said.Litigation could take place no matter which side prevails in the current standoff. Jessica Gonzalez, general counsel at the National Hispanic Media Coalition, which is in favor of the F.C.C.’s taking action, said her organization and others would probably file a lawsuit to challenge the Republican proposal if it were to become law.“I think it’s unavoidable regardless of the path,” Ms. Gonzalez said of the issue winding up in court.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Republicans Push Plan in Net Neutrality Debate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.