
App Smart By                     
 KIT EATON
 
JAN. 21, 2015
Look no further than your smartphone to do everything from tuning your stringed instrument to storing sheet music.SMARTPHONES and tablets are powerful music devices. You can listen to music, you can create music and, with the right app, you can get an assist when playing an instrument.One of the most useful apps for guitarists — and yet one of the simplest — is a tuner app. It makes sense: There is no need to carry another device when a smartphone is already in your pocket.For simple guitar-tuning powers, one of my favorite apps is TuneWave, $1 on iOS. I like it because the design is modern and the app has few distracting bells and whistles.The app’s screen is simple, with three main parts: A needle dial like an old voltage meter, a large display of the musical note being played and a wavelike display. To use TuneWave you simply place it near your guitar, pluck a string, adjust the tuning and watch the displays to see when you’ve tuned the string to perfection. The less wavy the display, the closer you are to the chosen note.AdvertisementThe app has a few simple controls and is minimalist and speedy. It is also useful for tuning other stringed instruments like violins.AdvertisementOn Android, I like Tuner -gStrings Free, a free app that also has a modern design and relatively minimalist look. It works in almost exactly the same way as TuneWave, but it has a few extras, like the ability to set up your phone’s microphone sensitivity for the best results.It is ad-supported and the ads could get annoying.For a more full-featured guitar tuning app check out Guitar Tuna, a free iOS and Android app. Tuning your guitar involves watching a graph on the screen as you pluck a string — when the graph’s trace is at the center, your tuning is accurate.The app even shows useful messages like “too low” if the string is tuned too flat.Guitar Tuna also includes a guitar chord section. This shows you how to place your fingers on the strings to play a chord, and it can sound out the chord you’ve selected.It also has a simple metronome section that can sound out beats to keep your playing exactly on time.Lastly, Guitar Tuna has a “Games” section with different activities to learn guitar chord fingering, or, for example, to train yourself to identify chords by ear.Some of these games are free, but you have to pay in-app to unlock more at around $3 each. Or you can unlock everything for $13.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you’re looking for a straightforward metronome app, then Pro Metronome, free on iOS, is a great choice. The app does precisely what you’d expect: It displays a visual cue and a simultaneous sound at the beats-per-minute rate you select. Its menu system is simple and over all, the app feels very professional.If you upgrade to the Pro version for $3, you get some extras like being able to keep two rhythms at once, which may be useful for some musical performances.AdvertisementYou can also choose the audio cues that accompany the metronome’s “ticks” — including a counting voice.On Android, a great equivalent app is Metronome Beats. This free app has many similar features, including the ability to choose custom sounds to keep you on the beat. It’s slightly more modern-looking, although its interface can appear cluttered and confusing. But it’s certainly a very capable metronome app.Lugging around sheet music is much easier now, too: No more carrying paper, and some apps even do clever tricks like turning the pages. On Android my favorite app of this type is Orpheus Sheet Music Reader. This app, which costs $4.57, is very capable: It not only stores PDF sheet music, but also syncs with Dropbox so you can easily add music to your library, and it connects to external peripherals like the AirTurn pedal so you can flip the pages hands-free.On iPads or iPhones, the DeepDish GigBook app, which costs $10, takes this idea one step further. As well as displaying sheet music for you to play, it also lets you scribble on the screen to annotate the score with information like fingerings.The app also has a set list creator, so you can collect all the music you need for a gig, and it’s also compatible with page-turning peripherals.Don’t forget SoundCloud — an audio-focused social network where musicians can upload and share their music with people around the world, who can even embed it in their websites if you give permission. SoundCloud, free on iOS and Android, is easy to use, and I find it a great place to discover new music and even share audio recordings of my own. Quick Call Google has given its Translate app a serious overhaul. The most impressive new trick is based on an older app called WordLens, which Google bought. WordLens lets you see translated words live on your phone’s screen when you hold your phone’s camera up to street signs, menus and other printed text. Translate is free on iOS and Android.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Staying in Tune, and Keeping the Beat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »