

 Molly Wood
 

MACHINE LEARNING
JAN. 21, 2015
Molly Wood’s top five Android power user tips.GOOGLE’S latest Android mobile operating system is incredibly powerful. Many of us don’t come close to touching its potential capabilities.But there are at least a handful of handy tricks that every owner of an Android device should know. All of these tips work on the latest version of Android, known as Lollipop, but many work on the previous version, too.DOWNLOAD GOOGLE CAMERA If you don’t love the camera on your Android phone, there’s a chance the free Google Camera app can make it better.Most Android phones have camera software made by the device’s manufacturer, like HTC, Samsung or LG. But in the spring, Google introduced a free stand-alone app called Google Camera, which is the app included on Google’s own Nexus phones.AdvertisementGoogle Camera has a stripped-down interface compared with some built-in phone apps — there’s no timer feature, color controls or white balance. But it’s simpler to operate, too. Just swipe from the left to reach your options.AdvertisementGoogle Camera includes an impressive panorama mode and the ability to take a 360-degree photo (which requires a lot of patience, but produces cool outcomes). The star of the app is the Lens Blur filter, which mimics the shallow depth of field you can get with digital single-lens reflex cameras: The subject in front is in focus while the background is softly blurred.GET GOOGLE CHROME TO PHONE One big trend in mobile phones is getting phones to communicate more easily with computers. Apple, for example, has Continuity, for sharing emails, calls and text messages between your phone and your Mac.Google can do some similar tricks: If you use Gmail, the popular email service, you’ll find your drafts in progress on your computer or on your phone, and if you use Hangouts, a chatting service, you’ll find all your instant messages and texts across devices, too. Google Voice lets you see your voice mail messages and make calls, as well.But my favorite upside to the Google ecosystem is Google Chrome to Phone, an app that lets you send map directions, web links, phone numbers or any copied text from the browser on your computer directly to your phone.It takes a little bit to set up. First you must download the free Google Chrome to Phone extension on your computer and install it in the Chrome browser. Then, download the free app from the Google Play store. Now make sure you’re signed in to your Google account in both places.You’ll see a little phone icon at the top of your browser page. Now, let’s say you look up directions on Google Maps on your computer. Just click the little phone icon to send it to your Android phone. You’ll see a link to the map in your notifications on your phone and after you tap it, the directions will open in Google Maps on the phone.That’s probably the best reason to use Chrome to Phone, but I also find it useful for sending phone numbers or a snippet of text that I want to send as a text message. You can just highlight some text on a page, click send to phone, then paste that text into a tweet, text or the phone dialer on the phone.AdvertisementBUILT-IN FITNESS TRACKER Android has built-in support for step-tracking and motion-tracking sensors. As a result, many Android phones can basically be their own activity trackers — no need for a separate wearable device.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Google’s own app, Google Fit, does basic activity tracking throughout the day, and you can enter your weight and some generic activity goals. It also integrates with a few apps, like RunKeeper and Strava, but not MyFitness Pal, a popular calorie-tracking app. The app is limited, but if tracking activity motivates you, the tracking patterns are nicely displayed.Many manufacturers have built more full-featured health software into their Android devices. Samsung has S Health, which uses the tracking sensors plus a full personal profile and built-in calorie and nutrition tracking. LG Health on the LG G3 also tracks daily activity, lets you record your own running, walking or biking routes, and shows exercise stats over time. And the HTC One M8 comes with Fitbit’s software preinstalled, for activity, sleep and food.A TV REMOTE CONTROL With the introduction of KitKat, Android began supporting infrared blasters — or devices that can act like an infrared remote control. Now many new Android phones can remotely control televisions, DVD players, cable boxes — basically anything that uses infrared remotes. It’s a great backup option, especially because you’re a lot likelier to lose your remote then you are to lose your phone.Some LG phones, like the LG G2 and LG G3, come with a really nice built-in universal remote app called QuickRemote that easily found and controlled my Panasonic TV as well as a friend’s Sharp TV. The HTC One M8 also has a good universal remote app that even lets you specify favorite shows to switch on. And Samsung and LG phones have remote control apps that will control their own TVs and Blu-ray players.You’ll also find universal remote apps on the Google Play store. It is probably worthy going for a paid option, like the $7 Smart IR app from AnyMote. There are free apps with decent reviews, like IR 2.0, but most are ad-supported and eventually want you to pay for full functionality.LOLLIPOP TIPS Android 5.0, or Lollipop, provides a rich collection of new extras and shortcuts.For example, you now swipe down once to see notifications and Google Now cards, and twice from the top of the screen to access quick settings, like one-touch screen casting, battery percentage, settings and airplane mode. And that screen now includes a built-in flashlight.The Lollipop Settings menu also finally gets a built-in search. If you know you want Tethering or Notifications, just tap the magnifying glass and start typing. After a few letters, you should see your option.There’s also a guest mode built into Lollipop. Use it, and you can lend your phone to someone with less fear of oversharing. To turn on that mode, swipe down twice for the settings menu, then tap the little person icon at the top right of the screen. You can add a guest with limited access or a whole other user, like a child or family member.These are just a small slice of the many new features built into Android. Its best features are sometimes hidden, but they are worth the search.Email: molly.wood@nytimes.com Twitter: @mollywood
A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Conjuring the Most From Google Android.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »