By J. D. BIERSDORFERJAN. 20, 2015
Abandoning The Lollipop Ship Q. I updated my Nexus phone to Android Lollipop and I hate it. How can I go back to the previous version, KitKat?A. Google’s Android 5.0 “Lollipop” system began to be released for Nexus devices last fall and has already had a couple of minor updates to fix certain issues. If you have not updated to the latest version, doing so may resolve some problems. If you are still experiencing erratic or sluggish behavior with Lollipop and do not want to wait for another update, you can wipe it off your phone and replace it with KitKat — but this approach can take a bit of work.Google keeps previous Android versions for its various Nexus devices at https://developers.google.com/android/nexus/images. The page provides basic instructions for getting the software needed to downgrade your phone by using your computer. Returning to a previous version of Android in this way deletes all the data from your phone and returns it to a pristine state, so be sure to back up pictures and files if you are not already backing them up to Google Plus Photos or elsewhere.While Google’s own instructions for installing Android system images seem to be written with developers in mind, you can find more user-friendly help online. Several independent Android-themed blogs have their own illustrated guides and some users have even created YouTube videos that show the process. Most sites, however, are quick to point out that you proceed with the downgrade at your own risk.AdvertisementCreating A Hybrid Network Q. I just have one desktop computer that I’ve had connected directly to my cable modem for years. I’m thinking about getting a tablet, though, which needs a wireless network. Instead of getting a Wi-Fi add-on for the computer, can I set up a network that uses both wired and wireless connections?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. Most wireless routers today have extra Ethernet ports on the back, and these ports can be used to create a “hybrid” network of wired and wireless connections. In a nutshell, the cable modem plugs into the router’s WAN (Wide Area Network) jack. The computer connects to one of the router’s Ethernet jacks (which may also be called LAN ports, short for Local Area Network) so it can keep sharing the modem’s Internet connection.AdvertisementAfter you set up and configure the new hardware and Wi-Fi network, the router beams out a network signal that the tablet can use to get online through your cable modem’s connection to the Internet. When shopping for a router, check its specifications to make sure it has the wireless-network speed and number of Ethernet jacks you need.TIP OF THE WEEK If you would like to give your mousing arm a rest, both Windows and Mac OS X have keyboard shortcuts for navigating through all your currently open programs — as well as for switching between open files within one of those programs. In the desktop mode of Windows 8.1, hold down the Alt key while pressing the Tab key to see thumbnail versions of all your open programs and files. Tap the Tab key to move through the thumbnails and release the keys to select a program or file. (If you accidentally go too far and skip over the program you meant to use, extend another finger to hold down the Shift key while pressing the Alt and Tab keys.)In most versions of OS X, hold down the Command key while tapping the Tab key to cycle through your open programs. If you have multiple files in the same program open, hold down the Command key while hitting the tilde key in the upper-left corner of the keyboard to switch between files. J. D. BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Abandoning the Lollipop Ship.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.