SEATTLE — This week, Microsoft did what it usually does when it has an intriguing new technology that isn’t fully baked: It released a video. The 2 minute 12 second Microsoft-made movie about HoloLens, the augmented and virtual reality headset it revealed this week, is a classic of the genre, showing some of the wild things people might one day do in their homes and offices with the technology. The clip, posted on YouTube and shown above, shows a man playing Minecraft, its landscapes and buildings painted across the vertical and horizontal surfaces of a living room. A woman creates a virtual model of a fuel tank and places it on an unfinished motorcycle in the real world. This is Microsoft’s vision of how HoloLens will work, brought to life with all of the artifice of a Hollywood fantasy. The demonstrations the company offered media and analysts this week, while exciting, were nowhere near as polished, though. This doesn’t mean Microsoft won’t deliver HoloLens in a form that blows people away when it releases the product. But there is good cause for skepticism. More than five years ago at a big games conference, Microsoft revealed the technology that it eventually named Kinect, a device that used cameras and other sensors to let people play games with gestures and voice. Microsoft executives described the device as a “revolutionary” new way to play games. Seeing the technology for the first time, the director Steven Spielberg said, felt like “an historic moment, a moment as significant as the transformation from the square-shaped movie screen to Cinemascope, and then to IMAX.”That device, too, was unfinished, along with the games that were supposed to exploit it. No matter, though: Microsoft whipped up a short movie to show a model family, with impeccable grooming and skin, playing all manner of games using Kinect. In the movie, it was easy to miss the disclaimer that said, “Product vision: Actual features and functionality may vary.” Initially, Kinect, sold as an add-on to Microsoft’s Xbox 360 game console, was a stunning hit. In the three months after it was released in Nov. 2010, Microsoft said it sold 10 million of the devices, earning it a place in the Guinness Book of World Records as the fastest-selling consumer electronics device. Kinect, though, has withered since then. Microsoft initially made the device part of its Xbox One game console, as part of the company’s grand vision to make it widely supported in games. After slow sales of the console, mostly because of the added cost of Kinect, Microsoft reversed course and began selling a cheaper Xbox One without the device. Now it’s hard to find many developers bothering to write games for the Kinect, an understandable decision since they can no longer count on the device being present in homes with an Xbox One. What’s also clear is that many consumers didn’t feel the value of a Kinect justified the extra $100 Microsoft was charging to get it with the Xbox One.Kinect came straight to my mind when I played with HoloLens this week. Adding to that sense was the knowledge that some crucial leaders on Microsoft’s HoloLens development team also worked on Kinect.  The HoloLens that Microsoft allowed people to use this week was a primitive version of the technology. It resembled something that Doc Brown, the mad-scientist inventor in “Back to the Future,” might have cobbled together. There were wires dangling everywhere from the headset, some of them tethered to a heavy box that you had to hang around your neck during the demonstration. Microsoft showed a sleeker design for the headset, but didn’t let outsiders use it. The demonstrations on the headset were impressive, but the images on the screens were not particularly sharp. The headset also had a narrow field of view, especially compared with the imagery in the Oculus Rift virtual reality headset. I tried to goad Microsoft engineers into telling me whether either of these would be improved in the final product, but they wouldn’t say. While the excitement around HoloLens is justified, it’s worth remembering Kinect. A lot of technical and marketing challenges can end up turning even ground-breaking new devices into ones that are easily forgotten. For technology companies, it’s easier to make a good-looking movie than a truly historical product.By FARHAD MANJOOThe device, which looks like ski goggles, superimposes holograms on reality and could have uses in communication, design, games, science and more.