The future of protecting an open Internet has been the subject of fierce debate, and potential changes to the rules by the Federal Communications Commission could affect your online experience.Congressional Republicans took a tactical step this week in their brewing confrontation with the Federal Communications Commission over who sets the rules for the future of the Internet.Republicans are seeking legislation that embraces popular principles of an open Internet that include a ban on blocking or slowing web traffic and prohibiting the creation of “fast lanes” for content suppliers willing to pay for favored treatment.But the Republicans’ approach — a proposed amendment to the Communications Act of 1934 — would also prevent the F.C.C. from public utility-style regulation of the Internet. The Obama administration and many Internet content providers advocate treating the Internet as a so-called universal service, and giving the agency the power not only to ensure openness but also to take up issues like consumer privacy, overcharging subscribers, mandated service for rural communities and access for the disabled.Skeptics regard the Republicans’ legislative plan as a sweeping deregulation initiative wrapped in populism — and cleverly done. But the Republicans see their effort as a measured step that adopts the essence of an open Internet — so-called net neutrality — while avoiding the danger of government rules that could stifle innovation.Senator John Thune, the South Dakota Republican who heads the commerce committee, said the goal of his legislation was to turn the F.C.C. “away from a heavy-handed and messy approach to regulating the Internet.”On Thursday evening, Mr. Thune and two colleagues in the House of Representatives, Fred Upton, a Michigan Republican and chairman of the energy and commerce committee, and Greg Walden, an Oregon Republican and chairman of the communications and technology subcommittee, sent a letter to Thomas Wheeler, chairman of the F.C.C. In the letter, they urge Mr. Wheeler to publicly release the draft text of his proposed Open Internet Order at the same time he circulates it to the other F.C.C. commissioners on Feb. 5.According to F.C.C. practice, the commissioners then have three weeks to review the chairman’s proposal and suggest changes before the commission is scheduled to vote on the order on Feb. 26.Given the significance and public interest in net neutrality, the congressmen wrote, “we believe the public and industry stakeholders alike should have the opportunity to review the text of any proposed order or rules prior to the commission action.”Frederick Hill, a spokesman for Senate commerce committee, said, “This is a transparency issue.”Kim Hart, a spokeswoman for the F.C.C., said the commission had received the letter from the Congressmen and was reviewing it.Only rarely, if ever, are draft texts of commission orders released publicly. In 2007, Kevin Martin, the F.C.C. chairman, did release one part of a draft order setting out media ownership rules before the commission voted. While not required, Mr. Martin explained that he took the unusual step “because of the intensely controversial nature of the media ownership proceeding and my desire for an open and transparent process.”The rationale for three weeks in which an order is considered by the commissioners alone is to ensure a private deliberative process, and to provide a “sunshine” period of at least a week in which lobbying of the commission is prohibited.