AdvertisementSupported byTechnophoriaBy Natasha SingerEverTrue, a Boston start-up that applies modern social media analytics to the traditional field of higher-education fund-raising, was born out of the frustrations of Brent Grinna, a former captain of the Brown University football team.A few years back, Mr. Grinna agreed to help lead a fund-raising drive for his fifth college reunion. To court prospective donors, Brown provided him with spreadsheets listing his classmates’ names and contact details. But that raw data, he says, offered little insight into the particular interests that might encourage a graduate to donate to the school. Worse, many of the email addresses and phone numbers were out-of-date.“I ended up going to Facebook and LinkedIn, places where I knew my classmates really were,” Mr. Grinna said.EverTrue, which he founded in 2010, enables educational institutions to parse the social media activities of their graduates. The company’s social donor management program, for instance, can evaluate alumni interactions with a college’s Facebook pages to help distinguish those people likely to give to a capital campaign from those more interested in a specific athletic or academic cause. It can also examine profiles of alumni on LinkedIn, a feature that allows fund-raisers to identify people in industries, like finance and technology, or specific companies or executive roles with a historically higher propensity to give.College development offices have for decades adapted the consumer-profiling techniques used by marketers at for-profit companies. Some schools employ their own in-house researchers to follow, say, the stock market transactions of individual donors or to look up the value of their homes on Zillow. Others buy information from data brokers on their most generous alumni or prospective donors.Blackbaud, a 30-year-old company in Charleston, S.C., markets donor management software and services for nonprofits. It helps colleges and universities identify, rank and target their best fund-raising prospects by combining a school’s historical giving records with data from outside sources, including an individual’s “overall wealth, income levels and hidden assets,” according to the company’s website. Blackbaud also maintains a database of more than 50 million donations; the company uses it to analyze donors’ gifts to other institutions to help schools understand the giving capacity of certain alumni.But EverTrue is among a handful of start-ups using social media to try to predict the willingness of graduates to donate or volunteer for other activities, like interviewing college applicants. Schools have historically relied on donor databases and have also used alumni attendance at reunions as proxies for willingness to donate. The start-ups are meant to complement those strategies with data visualization tools that allow fund-raisers to map their graduates’ locations or graph their social media interactions with a school.At a moment when President Obama is pushing for federal consumer privacy legislation, these nascent donor data-mining techniques demonstrate how easy it is for companies to repurpose the details that individuals volunteer about themselves in one context for a different use.“I do think there’s an ethical issue. It’s one thing to estimate someone’s wealth, but then to gauge how willing they are to give, you have to look deeply into a person’s life,” says Pam Dixon, executive director of the World Privacy Forum, a consumer group in San Diego. “I’m not sure alumni would appreciate or want that — if they knew about it.”A few university fund-raisers say they are aware of the seeming invasiveness of some alumni data-mining techniques, but feel that spurning these tools will put their schools at a disadvantage.Scott G. Nichols, senior vice president for development and alumni relations at Boston University, says he recently used EverTrue’s system when traveling to alumni events in Istanbul, Monaco and Dubai, United Arab Emirates.“We’ve discovered it is quite a major research tool,” Mr. Nichols says. “I was probing to see who are these alumni in Monaco, only to find every one of them was somebody I should stop and see.”Graduway, another cloud-based start-up, helps colleges and universities engage alumni by designing private social networking sites for them. Branded with the logo and imagery of a school, the networking sites encourage alumni to import their profiles from LinkedIn, develop professional connections with one another, mentor students or young graduates and invite fellow graduates to sign up. Graduway also analyzes individuals’ activities on each site and, working in conjunction with Blackbaud, sends members’ latest profile information back to their schools’ existing databases.“You have to offer your alumni real value,” says Daniel Cohen, the chief executive of Graduway. “They are not going to reward you with data, engagement and donations unless you are giving them something of real value.”Nine months ago, Tulane University introduced an alumni networking site designed by Graduway. Since then, 4,000 graduates have signed up, and 77 percent agreed to become mentors, says James E. Stofan, vice president for alumni relations.“We’ve been really able to engage our alumni more strategically,” Mr. Stofan told me. “Engaged alumni,” he added, “are giving alumni.”Investors have often taken a pass on software companies that specialize in the nonprofit sector because many focus on internal processes, like payment and accounting, which do not directly increase donations. But the new social donor intelligence start-ups are intended to help generate revenue, a value proposition that appeals to some investors.Graduway has raised $2 million in financing. One of its investors is RSL Venture Partners, whose principal investor is Ronald S. Lauder, the businessman and cosmetics heir.EverTrue, which works with about 300 educational institutions, has raised $14.6 million, including $10 million from Bain Capital Ventures. Michael Krupka, a managing director at Bain, envisions EverTrue eventually extending its services to other nonprofits, such as hospitals and social services, potentially generating annual revenue of several hundred million dollars.“We think there’s a massive potential market,” Mr. Krupka says. “If you can come up with a technology that is revenue-generating, then nonprofits will spend.”But it is too soon to tell whether donor-intelligence algorithms will be able to identify social networking patterns among alumni that correlate with big donations.“The jackpot for me will be when we know what pages people go to, or what they like, that actually has prompted a first-time gift or a rare gift,” said Mr. Nichols of Boston University.“We don’t know that yet,” he added. “But I believe we are going to find out.”Advertisement