Officials at the University of California, San Diego, had sparse information on the career success of their graduates until they set up a branded page for the university on LinkedIn a couple of years ago.“Back then, we had records on 125,000 alumni, but we had good employment information on less than 10,000 of them,” recalled Armin Afsahi, who oversees alumni relations as the university’s associate vice chancellor for advancement. “Aside from Qualcomm, which is in our back yard, we didn’t know who employed our alumni.”Within three months of setting up the university page, LinkedIn connections surfaced information on 92,000 alumni, Mr. Afsahi said. The names of the companies which are the top employers of the school’s graduates are ranked in order for anyone who visits the page to see: Qualcomm, Google, the University of California, San Diego, Kaiser Permanente, Northrop Grumman, Hewlett-Packard, Apple, Microsoft and so on.U.C.S.D. officials use that employment trend data to help students land internships, find mentors, and obtain jobs at companies where alumni work. And alumni on LinkedIn who visit the page immediately see a list of their fellow graduates, ranked by their degrees of separation.“The old models of alumni relations don’t work,” Mr. Afsahi said. “We have to be a data-driven, intelligence-oriented organization to create the engagement and value” that students and alumni expect.In an article on Sunday, I profiled two analytics start-ups, EverTrue and Graduway, which aim to help colleges and universities identify their best prospective donors or student mentors by scanning their graduates’ social networking activities. Each start-up taps into LinkedIn profiles of alumni — albeit in different ways — to help institutions of higher education stay up-to-date with their graduates’ contact information and careers.Since 2013, however, LinkedIn has offered its own proprietary service, called University Pages, where schools can create hubs for alumni outreach and networking. About 25,000 institutions of higher learning around the world now have official university pages on the site.U.C.S.D. was one of the first. The school has since used the social network as a springboard to reinvent its career offerings for students. For one thing, school administrators moved the university’s career development services from the student affairs department to the alumni relations office.The university’s alumni engagement team now uses the school’s LinkedIn page to help develop long-term relationships with companies that have hired graduates and decide which alumni to solicit for student internships or job openings. Mr. Afsahi or his colleagues also visit those companies, giving presentations to executives who are alumni about how the university is training the next generation of, say, data scientists or nanotechnology experts.At a time when the Obama administration is developing a program to rate colleges and hold them accountable for how well their graduates fare, U.C.S.D. may be the harbinger of a larger effort by colleges and universities to track the career trajectories of their alumni. Mr. Afsahi, at least, views his school’s LinkedIn page as an important illustration for current and prospective students — not to mention their parents — of the possible return on investment of their tuition fees.“We became a curator of the most important information in demonstrating the success and true value of the degree,” he said.