Louis Beryl insists that financially responsible young people are the borrowers most disadvantaged by the traditional math of consumer lending. The standard scoring of creditworthiness relies largely on a person’s credit history, and that’s a blunt instrument. Since young people have slender credit histories, he said, they pay higher rates than they should.Mr. Beryl is betting that he and his team at Earnest, a San Francisco start-up, can do better. Earnest is one of a new breed of lenders bringing the tools of data science — the modern flood of data and clever software — to consumer finance, which I wrote about in an article last week.  Their approach is a digital-age spin on the most basic principle of banking: Know your customer.Earnest, founded in 2013, began lending last year with general consumer loans. They are typically for a few thousand dollars, though they can range up to $30,000. Many of the loans are for relocation expenses and  professional training. Most of Earnest’s borrowers are college graduates, aged 22 to 34.So it is scarcely surprising that the next market for Earnest will be student debt, introducing on Tuesday a refinancing product for student loans. The start-up also announced on Tuesday that it closed a $17 million Series A round of venture investment, led by Maveron. To date, Earnest has raised $32 million including debt financing. Its venture capital investors include Maveron, Andreessen Horowitz and Atlas Venture.Other data-science lenders plan to offer education loans. Affirm, another start-up in San Francisco, will soon start making loans for so-called accelerated learning programs, said Brad Selby, vice president of business development. These short, intensive courses are designed to teach skills like computer programming and data science that improve a person’s job prospects, and thus ability to repay a loan.Interest rates on Earnest’s student loan refinancing product can be as low as 1.92 percent, the company says. But another advantage is that Earnest’s personalized underwriting allows for tailored rates and gives borrowers considerable flexibility. A borrower can to go the company’s website and change the repayment rate and term of the loan, and the site instantly recalculates the borrower’s total cost over the life of the loan.With more than $1 trillion in outstanding student loan debt in America, Earnest is certainly entering a large market, and making repayment cheaper and easier would have an economic and social payoff.“Student loans are our generation’s first homes,” said Mr. Beryl, the 34-year-old co-founder and chief executive of Earnest. And he still holds $100,000 in student debt himself, a legacy of attending pricey if prestigious schools — Princeton, the Harvard Business School and Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government.All the new data-driven lenders tap many different sources of information, and they are all constantly experimenting with new combinations of data and fine-tuning their predictive software. The loan approval process can be completely automated or require a human nod at the end.For Earnest, the student loan refinancing product will rely on the system used for its consumer loans.Earnest asks its borrowers for a lot of information. It wants to see their bank accounts, credit-card statements, student loan and any other loan balances. It also wants to see any investment accounts or retirement accounts. It asks loan candidates to make sure their LinkedIn accounts of job and education history are filled in and up to date.This is all done without paperwork. Earnest expects its borrowers to conduct their financial lives online. Earnest says it has read-only access to the information. It pledges not to store personal data or sell it. Earnest’s software algorithms give weight to things not factored into traditional credit analysis like education and savings, which, in the start-up’s calculations, point to capacity to pay and lower risk. “Our clients are giving us access to their data,” Mr. Beryl said, “so we can dig into the details of their life.”Autumn Carter, 26, borrowed $3,000 from Earnest in September, to furnish and decorate a new apartment in Mountain View, Calif. She wanted a loan quickly and conveniently, so she looked for alternatives to traditional banks or credit unions. Ms. Carter went online, searched and noticed a reference to Earnest and its “merit-based loans” with low interest rates. “At first, I thought it was a scam,” she recalled. But Ms. Carter proceeded to do some online research and saw favorable reviews, saying the loan process was smooth and the customer service helpful. She went to the Earnest website, and filled out the loan application in 10 minutes or so. The information she passed on included that she graduated from Stanford in 2011, and has under $10,000 in student loans outstanding; she was once rejected for a loan for lack of a credit history; and she makes a salary of about $55,000 as the executive director of California Common Sense, a public policy research group.Ms. Carter’s non-profit research organization focuses on data-driven policy analysis. She handed over her personal information without hesitation, and she finds Earnest’s data-gathering and analysis for determining credit risk to be “fascinating.”Within a day, Ms. Carter received an email approving her three-year loan with an annual interest rate of about 5 percent, a calculation based on her data. She plans to pay off the loan early, and there are no prepayment penalties on Earnest loans. At Earnest, smart software is its animating engine, but at this stage two or more people in the company review the predictive recommendations of the algorithms — and they make the final call. Fewer people may be needed as the software gets better. “But we think the human element,” Mr. Beryl said, “will always be an important piece in our process to make sure we are getting it right.”