Lyft, the popular ride-hailing start-up, is nowhere near as large as Uber, its top competitor. That certainly has not stopped Lyft from trying to catch up. To that end, Lyft is in talks to raise another huge round of venture financing, according to two people familiar with the negotiations, potentially adding hundreds of millions of dollars to the $330 million it has already raised.The new round, which was earlier reported by Recode, has not been finalized, according to these people, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the talks were still continuing. At least one previous investor, the Alibaba Group, has signed on to contribute to the new round, these people said. John Zimmer, Lyft’s co-founder and president, declined to comment on any potential fundraising efforts in an interview on Monday. But Mr. Zimmer said there was a lot of interest in his company’s business. He said the number of rides requested and the company’s overall revenue were five times higher in 2014 than the year before, though he did not give specific figures.He also said the company was profitable in some of its most established markets, including San Francisco, Los Angeles and Chicago, and that the company had expanded into more than 45 new areas over the course of 2014.That sort of growth could prove attractive to venture capitalists who are considering increasing their investment in the service, which was introduced in 2012. Like Uber, Lyft allows customers to hail a ride to their location using their smartphone. However, Lyft must also convince its backers that it has a fighting chance against Uber, which operates in hundreds of cities globally and has raised upwards of $4 billion in venture capital to date. Mr. Zimmer acknowledged that his opponents have deep, well-lined pockets. He said it did not deter him. “Capital is important, but strategy is also very important,” Mr. Zimmer said, citing Lyft’s leaner tactics, including fewer full-time employees spread across cities for recruiting purposes. “You have to remember, we’re still gaining market share.”Some of Lyft’s new funding, if it is secured, would likely go to offsetting the cost of cutting rider fares in cities in which the company wants to quickly expand. The company slashed prices in all the cities it operated in last year, and it offered newcomers two weeks of free rides in every subsequent city the company entered.The money would also most likely contribute to the tens of thousands of dollars the company spends lobbying city and state regulators. Lastly, it would also add fuel to an aggressive marketing campaign in the works. This week, Lyft kicked off a major advertising push across the web, including advertising across Facebook. In the future, the campaign will include radio and video advertising. It is the company’s first national marketing campaign, said Jesse McMillin, a former creative director at Virgin America who Lyft recently named as its creative director.“We’re trying to get our name out there more than ever before,” Mr. McMillin said.