By FARHAD MANJOOJAN. 28, 2015
NOT long ago I donned a vest and a top hat, gathered my pocketwatch and monocle, and rode my penny-farthing to the general store. The get-up seemed appropriate because I was on the hunt for one of the old-timiest machines still floating about our digital world: A photo printer.I had been looking for a printer because I’ve grown weary of digital images. Once, all our photos were displayed on paper; a picture was synonymous with its print. But as soon as we all got screens in our pockets, printing fell out of favor. I’ve mostly been a fan of this shift; I appreciate the convenience of seeing photos from anywhere, and I like the casual intimacy of snapshots shuttling about Snapchat, Instagram and Facebook.But we snap so many pictures nowadays that it sometimes seems as if we’ve forgotten to savor any. I miss a printed photograph’s capacity to arrest the attention. A good print is more aesthetically pleasing than a photo on an LCD screen — the colors are more vibrant, the light against paper more favorable than against glass — and because it is a permanent, physical object that can be mounted in a place you’ll see regularly, a print tends to pack deeper emotional resonance.But these days the most common way of creating prints is to send your pictures to an online or drugstore lab, and that process rarely works well. What you get back from the lab always looks a little bit off from what you’d pictured on the screen.AdvertisementFortunately, it’s never been easier, or more rewarding, to print your own photos at home. Inkjet photo printers have come a long a way over the last five years. The best home versions cost as little as $400 and use cartridges in eight colors, more than the two or three found in earlier versions meant for home use. A larger number of ink colors makes for more accurate color variations in the photos.AdvertisementIt’s not just hardware that has improved; software has, too. In particular, Adobe’s two fantastic photo-editing programs, Lightroom and Photoshop, are now available for $10 a month, and both have versions that run on mobile devices as well as PCs.After researching several printer models, I bought the Canon Pixma Pro-100, which sells for around $400. Canon frequently offers mail-in rebates on its printers; it is now offering a $200 discount for purchases made until the end of January, so you have a couple days to get half off.Part of what I like about the Pro-100 is size. It is one of a few home models that can print on paper as large as 13 inches wide, and for me, one of the important virtues of printing at home is the ability to quickly produce pictures big enough to put on the wall. What’s more, the Pro-100 easily connects to your home Wi-Fi network, meaning you can set it up anywhere, and it is compatible with Apple’s AirPrint system, so you can print photos straight from your iPhone or iPad.Another selling point is price. The review site The Wirecutter looked at several 13-inch printers, and it found another model, the Epson Stylus Photo R3000, to be the best on the market. But the Epson costs around $800. The Canon, which The Wirecutter calls its best “step down” from the Epson, is not only half the price, but has won rave reviews  for its print quality.The reviews were right: Once I set up the Pro-100, I was astonished at the beauty of the prints it produced. The colors were accurate and striking, with deep blacks, vibrant reds and blues, and an overall vibrancy that put to shame anything I’d printed from an online lab.Still, it’s worth noting that home printing is still something of a hobbyist’s pastime. While you can get nice prints without doing much to your photos, getting fantastic, professional-quality photos took a bit of work.Both Lightroom and Photoshop involve a learning curve. Photoshop’s is steeper, though you only really need that app if you want to edit the actual contents of the picture. Lightroom, which is easier to use but still can be inscrutable to the novice, offers a wide variety of tools to adjust the color and size of your image.AdvertisementYou also need to get acquainted with how your photos will look on different kinds of paper, and which settings to adjust when you print. I got up to speed on all this the old-fashioned way: A bit of Googling and a lot of trial and error.Be warned, too, that printing your own photos isn’t going to be cost-effective. Each ink cartridge sells for about $17, and you can get the whole set for $125; how many pictures you get from this set depends on the size and colors of your prints. But when you add the cost of paper, it’s unlikely you’ll be able to beat the per-print price of some of the largest online photo labs.On the other hand, if you’re looking for beautiful images that will last, nothing beats doing it yourself.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: The New Pleasures of Photo Printing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.