By J. D. BIERSDORFEROCT. 8, 2015
Q. When I take an Android screen shot, the notifications alert gives me a link to open it, but where does it go if I don’t open it right away? I looked in the Photos app, but all I see are pictures I’ve taken with the camera.A. The location of your screen shots varies based on your device and the version of Android it uses. If you do not see a Screenshots folder in the Google Photos app on your Android 5.1 phone or tablet, tap the three-lined Menu icon in the upper-left corner of the screen. From the menu that appears, open Device Folders.You should see thumbnails of your Android screen-grabs in the Screenshots area. The Device Folders area also displays images saved or created with other apps, like photos you have downloaded from Twitter posts or pictures you have edited in Adobe Photoshop Express.With gadgets running an older version of Android, like Kit Kat (version 4.4), open the Gallery app, select Album view and then look for the Screenshots folder. If you still do not see a Screenshots folder, check with your phone’s manufacturer.AdvertisementHow you take a picture of your Android screen can also vary based on your hardware, but holding down the Power and Volume Down buttons at the same time for a few seconds works on many phones and tablets like the Droid Turbo, the Moto X and Google’s own Nexus devices.AdvertisementSome phone makers, like Samsung with its Galaxy S5 and Galaxy S6 models, let you take a screen shot by touching the phone’s display with the side of your hand and swiping from left to right; the Power and Volume Down button combination works as well. To see a collection of your Samsung screen shots, open the Gallery app, go to Album view and tap Screenshots.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sharing iTunes Files Between ComputersQ. I have a work and home computer with different iTunes libraries. If I want to copy songs from one computer’s music library to the other, can I just copy the tracks to my Dropbox folder and then download them to the other computer from there?A. Syncing files through Dropbox is one way to share them between computers, but if you bought the tracks you want to copy from Apple, you have an easier way to get them. You can freely download music and other content you have previously purchased from the iTunes Store to additional computers, as long as you are logged into iTunes with the same Apple ID account you used when you bought the items.If you bought a song in the iTunes Store on your work computer, open iTunes on your home computer, click Sign In (or on your account name) at the top of the window and select Purchased from the menu. Click the Not In My Library tab to see the songs not on that machine, and then click the cloud-shaped Download icon to copy the files to the iTunes library on that Mac or PC. (Apple’s iTunes Match and Apple Music services can also make all your music easily available on all your devices, but are subscription-based and cost money.)If you want to sling between computers files that you did not purchase in iTunes — like audio tracks ripped from your own CDs — using your Dropbox folder as a transfer station can work. However, to avoid seeing exclamation marks or other errors because of original files gone missing from the first iTunes library, drag copies of the tracks out of the iTunes window to the desktop Dropbox folder, or copy over duplicates from your iTunes Media folder to Dropbox.Once you get to your second computer and open your synced Dropbox folder there, import the tracks into that system’s iTunes’s library. You can delete them out of your Dropbox folder at that point, but if you leave them there, you can play and view many types of unrestricted files on a smartphone or tablet by opening and streaming them through the Dropbox mobile app.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.