Sony said on Monday that it has sold Sony Online Entertainment, a business that has developed Internet games since the late 1990s, to Columbus Nova, an investment firm.Terms of the deal were not disclosed. Sony Online Entertainment will be renamed Daybreak Game Company. Sony Online Entertainment was one of the early makers of what eventually came to be known as massively multiplayer online games, or MMOs. They were best known for their original hit, EverQuest, an online fantasy game for PCs that came out in 1999. People paid a monthly subscription fee to join other players in quests to defeat monsters and accumulate treasure. But Sony Online Entertainment has struggled in recent years to keep pace with a new generation of online game companies, including Riot Games, the maker of League of Legends, and the growing fleet of mobile games publishers like Supercell. Sony online games based on Star Wars and other well-known brands haven’t performed as well as many had hoped, even as the company transitioned to the free-to-play business model that has become the standard in today’s online games. Free-to-play games make money by charging players small amounts of money to purchase in-game weapons and other items, though most players never bother to make a purchase and simply play free.   Sony Online Entertainment never had the significance of Sony’s other, far-better-known PlayStation console business, which is unaffected by the deal. Michael Pachter, an analyst at Wedbush Securities, said Sony typically invested in media businesses, including music, motion pictures and games, to support its hardware businesses. Sony still publishes many games for its PlayStation consoles, but Sony Online Entertainment, which still makes mostly PC games, had little value to its corporate parent, Mr. Pachter said.      “Online just doesn’t support anything Sony does,” Mr. Pachter said. “I think it became a nonstrategic asset just because of the way the industry moved away from them.” Separating from Sony will open new opportunities for Daybreak, though. On Monday, John Smedley, president of the company, said in a tweet that Daybreak planned to bring its games to Xbox One, Microsoft’s game console and the biggest rival to Sony in that market. 