By MIKE ISAACFEB. 1, 2015
Travis Kalanick did not build Uber into a global force by playing nice.Mr. Kalanick, the chief executive of Uber, a ride-hailing service, aggressively pushed the start-up into new markets, taking combative stances toward regulators and the powerful taxi industry — and the news media.But Mr. Kalanick and his team have begun to trade the art of Sun Tzu for a full-throated charm offensive.In January, Mr. Kalanick delivered a speech in Munich filled with talk about compromising with regulators he once sparred with, wanting to “make 2015 the year where we establish partnerships with new European cities.” The company also released two rosy, data-heavy reports about the service’s advantages on cities, drivers and communities. And on Friday, in an uncommon display of humility, Uber pledged to strengthen its user data privacy practices, acknowledging that “we haven’t always gotten it right.”The striking reversal in tone comes at a crucial time for Uber, which once somewhat prided itself on its antagonistic attitude. The company is now valued by investors at over $40 billion after the most recent round of financing, largely on the promise of rapid growth. To build a business worthy of that valuation, though, the company must prove to investors that it can continue its breakneck pace of expansion in markets abroad at the same rate it has domestically.AdvertisementAnd to reach those targets, the company will almost certainly need better relations with governments around the world.Advertisement“A company like Uber, whose culture is defined by its willingness to go up against the established regulatory regime, is going to run into this problem of perception sooner or later,” said Derek van Bever, a director of the Forum for Growth and Innovation at Harvard Business School.One large part of Uber’s new strategy is to let the data do the talking.In August, the company hired David Plouffe, the longtime confidant of President Obama, as Uber’s senior vice president for policy and strategy. Mr. Plouffe leaned heavily on data to aim messages at voters during Mr. Obama’s campaign, and has already begun to use much the same strategy at Uber.Uber’s research team approached Professor Alan B. Krueger, a Princeton economist who previously was Mr. Obama’s chief economic adviser, to conduct a joint survey of more than 600 of the company’s drivers.“I told Uber that I would take this on as long as I had full discretion over the content of the report,” Professor Krueger said. “They agreed.”The study found that of the 20 markets surveyed, the average driver wages were higher than taxi and limousine driver wage estimates from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Uber added close to 40,000 drivers to its ranks in the United States in December, the report said, and nearly 80 percent of its drivers were happy driving for the company.
            Uber, which is now valued at roughly $40 billion, has faced series of legal problems around the world, including widespread protests from taxi associations and accusations that the company does not meet national transportation rules.        The company agreed to temporarily suspend its operations after the city of Portland accused the company of operating an “illegal, unregulated transportation service.”Two California district attorneys filed a civil suit Tuesday against Uber, charging that the company misled consumers about the methods it uses to screen its drivers.The Public Service Commission of South Carolina orders Uber to cease and desist all operations within the state.The company suspended operations after a judge had ruled that UberPop, the company’s low-cost service, did not comply with Spanish laws and potentially amounted to unfair competition for taxi drivers.The government rejected a regulatory compromise suggested by Uber and vowed a “strong crackdown” on its services. The move follows the indictment of Uber's chief on charges of violating local rules governing taxi services.A woman who says she was sexually assaulted by an Uber driver last month in New Delhi filed a lawsuit against the company, seeking damages and overhauled safety measures.
A Dutch court banned Uber’s low-cost UberPop service from operating in the Netherlands.The head of Thailand’s Department of Land Transport ordered Uber to cease operating in the country.A judge ruled that drivers for UberPop must hold the official permits required of taxi drivers to operate in Germany. The ruling reinstates one of the most severe legal restrictions faced by Uber anywhere in the world.Mr. Plouffe was eager to trumpet the study’s claims.“Uber is growing every month, and is becoming a bigger part of not just cities and transportation systems, but of the whole economy,” he said in a recent interview. “We’re likely to be one of the biggest job-producing companies for the economy over the coming years.”In another joint study, with Mothers Against Drunk Driving, an advocacy group otherwise known as MADD, Mr. Plouffe promoted Uber’s potential influence on drunken driving in states in which it operates. The study found that about four of five respondents said they were less likely to drive themselves home after a night of drinking because of ride-hailing applications like Uber.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When David came on, he was very passionate and deep in this issue and wants to dig into this even more,” said Amy George, senior vice president for marketing at MADD. She said Mr. Plouffe wanted to examine Uber’s impact on rural markets as well, where there are often higher incidences of drunken driving than in urban markets.AdvertisementIt will most likely take more than a couple of reports, though, to change the company’s overall reputation.Inside the company, some employees say, morale was low late last year, after BuzzFeed News reported that a senior Uber executive had suggested that the company commission “opposition research” on reporters. Competitors like Lyft seized on the news, and Uber was left publicly playing defense.As scrutiny intensified, even Capitol Hill piled on. Senator Al Franken, Democrat of Minnesota, questioned Uber’s privacy practices after it was reported that an Uber employee had gained access to the ride history of a BuzzFeed journalist.Uber followed up with a privacy audit, conducted by an outside law firm, and a commitment to improve its practices.Employees inside Uber, and several people with ties to Uber, all of whom spoke only on the condition of anonymity to protect their connection to the company, expressed concern that the negative attention could hurt employee recruiting and retention.“It’s not fun for Uber’s employees, who are bright and mostly wonderful, to have to keep explaining to their friends why they work for” an organization that would act that way, one person close to the company said.Some also noted that Uber had partnerships with image-conscious companies like Spotify, United Airlines and Starbucks, and that future partnerships could be at risk if its reputation did not improve.Mr. Kalanick seems to be getting the message. As he indicated in Munich, by working with, instead of against, regulators in Europe and the Asia Pacific region, the company stands a much better chance of sustaining its rapid expansion.“Unless they examine the costs as well as the rewards of this kind of reflexive pugnacious stance, they run the risk of having the carpet pulled out from underneath them, regardless of the quality of their service,” Mr. van Bever, the Harvard Business School professor, said.A version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Hard-Charging Uber Tries Olive Branch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.