

      By KEVIN GRANVILLE

FEB. 5, 2015

Cyberattacks have become an ever-increasing threat. The F.B.I. now ranks cybercrime as one of its top law enforcement activities, and President Obama’s recently proposed budget would sharply increase spending on cybersecurity, to $14 billion. Here are some of the major attacks on United States businesses in recent years. 
Related Article

Cyberattacks have become an ever-increasing threat. The F.B.I. now ranks cybercrime as one of its top law enforcement activities, and President Obama’s recently proposed budget would sharply increase spending on cybersecurity, to $14 billion. Here are some of the major attacks on United States businesses in recent years. 

 The company, a health insurer based in Washington State, 
said up to 11 million customers could have been affected by a cyberattack last year. Hackers gained access to its computers on May 5, and the breach was not discovered until Jan. 29, Primera said. The breach could have exposed members' names, dates of birth, Social Security numbers, mailing and email addresses, phone numbers and bank account information. The company is working with the F.B.I. and a cybersecurity firm to investigate. One of the nation’s largest health insurers said that the personal information of tens of millions of its customers and employees, including its chief executive, was the subject of a “very sophisticated external cyberattack.”The company added that hackers were able to breach a database that contained as many as 80 million records of current and former customers, as well as employees. The information accessed included names, Social Security numbers, birthdays, addresses, email and employment information, including income data.A huge attack that essentially wiped clean several internal data centers and led to cancellation of the theatrical release of "The Interview," a comedy about the fictional assassination of the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un. Contracts, salary lists, film budgets, entire films and Social Security numbers were stolen, including -- to the dismay of top executives -- leaked emails that included criticisms of Angelina Jolie and disparaging remarks about President Obama. President Obama and national security officials have said North Korea was behind the attack.  The office supply retailer said hackers had broken into the company’s network and compromised the information of about 1.16 million credit cards.Home Depot said about 56 million payment cards were probably compromised in an attack that ran from April through September and affected stores in the United States and Canada. Company officials said hackers used custom-built software that had not been seen in previous attacks. They estimated the cost of the breach at $62 million, which included expenses related to credit monitoring and additional staffing at call centers.The computer networks of JPMorgan Chase were infiltrated in a series of coordinated, sophisticated attacks that siphoned off gigabytes of data, including checking and savings account information. JPMorgan Chase said account information of 83 million households and small businesses were compromised. Authorities said the same hackers tried to to gain access to the systems of at least a dozen other financial institutions. In the JPMorgan attack, the bank said it found no evidence of any fraud or misuse of customer information. JPMorgan said the hackers got access only to customer email addresses, homes addresses and phone numbers but nothing of a more sensitive nature like Social Security numbers.The company, a publicly traded hospital operator based in Franklin, Tenn., said personal data -- including names, birth dates, Social Security numbers and addresses -- for 4.5 million patients had been compromised in a Chinese cyberattack on its systems from April to June. Community Health Systems, which operates 206 hospitals in 29 states, said the data was stolen from records of patients who had been referred to or treated by doctors affiliated with the company over the previous five years.Michaels, an arts and crafts supply chain, estimated in April that data from three million customers' payment cards may have been stolen over several months. The breach exposed information like credit and debit card numbers and expiration dates. The attack focused on the chain's point-of-sale system, and also affected a subsidiary, Aaron Brothers, a framing company. There are more than 1,130 Michaels stores and more than 100 Aaron Brother stores.In one of the largest data breaches ever reported, hackers stole credit and debit card records from more than 40 million Target customers, as well as personal information like email and mailing addresses from some 70 million people.The Target breach, caused by malware installed on the company's networks that siphoned away customer information, happened during the holiday shopping period. When it was announced, the chain's traffic and sales took an immediate hit, and its profit for the quarter fell 46 percent. Update: Target agreed to pay $10 million to settle a lawsuit brought by shoppers affected by the breach. Advertisement