By GREGORY SCHMIDTFEB. 4, 2015
The video game industry is rapidly evolving with the rise of e-sports. But not everyone has the skills to play at the professional level.Fear not, would-be gaming stars; there are tools to help you improve your game. Here are some notable accessories that will help even an amateur player level up:$180For players who want to stream their maneuvers on websites like Twitch and Ustream, the German company Elgato offers the Game Capture HD60. A slim device about the size of a smartphone, the Game Capture HD60 serves as a link between a video game console and a computer.With Elgato’s software, users can record gameplay in the 1080p60 format, and the streaming function lets users add webcam and voice for live commentary. The Game Capture HD60 is intended for newer consoles like the Xbox One (and it helps to have a TV that can support the high-definition format).$230Astro Gaming, a popular maker of gaming headsets, is seeking a broader audience with the A38, a wireless, on-ear headset designed for mobile gaming. The A38, which can pair with mobile devices via Bluetooth, blocks outside sounds with active noise canceling and has a built-in microphone for phone calls. Padded ear cups offer a comfortable fit and lay flat when not in use.AdvertisementThe headset is available in white or gray and can be customized with speaker tags for an additional $20 a set. The lack of a 3.5-millimeter port for a wired connection means the A38 won’t work when the battery runs out; fortunately, Astro says the headset will last 20 hours on a full charge.Advertisement$69 TO $99Staring at any screen, whether a TV or computer, for extended periods can cause eye strain, headaches and dry eyes. To help ease eye fatigue, Gunnar Optiks designed a line of eyewear with features like a patented lens shape that limits air currents, custom tints that filter ultraviolet and artificial blue light, and coatings that reduce glare and resist scratching.For gamers, specific styles were engineered with flat temples that fit with most gaming headsets. The Gunnar eyewear that I tried, a sturdy style called Haus, fit comfortably over my glasses, but prescription styles are also available.FreeConsole makers are gradually moving away from the TV, creating apps to stream video games to a mobile device. With the Remote Play app from Sony, owners of the PlayStation 4 can play console games on a Sony Xperia Z2 or Z3 smartphone or tablet.After syncing, players can use the PS4’s DualShock 4 controller to play games on the Xperia; Sony’s Game Control Mount, which costs $40, helps to enhance the experience. Remote Play is limited to those who own a PS4 and a compatible Xperia device, and both need to be on the same Wi-Fi network, so you can’t venture far. But it does free up the TV in your home.$80When the Xbox One was released in 2013, its design was not compatible with headsets on the market. Microsoft eventually made an adapter, but Turtle Beach worked to devise a new line of headsets specifically for the Xbox One. The entry-level headset, the XO One, is a lightweight and comfortable option that features a bass boost and microphone monitoring, which eliminates the need to shout while chatting with other players.For those looking for a more advanced headset, the $160 XO Seven Pro offers Superhuman Hearing, a nifty feature that makes soft sounds louder, so you can hear an enemy before he sees you.$11Thumbsticks, those tiny joysticks on console controllers, allow users 360-degree movement in a game. But their diminutive size can be a drawback, making it easy to overshoot a target or underestimate a sharp turn with the flick of a thumb.At one-tenth of an inch high, KontrolFreek’s Alpha thumbstick extenders don’t seem like much, but they do help increase a player’s range of motion. It’s a slight advantage, but it does improve accuracy, which can be crucial when you’re shooting zombies or racing aliens. Designed for the Xbox One and PS4, the Alpha thumbstick extenders have a nubby surface to decrease slippage, helping players stay in the game.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Taking Video Games to the Next Level.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.