By J. D. BIERSDORFERFEB. 4, 2015
Taking iPhone On the RoadQ. I am 71 years old and plan to drive to Florida soon. Are there any apps to locate hotels to stop along the way, along with directions to find them from the highway? I have an iPhone 5 and a MacBook Air.A. Thanks to your iPhone’s Location Services (GPS) feature, which pinpoints your location as you travel, you can use a map program like the built-in Apple Maps and the Google Maps app for iPhone to display nearby places to stay. Just search for “hotels” with the name of a town you are near. The app should show you lodging choices and provide an option (usually the icon of a car) to see the driving directions when you select an establishment.Fiddling with a phone screen is dangerous when driving, and both Apple Maps and Google Maps have an audio-navigation feature that provides turn-by-turn directions to a specific address while you are behind the wheel. You can use Apple’s Siri personal assistant or the voice-search functions built into Google’s search app to seek out local hotels without having to type.You can also find apps dedicated to showing all the coming hotels, restaurants and other local businesses near each exit as you drive. RoadNinja and iExit are two such apps with both iOS and Android versions available, and can supply directions from your location.AdvertisementIf you would like to use the MacBook Air’s bigger screen and keyboard to do the hotel-searching before you leave, you can use the desktop editions of Apple’s Maps program, (available in OS X 10.9 and later) or the Google Maps site to do the research. Both programs let you send your maps and directions to your iPhone for mobile reference.AdvertisementUsing your phone as a GPS unit is handy, but it runs the battery down. Packing a mobile phone charger that plugs into the car’s dashboard power port can keep the iPhone going, too.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Stopping The Surface SyncQ. How do I make Microsoft OneDrive stop syncing my browser history between my Surface and Windows 8.1 PC?A. The OneDrive service can sync personal settings and data between machines that all use the same Microsoft account, but if you would rather keep your browsing sessions separate on the device you are using, start in the Settings area. Swipe in from the right side of a touch screen or move the cursor up from the desktop’s lower-right corner, then select Settings and Change PC Settings.Choose OneDrive and then Sync Settings. On this screen, you can turn off syncing for your browsing history and anything else you no longer wish to keep synchronized between devices.TIP OF THE WEEK If you have to get back to work before you finish watching your lunchtime selection of YouTube videos, you can mark clips for later viewing if you have a YouTube account. In the desktop browser, move the cursor over the video to show the toolbar along the bottom of the clips’s window and then click the clock icon. When the clock changes to a checkmark, the video is saved.Later, when you have time to view the saved clips, log into your YouTube account. Under the YouTube logo on the left side of the window, click Watch Later from the menu to see the saved videos and play them at your leisure. If you do not see the Watch Later list, click the menu icon next to the YouTube logo. In the YouTube mobile app, you can save videos to your Watch Later list by tapping the plus (+) sign in the clip’s toolbar and choosing “Add to Watch Later” from the menu.  J.D. BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Traveling With an iPhone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.