By J. D. BIERSDORFERFEB. 6, 2015
Q. My tablet just died and nothing I’ve tried can revive it. When asked, the I.T. staff at my place noted there may be a risk that if I recycle the device, someone else might be able to either revive it or get personal information off it. Their advice was to work it over with a hammer. While that sounds like fun, are there better and greener alternatives?A. Taking a hammer to the tablet to smash up its internal drive and physically destroy your data is one way to protect your personal information, but yes, there are alternatives. If you have a bit of time, you can try gently disassembling the tablet to remove the flash memory drive with your files on it, while leaving the screen and other components intact for possible reuse elsewhere by a recycler.For instance, the iFixit site has hundreds of repair guides for all types of electronics, including iPads and other tablets. The site also specializes in “teardowns,” which show various gadgets being disassembled. Most iFixit teardowns are illustrated with photos and videos, and describe the process and tools needed for taking the gadgets apart.If your tablet has been the topic of an iFixit teardown, you will likely see how to open it up and find the flash memory drive — which you can remove and smack just that part with a hammer, while saving the rest of the tablet for recycling. But before you tear down your own tablet, it may be worth a few minutes searching the iFixit site (or other technical support forums) for discussions by people reporting similar woes with dead tablets. The chances may be slim, but you might find people with similar problems and their own suggestions for possible causes and repairs.AdvertisementIn the case of a truly dead tablet, however, once you have disposed of the memory drive, you can recycle the rest of the components to keep them out of landfills, where they could cause environmental harm. If your local area does not have electronic waste recycling services, look for a general electronics recycling company.AdvertisementMany Staples and Best Buy stores take old gear for responsible recycling, and your tablet’s manufacturer may have its own program. The Environmental Protection Agency has information on electronics recycling, as do groups like the Electronics TakeBack Coalition. Some used-electronics sites like BuyMyTronics and Gazelle even pay a small amount of cash for broken gear.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Finding the Full-Screen View in OS X YosemiteQ. Where do I find the icon for making the current window expand to the full screen in Mac OS X Yosemite?A. In earlier versions of Mac OS X, you could expand a compatible program or window to fill the screen by clicking an arrow icon in the top-right corner of a program’s title bar or open window. Mac OS X 10.10 (also known as Yosemite) has changed things up a bit.In Yosemite, you expand the current window to the full-screen view by clicking the green button in the top-left corner; it is the third button in the row after the red button that closes the window and the yellow one that minimizes to store it temporarily in the Mac’s Dock. To leave the full-screen view, move the mouse cursor up to the very top of the screen to see the Mac’s menu bar and the window’s frame reappear, then click the green button again.If you prefer a keyboard shortcut, press the Control, Command and F keys to switch in and out of full-screen view. To expand the window to the full height of your screen — while leaving the Mac’s menu bar and other open windows still visible — hold down the Option key while clicking the green button.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.