Start-ups like Uber and Lyft are making it acceptable to carpool with total strangers. In the future, you may start carpooling with their lunch. That is exactly what Sidecar, a ride-hailing start-up in competition with the likes of Uber and Lyft, aims to make happen. The company announced on Monday it plans to use its fleet of cars to introduce a package delivery service, delivering items like food and groceries for partner companies.That service will be powered by Sidecar drivers who are also picking up and dropping off passengers, a move the company says cuts pricing and delivery times dramatically. The new service, which is now available in all of the American cities in which Sidecar operates, is essentially an open call to restaurants, grocers and stores which do not otherwise offer a delivery service. Sidecar, which is based in San Francisco, will face numerous competitors. GrubHub, the big online food-ordering service, recently acquired DiningIn and Restaurants on the Run, two companies that will allow GrubHub to start offering delivery for the restaurants it serves. Postmates, another start-up, owns a fleet of messengers who order and pick up food from thousands of restaurants. Sidecar will rub up against Uber, too, in its ultimate ambitions of becoming a way to delivery anything — from groceries to gourmet food — anytime, anywhere to anyone. And to some degree, Sidecar’s move into deliver will also pit it against a couple of the tech titans,  Amazon and Google, which have both dabbled in same-day delivery projects. “All of these companies have been trying to figure out the last mile problem of same-day delivery forever,” Sunil Paul, chief executive of Sidecar, said in an interview. “We’re creating the maximum efficiency possible in any particular trip.”Of course, the only way Sidecar will be able to grow its package delivery service is by adding many new drivers to its platform. And right now, the company has to fight with the likes of Uber and Lyft, two much larger competitors, in order to do that. Sidecar says it has initially partnered with Eat24, an online food-ordering company, and is in talks with multiple other partners to offer delivery of other sorts of items. 