Box, a cloud-based data storage and collaboration company, hopes it has solved one of the last great impediments to businesses going fully online.On Tuesday, the company announced a technology that adds another layer of data encryption to its service. The idea is to put in new kinds of protection from hackers and snoops. If it works, regulated industries like finance and healthcare might move their data from locally maintained computers to Box’s machines, which are accessed via the Internet to office computers and mobile devices.“Classified data hasn’t moved to the cloud,” said Aaron Levie, the co-founder and chief executive of Box. “We’ve added another layer of security to address that.” Box already encrypts the data it stores, as well as virus scanning, he noted, but the new security technology appeared to appease concerns at clients with particularly sensitive data. The service, called Enterprise Key Management, or EKM, relies on a so-called public key program, a very hard kind of encryption to break. The customer puts the data into Box through software inside Amazon Web Services. When Box sends the data back out to a customer, it must ask permission from the customer, and also creates for the customer an audit trail of who accessed which files.“This isn’t really a security feature, though it adds that,” Mr. Levie said. “This adds a level of data control.” Legal departments in several regulated businesses had looked at the feature, he said, and concluded it could enable them to move data online.Public keys have been known about and used for decades. What made the Box technology difficult is that it appears not to severely affect latency, or the speed with which data can be retrieved. It is not clear how many customers Box may pick up with the new feature, though data breaches like the recent loos of 80 million patient records from Anthem hardly argues for the superiority of legacy systems. Box currently has more than 44,000 paying businesses.Other cloud providers are likely to respond to the stronger and audit-oriented security tech, however. Dropbox for Business, which asserts it has 100,000 businesses, also encrypts its data, both in transit and while stored with the company, as well as providing services like identity management. It does not address encryption from the client side yet, though it does recommend third-party providers to provide added security.