On the eve of a congressional hearing to explore the use of new technology in classrooms nationwide, a software engineer has found significant gaps in an industry effort to bolster student data security and privacy.Over the last several months, more than 100 education technology companies and organizations have signed on to a voluntary student privacy pledge in which they have committed to a variety of data safeguards, including maintaining “a comprehensive security program that is reasonably designed to protect the security, privacy, confidentiality, and integrity of student personal information against risks.”Of the approximately 60 companies that have signed the pledge and have websites with logins for students, teachers or parents, however, about one-fifth of them did not use basic encryption — called Secure Socket Layer or SSL — during the login process, according to an investigation this week by Tony Porterfield, a software engineer in Los Altos, Calif.  (Earlier this week, I wrote an article about a previous ed tech security research project by Mr. Porterfield.)While these vulnerabilities do not appear to have been exploited by hackers, cybersecurity experts said they potentially exposed student, parent and teacher accounts to snooping or hijacking by unauthorized users. The security lapses raise questions about an expected federal student digital privacy bill, to be modeled in part on the industry pledge. President Obama endorsed the pledge during a speech last month at the Federal Trade Commission.The industry pledge, for instance, does not require specific security measures, such as encryption of logins for sites that collect personal details about students. The pledge also does not require companies to protect teacher or parent information collected by educational sites or apps.“Suppose a person logs in from a public wireless network, such as at a coffee shop or airport,” said Jonathan Mayer, a lawyer and computer science graduate student at Stanford University, explaining the possible risks of sending login information in unencrypted plain text. “Anyone sitting nearby could grab that person’s password,” he said, and take over their account.The New York Times had asked Mr. Mayer to confirm Mr. Porterfield’s findings about the data security practices of signers of the privacy pledge.When contacted on Tuesday, executives for signers of the privacy pledge that did not have encrypted logins said they had been caught in the process of updating their data security measures. Zearn.org is a fledgling nonprofit that aims to democratize digital learning by offering daily online math lessons free to elementary school teachers. Its site, which collects information on the speed and accuracy with which students add, subtract, multiply and divide, requires children to provide their birth dates, first and last names, and email addresses. According to the site’s privacy policy: “Zearn has multiple security measures in place to protect the loss, misuse or alteration of information under our control.” But the site committed to the privacy pledge before adding important security protection. Shalinee Sharma, the executive director of Zearn, said that the organization had been testing encryption and had planned to add it this Friday. “We are striving to be exemplars on data privacy for kids,” Ms. Sharma wrote in an email Tuesday afternoon. On Tuesday evening, Zearn.org switched to encrypted logins.A spokeswoman for Otus, which created a free learning management system and has also committed to the industry pledge, said on Tuesday that its login was temporarily unencrypted while the site upgraded its systems. The company’s site, OtusPlus, collects personal details including students’ names, email addresses, profile photos, school names, homework assignments, blog posts, grades, test results and attendance records.“Our user base has grown very quickly and we outgrew our server,” Jennifer Amdur Spitz, a spokeswoman for Otus, wrote in an email on Tuesday. By Wednesday morning, the site’s logins were encrypted.Jules Polonetsky, the executive director of the Future of Privacy Forum, an industry-financed think tank in Washington that helped develop the privacy pledge, said his group would be holding training sessions next week to “help companies get in shape on security and privacy.” Although the pledge does not require specific security measures, he wrote in an email on Wednesday afternoon, it does require the companies that sign to use security practices appropriate for the kinds of services they provide and the sensitivity of the student data involved.“Companies that have security practice that fall short can face legal liability,” Mr. Polonetsky said in the email.By KIT EATONAmong other things, calendar apps let users make entries through natural language and arrange conference calls.