
App Smart By                     
 KIT EATON
 
FEB. 11, 2015
Whether it is jiu-jitsu, karate or tai-chi, three mobile apps can help you practice and improve your martial arts skills.LEARNING a martial art is a true challenge, both mentally and physically, because there is so much to master and remember. Turning to an app for help might not seem like an obvious course, but many apps do provide worthwhile support.Brazilian jujitsu, which largely focuses on ground fighting, is quickly gaining in popularity, and one of the most popular styles, the Gracie Barra Brazilian Jiu jitsu, has some particularly strong apps. They include videos that document techniques like defenses and escapes. Each video is performed by experts and filmed from different angles so you can see exactly what’s going on. There’s also narration about the moves, and the video pauses at key points. These videos supplement what you learn in person, and they are part of a 16-week course that gets progressively more complex.As teaching supplements, the apps will certainly help you brush up on techniques, but apart from the videos there’s not much content. The apps are also expensive. One on iOS costs $15 for the first four weeks, and the remaining three apps are $10 each.A great alternative jujitsu app is iBJJ, which is $4 on iOS and Android. Instead of video, iBJJ relies on still photos that you can scan through in the style of a flip book. The app makers say this is to help you see the techniques at your own pace, instead of at the forced pace of a video. The photos have descriptive text, and there’s also an option to see frames from a reverse angle to better illustrate the way the body should be positioned.AdvertisementThe iBJJ app is easy to navigate, with techniques broken down into categories like “top guard” or “back attacking.” The flip-book teaching style may suit beginners, while serving as an encyclopedia of moves for more experienced practitioners. And the app has plenty of content.AdvertisementKarate practitioners may appreciate the app Learn Karate by Fitivity. This app, which is free on iOS and Android (where it’s called Karate Training instead) could be a useful practice resource. In addition to lessons on karate techniques, it has sections on how to keep flexible and build strength. It also has a section for the many katas, or symbolic attack and defense postures that practitioners must learn. The lessons include videos as well as still photos and descriptions of how to move. Over all, it’s a nicely designed app with a professional feel that tries to please beginner and expert karateka alike. Though the basic app is free, higher levels require an in-app payment of $5.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Taekwondo is another popular martial art, with Korean origins. Unlike many of its rivals, Taekwondo Bible, a free Android app, has been frequently updated, which means it may run better on your device. The app contains detailed instructions on how to practice the patterns, including diagrams on how to place one’s feet, and it even includes explanations of what the Korean names of the moves mean. It’s straightforward in design, and looks good — a nice contrast to many Android apps. However, while the first five taekwondo patterns in the app are free, you have to pay for the full list.On iOS there are surprisingly few good taekwondo apps, but Taekwondo White Belt is a free app that has been recently updated, a nice sign that its developers are paying attention. Taekwondo White Belt is aimed at beginners, and it describes some of the history and philosophy of this martial art. It also has detailed instructions that explain many taekwondo techniques using photos, text and video.It’s easy to navigate this app, which offers more advanced moves as you go, and its design is simple and frill-free, which may keep you focused. But clicking through the different sections of the app takes time, and sometimes menus feel unresponsive. In addition, only a few lessons are free — the full content costs $1.Tai Chi is another a martial art, though you might think of it as a slow-moving health-based activity. Yang Tai Chi for Beginners is a comprehensive iOS and Android app for learning one of the more popular forms of Tai Chi. It uses video-based lessons to talk you through the precision movements of the form. The video demonstrations are backed up with text-based instructions and explanations of correct posture and what the movements are for and what they mean. The app has a short sample of its content available free, but the full content requires an in-app payment of $10. There’s also a second app that completes the lessons. Quick Call Microsoft recently released Outlook, its well-known email program, for iOS and Android users. Far from being a cut-down version of the software many of us use to manage our work email, the apps are full-featured and work well on phone touch screens.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘Karate’ Means Empty Hand, but a Handheld Device Is Needed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »