By J. D. BIERSDORFERFEB. 11, 2015
Q. I recently scanned a bunch of old pictures and have them in a folder. How do I get them into iPhoto?A. You can import a batch of pictures into the Mac’s iPhoto library from a folder on the hard disk (or other locations) in several ways. For one, open iPhoto, go to the File menu and choose Import to Library. When the Import Photos box opens, navigate to the location of the folder, select it and click the Import button.For a more direct approach, you can also add the scanned pictures to your image library by dragging the folder from the desktop (or wherever you have it) into the open iPhoto window. Dragging the folder and dropping it on the iPhoto icon on the Mac’s Dock is another method for importing the pictures.According to statements Apple made to several technology publications, iPhoto will be replaced this year with a new Photos for OS X program. The company has said that iPhoto users can update their image libraries to the new Photos program and preserve the existing albums, keywords and captions used to organize pictures in iPhoto.AdvertisementSurfing Securely on a SmartphoneQ. I get nervous when using public Wi-Fi hot spots on my phone. What’s involved with using a virtual private network on a mobile device?AdvertisementA. Most major smartphone platforms, including Android, iOS and Windows Phone, support virtual private network connections that create an encrypted tunnel between your device and a private network when you are using a public hot spot or other open network. If you are doing work on your phone while traveling, your company may have its own V.P.N. that you can use on the road. If so, check with the technical support department to see if it can set you up.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you do not have a corporate V.P.N., you can use one of the many commercial V.P.N. services available; check your app store for options. TunnelBear and HotSpot Shield are two popular services with Android and iOS apps, as is F-Secure’s Freedome app.You typically need to download the app, let it configure the proper V.P.N. settings on your phone and turn it on when you need it. Some services charge a monthly or annual fee for use, while some offer a free amount of data along with advertisements.TIP OF THE WEEK Running out of battery juice is a nagging fear of many a smartphone user, but your gadget may have built-in tools to help you squeeze out some extra time. Google recently added a new Battery Saver mode in Android 5.0 Lollipop that claims to add an additional 90 minutes of life between charges by temporarily putting a stop to mail and message syncing, vibrating alerts and other power-draining activities.To use it, open the Settings icon from the apps screen, select Battery and then tap the three-dot icon in the upper-right corner to get to Battery Saver in the menu; swiping down on the home screen to summon the Quick Settings box also gets you to the Battery preferences. In the settings, you can turn Battery Saver on or off manually, or have it automatically kick in when the battery is down to 5 or 15 percent of its power.Several Android phones from HTC, Samsung and LG include a power-saving mode in their settings. Microsoft has a similar Battery Saver feature in the settings for its Windows Phone software. Apple does not have a dedicated power-saving mode for its iOS 8 software, but has a page of tips for getting more out of a charge. Most app stores also have programs for monitoring and maximizing battery use.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Importing Images to iPhoto.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.