BEIJING — The new Chinese agency in charge of Internet control and censorship might have recently unveiled a rousing television anthem celebrating its shaping of cyberspace, but foreign businesspeople here say they have little to sing about. They are increasingly frustrated by the growing obstacles to wide Internet access, including the onerous system of censorship known as the Great Firewall, according to survey results released this week by the European Union Chamber of Commerce in China.The survey was answered by 106 companies that are based in the European Union and have offices in China. Eighty-six percent of the respondents said their businesses had been negatively affected by the blocking of certain websites or tools. That was an increase from 71 percent in last year’s survey.The chamber also asked its members about the greater tightening of Internet access that occurred in China at the end of 2014 and this year. Eighty percent reported a worsening impact on business.Starting in late 2014, the Chinese government cut off access to Gmail from third-party apps, forcing people in China to rely on virtual private network, or V.P.N., software to get to Google’s email service. The regular Gmail site and other Google pages had been blocked consistently since last summer, but people in China had been able to use third-party apps to download Gmail to their devices until December. After blocking Gmail downloads through those apps, forcing more people to turn to VPN software, the government went on to aggressively attack V.P.N.’s.The chamber found that 13 percent of survey respondents had recently deferred investing more in research and development in China, or had been unwilling to set up those operations here, since restrictions grew at the beginning of the year.“These worrying trends illustrate how excessive tightening of Internet controls can choke business growth and stifle investment in technology and R&D — areas which are crucial for China’s development,” Jörg Wuttke, president of the chamber, said in a statement Thursday. “This is compounded by the fact that these measures are also discouraging much-needed foreign talent from relocating here.”Mr. Wuttke added that it was in China’s interest to allow commercial businesses to operate online. “This is not just a problem for international business,” he said. “We know from extensive conversations with the Chinese public and the private sector that many domestic companies are just as frustrated as our members.”The European Union Chamber of Commerce in China, founded in 2000, has 1,800 member companies across the country.Its survey results echo findings released this week in the annual business climate survey done by the American Chamber of Commerce in China. Of the 477 responses in that survey, more than 80 percent said their companies were suffering negative effects from China’s Internet censorship and other blocking. In addition, 60 percent said that the risk of intellectual property leaks or information technology and data security threats was greater in China than in other geographic area where the companies operated.By PAUL MOZURDuring the talent show portion of a Lunar New Year celebration, the Cyberspace Administration debuted what can only be described as a semiofficial anthem, a throwback to revolutionary songs glorifying the state.By ANDREW JACOBSThe Chinese authorities are no longer tolerating the workarounds used by millions of people who rely heavily on less-fettered access to the Internet.