Updated, 11:56 a.m.Before she got engaged a couple years ago, Lisa Sokolowski, a blogger in Leland, N.C., rarely mentioned her boyfriend on her regular Twitter account. But after he proposed, she started a new account where she frequently made reference to her fiancé and their joint activities.Exhausted. And my alarm is set for 4am (less than three hours!) so I can make sure my fiance is up for a fishing trip. #TooEarly— lisa (@abrideabudget) 16 Jul 13In a phone interview this week, Ms. Sokolowski, now 34, described the alteration of her social media usage as a logical progression. “You don’t want to tweet too much about your boyfriend because it could make you look clingy,” she said. But once he had proposed, “I started to tweet about him more. We were going to be entwined for the rest of our lives.”Now, Ms. Sokolowski’s fishing trip tweet has been cited in a new research effort by two computer scientists who examined how the soon-to-be-married used Twitter. (The study quoted a number of Twitter posts “anonymously,” but I easily located and contacted Ms. Sokolowski. I informed her that her Tweet had been quoted in the study and obtained permission from her to write about it.)Anthropologists have long studied how people change their behavior in their physical lives as they prepare to marry or go through other transitional stages, known in social science terminology as liminality. To understand how people convey their liminal status online, computational social scientists are analyzing users’ posts on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and Pinterest to try to understand how their use of those services shifts as they get married or divorced, pregnant, fired from a job, graduate from college or move to a new city.“Our hypothesis was that Twitter could be an archive which could tell us about the life milestones people experience,” said Munmun De Choudhury, an assistant professor in the School of Interactive Computing at the Georgia Institute of Technology and the co-author of the new Twitter study. In that study, entitled “She Said Yes! — Liminality and Engagement Announcements on Twitter,” researchers first identified more than 900 Twitter accounts belonging to people who posted public comments about their engagement on the site. Then they examined those users’ posts for the year after they made the announcement and the nine months preceding it.In many ways, the behaviors the researchers identified on social media paralleled the changes newly engaged couples often make offline. People used the words “boyfriend” and “girlfriend” less in their Twitter posts while making more frequent references to a fiancé or fiancée. In acknowledgment of their newly announced coupledom, the Twitter users also began using “we” more than before. And they posted more comments about couple-centric activities like cooking, watching TV and traveling together. But engagement announcements on Twitter, Professor De Choudhury noted, represent more than just virtual analogs of the traditional practice of publishing an engagement notice in a newspaper. Engaged couples are using Twitter to publicly enact their new social status in an immediate way and solicit good will in real time from friends and strangers alike.“People are repurposing Twitter as a mirror of how they see themselves in the real world, and that’s very interesting,” Professor De Choudhury said. “It tells us people are taking these tools very seriously.”Although the researchers did not study disaffected brides-to-be, a few anonymous Twitter users are also using the platform to vent about the stress, chores and annoyances of the engagement process. Yet that practice already seems old-fashioned, given anonymous gossip apps like Whisper and YikYak.Two of my bridesmaids are coworkers. They have not ONCE asked me if they could help with anything. They don’t ask how anything is going.— Bridezilla Life (@bridezilla_life) 20 Jan 15A version of this article appears in print on 02/16/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Seeing Love Bloom on Twitter.