AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicole Perlroth and David E. SangerPALO ALTO, Calif. — Declaring that the Internet has become the “Wild Wild West” with consumers and industries as top targets, President Obama on Friday called for a new era of cooperation between the government and the private sector to defeat a range of fast-evolving online threats.Mr. Obama signed an executive order urging companies to join information-sharing hubs to exchange data on online threats — and, in some cases, to receive classified information from the government. But the order stopped short of exempting the companies from liability if the data they collected and shared led to legal action.Only legislation, which Mr. Obama has tried and failed to get through Congress for three years, can exempt the companies from such liability. Many companies outside the financial industry have been reluctant to share data without such a law in place.Mr. Obama deliberately chose Stanford University as the site of the first summit meeting on online security and consumer protection, saying that it was where much of the Internet was born and is also where the innovations to secure it must be developed.“The very technologies that can empower us to do great good can also be used to undermine us and do great harm,” Mr. Obama said.Mr. Obama also made clear that his six years of presidency had given him new appreciation of how the government will be called upon to protect citizens against the most severe attacks, and once again accused North Korea of hacking into Sony Pictures. “The cyberworld is the Wild Wild West — to some degree we’re asked to be the sheriff,” he said. “When something like Sony happens, people want to know what the government can do about this.”Mr. Obama arrived in the heart of Silicon Valley at a time of great tension with companies here, including Apple and Google, both represented at the event. Apple’s chief executive, Timothy D. Cook, was seated to Mr. Obama’s left Friday afternoon at a closed-door lunch meeting with senior executives, only months after coming into direct conflict with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and intelligence agencies over the full encryption of its mobile devices.Mr. Obama’s intelligence and law enforcement aides would like to preserve access to all digital communication with a court order. The companies say that would create a breach that China and Russia, among others, would exploit.Mr. Cook, who was invited to the meeting to discuss Apple’s new payment system, Apple Pay, used the occasion to urge government and technology leaders to do everything they can to protect users’ rights to privacy and security.“People have entrusted us with their most personal and precious information,” Mr. Cook said. “We owe them nothing less than the best protections that we can possibly provide.”Failing to do so, Mr. Cook said, would “risk our way of life.”The private sector has largely been reluctant to share information about threats with the government, arguing that it would create onerous regulations and potentially compromise proprietary and customer data.Joseph M. Demarest Jr., assistant director of the F.B.I.’s cyberdivision, said in an interview that given the sophistication of the hackers American companies are up against, information-sharing had proved critical to tracing attacks back to hackers and ridding them from systems. “We’re fighting Ph.D.s on the other side of the world,” Mr. Demarest said. “Not only the F.B.I., but our colleagues from the intelligence community, can enable and assist not only with attribution but with kicking actors out and keeping them out.” After the Sony attacks late last year, Mr. Demarest said the F.B.I.’s presence at Sony’s headquarters was crucial in helping the government trace the attacks back to North Korea. “Companies are realizing there is a benefit to keeping us involved,” he said.But businesses reeling from the fallout of the revelations about online surveillance from the former government contractor Edward J. Snowden worry about the impression such sharing would create among customers. Foreign governments are worried that such arrangements will compromise their data.Privacy activists say the approach is misguided. “Key to security is to minimize data collection and adopt robust security measures,” said Marc Rotenberg, president of the Electronic Privacy Information Center. “If they can’t protect it, they shouldn’t collect it.”But few of those tensions were on display on Friday, as Mr. Obama, government officials and a carefully curated list of executives from the technology, banking, energy and health care sectors took the stage to speak for the need for greater public-private partnership in combating online threats.“This work cannot be adversarial; we have enough adversaries out there,” Anthony Earley Jr., the chairman and chief executive of Pacific Gas & Electric, said on stage Friday.Many companies point out that they already share information with others in their industries through industry-specific instruments, notably the Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Center, a group that shares threats with members of the banking industry.And companies have been particularly reluctant, after the Snowden revelations, to do anything to aggravate concerns abroad that they are sharing data on foreigners with intelligence agencies.To assuage those concerns, Bernard Tyson, the chairman of Kaiser Permanente, tried to distinguish the kinds of data his corporation would share with the government.“I am not talking about sharing the actual content that I am here to protect,” Mr. Tyson said. “It is sharing what I am learning about people trying to get at that content. It’s important for me to say that because that is the sensitivity I hear every day.”Not mentioned at the event was the issue that has most roiled companies in Silicon Valley. Disclosures by Mr. Snowden showed that intelligence agencies were surreptitiously siphoning off customer data from companies like Google and Yahoo as it flowed internally between their data centers.That information created an atmosphere of distrust that executives say will make information-sharing much more difficult.“The tricky thing with information-sharing is that it is about trust,” Eric Grosse, Google’s vice president of security, said in an interview earlier this week. “Information-sharing becomes pretty hard to do once trust is lost.”Advertisement