

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
SEPT. 30, 2015
You could be forgiven for reacting to the Volkswagen scandal by yearning for the halcyon era of dumb cars. Remember when our rides weren’t controlled by secret, corrupt software — when your father’s Oldsmobile was solidly mechanical and so simple in its operation that even a government regulator could understand it?But emotionally attractive as it might be, the analog automobile isn’t a realistic option (which is perhaps why even Luddites aren’t asking for it). The real lesson in VW’s scandal — in which the automaker installed “defeat devices” that showed the cars emitting lower emissions in lab tests than they actually did — is not that our cars are stuffed with too much technology. Instead, the lesson is that there isn’t enough tech in vehicles.In fact, the faster we upgrade our roads and autos with better capabilities to detect and analyze what’s going on in the transportation system, the better we’ll be able to find hackers, cheaters and others looking to create havoc on the highways.Right now we are at an awkward in-between phase in the transformation of the automobile — somewhere in the uncanny valley between the mechanical horse of Henry Ford’s era and the intelligent, autonomous, emissions-free, crash-free, networked fleet that will begin chugging along our roads later this century. This transition period will mean short-term turmoil. Cars today are lousy with code that can’t be inspected, opening the way for scary hackings and cheats and also the unforeseen complications of  interactions between robots and humans.AdvertisementSome of these problems call for obvious fixes. As many have pointed out since the VW admission, the code in our cars (and other life-threatening machines) shouldn’t be secret, but should allow for better inspection by authorities and independent experts. Another obvious fix is to replace the sort of lab-testing that VW was able to game with the kind of real-world analysis that uncovered its chicanery.But to do that, we’ll need more technology, not less. We need more sensors in cars and on roads and a network of computers watching the data to figure out when vehicles are behaving in aberrant ways. In other words, the best way to prevent cheating isn’t to make our cars dumber, but to make the entire transportation grid smarter.AdvertisementLook at how the VW cheating was uncovered. The software in the company’s diesel cars seems to have been designed to detect when a driver was pushing it through the specific routines that the Environmental Protection Agency uses in its emissions labs. When it detected these routines, the car’s software figured, “Hey, someone’s testing me!” and then put itself into an innocent, low-emissions mode that it didn’t use on the open road.The cheating was discovered only when researchers at the International Council on Clean Transportation, a nonprofit automotive research group, working with scholars at West Virginia University, used smarter technology. To analyze VW’s emissions in real-world conditions, they used sophisticated devices mounted inside the trunks of two VWs and one BMW that collected and analyzed exhaust fumes as the cars drove along routes mainly in California.The devices are called “portable emissions measurement systems,” or P.E.M.s, and they are a relatively novel way of measuring how vehicles perform in real-world conditions. The devices found that nitrogen oxide emissions from the VW Jetta were 15 to 35 times the acceptable standards, while those from the VW Passat were five to 20 times over the limit; the emissions from the BMW X5 were generally at or below the standards.“This is a recent development — you miniaturize the equipment you’d have inside a lab so that it fits inside a trunk,” said John German, a senior fellow at the I.C.C.T. These devices are bulky and expensive: Each P.E.M. unit fills most of a car’s trunk, and operating the system and analyzing the data requires trained professionals. The council paid West Virginia University about $70,000 to study just three cars, Mr. German said.He said it would take “a very long time” before such systems would become small and cheap enough to be used routinely in all cars. Still, as in all things powered by software, it’s likely these devices will become more accessible over the next few years, permitting more such tests, if not everyday use.There are other emerging technologies to monitor emissions. Remote sensors on roads, for instance, can measure the average emissions from a fleet of cars to figure out if there are large-scale deviations from what regulators might expect given their guidelines. Another idea is “plume chasing” — investigators drive behind certain cars and collect their gaseous wastes, permitting surreptitious analysis of real-world performance.AdvertisementData flowing in from other sources could help uncover different kinds of automotive gaming. The I.C.C.T. recently collected fuel-consumption data on more than 600,000 European cars from nearly a dozen sources (for instance, a German leasing company that automatically monitors its fleet’s mileage and a Dutch fuel-loyalty card that tracks how much gas people buy).By analyzing the data, the group found that cars in real-world driving conditions emitted far more carbon dioxide than government tests would indicate. In 2014, emissions were 40 percent higher than expected emissions based on guidelines — and the gap has consistently grown since 2001. The research group blamed automakers’ ability to specially prepare their cars for tests, making them unrepresentative of real-world conditions, for part of the gap.In the future, the kind of data the council collected from its many sources could become a standard part of driving. Tesla, the electric carmaker at the forefront of building the connected automobile of the future, already anonymously logs its cars’ “telematics” — measurements like mileage and energy use, in much the same way that Apple and Google track how smartphones are performing in the field.Several start-ups now also make aftermarket devices to add similar intelligence to cars. One, Automatic, a company that makes a device that is kind of like a Fitbit for your car, analyzes data as you drive to determine your car’s efficiency, among other factors.“What happened at Volkswagen had to do with embedded software that’s buried deep in the car, and only the supplier knows what’s in it — and it’s a black box for everybody else,” said Stefan Heck, the founder of Nauto, a new start-up that is introducing a windshield-mounted camera that monitors road conditions for commercial fleets and consumers. The camera uses artificial intelligence to track traffic conditions; over time, as more vehicles use it, it could provide users with traffic and safety information plus data about mileage and other automotive functions.The end goal for intelligent-car systems, said Dr. Heck, is to create an on-road network with data that is constantly being analyzed to get a sharper picture of what’s happening on the road. Sure, companies might still be able to cheat. But with enough independent data sources coming from different places on the road, it would become much more difficult.He said there really isn’t any going back — software in cars is responsible not just for driver comforts like in-dash navigation, but also for critical safety and performance systems, many of which improve the car’s environmental footprint.“I think people are fundamentally comfortable with software running in the car,” said Dr. Heck, who is also a consulting professor at Stanford who has studied the effects of intelligent transportation. “The real issue here is that it was a black box.”When the cars are part of an intelligent network, the black box will be much more transparent.Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; 
Twitter: @fmanjoo A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline:  Our Cars Need More Technology.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »