AdvertisementSupported by9 PhotosView Slide Show ›Sasha Maslov for The New York TimesBy Steve LohrAs inventions go, Jake Zien’s was a clever fix rather than an imaginative breakthrough: Irritation was the mother of his invention.He found the standard power strip maddening because electric plugs would often block the adjacent sockets. So after his senior year in high school, while attending a summer program at the Rhode Island School of Design, he devised an adjustable power strip that solved that problem. But his product concept — a brief description, drawings and a crude mock-up — went nowhere until he was a senior in college. At that point, he sent digital versions of his sketches to a start-up called Quirky.Quirky’s designers and engineers refined the concept. “They made it a much more elegant solution,” he said. Quirky also handled the manufacturing and marketing, secured a patent and listed Mr. Zien as the lead inventor. A year later, in 2011, the snakelike adjustable strip, Pivot Power, was on its way to store shelves.Mr. Zien, 25, now gets a few cents on the dollar for every Pivot Power sold. A software designer in New York, Mr. Zien has collected more than $700,000, and counting.This flexible power strip is the biggest hit so far for Quirky, founded in 2009. The company, based in Manhattan, is a curious creation of the Internet era, a hybrid of the digital and physical worlds. It is a social network, an online retailer and an industrial designer, manufacturer and marketer.Ben Kaufman, the company’s 28-year-old founder and chief executive, calls it “a modern invention machine,” whose mission is to commercialize product ideas.Quirky is Exhibit A for the case that a digital-age renaissance of the small inventor is not only possible but underway. The company taps an online community of one million registered users. More than 400 Quirky-generated products have made it to the marketplace so far.The company is also a laboratory for testing how far the crowd-based model of innovation and product development can go. Quirky’s ultimate goal, Mr. Kaufman insists, is to create an engine that accelerates the process of identifying and developing new ideas for all kinds of products. “I’d like Quirky to be a utility like electricity,” he said.Investors are betting that Quirky can build a sizable business. The company has raised $185 million to date. General Electric, the nation’s largest manufacturer, has put in $30 million, as part of a partnership to experiment with faster-paced models of manufacturing. The rest of the money has come mainly from venture capital firms, including Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers and Andreessen Horowitz.To realize its ambitious goals, however, Quirky has to go beyond making small-bore products that you could imagine hanging in the aisle of Bed Bath & Beyond, like the Pivot Power. Other popular Quirky products include a gadget for separating egg yolks, a plastic stem that inserts into a lemon or a lime and becomes a push-button spritzer, and a corkscrew that cuts the foil off a wine bottle and doubles as a pour spout. Smart, perhaps, but not essential for a networked future.That is starting to change. Quirky is pursuing the much-promoted vision of the smart home, or the consumer Internet of Things. The strategy and the timing are guided in part by its inventor community. A quarter of the 4,000 product ideas Quirky fields each week are for products — like light switches and air conditioners — that can communicate with a smartphone or a household Wi-Fi network.Big companies — not just lone inventors — will increasingly be part of Quirky’s future. It says a handful of companies have lined up for its new corporate partnership program, which builds on Quirky’s experience with G.E. Though it is not identifying them yet, the new partners will include large companies that make toys, audio equipment and kitchenware. The products created will carry the tagline “Powered by Quirky,” but will be sold under the big companies’ brands.The corporate-partner strategy is intended to allow Quirky to focus on its design talents while it benefits from the marketing and manufacturing muscle of the large enterprises. But it creates the potential for a culture clash. Big companies want to pick up innovation tips from Quirky, but they will be encountering a corporate culture whose essence Mr. Kaufman defines as “a complete disregard for the way things are supposed to be done.”A Macworld Epiphany Quirky occupies the expansive top floor of a 19th-century building, overlooking the Hudson River, that was once a terminal for rail car deliveries in Manhattan. The interior is all red brick, vintage wood floors and inventive restoration. An unusually long, open desk space is made from a bowling lane salvaged from North Carolina. Another desk area is a reclaimed glass basketball backboard.Walking the floor, Mr. Kaufman observed, “We’re a very Internet-minded hardware company.”Leadership, it is said, is a performance art, and Mr. Kaufman is a natural. Stocky, animated and always dressed in black, Mr. Kaufman has the ability to persuade.While still in high school, Mr. Kaufman coaxed his parents into taking out a second mortgage of $185,000 on their house to fund an early entrepreneurial venture, which made accessories for the Apple iPod. His mother, Mindy Kaufman, a business manager, and father, Roy Kaufman, a lawyer, initially had no intention of lending their son that kind of money. But he kept coming to them with spreadsheets, product sketches and arguments. “I don’t know what I was thinking — I just did it,” she recalled. “He convinced me.”The young Mr. Kaufman, who had just graduated from high school, traveled alone to China to arrange contract manufacturing for the products. “Age has always been just a number for Ben,” said Claude Zdanow, a friend since high school.The loan from his parents had one condition: that Mr. Kaufman go to college. He attended Champlain College in Burlington, Vt., but he dropped out in his freshman year. He worked on his start-up, called Mophie. It made products like a plastic sled to hold the iPod Nano that could split the audio stream so two people could listen at once. It won a Best of Show award at the Macworld convention in 2006.Rather than simply trying to repeat that accomplishment the following year, Mr. Kaufman decided to do something totally different. He and his team showed up at Macworld in San Francisco, set up a booth and asked the attendees to invent the company’s 2007 product line. At their booth, they passed out small notebooks and pens, and encouraged the Macworld crowd — die-hard Apple fanatics — to draw up their ideas and submit the sketches. Winning entries were selected, and by the end of the four-day show, they used a 3-D printer to make prototypes.That experience, Mr. Kaufman recalled, was “absolutely life changing.” He was struck, he said, by the power of seeing “a community of passionate people work together to create and invent the future.”So Mr. Kaufman sold his iPod accessory business and founded another start-up in July 2007, a month after the first iPhone was sold. The new company, Kluster, was a social network for product design, and it began operating in February 2008. It was the right idea, Mr. Kaufman said, but too early. It didn’t attract a crowd. At the time, Facebook was four years old and Twitter was two. The online sharing ethos had not yet become deeply ingrained.But Kluster paved the way. Two years later, he founded Quirky.The Wisdom of Crowds “Ladies and gentleman, 7 p.m. Thursday night and you’re watching Quirky product evaluation,” Mr. Kaufman said, standing behind a lectern, stage-lit and wearing a mike. “Give it up.”Hearty applause issued from the 100 or so people assembled at the company’s headquarters. Many more Quirky followers in the United States and abroad were watching the event streamed over the web.This happened to be in December, but these evaluation sessions happen every Thursday, except holidays, and are the theatrical highlight of Quirky’s idea-winnowing system.The first step in that process is automated. Software algorithms search inventors’ online submissions for product ideas that are off limits for Quirky, like guns, bombs, medicine and food. Next, the company’s inventor community gets engaged in a virtual plebiscite, voting up or down on the ideas.Quirky’s screeners and product managers then study the popular ideas. They look for, among other criteria, whether the product category is a trending subject, Twitter-style, on its inventor social network. That’s a good indicator that other community members will contribute to and refine the initial idea.Each week, fewer than 10 ideas are presented at the Thursday events, and about half typically get the go-ahead. Mr. Kaufman is the evening’s wisecracking ringmaster. He asks questions of audience members and a panel of Quirky staff members and outside guests. Man-in-the-street interviews conducted outside Madison Square Garden, in which good-natured civilians are asked about the proposed products, are beamed into the webcast. Mr. Kaufman offers summaries, commentary and encouragement. When a product idea gets the nod, Mr. Kaufman intones, “Congratulations, you’re a Quirky inventor.”In truth, there’s still a way to go at that point. About one in five of the ideas approved at weekly evaluation events makes it into the marketplace, where Quirky products are sold through major retail chains including Home Depot, Target and Bed Bath & Beyond, and through online sites like Amazon and Quirky’s own Internet store. (The company sold 172,000 items of merchandise on its website on Cyber Monday in December.)Quirky’s motto is “We make invention accessible.” For any individual inventor the odds are long. Still, what Quirky has done for many inventors is to make placing a product on store shelves an attainable aspiration. And that has attracted a crowd of enthusiasts: a million registered users, 66 percent male, with the largest single cluster between the ages of 26 to 36. There are Quirky members in 165 countries, but a majority are Americans.All inventors have their own stories. Tony Lytle, 56, a millwright in Larwill, Ind., came up with his idea years ago, after his daughter’s dog nearly died of dehydration one scorching summer day. His daughter, who lived nearby, was both working and taking college courses, so she was often away from her house for hours. Her dog had a habit of kicking over its backyard water bowl. Mr. Lytle vowed to think over the problem. One day at a tractor supply store, he paused for a drink at a water fountain. “I started walking away, and it just hit me,” he recalled. “If I could do that for a dog, I think we’ve got something.”Mr. Lytle built a prototype of a water fountain for dogs. It attached to a garden hose, and a thirsty and trained dog could press a pedal and up would come a stream of water. Then, over the next few years, he got an education in the hurdles facing inventors. He applied for a patent, which was eventually granted, but not before he paid more than $5,000 in fees to a patent law firm. A pet product company liked the idea, but dropped its plans in 2008, after the economy sank.Mr. Lytle found a very different experience at Quirky. After his idea was approved at an evaluation event in December 2013, Mr. Lytle spoke regularly with his invention ambassador, a Quirky staff member assigned to shepherd a product through development. “Quirky,” Mr. Lytle said, “listened to all my ideas.” And the company added some of its own as well as ones culled from its community of inventors, including the product name, Pawcet. The dog faucet, priced at $25, went on sale over the holidays last year and sold out its initial production run of 500, Mr. Lytle said. Shipments are scheduled to resume in the spring.Quirky welcomes inventors like Mr. Lytle, but the company’s future will increasingly rely on ones like Nathan Firth, a 32-year-old software developer who is inventing for the smart-home market.Like many Americans, Mr. Firth, who lives in San Marcos, Calif., typically enters his home through his garage door, and was growing weary of the hassle of using his garage door opener. If he went to the playground with his children or for a run, he would have to carry the clicker with him.Mr. Firth figured he always carried his smartphone with him, so why not use that instead? He sketched out a design for a sensor-equipped device that could be connected to the ceiling-mounted motor of any garage door opener. With a smartphone app, users could open and close the door and program it to allow others to have access when they were away on vacation.In November 2012, Mr. Firth submitted his idea to Quirky. Nothing happened at first; he did not have a following on its social network of inventors, and his idea was ignored.But months later, a popular Quirky inventor submitted a similar idea. It was headed for approval, prompting a search of Quirky’s digital archive — and discovery of Mr. Firth’s idea. The ruling was that Mr. Firth was the original inventor. “It was like having a patent without having to get one,” he recalled.Then Quirky staff members did a real patent search, scrutinizing the invention records at the United States Patent and Trademark Office. That took a few more months. The first prototype was built in August 2013, and his smart garage door device was on its way. The result, called Ascend, can now be ordered for $100, with shipments starting in April. “They take your idea,” Mr. Firth said of Quirky, “and they do the hard part.”For its hard work, Quirky takes 90 cents of each dollar of product sales. The other 10 cents is distributed among the inventor community. The person who came up with the product idea typically pockets 4 cents of that. Lesser shares go for contributions like enhancing the idea, choosing the price or coming up with the name.There are a few Quirky inventors, like Mr. Zien, who have made very good money. But for most, the main satisfaction is being a part of ideas that make their way into the world as products. And there is recognition: The inventor’s name appears on the packaging for each product.Old Maker, New Maker G.E., the 123-year-old industrial giant, and Quirky, a feisty start-up, seem an odd couple. But two years ago, G.E. sought out Quirky, as a window into new ways of doing business. “We got intrigued by community-based innovation, and Quirky is a real-life laboratory,” said Beth Comstock, president of G.E.’s business innovation unit and its chief marketing officer.G.E. may be the only corporate investor in Quirky, but across corporate America and in business schools there is a fascination with the collaborative crowdsourcing model it uses. These so-called open innovation techniques have already spurred productivity and product development in the field of open-source software, like the Linux operating system and the Apache web server, which rely on contributions from far-flung programmers.“Quirky has adapted the innovation model from open-source software for the physical world, and done it quite successfully,” said Karim R. Lakhani, an associate professor at Harvard Business School.Other companies are using crowdsourcing to make physical goods, from Threadless for T-shirt designs to Local Motors for automobiles. But none are doing it as broadly and across as wide a range of products as Quirky.At first, G.E.’s main interest in teaming up with Quirky was to explore faster, more democratic models of designing and producing goods — “the next wave of manufacturing,” as Ms. Comstock put it. But as the two companies began working together, they also found that the product strategies for both companies were going along parallel paths: mechanical products that increasingly include software and communicate digitally. Today G.E.’s jet engines, for example, generate sensor data to help predict when maintenance is needed.In the emerging smart-home market, Quirky and G.E. could even make products together. There were some early duds, like the Egg Minder. It was billed as a “smart egg tray,” with sensors and wireless technology to track the number of eggs remaining and when they might be going bad. It worked, but no market existed for the $50 tray.Other products have done better. One is an air conditioner introduced last year with sensors and software to monitor household usage patterns and temperature preferences, and to help keep energy costs within a set budget. It can be controlled from a smartphone app. The initial idea for the Aros window air conditioner, which was introduced last year and sells for $279, came from Garthen Leslie, a former technology manager at the Department of Energy and a Quirky inventor. Mr. Leslie has earned $275,000 so far from his idea (inventors’ earnings are displayed on their Quirky profile page, with a time lag).Another promising product resulting from the partnership between Quirky and G.E. is a light bulb made of energy-efficient light-emitting diodes, or LEDs. The GE Link bulb communicates with home networks and can be programmed so that, for example, certain lights automatically go on when a person opens the front door at night. The bulb costs $15, far less than previous networked LED bulbs. The time from initial design to its shipping to retailers took 100 days, compared with a typical 12 months, said John Strainic, general manager of G.E.’s North American consumer lighting business.“That shows why we’re doing this,” Ms. Comstock said.Quirky was in charge of design and overseeing manufacturing for the bulb, while G.E. brought the LED technology and its expertise in quality control and federal regulations. There was no inventor or listed influencers on the Quirky web page for GE Link. The idea for a networked LED bulb had been around. What remained, it seems, was largely hard-core engineering — work perhaps suited for a focused few rather than a crowd.Broadening the BaseQuirky, with nearly 300 employees, is growing fast. The company is private and does not make public its financial reports, but Mr. Kaufman says Quirky’s revenue more than doubled in 2014, to $100 million.How far Quirky can go from here depends on the pace at which the smart-home market develops. Someday, homes will be more intelligent, safer and more energy-efficient as devices including light bulbs, doors, window shades, water heaters and lawn sprinklers become able to communicate and respond to and learn from users’ digital commands. It’s beginning to happen, but slowly.Another question is how much you can bank on the wisdom of the crowd. Skeptics say that the Quirky model has produced a comparative handful of winners, like Pivot Power, and a host of products with marginal sales. That is starting to change as Quirky broadens its portfolio, but it is also true that its crowd is a community of invention devotees. Their votes are hardly a representative sampling of American consumers. Clever invention does not equal market demand.Quirky supporters note that a high failure rate is the norm for new consumer products. “What open innovation does is change the economics of experimentation and discovery,” Mr. Lakhani said. “Things move more quickly, the cost of failure is much lower, and ideas are more widely distributed as a result of the process.”Mr. Kaufman, an impresario of open innovation, offers a perspective informed by firsthand experience. Community-based innovation, he says, is surely a huge asset in finding ideas and in guiding decisions on a product’s price, color, name and design improvements. Truly original ideas or complex engineering challenges, he notes, tend to be the province of inspired individuals or dedicated small teams of people.Crowdsourcing, Mr. Kaufman said, is “a tool, not a silver bullet. I look at the community as a way to have a broader conversation about how to make great products and better decisions.”In short, be guided by the crowd, not ruled by it.Advertisement