Google is all over the place. From biotechnology and robots to satellites and space exploration, the company has dipped into a dizzying and often confusing range of projects, especially when you consider that the core business is to sell advertising.Astro Teller is also all over the place. Mr. Teller is a Ph.D. computer scientist and entrepreneur, but moonlights as a novelist and used to be a hedge fund manager. Today, Mr. Teller is head of Google X, the research division that works on out-there projects like the self-driving car.Mr. Teller refers to X as the “Moonshot Factory,” a twofold reminder that their projects should be audacious and that they should eventually be profitable for Google. He talked to The Times about how their various projects are going, and when they might make Google some money.The following is an edited and condensed version of that discussion:What responsibility does Google X have to Google’s bottom line?Our way of thinking about ourselves is that we owe it to Google to explore new problems for Google to have a hand in (solving) and new businesses for it to get into over time. Our time horizon is longer than most of the rest of the company’s time horizon tends to be. Because risk abounds, we owe a very strong return. We think of ourselves as having to have a return on investment that is at least comparable to the best early-stage investors.Have any products produced that yet?It would be fair to say Google Brain (now called the Neural Network Project) is producing in value for Google something that would be comparable to the total costs of Google X — just that one thing we’ve spun out. We’re in commercial discussion with various telecommunication companies about integrating Loon into other networks. Without getting into specifics, I assure you we are looking at very substantial opportunities for Loon — Google-scale opportunities. I think generally Google feels the return on investment for Google X has been pretty good so far.Do you feel the need to talk more about your successes?I personally have a philosophy around authenticity and vulnerability. I believe that the right thing for us to do, as much as we can and without confusing people, is to talk about how we’re doing, the things that are going well but also the things that aren’t going well. We have very complex interactions with the public, with regulators. We need to approach each of those conversations — like cars that drive themselves — with a lot of sensitivity, by starting those conversations early.Has Google Glass returned value to Google?I think obviously it’s going to play out over a longer period of time. I do believe when you look backward another few years from now, it will be clear to the outside that Glass, already today, has created value for Google. I am more sure than I have ever been that 10 years from now, a lot of people, I won’t say the bulk of people, will consume a lot of their digital information through something like smart glasses. Whether that’s Google or not, and how much that looks like Glass in its current form, that’s very much up for grabs.How do you ensure something as out there as Google X keeps going?I guess my answer to that is we need to make sure that the things we are already working on turn out to do the things we believe they can do and creating value both for the world and ultimately for Google. We need to make sure we have a pipeline of new things. And the third is we need to be proud in an ongoing basis of the way Google X behaves, how it interacts with the world. I think generally checking those three boxes ought to be enough to justify going forward.By CONOR DOUGHERTYAfter patiently abiding a steep increase in research and development spending, Wall Street is starting to wonder when — and if — Google’s science projects will pay off.