By J. D. BIERSDORFERFEB. 17, 2015
SecuringA Hotmail AccountQ. I’m trying to set up the extra verification to protect my Hotmail account from getting hacked, but it says I need an identity verification app. How does this work?A. Microsoft, like Google, Apple and other companies that offer password-based accounts, offers two-step verification when you log in. The first step is your regular password, and the second step is typically a four- or six-digit security code sent immediately by the site or service to your mobile phone or a separate email address.Once you enter the code and your credentials are verified, your login succeeds. This security setup assumes that even if someone has obtained your password, he or she will not have your phone or second email address and the unique security code to complete the login process.If you supply a mobile phone number in your account settings, the security code can be sent as a text message. If you do not add your phone number, you can use an authenticator app that works directly on the phone to generate a code.AdvertisementSeveral authenticator apps work with Hotmail and Outlook.com, and Microsoft has recommendations for each based on the type of phone you use. For Windows Phone models, you can download Microsoft’s own free Authenticator app from the Windows Phone Store. If you have an Android phone, look for the Microsoft Account app in the Google Play store. For iPhones and other iOS devices, you can use the Google Authenticator app in the Apple App Store. Other authenticator apps designed for your phone platform may work as well.AdvertisementPreserving An iPod ClassicQ. I still love my now discontinued iPod Classic, but how long can I expect the rechargeable battery to last?A. Apple has a help page on its site stating that the “battery is designed to retain up to 80 percent of its original capacity at 400 complete charge cycles.” One charge cycle is completed when you use 100 percent of your lithium-ion battery’s capacity, but this does not have to be all at once. If you use half the battery’s power one day, charge it fully overnight and then use half the power again the next day, you have completed one charge cycle.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So you could get 18 months of good battery life if you are a heavy user, or several years if you use the iPod less frequently. But even when the battery starts to conk out, you can get it replaced. Apple’s iPod battery replacement service for the Classic is now limited mostly to California residents, but you can find independent companies like iResQ or even do-it-yourself kits online.TIP OF THE WEEK Lock-screen notifications are alerts about new mail, messages and other urgent bits of data that appear on your phone’s display without your having to unlock it with a password. While the notifications are a great way to keep informed, you may want to control which apps are allowed to pester you in front of other people.For devices running Google’s Android 5.0 Lollipop, open the Settings icon and in the Device area, tap Sound & Notification. On the next screen, tap App Notifications to get a list of apps, then tap each app to adjust its notification abilities.In Apple’s iOS 8 software for iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch, tap the Settings icon on the Home screen and select Notifications on the next screen. In the list of apps that can provide alerts, select an app to adjust its allowed behavior — like appearing on the device’s lock screen or in the Notifications Center.In Windows Phone 8.1, open the Settings and select Notifications + Actions. Select an app from the list to block it from your lock screen or to make other changes for how it gets your attention.  J. D. BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. A version of this article appears in print on February 19, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Securing a Hotmail Account.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.