Bringing the digital magic of the Internet economy to the machines that run the world is the heady vision of the industrial Internet, or the industrial Internet of Things.Industrial gear like jet engines, power turbines and rail locomotives will sense and predict when they need a tuneup, before any breakdowns, and automatically adjust to changes in the weather and market demand. Factories, cities and even national economies will become more efficient, more productive and cleaner, the thinking goes.Enthusiasm is fueling a global spending spree, and all the major industrial and technology corporations are jumping in.Still, the optimism is tempered by an increasing recognition of the security risk inherent in combining online and physical resources and cultures in industry. Unless the security challenges can be managed, experts agree, the march toward the industrial Internet will be slowed and the payoff will be much smaller.General Electric, the nation’s largest industrial corporation, offers a prime example of the focus on security. No company has been a more forceful champion of the industrial Internet than G.E. in recent years. To pursue its digital strategy, the company has recruited a fast-growing corps of software engineers and data scientists. Last month, Jeffrey R. Immelt, G.E.’s chief executive, predicted that the company would be “a top 10 software company” by 2020.But G.E. has also been enlarging its security group. It has hired experts and last year bought Wurldtech, a start-up that specializes in industrial online security. “We’re seeing these digital and industrial worlds colliding,” said William Ruh, G.E.’s chief digital officer. “On security, the industrial world is a step behind, but has to catch up quickly.”Part of the catch-up challenge, according to Mr. Ruh and others, will be making an adaptive adjustment in the engineering culture of heavy industry. In computing, software security engineers are accustomed to open technical standards, the complexity of distributed systems, regular patches and updates to code, and a constantly shifting battleground in the fight against malicious software. Their work environment assumes a large measure of chaos.The mechanical engineers who manage factories and heavy equipment have traditionally had a different work setting and mind-set. They are experts in control theory, often operating in dirty, hazardous environments. Power plants, oil refineries, water treatment facilities, and air and rail transport systems are known as critical infrastructure because they operate around the clock and failures can have serious, even life-threatening, consequences.For years, the conventional wisdom was that the industrial control technology, while electronic, was separate from the outside world. The communications software was specialized and proprietary, designed for closed, industrial networks. They were assumed to be isolated, so-called air gap systems.Yet for more than a decade, the digital world had been quietly invading industrial factories and equipment more than people recognized. Often, it was through a device connected to a machine or a tweak made in a plant for greater efficiency.Similarly, industry security has been concerned with perimeter control — keeping bad people and malicious software outside the factory gates. But with sensors increasingly placed on all kinds of devices, inside and outside a facility, often involving partners and outside suppliers, all done to streamline operations, the old approach is being challenged.So today’s reality, observed Paul Rogers, chief executive of Wurldtech and G.E.’s general manager for industrial cybersecurity, is that much of the world’s heavy industry is “already online and it is vulnerable.”Managing that risk is a growing business. The market for industrial digital security products and services is more than $2 billion a year and increasing 15 percent annually, said Sid Snitkin of ARC Advisory Group, a research firm.G.E.’s Wurldtech unit offers both services and products. Its Achilles service tests equipment to certify whether it can withstand attacks from about 100 kinds of malware used in industrial settings. It also sells a device, about half the size of a shoe box, that sits on an industrial controller and monitors data traffic coming in, looking for unusual patterns and, if any are detected, sending alerts.Wurldtech’s corporate parent alone represents a huge market. G.E. says it monitors the data flowing from 10 million sensors on $1 trillion worth of equipment every day.The nature of security threats, experts say, ranges from the nuisance of hackers clogging industrial networks to sophisticated, targeted attacks that can shut down machinery and damage a plant.In its most recent report, a  Department of Homeland Security industrial security team said the largest categories of known attacks in the 245 reported incidents in 2014 were network probing and spear phishing — garden-variety computer intrusion techniques.The real fear, experts say, is an expert group carrying out a Stuxnet-style operation. (Stuxnet severely damaged an Iranian nuclear facility and set back its nuclear program. Though it has never been officially confirmed, Stuxnet was believed to have been an American-Israeli cyberweapon).That kind of attack, experts say, is the rare case combining access to equipment, a deep working knowledge of how it operates and camouflaging the sabotage until the damage is done.So far, there have not been assaults with disastrous effects. “We haven’t seen Armageddon threats yet,” said Mr. Ruh of G.E. “And everything that is being done in industrial cybersecurity by companies, university researchers and the government is intended to reduce that risk.”A version of this article appears in print on 10/15/2015, on page F10 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Security Risks In the Internet of Industry.