LinkedIn, the largest business-oriented social network, has agreed to compensate up to 800,000 people who paid for its premium services to settle a class-action lawsuit alleging that it falsely assured them it was using strong security measures to protect their personal information.In June 2012, a file containing 6.5 million encoded LinkedIn user passwords was posted on a Russian hacker site.  The passwords were protected with a weak form of security, allowing hackers to easily unravel the code and find the actual passwords. The company, which had about 160 million users at that time, quickly put in place improved security measures, but everyone was advised to change their passwords immediately.While there was no indication that the breach had any disproportionate effect on the small number of LinkedIn users who were paying the company a subscription fee for extra services, those customers argued in court that the company had deceived them about the level of its Internet security when they had signed up.Under the settlement, tentatively approved by a federal district court in Northern California in late January, 800,000 American users who paid for premium services between March 15, 2006 and June 7, 2012, are eligible to make a claim on the $1.25 million settlement fund. After fees for the plaintiffs’ lawyers are deducted, that works out to about $1 per affected user. However, only those who apply will receive a share of the fund, which means the actual payment to successful applicants will probably be larger. (For more details and instructions on how to apply, visit the official settlement page.)In a statement, LinkedIn said, “Following the dismissal of every other claim associated with this lawsuit, LinkedIn has agreed to this settlement to avoid the distraction and expense of ongoing litigation.”LinkedIn is also close to settling a more sweeping case involving its practice of scanning the email contact lists of its users and sending repeated invitations to those contacts to connect on the service. The company told  Judge Lucy H. Koh of Federal District Court earlier this month that it had tentatively accepted a mediator’s proposed settlement in the case, according to reports on several legal news sites. Details of the proposal were not disclosed but will be filed in court by March 24. A LinkedIn spokesman, Hani Durzy, said the company had no comment “at this time” on the proposed settlement of the second case.