For Lenovo, now comes the apologies.Consumer trust in the world’s largest PC manufacturer plummeted last week after users discovered the company had been shipping its PCs with spyware — what the industry calls adware — buried deep in its operating system, precisely where consumers and antivirus products would have difficulty finding it.Then things got worse. The adware was intended to serve Lenovo users targeted ads, but the company Lenovo partnered with to do this, Superfish, did so by hijacking the trusted certificates that websites use to connect securely to web browsers. And Superfish was doing so in such a way that made it possible for the company, and hackers, to take complete control of their machines.It would appear there is little room for plausible deniability. The company Superfish used to hijack those certificates, Komodia, specializes in hijacking encrypted communications. Superfish has not responded to requests for comment.Lenovo claims it eradicated all traces of Superfish and Komodia from its systems last week, but customers and security researchers say that is not enough. Many have asked why anyone would trust the company in the future.In an interview on Tuesday, Peter Hortensius, Lenovo’s chief technology officer, tried to explain how this could have happened and what the company planned to do next.The interview has been edited for length:How did Superfish even get onto Lenovo machines in the first place?The original motivation for this was that the product team was being asked, “Can we do something to improve our consumer experience?” Someone had the idea to improve their shopping experience in a novel way — not to own their experience, but just, if the consumer is looking at a desk, can we suggest an alternative product that looks like that desk? The motivation was to enhance the experience. Obviously, in retrospect, if we had known what that meant in terms of how it was implemented, we would have never done it.Peter Horne, the technologist that first alerted me to this issue, said he alerted Lenovo about the security issue through your customer service channels in mid-January, and nothing was done until now. When did you first learn that this practice was unacceptable to your customers? When did you take action?We first got complaints in December, but they were more about web compatibility. Customers were saying “Hey, I did this and I got that back, what’s going on?” In January, we concluded [Superfish] was not going to deliver the experience we had wanted. At that point, we had Superfish shut down, and shut down the servers on their end.Unfortunately that’s not what the security exposure was motivated by. That was motivated by the certificate that was created. That we really did not know until last Thursday, midday.I have to press you on that. Mr. Horne brought the security issue to Lenovo’s attention in mid-January, more than six weeks earlier.At that time, we were responding to this issue from a web compatibility perspective, not a security perspective. You can argue whether that was right or wrong, but that’s how it was looked at. We thought turning off the servers at that point would address that problem and that was what was done. At that point, we concluded [Superfish] was not very useful and that is why we started to remove it from the preloads.Why wasn’t this issue picked up in the quality assurance process? What kind of quality assurance process would even allow for installing this kind of adware on Lenovo machines?At a high level, the team that defines what is in these products will encounter stuff in the market, then they will say, “Here is something we want to do,” and they will engage an engineering team. Then we will go through this thing and make sure it adheres to our policies and practices. We make sure it doesn’t know who the individual is. We make sure it’s opt-in. But what was completely missed in this was the security exposure caused by the design of the certificate authority they used.There was nothing about this experience that was opt-in.When you buy a Lenovo machine and turn it on, this was one of the programs that was presented to you. At that point, you could click a button that says, “I don’t want to use this.”I have to press you on that. What did the opt-in prose look like? Nobody recalls anything about this being opt-in.I don’t have it in front of me, but I will get it to you. We want to make this right going forward. Part of this is what we are doing to fix the problem and what are we doing to make this right going forward. To that end, we’re trying to present – in much more plain English — a view of what these programs do.How did you miss the fact that Superfish was hijacking the certificates?We did not do a thorough enough job understanding how Superfish would find and provide their info. That’s on us. That’s a mistake that we made.By simply unplugging the Superfish servers, you did not address that issue.That’s exactly correct. In January, we turned off the servers to respond to the compatibility concern. But unfortunately that did nothing to solve the security problem, which is that someone could hijack the certificate. The actions we took on Thursday and Friday to remove the certificate, and remove all traces of the application, that is what solved the security problem.Were you aware that Superfish was using Komodia to serve its certificates?We were told by Superfish that they were using Komodia but we never looked into it. In December, there was no reason for us to be suspicious. Superfish had a good reputation. But we should have dug in more. I won’t debate that.What does a visual search company like Superfish actually do? It seems that logically to perform a “visual search,” they would have to log everything I’m looking at to know what I might be searching for.For lack of a better term, they take a signature of what you’re looking at. So if you have a mouse hovering over an image, they send the signature back to their servers. That is then used to match against things that are close to what you’re looking at and put that back [into the web page]. This is the magic of their software.So if I’m understanding this correctly, Superfish was pulling the metadata from everything that I saw online, then hijacking the certificate of the website I was on, to insert an image of something I might be inclined to click on and buy?That is my understanding. The idea was that if I’m looking at something, Superfish can serve me an alternative. “Here’s a vase. Here’s a vase that’s similar to it. Or here’s the same vase from a different place.” That was the idea at least.The engineering community is up in arms about this. What was the reaction on your team when you learned Superfish was essentially leaving your users susceptible to hackers?We were incredibly disappointed. That’s probably the polite way to say it.Have you communicated with Superfish since?When this broke, we made sure they knew about it. I have not personally talked to them. I can’t speak to what the team has said to them.Why would anyone trust a Lenovo product ever again, knowing that this program was buried so deep in your operating system, and nobody remembers having opted in to this?All we can say is we made a mistake and we apologize. That’s not nearly enough. So our plan is to release, by the end of this week, the beginning of our plan to rebuild that trust.We are not confused as to the depth that this has caused people not to trust us. We will do our best to make this right. In the process of that, I think we will come out stronger. But we have a long way to go to make this right.We are not trying to pretend Superfish delivered on what it aimed to do. We’re not trying to pretend it did it the right way. And we’re not trying to pretend we should have shipped something that delivered the way it did. We made mistakes on all accounts.Is there any evidence that hackers were able to hijack these certificates to attack your customers?We are not aware of this actually being used in a malevolent way.Do we have your assurances that there are no other cases of similar adware buried in Lenovo products?We are digging through. By the end of the week you will get an absolute statement on that. I do not believe there is any. But I want to be 1,000 percent sure.Our first action was to remove this thing, to eradicate it. This week we begin the plan to make sure this never happens again. We’ll release that plan by the end of the week.