Artemis Networks, a start-up that says it has created a technology for increasing the speed and reliability of wireless networks, is getting closer to bringing that service to the public. The start-up,  which first announced its technology a year ago, said it planned to lease wireless spectrum from Dish Network, the satellite television provider, for up to two years. It will use the spectrum to introduce a wireless Internet service in San Francisco. The deal still needs approval from the Federal Communications Commission. Steve Perlman, the chief executive of Artemis, said he hoped to start the service in San Francisco by the fall. San Francisco, like many big cities, is already served by all the major wireless carriers, but Artemis has developed a technology that it promises will increase wireless Internet speeds through an innovative method of dealing with the congestion that dogs cellular networks. When too many users get onto the Internet in one area from wireless devices, speeds typically slow, like a freeway jammed with too many cars. Carriers try to mitigate the problem by putting up more antennas in busy places like stadiums, but there are limits to how much of that can be done without creating interference between the antennas. Artemis, in contrast, has an antenna technology called pCell that it says embraces, rather than avoids, avoids wireless interference. The antennas on an Artemis network are connected to data centers that perform nearly instantaneous mathematical calculations to fashion a unique wireless signal for every person on the network, giving them access to wireless data speeds that are not degraded as other people use the Internet from their devices. Artemis hasn’t shared a plan for offering its technology to the public until now. It’s clear that leasing wireless spectrum temporarily from Dish in one city is not a strategy that will allow Artemis to bring its technology to a broad public. Artemis lacks the distribution and marketing muscle of the big carriers, whom Mr. Perlman said he would ultimately like to license his technology to.  “Our first choice would probably be to go with a larger carrier,” Mr. Perlman said in an interview. “They have the scale, marketing clout, the stores all over, if you’re really going to deploy to tens of millions of people. Very large scale is what we want to do.” “The problem with working with carriers is, even with the best of intentions, these are large entities that triage what they do,” he continued. “It’s very hard for them to focus their attention on it.”Still, San Francisco could be a proving ground for Artemis’s technology in a highly visible market if it can figure out how to offer a compelling service. Mr. Perlman declined to share details of how much it would cost and how fast the speeds of the service would be. He said the technology would offer more consistent speeds and be cheaper than traditional cellular networks. He said Artemis would likely offer the service both to mobile users and people who use it to replace landline Internet service at their homes and businesses. Artemis will give customers the option of subscribing to wireless service on other carrier networks when they roam outside San Francisco. Mr. Perlman said Artemis is also in discussions with wireless carriers that want to use its technology. 