Growing up in Moscow, David Gorodyansky listened to his grandfather tell stories about fighting the Nazis during World War II. His grandfather was an aerial photographer who flew sorties to take pictures of enemy targets, then returned to bomb them. To Mr. Gorodyansky, he was a hero.“I grew up thinking, what am I going to do to save the world or impact a billion people, like he did?” said Mr. Gorodyansky, chief executive of AnchorFree, an online security company in Menlo Park, Calif.Mr. Gorodyansky may now be getting closer to that goal with Hotspot Shield, one of AnchorFree’s technologies. Hotspot Shield, an app that creates a virtual private network, allows users to hide their Internet protocol addresses, adding another layer of privacy and security to web browsing. That makes it more difficult for censors to block access to specific websites, including Facebook and Twitter. It also gives users more anonymity and security, reducing the amount of data that censors and hackers can easily collect.Hotspot Shield has been used to protect online communications against repressive regimes, including during times of major political upheaval like the Arab Spring. Today, AnchorFree’s products are on 350 million devices, and the company has 30 million monthly active users.Users are also being drawn to the service for more than political reasons. The app is being adopted in corporate environments to improve security. Business travelers and expatriates, for instance, are using it to gain access to sites like Netflix when they are overseas.Efe Oztekin, an industrial engineer living in Colorado, looks to Hotspot Shield to provide security when he is using public Wi-Fi networks .Mr. Oztekin, who is from Turkey, said he also used the app when he recently went to visit his family. Even though he normally would not be able to log into his Netflix account in Turkey, he was able to watch episodes of “Orange Is the New Black” using Hotspot Shield.Mr. Gorodyansky, 33, took a circuitous route to creating Hotspot Shield. When he was 9, his parents moved the family from Russia to Silicon Valley, where they worked as computer engineers. He went to the local high school, and then to San Jose State University, but did not show any affinity for programming. Instead, he found a way to make a quick buck off the bursting dot-com bubble in the early 2000s. With his friend Eugene Malobrodsky, Mr. Gorodyansky founded Intelligent Buying, a company that bought computer equipment from tech companies that were shutting down and resold it to start-ups looking for deals.But while Intelligent Buying was humming along, bringing in more than $1 million in revenue its first year, Mr. Gorodyansky was not fulfilled.In 2004, his girlfriend at the time took Mr. Gorodyansky to hear Muhammad Yunus, the Nobel Peace Prize-winning micro­finance pioneer, speak in Berkeley, Calif. Inspired, Mr. Gorodyansky once again began dreaming big.“The next thing we’re going to do, the promise has to be helping one billion people,” he said he told himself.Believing that access to the Internet could improve lives, Mr. Gorodyansky and Mr. Malobrodsky created AnchorFree, a company that would offer free Wi-Fi hot spots. They blanketed downtown Palo Alto, Calif., and had five neighborhoods in San Francisco covered. The company raised more than $6 million from investors including Bert C. Roberts Jr., a former media executive, and Esther Dyson, a prolific investor.But in 2005, the free Wi-Fi hot spot idea was not lucrative. Revenue from advertising hosted on the service was modest. And Mr. Gorodyansky was still living at his parents’ house.At the same time, AnchorFree introduced Hotspot Shield. By 2008, AnchorFree had made a classic Silicon Valley pivot. The main product — free Wi-Fi — had become a commodity. But that other feature, Hotspot Shield, was becoming a hit.As political unrest began to spread through the Middle East in 2010, Mr. Gorodyansky and his colleagues began to notice an increase in traffic from countries such as Kuwait, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia. Soon it became clear that Internet users were using Hotspot Shield to evade censors.“It allows the world that had been closed to open up,” said Ms. Dyson, who remains an adviser to AnchorFree. “And it’s transformed from something about how we could make money into something with more of a social conscience.”The company soon bought a banner ad on a popular forum being used by pro-democracy activists in the region. In a matter of days, Hotspot Shield had several hundred thousand more downloads. “Without knowing it, we were sitting on the billion-person idea,” Mr. Gorodyansky said.Emboldened by success overseas, AnchorFree raised an additional $5 million in 2008. Hotspot Shield, which is free to download but charges for enhanced services, soon helped the company become profitable. In 2012, Goldman Sachs invested $52 million in AnchorFree.After Egypt began restricting access to social media in 2011, Egyptians downloaded Hotspot Shield one million times in a single day. Today, AnchorFree said, Hotspot Shield is installed on a quarter of all computers and smartphones in the Middle East, and it is growing in other regions.Yet AnchorFree has treaded carefully in certain places. It has not made a big push into China. “We try not to kick the bear,” Mr. Gorodyansky said.Still, as governments crack down, new markets open up. Last year, Turkey blocked access to Twitter. Within 24 hours, Hotspot Shield was the most popular app in the country, and within 72 hours, it had two million users there.Mr. Gorodyansky is still prone to making grandiose proclamations, channeling the sense of historical ambition he inherited from his grandfather.“Privacy and Internet freedom are a basic human right according to the United Nations and will be a matter of life and liberty for citizens of the developing world,” he said. “AnchorFree will play a key role in providing these basic human rights to the next five billion Internet users.”He is also busy introducing new products, including Privacy Wizard, which adds a layer of security to other smartphone apps, and a Snapchat competitor called Kaboom.“Hopefully, as we continue on our goal to reach one billion people, we will make freedom and security available to everyone on the planet,” Mr. Gorodyansky said. “That’s really my dream.”A version of this article appears in print on 10/15/2015, on page F8 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Outflanking the Censors.