The Electronic Privacy Information Center has asked the Federal Trade Commission to investigate Samsung over what it says is the recording of private conversations in homes through the company’s television sets. The privacy rights group filed a complaint with the commission on Tuesday accusing Samsung of violating federal laws with a technology that allows viewers to operate the company’s Internet-connected smart TVs with voice commands. In the past, EPIC has also complained to the commission about the privacy practices of Google and Facebook. The companies ended up settling their cases with the F.T.C.  The complaint underscores the privacy minefield that technology companies are wading into as they cook up new methods of operating devices with voice commands and other techniques. Samsung’s sets allow people to change channels, increase volume and search for recommended programs to watch by using their voices, rather than by pushing buttons on a remote control. Samsung ignited the debate over its privacy practices this month when it modified the privacy policy for its television sets, adding a sentence that suggested the sets were spying on their users in uncomfortable ways.  “Please be aware that if your spoken words include personal or other sensitive information, that information will be among the data captured and transmitted to a third party through your use of voice recognition,” the sentence read. After an outcry, Samsung said in a blog post that that sentence had “led to confusion” and sought to clarify that its voice recognition technology works only after a user pushes an activation button on a television remote control or screen and speaks into a microphone on the remote. Samsung updated its privacy policy Wednesday afternoon.Adam Yates, a Samsung spokesman, declined to comment. In its complaint, EPIC accused Samsung of violating several laws intended to protect consumer privacy, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, which prohibits the interception and disclosure of electronic communications, and the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act, which regulates collection of personal information from minors. The group asked the F.T.C. to investigate Samsung, halt its practice of transmitting voice recordings to third parties and examine other companies involved in similar practices. Many electronics devices, including Apple’s iPhone, Amazon’s Echo home speaker system and Microsoft’s Xbox One, have voice recognition capabilities. Even though Samsung argues that a user must activate voice recognition with a push of a button, that did little to diminish the privacy concerns of Marc Rotenberg, the president and executive director of EPIC.“Consumers will have no idea what the practical consequence will be of the activating voice recognition,” Mr. Rotenberg said in an email exchange. “The key point is that Samsung is not just recording voice commands to operate the TV, as many would expect. The company is capturing all voice communications, including conversations between people in the room.”