In the scheme of things, 336 is not a terribly large number when it comes to corporate layoffs. That is, unless people have thought you were the Next Big Thing — or at least one of the next big things that probably won’t be quite as big as Facebook.Early Tuesday, Jack Dorsey, Twitter’s recently reappointed chief executive, said the social media company would lay off about 8 percent of its work force, or 336 people. The layoffs were widely expected as Mr. Dorsey tries to reignite growth at the company he helped found. (On Wednesday, the company made another change, appointing Omid Kordestani, until recently Google’s chief business officer, as its executive chairman.)But here are a few numbers to put Twitter’s layoffs in perspective: 30,000, 10,000 and 7,800. Those numbers are, respectively, the number of job cuts expected at Hewlett-Packard as it cleaves itself into two smaller Hewlett-Packards; roughly the number of jobs IBM cuts every year (even as it continues to hire) and cuts recently announced at Microsoft.So why the increased attention to Twitter’s 336? For one thing, Twitter is a tiny company compared with those tech giants, so a few hundred people is proportionally as disturbing to Twitter employees as 30,000 is at HP.But the bigger issue is one of expectations and fear that tech’s multiyear upswing is starting to slow. Twitter is one of a handful of social media companies that have managed to break into the mainstream. While it has seen remarkable growth since it was founded (it wasn’t all that long ago that Twitter didn’t even have 336 employees), those increases have slowed over the last year. As Mark Mahaney, an Internet analyst at RBC Capital Markets, said, “You don’t normally see job cuts at this early stage for growth companies unless there is something materially going wrong with the operations or the strategy.”What’s more, if Twitter, a household name, is struggling to find its footing, what does that say for the young tech companies that are unknown outside a few other numbers – 415, 650, 669 and 408?Those are the main area codes of San Francisco and Silicon Valley.