LONDON — Matt Brittin, a former Olympic rower, has become Google’s man in Europe.As part of a reorganization of its European operations, Google has appointed Mr. Brittin, who is English, to be its top executive in Europe, ending a previous arrangement in which the region was managed by two executives, whose responsibilities were split along geographical lines.Europe, with its 742  million residents, is one of Google’s largest markets and also its biggest headache.Over the last year, European officials have accused Google of dodging taxes and acting like a monopoly. European courts also hit the company with a new “right to be forgotten” law that set up a process for people to have links about themselves removed from Google’s search engine. Taken together, Google’s regulatory problems in Europe have become a major point of concern among investors.“As we saw with Microsoft, it can be a long-term cloud over the company,” said Ben Schachter, an analyst with Macquarie Securities. “We don’t think it will destroy the company, but it certainly can harm them competitively and restrict them from doing things other competitors might be able to take advantage of.”The move to reorganize Europe’s operations under a single executive should help Google react more nimbly to regulatory issues that have become the company’s top threat in the region.Carlo d’Asaro Biondo, a former media executive who previously oversaw Google’s Southern European business, will oversee the company’s strategic relationships with policy makers and commercial partners, according to a source with direct knowledge of the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.Mr. Brittin and Mr. d’Asaro Biondo, a citizen of France and Italy, began their roles this year. Mr. Brittin, a former publishing executive who previously ran Google’s operations in Northern Europe, will take charge of the newly combined unit that will include the search engine’s operations across Europe, the Middle East and Africa.The move come as Europe’s antitrust officials continue to examine a four-year competition case against Google’s dominant position in the search engine market. Rivals like Microsoft have claimed that the company has throttled competition, and the inquiry has expanded from Google’s search business to include Android, the company’s mobile phone operating system that has more than a billion active users around the world.At the same time, several countries, including Britain, France and Spain, have questioned tax practices that have allowed Google to sidestep national taxes. That is because, in a common arrangement among United States tech companies, Google’s European operations are based in Ireland, whose low-tax practices are being questioned by ​the European Commission, the executive arm of the European Union.Last year, Europe’s highest court passed a landmark privacy case that allowed anyone with connections to the Continent to request that links to information about themselves be removed from online search results. Google has pushed to limit the ruling, known as the right to be forgotten, to Europe’s borders, though some of the region’s privacy watchdogs want the European court decision to be enforced across Google’s global domains, including google.com.Despite the search engine’s efforts to rejigger its European operations to placate local fears, it is unlikely that the region’s authorities will pull back from the various regulatory investigations that have engulfed Google’s businesses within the 28-member bloc. Some European officials would like the region to take an even harsher stance toward not just Google, but much of the United States tech industry. Günther Oettinger, the European commissioner in charge of the digital economy, warned  this week that international tech companies would have to comply with Europe’s tough antitrust and privacy rules, or face the consequences.“Anyone who wants to take advantage of our data will have to comply with our rules or they are going to have trouble with the competition authorities,” Mr. Oettinger, a German politician, told an audience in Brussels on Tuesday in reference to  United States tech companies. If companies do not comply, Mr. Oettinger added, they “ultimately, perhaps, may be thrown out of the single market.”In addition to shuffling its executive ranks, Google has also been on something of a charm offensive. On Thursday, the company announced it would help train one million Europeans in digital skills.The company is also backing a number of co-working spaces that have become hubs for start-ups looking to tap into the region’s growing tech scene. And last year the company created a $100 million venture capital fund to invest in the region’s fledgling tech companies — an area that the European Commission has earmarked as a potential engine for growth, as Europe’s economy continues to stutter from the recent financial crisis.Mark Scott reported from London and Conor Dougherty from San Francisco.