By REUTERSFEB. 25, 2015
NEW YORK — Apple has been ordered to pay $532.9 million after a federal jury found its iTunes software infringed on three patents owned by Smartflash, a patent licensing company based in Texas.Though Smartflash had been asking for $852 million in damages, the verdict, which came late Tuesday night, was still a costly blow for Apple.After deliberating for eight hours in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Texas, the jury said that Apple not only had used the Smartflash patents without permission but also had done so willfully.Apple suggested the outcome was a reason why change is needed in the patent system to curb litigation by companies like Smartflash that do not make products themselves.Advertisement“We refused to pay off this company for the ideas our employees spent years innovating and unfortunately we have been left with no choice but to take this fight up through the court system,”  Apple said in a press release.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A representative for Smartflash could not immediately be reached.Smartflash sued Apple in May, 2013, saying Apple’s software infringed on its patents related to access to and storage of downloaded songs, videos and games.The trial was held in Tyler, the hub of the East Texas region, which over the past decade has become a focus for patent litigation in the United States. Some of the biggest jury verdicts have been awarded in the district. Smartflash is based in Tyler.AdvertisementApple tried to avoid a trial by having the lawsuit thrown out. But this month, Judge Rodney Gilstrap, who presided over the case, ruled that Smartflash’s technology was not too basic to deserve the patents. That ruling set the stage for a trial. Apple argued that it had not infringed on the patents and asked the jury to find they were invalid because previously patented inventions covered the same technology. Smartflash’s suit said that in about 2000, the co-inventor of its patents, Patrick Racz, discussed the patents’ technology with a man named Augustin Farrugi, who, the complaint said, later became a senior director at Apple.A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.