By J. D. BIERSDORFERFEB. 24, 2015
Q. If I archive a Gmail message in my browser, what does that do and where does the message go?A. Unless you are downloading and moving the mail elsewhere with a third-party mail app, messages stay in your Gmail inbox on the web until you decide to do something with them. If you like a tidy inbox, you can archive messages.Archiving a message moves it out of your inbox but still keeps it in your account. You can find the message again by searching or looking in the All Mail view listed on the left side of the Gmail window. If you do not see All Mail listed, click the triangle under the More menu there.You can archive a message when you have it open on screen by clicking the Archive button at the top of the Gmail window; the button looks like a folder with an arrow on it. If you do not have a single message open, you can archive multiple missives in the inbox by turning on the checkbox next to each message listed and clicking the Archive button.When a Laptop Battery WanesQ. My laptop battery is nonremovable — and it is not holding a charge for very long anymore. What are my options if I don’t want to stay plugged into a power outlet all the time?AdvertisementA. Many ultrabooks and smaller laptops now seal the battery inside the case to keep the computer as lightweight as possible, but this does make it harder to replace the power cell when it begins to fade. Unless you are in do-it-yourself mode and have found a reliable upgrade guide for your model, check with your laptop’s manufacturer about available repair services. Most should offer battery replacement by mail or through an authorized service provider.AdvertisementAn external battery may be another solution. Lenmar makes a few models for laptops, and there are other portable power packs around, like the Energizer XP8000A and the BatteryBox.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.TIP OF THE WEEK If you do not want to keep a credit card on file to buy apps for your phone or tablet, you can purchase gift cards from major retailers for the Google Play store, Microsoft’s Windows and Xbox Store and Apple’s App Store. You can then redeem the cards for credit in the online store.Converting a gift card to online cash typically requires entering the code from the back of the card on the Redeem page for your selected app store, but if you have iOS 7 or later on your Apple device, you do not even have to type the 16-digit code.Just remove the label covering the card’s number on the back and then open the iTunes Store or App Store icon from the Home screen. Scroll to the bottom of the page and tap the Redeem button. After you sign into your Apple ID account, tap the Use Camera option on the Redeem page. Hold the camera so it can focus on the code inside the black box on the card’s back. When the camera successfully captures the code, your store balance updates on the screen.You can also capture gift card codes on a Mac desktop or laptop with a FaceTime camera, iTunes 11 or later, or OS X 10.8 or later. When you have removed the label covering the code on the back of the gift card, open iTunes (or the App Store) on the Mac and in the Quick Links area, click Redeem. Log into your account and click the Use Camera button. Hold the card up so the Mac’s FaceTime camera can capture the code, and click Done after you see that your account balance has been updated.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Filing Messages in Gmail.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.