Venmo, the popular mobile payments app, is one of eBay’s secret weapons. The app, which allows users to quickly send cash directly to friends’ bank accounts, is popular with young audiences, a demographic eBay desperately wishes to court.But critics have said that Venmo has long taken a lackadaisical approach to users’ security, and that it seems to have made little effort to improve it. An article in Slate on Thursday explained weaknesses in the company’s basic security features and an inability to notify users if an account had been compromised.Back in July, though, Venmo was ordered by California regulators to establish companywide best practices and programs around user privacy, security, customer service and fraud loss management.The order, issued by Jan Lynn Owen, commissioner of the California Department of Business Oversight, required that Venmo respond to more than 20 “unsafe practices,” including what Ms. Owen cited as a lack of a “formal consumer assistance policy” and a complete absence of a “compliance system for active suspicious activity monitoring.”The order, dated July 17, 2014, also requested that Venmo “establish vital company policies” around such areas as “consumer privacy (including California Information Privacy Act), information technology, operations, internal controls and ACH and fraud loss management,” the document said.Mrs. Owen requested that Venmo respond within 60 days of the order’s issuance.​A Venmo spokeswoman said all of the items in the order had been “remediated.” “Venmo is addressing the concerns that the California Department of Business Oversight brought to our attention and we are complying with their recommendations,” said Jennifer Hakes, a spokeswoman for the company. “To be clear, we take the security of our customers extremely seriously. We always put them first, and operate accordingly.”The California Department of Business Oversight, however, agreed that the compliance process was continuing.“We’re continuing to work with Venmo to obtain full compliance with the order,” said Tom Dresslar, a spokesman for the department.A post aimed at the company’s users by Michael Vaughan, Venmo’s general manager, on the company’s blog on Friday detailed “the things we do to help keep you secure,” adding that “I want to assure you we are continuously improving product and security measures.”The security issues are a black eye for the otherwise successful young arm of eBay’s powerful payments division. The company, which started as a online auctions company, is in the middle of a major restructuring. PayPal — the huge payments arm of eBay that owns Venmo and Braintree, another payments technology company — will be spun off from the online auctions giant later in 2015.Though Venmo does not bring in revenue, the company has been described as eBay’s powerful connection to young customers.“If you go to any college campus across America, they talk about Venmo-ing money to each other,” John Donahoe, chief executive of eBay, said on the company’s recent earnings call.Criticisms regarding security are a particularly important area for Venmo, which encourages users to connect the app directly to their bank accounts. Security is also a sore spot for eBay, which in May disclosed it was the victim of a security breach that exposed the personal data of 145 million of its customers.