Online activists played a significant role in the vote on Thursday to regulate broadband Internet service as a utility.And even before the vote yesterday, outside the headquarters of the Federal Communications Commission, they started taking a bow.Grassroots advocacy groups began gathering outside the building more than four hours before the 1 p.m. vote, greeting each other with preemptive congratulations while staking silhouettes of black cats into the ground as a playful nod to Internet cat memes. The cats wore orange stickers that read “Save the Internet.”“We have been out here pretty much every month — in rain, sleet and now snow,” said Craig Aaron, president and chief executive of Free Press, an activist group that promotes Internet openness.The week had already been one of celebration for the advocates. Senator Ed Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, days before called groups like Free Press critical to Thursday’s victory. “This is truly a 21st century battle, and all of you are Paul Reveres,” Mr. Markey said.Unlike Paul Revere, though, these activists weren’t going anywhere. Hip-hop music and coordinated chants grabbed the attention of passersby.“Comcast, you lose,” they called out. “We win.”The activists’ enthusiasm carried inside the F.C.C. meeting room, too, as the final vote was followed by a standing ovation by the crowd in the room. The mood was similar in the two overflow rooms used to accommodate the attendees forced to watch on television sets.Of course, not everyone was feeling triumphant or hopeful. While the majority of attendees were clearly in favor of the new rules, the vote itself was a squeaker, albeit an expected one: 3 to 2, down party lines.In an unusual move, the two dissenting commissioners, both Republican, held a joint press conference after the hearing to express frustration, not just about the way the vote had gone but about the process leading up to it.The commissioners had called for the rules to be published before the vote. The commissioners themselves received a draft of the rules, proposed by Tom Wheeler, chairman of the F.C.C., three weeks before Thursday’s meeting and were invited to suggest edits leading up to Thursday.Ajit Pai, one of the two Republican commissioners, said that he had disagreed too fundamentally with the new rules to propose any specific changes. “There was no room for negotiation,” he said. “Under no circumstances would I nibble around the edges.”Some dissent from others was less intelligible, and intentionally so. After the vote, Verizon — which had staunchly opposed the new rules and sued the F.C.C. for its last attempt to establish new regulations — said the new rules were fit for the past, for “the era of the steam locomotive and the telegraph.”The message was written in cutting-edge technology for that era: Morse code.