AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. What’s the difference between the Amazon Fire TV and the Fire TV Stick — besides the size and about $60?A. Amazon’s two main pieces of hardware for streaming video to your connected television set have a lot of similarities — and some differences. As for what is the same, both devices have eight gigabytes of storage. All your music, Prime Music, Amazon Instant Video and Prime Instant Video purchases work on the Fire TV box and Fire TV Stick. Each also comes with a remote control and can connect to the Internet over a wireless connection. (The Fire TV’s remote also includes a voice-search feature, but the same remote must be purchased separately for the Fire TV Stick.)The Amazon Fire TV box, however, has a bit more under the hood than its Stick sibling. The Fire TV is a set-top box with twice as much memory installed as the Stick and can connect to your home network through a wired Ethernet connection as well. Both devices have Dolby Digital Plus, but the Fire TV can output audio in 5.1 surround sound.The cheaper and smaller Fire TV Stick may not work with as many apps and games as the Fire TV does. And for those in need of parental controls, Amazon’s FreeTime and FreeTime Unlimited tools for managing content for children are available only on the Fire TV box.Transferring a Boarding Pass Between iPhonesQ. Is there an easy way to get a mobile boarding pass from one iPhone to another from my airline’s app?A. If you have downloaded boarding passes for two people with your airline’s own app and want to send the appropriate pass to your travel companion, you should be able to transfer it in a couple of ways.If your airline’s app does not offer an option to send the boarding pass directly by email or message, you can probably share it through Apple’s Passbook wallet — as long as the airline app allows you to add the boarding pass to Passbook. (Most apps from major airlines do; open the boarding pass in the app and look for an Add to Passbook button in the top corner.)Once you have added the boarding passes to Passbook, select the boarding pass with your fellow traveler’s name on it and tap the Share icon in the bottom-left corner. You should see the icons to send the pass by Mail or Message on screen. If you choose one of these, the other person should get an Add to Passbook option after opening the message with the boarding pass attached.If both iPhones are running at least iOS 7 (and are at least iPhone 5 models), you should also be able to use Apple’s AirDrop feature to beam the boarding pass between phones. You can turn on AirDrop by swiping up from the bottom of the screen to open the Control Center; tap AirDrop to turn the feature on if it is not active already. When you tap the Share icon on the boarding pass, select AirDrop and choose the icon for the other phone. Once you do, the file is sent over — where it can then be added to that phone’s Passbook wallet.Advertisement