AT&T, the second-largest wireless carrier in the United States, says it is has found life beyond being a phone carrier.The company said that this year it is poised to become a more diversified company, with money coming in from connected cars and the “Internet of Things.” AT&T also says that business solutions, or services it offers to businesses, will be its largest source of income.In an interview, Ralph de la Vega, the head of AT&T’s mobile and business solutions division, shared insight into how the company was finding business beyond offering service for cellphones. The following is an edited version of that interview.You mention that a big part of AT&T’s revenue comes from business solutions. What does that even mean? What’s an example?We are an organization that covers more than 120 million wireless subscribers in the United States and 3.5 million and more businesses throughout the world in over 180 countries. And we serve nearly all of the Fortune 1,000 companies around the world. We give some great solutions for entertainment or businesses.A good example of a business that has dramatically transformed the industry that’s using those capabilities is Uber. Uber has transformed what it took to hail a taxi completely and does it now via smartphone. We are their primary provider. We were there with them from the very beginning, when it was a much smaller company. We provided Uber the phones that they gave to their drivers, and we made sure the application was on the phones, of course. And we did some of the back-office stuff that they needed us to connect them with.We loved their vision for taking a smartphone, putting it in the hands of the driver and the passenger and letting them connect, to bring about it a completely new service that, quite frankly, wouldn’t have been possible.So AT&T keeps saying it’s really bullish about the Internet of Things. Do you really think people are going to care about things like turning on light bulbs with their phones? So far these applications have been perceived as a luxury, not a necessity.That’s not the definition we see of the Internet of Things. Clearly that’s one of the things you could do, but gosh, you could do so much more.When we say Internet of Things we say everything from wearables to light bulbs, but it includes locomotives, jet engines, cargo containers, cars, trucks, trains, automobiles.I don’t think you’ll see too many things in the future that are not connected. Once you connect those things then it adds huge value for tracking where different pieces of equipment are and their status, so businesses can run more effectively.A real-life case is a garbage can. You would say, “What in the world are you doing connecting garbage cans?” A waste management company came to us and said: “We don’t know how full they are. If we don’t know how full they are, we might pick up bags when they aren’t full.” So as they make the rounds picking up they can say, “If they’re not filled we don’t have to pick that one up today, we can pick it up next week.” And it saves them time and materials, and can even lower prices for customers.So we brought that company and their garbage can to our Foundry, our innovation center. We manufactured a piece of equipment there using a 3-D printer. Whether the garbage can was half full or three-quarters full, it would send a message to a control center that could also route a person to pick up the garbage.When we say the Internet of Things it encompasses a very wide field.You mentioned wearables. The Apple Watch is coming out in April. What’s your take on smart watches? Will they be as successful as smartphones?I think it’s going to be hard to tell. The key with the smart watch is it really has to be smart on its own. I think some of the ones you’ve seen that get us the most excited are those that connect directly to a cellular network. When they are able to stand alone, you can leave your smartphone at home while going for a run.I don’t really get the appeal of connected cars. In the car when you’re driving, you don’t want to be distracted, so why would you need an extra data plan on top of your smartphone plan for a car? Doesn’t that get expensive?We are pioneers in the connected-car space and are ahead of our time in spotting the trend that all cars will have connectivity in the future. Car manufacturers all want connectivity because that’s the easiest and fastest way to update the software. The days of having to take your vehicle to a dealer to update maps are long gone.Tesla is one of the more aggressive manufacturers when it comes to updating the software in their vehicles over-the-air, which all manufacturers are moving to. When the car breaks down what happens to the car? Did the battery go dead? They can also track the history of what happens to the car for diagnostics.From the user’s point of view, there isn’t an autonomous driving vehicle that’s not connected that I know of. How you interact with the autonomous driving vehicle is with a smartphone. All cars will have an autonomous driving feature, so you can talk to the car while using your smartphone.We added 800,000 connected cars in the fourth quarter of 2014 alone. That is pretty significant.