BARCELONA, Spain — On Sunday at the Mobile World Congress trade show here, HTC announced a new version of its flagship phone, the HTC One. But the company also branched into two totally new categories: wearable devices and virtual reality. A year after rumors emerged that HTC might make a wearable computing device, HTC announced a wrist-worn activity tracking device aimed at serious athletes called the HTC Grip that can synchronize with either an iOS device or Android phone.The Grip took a while to become a reality, HTC officials said, because the company did not think it had the expertise to create its own health and fitness software, app and infrastructure. So in January, HTC announced a partnership with fitness giant Under Armour to develop a line of devices that would work with Under Armour’s UA Record fitness app. The Grip is the first, but HTC said will not be the last. The HTC Grip will be released this spring for $199 and, unlike most wearable fitness trackers, it includes GPS, which makes it a good option for runners or cyclists who do not want to carry a phone. The Microsoft Band is one of just a handful of other devices that include GPS at the same price. It is water-resistant. The company does not recommend swimming with it, but said it can easily withstand sweat, rain and even showering. The Grip supports multiple sport modes, so it can track distance, route and pace of a run of bike ride and then sync with the phone. Or a user can specify that he or she is on a treadmill indoors or cycling in a class, or even just  at the gym. It syncs with either Android or iOS phones, and can display incoming calls and texts, although HTC said it intends the device to be about fitness first, phone compatibility second. The Grip does not, however, support heart-rate sensing, which HTC said it considers too inaccurate to be useful. The company recommends an external heart-rate sensor like a chest strap, and supports connecting to those devices over Bluetooth. The band will come in small, medium and large sizes and will be available in one sporty color: lime and dark teal.Under Armour is not HTC’s only intriguing partner. The company also announced a deal to work with video game development company Valve to develop a virtual reality headset called the HTC Vive. Details were sparse and the device was not available to test, but HTC said an early version called a developer edition will appear this month and that it would release a consumer version of the headset late this year. The Vive is closer to the Oculus Rift than a headset like the Samsung Gear VR. Where Samsung’s headset is powered by inserting a Note 4 phone and using it as the screen, HTC said the Vive will be a PC gaming accessory that also supports a new virtual reality content store called Steam VR. As for its flagship phone, HTC is not messing too much with a good thing. The HTC One and last year’s HTC One (M8) featured similar designs that were generally well received. The latest HTC One looks similar to last year’s model, which is a good thing, but with a few improvements to make it even better. The previous design was a little too rounded, which made it easy to drop, so the new version gets more squared-off edges that are easier to grip. The curved back remains the same, as does the dual-speaker design, although the power button moves from the top of the phone to the right side. HTC is adding some interesting tricks to its flavor of Android, too. Its HTC Sense interface will try to intelligently predict what apps you want to see and when, kind of like contextual homescreen apps like EverythingMe and Aviate. It will rearrange the home screen (with the user’s  permission) based on whether the user is  at home or at work, for example. In the morning at home, a user might see weather, traffic and news apps, while email and calendar might pop up in the office.Or Sense could offer suggested apps or web links depending on the user’s location. So, if I were visiting Barcelona with my HTC One, my phone’s home screen might show me links to nearby restaurants or tourist information, or suggest that I download a subway map. That could be useful if buyers accept the premise of contextual rearranging, but could also prove intrusive or confusing. Still, it’s a bold experiment on HTC’s part. The other major improvement to the HTC One is in its camera. HTC has long relied on clever camera tricks like larger pixels and editing features instead of increasing megapixels or bragging about high-tech sensors. The HTC One (M8), in fact, had just a 4-megapixel camera, and although it produced good images some of the time, it was starting to show its age. In what is possibly a case of overcompensating, the new HTC One moves the old 4-megapixel camera to the front of the phone, and the rear camera jumps all the way up to 20 megapixels for stills, and can shoot video in ultrahigh definition 4K resolution. Camera purists argue that more megapixels does not always equal better images, however, and competitors like Apple still rely on powerful sensor technology at relatively low megapixels. Again, this camera will need some testing. HTC will, though, include its impressive suite of photo effects, editing tools and the Zoe app that can automatically edit pictures into a slideshow set to music. The HTC One also boosts its already impressive sound, which makes it good for playing music around the house or a hotel room, and for speakerphone calls. And HTC is hoping to jump in on the booming wireless audio trend by allowing you to easily stream music to connected speakers that the Qualcomm AllPlay or Blackfire Research wireless streaming technologies.It even includes a built-in remote control app for controlling your television and home theater systems. The new HTC One is an interesting effort with built-in concepts that could prove hard to grasp for consumers who are used to the simpler message of iPhones (lots of apps, easy to use!) and Samsung Galaxy phones (like an iPhone, but with Android!). The phone often finds itself in third place despite great looks, great performance and a cult following. The new model is not making a mainstream argument, so it could end up in the same boat,  or worse, depending on other phones that could be announced in Barcelona and beyond. For a company struggling to sell more phones, that would be a tough outcome. The new HTC One looks to be just as cool, different and lovable as its predecessors, but HTC needs more than a cult hit right now. It needs a blockbuster. 