BARCELONA, Spain — In front of a packed audience here, Mark Zuckerberg turned on the charm.The Facebook chief executive outlined on Monday why he thought Internet.org, a service backed by his company that is intended to provide people in emerging markets with free  access to some online applications, would help telecommunications carriers persuade customers to spend more on  streaming content to their cellphones. The service, which is now offered in countries including Paraguay and Zambia, allows individuals to access Facebook and a limited number of other applications free. Carriers hope that  this access — often the first time that  people have surfed the web — will lead  them to spend money on separate data  packages. ‘‘Growing the Internet is expensive  work,’’ Mr. Zuckerberg, dressed in jeans  and a gray T-shirt, told an audience at the  Mobile World Congress, an industry conference that has become an annual global  event where telecom operators talk shop.  ‘‘The only way to accelerate that is to  help operators to grow their business.’’Mr. Zuckerberg’s words are part of efforts to quell growing disquiet among some carriers, particularly in Western  countries, who say that Facebook,  Google and other Internet companies  are taking unfair advantage of carriers’  mobile networks.Industry executives say that these Internet services, which are used by billions of individuals each day, do not invest in the costly infrastructure  required so that people can access applications on their smartphones. Some  also say that the likes of Facebook,  which now holds a strong position in  Internet messaging after buying  WhatsApp last year for $19 billion, do not  face the same tough regulations as traditional operators.‘‘We want a level playing field,’’ Vittorio Colao, Vodafone’s chief executive,  said in Barcelona on Monday. ‘‘Facebook  now has become one of the biggest Internet messaging companies in the world.’’Mr. Zuckerberg tried to assuage these  concerns, saying that Facebook helped  drive extra revenue to carriers because  people were willing to pay extra to access online services.‘‘The business of operators used to be  voice and messaging, but that has shifted towards data,’’ Mr. Zuckerberg said.  ‘‘Apps like Facebook drive data usage,  and that’s the future of the business.’’And after Google announced earlier on Monday that it was working on partnerships with carriers to offer its own  mobile services, Mr. Zuckerberg reiterated that he would be willing to work  with the search giant on potential deals,  primarily in emerging markets. Both  Silicon Valley companies have announced projects, including blimps  equipped to provide Wi-Fi access to the  Internet across broad areas, that are intended to bring online services to developing countries. ‘‘We would love to do more with  them,’’ Mr. Zuckerberg said when asked  about potential agreements with  Google.As part of his charm offensive, Mr.  Zuckerberg was joined on stage Monday by executives from several emerging market carriers that have become  partners of Internet.org. Christian De Faria, chief executive of  Airtel Africa, one of Facebook’s partners, said he was initially skeptical  about joining the Internet.org initiative.‘‘One year ago, if you had asked me  about Facebook, I would have said it  was like beauty and the beast,’’ Mr. De  Faria told the conference, adding that  his carrier had seen an increase in paid  data traffic since joining Internet.org.  ‘‘But I can say that the beast has become more human.’’