BARCELONA, Spain — Tom Wheeler has gone from policeman to salesman.Only days after voting to regulate broadband Internet service as a public utility, Mr. Wheeler, chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, is now trying to convince other global regulators and some of the world’s telecom operators that these so-called open Internet rules will not hinder how the web works.The new rules, approved 3 to 2 along party lines, say that no online content can be blocked or throttled. The regulations also demand that the Internet can not be divided into pay-to-play fast lanes for tech and media companies that can afford it and slow lanes for everyone else.“There’s nothing the day after the rules go into effect that offers a different revenue picture for Internet service providers,” Mr. Wheeler said in an interview on Monday at Mobile World Congress, an industry event here. “Go ahead, do what you want, as long as it’s just and reasonable.”Mr. Wheeler’s sales pitch here has included a dinner on Sunday held by the Spanish king. At the dinner, Mr. Wheeler said, several senior executives from global carriers tried to corner him to understand the implications of last week’s vote. He also will speak at the industry event on Tuesday to outline what can be learned from the American experience with passing rules for an open Internet, a concept often called net neutrality.“I’ve tried to balance two things,” said Mr. Wheeler, who was wearing gilded cufflinks in the shape of cellphones. “We have to have open innovation, and we have to provide incentives for carriers to build and expand their networks.”Some telecommunications executives and Republican lawmakers have balked at the new regulations. They say the rules will limit investment in both mobile and fiber-optic broadband, and reduce innovation because operators will not be able to generate sufficient revenue from their networks. Industry executives have also complained that they will not be able to manage their networks in necessary ways, like prioritizing mobile traffic from first-responders over other online material like movie streaming and social networking.“We are for net neutrality,” Tim Höttges, chief executive of Deutsche Telekom, the owner of T-Mobile US, said at the conference on Monday. “But some services should be prioritized over others.”In the United States, some carriers and industry groups have said that they will file lawsuits against the rules, which they say go too far by over-regulating how companies manage and operate their networks. Republicans in Congress also are also considering legislation that may overrule the F.C.C.’s rules.“The big dogs are going to sue,” Mr. Wheeler said on Monday, in reference to the American companies. He added that he expected to publish the complete draft of the F.C.C.’s proposals as soon as he had received — and responded to — the dissenting positions drafted by the Republican commissioners. “I hope it will be this week,” Mr. Wheeler said when asked when the rules will be released, “but it’s out of my hands.”The F.C.C.’s yearlong path to issuing the open Internet rules led to an unprecedented level of public involvement, which included President Obama weighing into the debate. More than four million comments also were sent to the F.C.C. in the build up to last week’s vote, as campaigners raised concerns that carriers and cable providers may try to take control over what could — and could not — be viewed on the Internet.And in a sign that Mr. Wheeler did not anticipate the strong public opinion on the issue, he said on Monday that he could have explained his proposals better to both industry groups and open Internet campaigners“This is something that got quite emotional, quite fast,” Mr. Wheeler admitted when asked what he could have done differently ahead of the F.C.C.’s vote last week. “I would have tried to do a better job of explaining what it means to both sides.”