BARCELONA, Spain — The phone maker Blackphone and the security communications company Silent Circle, whose partnership created the first privacy-oriented smartphone, announced two new devices at Mobile World Congress here on Monday, along with a suite of software and services intended to lock down both private and work communications.The Blackphone 2 is scheduled to be released in July and will, like its predecessor, cost just over $600. The company said the phone would offer faster performance, longer battery life and would be easier for company technology managers to configure. A tablet called the Blackphone+ will be released in the fall, but its price has not been specified.The company strongly positioned both devices for enterprise: phones and tablets intended to be used at work.Jon Callas, a co-founder of Blackphone, showed off an intriguing new feature of the operating system called Spaces, which can cluster apps with different functions into groups separated from one another.For example, Mr. Callas said, a user could create one space solely for private communications, which could hold the phone’s built-in apps for encrypted calling and texting. Another space could hold work apps or even different versions of apps, like a Twitter app that is always logged in to the user’s work account. A personal space could hold personal email, as well as apps that are logged in to personal accounts, games and more.Mr. Callas said it would be simple to create and delete these spaces as a person needs them, and he said Spaces would let company I.T. managers configure phones where work apps are clearly segregated from personal data.“Our theme is privacy, security and control,” Mr. Callas said.Appealing to enterprise is a common theme at Mobile World Congress. For example, Samsung was also trumpeting its Knox security platform, which comes on its new Galaxy S6 phones, as a way to separate work apps into a separate, secure container — although no doubt the Blackphone team would take issue with its definition of “secure.”Blackphone executives said a software update would be released next week that would add Spaces and other functionality to its existing phones.Blackphone and Silent Circle also announced new services, including an online store for finding privacy-oriented apps and an encrypted calling plan that would help people make secure calls to any user on any device. And it showed off a secure conference-call program, Silent Meeting, intended for use on tablets, that encrypts the voice data in a conference call and securely identifies who is participating.Phil Zimmermann, the renowned security expert and creator of the Pretty Good Privacy encryption standard for email, said the only way to ensure the best possible security on a device was to create the device itself.“If a computer is compromised by malware, no matter how good your crypto is, keys can be exfiltrated by malware,” he said. “Now we’re trying to address the question: How can you be sure your software is secure when the platform it’s running on can be compromised? The only way to try to address that is to build your own platform, your own hardware, your own kernel — everything.”“It’s an arms race,” said Mr. Zimmermann, acknowledging that no platform can be completely secure. “We’re happy to participate in that arms race.”