By VINDU GOELOCT. 13, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  Jack Dorsey has been permanent chief executive of Twitter for slightly more than a week. He has already decided that to grow, the company needs to shrink.Twitter announced on Tuesday that it was laying off as many as 336 employees, or 8 percent of its work force, to streamline and refocus as it tries to find ways to attract new users to its social network.“We are moving forward with a restructuring of our work force so we can put our company on a stronger path to grow,” Mr. Dorsey, one of the founders of Twitter, wrote in an email to employees. “We feel strongly that engineering will move much faster with a smaller and nimbler team, while remaining the biggest percentage of our work force. And the rest of the organization will be streamlined in parallel.”The cuts, one of the first major moves by Mr. Dorsey since he was named chief executive, received a mixed reaction from Wall Street. News of the impending layoffs leaked out Friday, after the market closed, and Twitter’s shares fell nearly 7 percent on Monday. After the staff cuts were announced Tuesday morning, the stock rebounded briefly and ended the day at $29.06, up 1 percent.Advertisement“Cutting 8 percent of your work force is a little jarring,” said Mark Mahaney, an Internet analyst at RBC Capital Markets. “You don’t normally see job cuts at this early stage for growth companies unless there is something materially going wrong with the operations or the strategy.”Twitter’s growth team, which has been responsible for various efforts to attract new users, has been a particular target of recent revamping efforts, according to current and former employees, who spoke on condition of anonymity.AdvertisementThis year, Alex Roetter, Twitter’s head of engineering, decided to bring the growth initiatives under more central control. In July, the leader of the growth efforts, Christian Oestlien, left for Google’s YouTube. Since then, his former team has gradually dissolved, with some members reassigned, some quitting for other companies and others laid off on Tuesday.One member of that team, Bart Teeuwisse, tweeted that he learned he had lost his job when he tried to log in to his email Tuesday morning and got an error message.A Twitter spokeswoman declined to comment beyond the company’s securities filing about the layoffs.Twitter’s work force has grown quickly in recent years, through acquisitions and hiring. As of June 30, the company, which is based in San Francisco, had about 4,100 employees, an increase of more than 800 people, or 24 percent, from the previous June.Twitter’s struggle to add and retain users remains Wall Street’s top concern about the company.Advertisers, the principal source of Twitter’s revenue, have also complained that Twitter’s offerings are less compelling than those of Facebook and Google.Sign up to receive an email from The New York Times as soon as important news breaks around the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Dorsey and other top executives have acknowledged that the service remains too difficult to use, and they have warned that a turnaround will not be quick. As of the second quarter, the company had 316 million users, up 15 percent from the previous year.AdvertisementTwitter said Tuesday that revenue and adjusted profit for the third quarter would meet or exceed previous forecasts. The high end of the company’s previous forecast predicted revenue of $560 million and adjusted earnings of $115 million.The company said it would provide “generous” exit packages to those who are losing their jobs, including 60 days of pay for San Francisco employees, which is required under a provision of state law governing large layoffs. Twitter intends to take a pretax charge of $5 million to $15 million in the fourth quarter in connection with the layoffs.Demand for software engineers is intense in Silicon Valley, and former Twitter employees were quick to reach out to those laid off and urge them to join them at other companies.Dale Harrison, now an engineering manager at Facebook, tweeted, “If you’re out there looking for what’s next or just want to chat, DM me,” referring to Twitter’s private messaging system.Chris Aniszczyk, who worked at Twitter’s open source team in Austin, Tex., and left the company two weeks ago, even posted a list — on Twitter — of job openings at other companies, including Microsoft and Instacart.A version of this article appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Twitter to Cut More Than 300 Jobs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.