AdvertisementSupported byGadgetwiseBy Gregory SchmidtFor a budding artist, a simple pen and paper may seem a bit old-fashioned in the age of iPad animation tools. Today, there are smart notebooks that can turn drawings into digital concepts, new types of camera gear that can work a smartphone and keyboards made for the multitasker.Best of all, as technology has improved, the tools for photographers, artists and writers have become more affordable.Take, for example, the Pencil.The $60 Pencil stylus from FiftyThree is popular because of its expressiveness and versatility. Resembling a carpenter’s pencil, the stylus has a tapered tip that allows for angled drawing without changing settings.When used with FiftyThree’s free Paper sketching app for the iPad, Pencil offers a few extras, including palm rejection technology, which recognizes the difference between the Pencil and your hand, and a color blending feature. And there’s no need to switch tools to fix a mistake; just flip the stylus and start erasing. A new Pencil Gold is the third in a line that includes Graphite and Walnut finishes.Another way to take drawings digital is the Moleskine Smart Notebook. Moleskine notebooks are practical to keep on hand because inspiration can strike at any time. Teaming up with the software maker Adobe, Moleskine has created a $33 notebook that bridges the gap between analog and digital, allowing users to capture a spark of imagination on the go, then follow up in the studio.Sketches drawn on the pages of the Moleskine Smart Notebook can be captured via a free companion app for iOS devices and then synced to the Adobe Creative Cloud. The sketches can be opened and edited later in Photoshop CC or Illustrator CC.For photographers who want to do more with the cameras on their smartphones, there is the Olloclip 4-in-1 Lens.Anyone with a smartphone can be an amateur photographer these days. For those looking to go beyond selfies and app filters, Olloclip offers a range of possibilities. The company’s most popular product, the 4-in-1 Lens, was recently redesigned to fit both the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus.As its name states, the 4-in-1 offers four quick-change lenses — fish-eye, wide-angle and two macro options – in a compact package for $80. The lens clips on and off easily and can be stored in a supplied pouch or worn as a pendant. Sizes for iPads and Samsung Galaxy S phones are also available.Another tool available to smartphone photographers is the GripTight GorillaPod.With flexible, ball-jointed legs that rotate 360 degrees, the GripTight GorillaPod tripod, which costs $30, allows photographers to get great shots from unusual angles. The GorillaPod’s mount expands to hold any phone securely, even when turned sideways, keeping the camera lens steady and the subject in focus.The durable GorillaPod has a quick-release clip and folds up for easy storage. For those looking to step up to the next level, the GripTight GorillaPod Hybrid costs $50 and features a bubble level and pan-and-tilt knob.Writers whose work tends to spread out to more than one screen no longer have to be tech wizards to use several machines at once, thanks to the Logitech Bluetooth Multi-Device Keyboard K480.The K480 was designed for those who multitask on multiple screens: computers, tablets and smartphones. The $50 keyboard can be synced via Bluetooth to three devices at once, regardless of platform.With a turn of the keyboard’s knob, users can move seamlessly from computer to mobile device. The K480’s full-size keyboard with raised keys makes typing feel more natural, and a slot holds phones and tablets. Logitech says the keyboard is intended for desktop use, but I found it sturdy enough to toss in my backpack and take to a cafe.And if you’re trying to do all that creative work in noisy, shared space, consider the RHA T10i.Headphones help provide a little seclusion in a noisy world, but choosing a pair with the right sound and fit can be daunting. With the T10i in-ear headphones from the British headphone maker RHA, users can customize both.The $200 headphones’ drivers produce clear, detailed sound, and three interchangeable tuning filters allow users to adjust the bass or treble. Moldable ear hooks are designed to keep the headphones in place, and a selection of 10 silicone and memory foam ear tips provide a secure, comfortable fit.Advertisement