By SHANSHAN WANG and PAUL MOZURMARCH 4, 2015
BEIJING — Beijing reacted on Wednesday to President Obama’s criticism of China’s rules for technology companies by saying that a draft antiterrorism law would not affect the “legitimate rights” of network operators.The pushback against American insistence that China temper its rules is part of a deepening conflict between Beijing and Washington over a number of new regulations that the United States government and technology industry say go too far in broadly demanding access to user data, encryption methods and intellectual property.Fu Ying, the spokeswoman for China’s legislature, said that the antiterrorism bill was in accordance with the basic principles of administrative law and was justified in asking that technology companies make telecommunications and Internet ports accessible to the government for investigations.“It is also the general practice internationally, and it will not affect the legitimate rights of Internet operators,” Ms. Fu said, according to Xinhua, the state-run news agency. She was addressing a news conference before a meeting of the Chinese legislature, the National People’s Congress.AdvertisementMs. Fu said that the antiterrorism bill had been the subject of heated discussions among legislators, and that it had been refined to clarify that, with strict limitations, only government security agencies would be allowed to monitor data, and only for the purpose of investigating and forestalling terrorist activities.AdvertisementHua Chunying, the spokeswoman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, said on Tuesday that China was doing what was necessary to guard against the risks of terrorism.“To issue the antiterrorism law is part of China’s internal affairs,” Ms. Hua said at the ministry’s daily news conference in Beijing. “We hope the U.S. will treat it in a correct, calm and objective way.”On Monday, Mr. Obama told Reuters in an interview that if China wanted to do business with the United States, the rules would have to be changed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although the antiterrorism law is still in draft form, over the last few months China has passed new regulations for specific industries, like banking and finance, requiring information technology suppliers to turn over source code, to submit to invasive audits and to build so-called back doors into hardware and software.Beijing’s suggestion that its rules are fair may be of little comfort to technology companies. The United States alleges that Chinese government agencies have hacked American companies to gain commercial advantage through access to intellectual property and other trade secrets. Human rights advocatesalso say that China often uses the pretense of cracking down on terrorism to go after activists and others it sees as a threat to its power.Contrary to Ms. Fu’s statements, whether or not technology companies should turn over user data to government agencies conducting investigations has in recent years become a hotly contested issue.Following the revelations by Edward J. Snowden, a former National Security Agency contractor, of American government snooping on electronic communications, technology companies have taken steps to encrypt their products and services more heavily. At times those moves have led to complaints from the United States government. A move last autumn by Apple to encrypt products in such a way that it would be impossible for the company to comply with warrants asking for customer information — like photos, emails and call histories — drew sharp complaints from the Federal Bureau of Investigation.The antiterrorism law in China could make it impossible for Apple and other companies to continue with their current encryption methods within that country.Even as Mr. Obama complains about China’s technology rules, in some ways the regulations show how Beijing and Washington have a similar outlook on electronic communications. Both would like to be able to collect data when they deem it necessary and strongly oppose encryption that foils such efforts.Shanshan Wang reported from Beijing, and Paul Mozur from San Francisco.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.