By J. D. BIERSDORFERMARCH 2, 2015
Q. I got mail claiming to be from the Internal Revenue Service and am pretty sure it’s a fraud, but how can I tell? Does the I.R.S. even contact people by email?A. You may get email regarding a continuing matter, but as stated on its website, the Internal Revenue Service “doesn’t initiate contact with taxpayers by email, text messages or social media channels to request personal or financial information.”The agency does not ask for PINs or passwords for your credit cards, bank account or other financial accounts, either.If you get such a message, do not reply to it. Nor should you click on any links or attachments included with the text. The agency asks that you forward the message to phishing@irs.gov and delete the original from your mailbox.AdvertisementScams that take advantage of the tax system are year-round and can include attempts to contact you by telephone and text message as well. The agency has a list of alerts, podcasts and other information for taxpayers at irs.gov/uac/Tax-Scams-Consumer-Alerts.AdvertisementLocking Up a Mac FolderQ. Can a single folder in an Apple MacBook be secured with a password?A. File-security programs like Espionage and Knox are out there for the Mac, but Apple includes at least one way within OS X to password-protect a folder: You can create an encrypted disk image that can be opened only with a password. To do so, start in Mac’s Applications folder, which you can easily get to from the Go menu in the desktop Finder. Once in the Applications folder, open the Utilities folder and then open the Disk Utility program.In Disk Utility, go in the File menu to New, and then select “Disk Image from Folder.” Next, select the folder you want to password-protect and click the Image button. In the next box, choose a format for your folder, like Compressed or Read/Write (if you want to edit the contents). Select an encryption level, either the recommended 128-bit AES Encryption or 256-bit AES Encryption (which is more secure but takes longer to encrypt). Click the Save button.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Because you have opted to encrypt the folder’s contents, you will next be asked to provide a password. Enter and verify your password, and make sure to uncheck the box next to “Remember password in my keychain.” When you click the O.K. button, OS X creates an encrypted image of the folder. When you see the icon with the .dmg file extension, you can delete the original folder. (Making a backup to a secure external drive and safely tucking it away can bring peace of mind if you are nervous about deleting that original folder.)To open the protected folder, double-click the disk-image icon and supply the password.Apple has its official instructions for creating encrypted disk images at support.apple.com/en-us/HT201599, and information about the FileVault 2 utility for encrypting your entire drive is at support.apple.com/en-us/HT4790.TIP OF THE WEEK While it is supposed to provide easy access to the search function and system settings, the Charms bar in Windows 8.1 can often pop open unexpectedly when you inadvertently brush the mouse cursor along the upper-right side of the screen. If you find this annoying, you can stop it from happening.Just open the Charms bar, select the Settings icon and then “Change PC Settings.” In the panel on the left side of the screen, choose “PC and Devices” and then “Corners and Edges.” In the Corner Navigation area, turn off the button next to “When I point to the upper-right corner, show the charms.”Later, if you ever need to use one of the icons in the Charms bar, just press the Windows and C keys to summon it manually.J. D. BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: The Tax Con Cometh.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.