AdvertisementSupported byBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. My Android phone just started freezing and crashing a few days ago. What would cause it to do so?A. Certain third-party apps could make the phone act erratically, and some people have complained that recent Android updates have caused problems. As with a desktop computer, you can restart the phone in Safe Mode. When in Android’s Safe Mode, only the basic original software and apps are used and any other apps you have downloaded from Google Play or elsewhere stay on the sidelines. If the phone’s performance instantly improves, a third-party app is likely the culprit.To restart the phone in Safe Mode, press and hold the power button down until you see the Power Off box appear on screen. Next, press and hold your finger on the Power Off box. When you see a “Reboot to safe mode” option, tap the O.K. button. The phone should start up in Safe Mode.Try out the phone for an hour or two to test its stability. If the handset shows a noticeable improvement, a third-party app is the probable cause. (You can leave Safe Mode by restarting the phone again.)If you have your suspicions about any new apps you have recently downloaded, delete them one by one to see if the phone’s behavior improves. You can always download and reinstall an app again if you see no difference in the phone’s performance. Mobile malware and adware apps posing as games have been issues with Android at times, so be careful what you download to your phone. A number of Android antivirus apps are also available, but read the reviews from trusted sources first if you are considering a security app.If the phone is still freezing and crashing, a deeper level of investigation is necessary. Google has a page of troubleshooting tips that may help point you in the right direction. You may also want to check Google’s Android Help page and user forums on sites dedicated to Android to see if issues for your version of the system have been reported.Silencing a Ringing iPadQ. Every time I get a call on my iPhone at home, my iPad also rings. Does the iPad also ring when I’m out of the house? I looked in the Cellular Settings on the Phone, but can’t figure out how to turn it off.A. As part of last year’s updates to its iOS and OS X software, Apple introduced a new feature called Continuity that links a user’s iPhone, iPad, iPod Touch and Mac to share services and information. With the phone-call function of Continuity enabled, the calls you get on your phone also ring on your computer, iPad or iPod Touch — as long as you are signed into the FaceTime voice and video chat program through the same iCloud account on each device. You can also answer or make calls on the other devices through FaceTime.If your iPhone is not on the same Wi-Fi network as your iPad when you get a call, however, the tablet should not ring. As part of Continuity’s system requirements, all devices must be on the same wireless network, and you also need to be running iOS 8, Mac OS X Yosemite and be using fairly recent Apple hardware.If you do not want the iPad or any other device in the house making a racket when your phone rings at home, you can turn off this feature. The controls for doing so are not under the Cellular area of the Settings, however, but in the FaceTime preferences.On the iPad, open the Settings icon from the home screen and tap FaceTime. On the FaceTime settings screen, turn off the button next to iPhone Cellular Calls. Mac users wishing to turn off the calls can do so by opening the FaceTime program on the computer, selecting Preferences under the FaceTime menu and turning off the checkbox next to iPhone Cellular Calls.Advertisement