As technology giants like Google and Facebook slug it out over the $40 billion global market for mobile advertising, smaller players like InMobi have to stay nimble to avoid being trampled in the fight.So far, InMobi, which is based in Bangalore, India, has managed to thrive, building an ad-targeting platform that it says reaches more than one billion mobile devices worldwide.On Wednesday, the start-up even got a moment in the spotlight when it was the subject of reports in India, first published by The Economic Times and echoed by other major news outlets, that it was in talks to sell itself to Google for as much as $2 billion.While flattered by the attention, Naveen Tewari, chief executive of InMobi, said in a telephone interview that no acquisition discussions were occurring and he did not know how the rumors started. He said InMobi was always talking to other companies about partnerships, but he wanted to keep InMobi independent and eventually sell stock in an initial public offering.“We are the only large mobile advertising player outside of Google and Facebook,” he said. “I would argue that anyone would be happy having us as an asset.”But he does not want InMobi and its 900 employees to be someone else’s asset. “There’s a huge level of pride in taking this to an I.P.O. in India,” he said. “And I think we’re going to do that.” (The company’s investors include Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, Sherpalo Ventures and SoftBank.)Google said it never comments on rumors of acquisitions. However, it already owns AdMob, a powerful mobile ad network in its own right.Realistically, any InMobi public offering is still probably a couple of years away, and a lot can happen on the way to the stock exchange. In addition to Google and Facebook, the No. 1 and No. 2 mobile ad companies globally, InMobi must contend with Alibaba and Baidu in China, where roughly 35 percent of the phones on its ad network are located. Twitter and Yahoo are also players with deep pockets and grand ambitions.InMobi, which turned profitable in the fourth quarter, is growing quickly. Outside analysts estimate the company had revenue last year of about $350 million. Although Mr. Tewari declined to provide a more precise figure, he said the company’s revenue was growing at about 75 percent a year and it had plenty of cash flow to fuel its growth without raising additional capital.Like Google and Facebook, InMobi analyzes the apps on your mobile phone to build a profile of you, then uses that profile to tailor ads that pop up inside your apps when you open them. Advertisers can further refine the targeting by location. “Basically on our system, you can choose a ZIP code and draw a circle around it,” Mr. Tewari said.The company’s system now gets about 9.2 billion ad requests a day. Typically, the ads push the user to install other apps, especially games. But Mr. Tewari said that the growth in app install ads was slowing, so InMobi was focusing more of its efforts on e-commerce ads that urge consumers to buy a product directly from the ad. Video ads are also gaining in popularity. Its advertisers include Ford Motor, Lancôme, Macy’s, Samsung and Unilever. Mr. Tewari said that as global advertising spending continued to shift to mobile, there was still plenty of opportunity for InMobi to prosper alongside larger rivals. “We’re going to be out there and play,” he said.