AdvertisementSupported byBy David StreitfeldSAN FRANCISCO — The esteemed venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, its star partner, John Doerr, once said, “is a family, with occasional disputes.”Maybe, if by “family” you mean one of those clans where everyone is fighting for power and wealth. In Superior Court here, the case of Ellen Pao v. Kleiner Perkins is beginning to look at little like “King Lear,” or at least “Keeping Up with the Kardashians.”For two weeks a former Kleiner junior partner, Ellen Pao, presented her evidence that she suffered from gender discrimination. Along the way, she portrayed the firm as a place riven by sexism and unseemly striving, and that heedlessly employed and encouraged an unsavory cad whom she had the misfortune to briefly date.Now Kleiner’s lawyers have for the first time the opportunity to defend the beleaguered firm in a sustained way, and on Tuesday and Wednesday they made the most of it. They depicted Ms. Pao, 45, as combative and full of resentment, the kind of co-worker who begrudges a colleague for tending to his dying mother.In this telling, Ms. Pao is less a victim of discrimination than a difficult and conniving employee who rejected advice to improve, and whom Kleiner clearly wishes it had tossed overboard sooner.Ms. Pao is being cross-examined by Lynne C. Hermle, a partner in the Silicon Valley firm of Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe. Ms. Hermle is well known in Bay Area legal circles for her success in defending companies from discrimination and retaliation claims. Part of her lore is that an opposing lawyer vomited repeatedly as motions persistently went Ms. Hermle’s way.Ms. Hermle’s cross-examination was lengthy, patient and relentless, seeking to undermine Ms. Pao’s case in all sorts of ways. It called her cold, territorial, untrustworthy, entitled and either passive-aggressive to colleagues or maybe just aggressive — the sort of person who an office that depends on relationships would be crazy to promote to a senior role.Ms. Hermle said Ms. Pao had trouble with many others in the office. “You developed a very negative relationship with her,” the lawyer said, referring to a secretary. About another colleague, “Isn’t it true you called her a major problem?”“I may have,” Ms. Pao conceded.Another email from a senior partner to Ms. Pao said: “You seem angry and the affair has become personalized. This is always the kiss of death.”Yet another email thread was shown where Ms. Pao complained to a senior Kleiner partner, Matt Murphy, saying that “I should have been informed of and probably invited to Friday’s meeting. It’s not only polite, it creates a better process.”Mr. Murphy responded: “Seems like you are telling me what I need to do and that is not resonating with me.” He suggested talking in person, but Ms. Pao kept up the email barrage.Nor did Ms. Pao seem much interested in the cause of women in Silicon Valley. “Did you ever recruit a woman to a Kleiner portfolio company’s board?” Ms. Hermle asked.“I don’t believe so,” she replied. (She did however say at another point she brought in four female executives to help run companies.)In better times, Kleiner paid for a speech coach for Ms. Pao in an effort to help her “own the room,” something the firm viewed as a priority. That paid off for her at the trial, particularly earlier in the week when she was being questioned by her own lawyer. She spoke clearly and loudly, and smiled frequently.Under Ms. Hermle’s assault, the smiles largely disappeared and the responses became more clipped. Her memory grew more faint.Ms. Pao is asking as much as $16 million in damages, plus unspecified punitive damages. She wanted $10 million to leave quietly at the end of 2011, testimony this week revealed.Ms. Pao’s husband, Alphonse Fletcher Jr., whom she met, married and had a child with during the years covered by the trial, is a Wall Street financier whose hedge fund is bankrupt and has been accused of fraud. The judge in the case, Harold Kahn, has refused to allow discussion of Ms. Pao’s financial motives in filing suit, but Ms. Hermle asked him on Wednesday to reconsider. He will decide by Thursday morning. The exhibits in the case continue to pile up. Evaluations, self-evaluations, summaries of meetings, messages to colleagues, messages to colleagues about colleagues, messages to friends about colleagues — there seems to be scarcely a word at Kleiner that was not committed to paper.And the jurors were taking more notes. A painter, a physical therapist, a prison nurse — they all seemed rapt on Wednesday, as they have been all along. What they really think, however, will not be known for some time. The trial has not even reached its halfway point yet, and Kleiner promises many witnesses in its defense.Advertisement