AdvertisementSupported byApp SmartBy Kit EatonHOW do you sift through all the clutter on the web and find the best stuff to read? And once you find the best stuff, what’s the best way to share it with others?Those seem to be two of the most pressing questions about using the web, and mobile apps try to answer them with varying degrees of success.My favorite for discovery and sharing of online content is StumbleUpon.First, create a free account and then enter your preferred topics. The options are vast, including alcoholic drinks, artificial intelligence and ancient history. Once you have made your choices, the app finds articles online that align with your interests.The articles are displayed with a brief summary at the top so you can see the headline and the source website. The content is shown below in a vertical-scrolling webpage style. You swipe left or right to see other articles — or stumbles, as the app calls them — that fit your interests.You can filter the stumbles by specific topic or by popularity, and you can give specific articles thumbs-up or thumbs-down to help teach StumbleUpon the kind of material you find most interesting.If you find something interesting online, you can share it with just a few taps, so other StumbleUpon users may see it in their feeds. You can also share stumbles that you like with friends via other social networks or even emails.The app is attractively designed, and reading online news articles or other content is easy. But the interface can be a little confusing, because the menus and options look similar at a glance. StumbleUpon is free for iOS and Android devices.The makers of StumbleUpon also have an app called 5by, free for iOS and Android. It is a similar discovery and sharing system for online content, but 5by is only for video. The app is a little simpler in design than the main StumbleUpon app and could be useful for filling up a few idle minutes with curious or interesting video clips.Pinterest is perhaps the best-known app in this category; if you haven’t heard of it, you’ve probably been hiding under an online rock. But if you haven’t actually tried Pinterest yet, now is the time.The app is an image-centric discovery and sharing tool. It works like a social network and is based on digital pinboards on which interesting images are “pinned.”For example, a friend and I use Pinterest to share ideas about our photography projects: We find inspiring images, ideas or photographs by others and pin them to our board.Once you have created an account (it is free), you can search Pinterest and find individual pins or other people’s collections. You can follow users and add someone else’s pin to your own board. For example, I maintain a board that has cute T-shirt slogans. Other people sometimes re-pin what I have found to their boards.You can also save content to read or look at later. When you are surfing online, you can pin items you want to bookmark. They appear as images in the Pinterest board you choose; clicking on the images takes you to the source web page.The app’s interface is slick and easy to use, and pinning is a surprisingly smooth process. When you get the hang of it, it’s a great way to keep track of interesting online content. Be careful, though: Using Pinterest is a lot of fun, and it’s free for iOS and Android. You may suddenly find yourself completely absorbed.Lastly, music fans should check out Soundwave, a social network-based discovery and sharing tool for music, free on iOS and Android.Soundwave tracks whatever music you are listening to, whether on your phone’s native music app, YouTube app or other apps, and automatically adds it to your Soundwave profile. Your profile is shared so other users can follow you, and you can create private groups to chat about particular music.The social and recommendation systems have one goal: Introducing you to new music aligned with your existing tastes. It works surprisingly well. But it isn’t the most visually attractive or exciting app to use, and setting it up to connect to all the music apps you use can take some effort. Quick Call One of my favorite writing apps on iOS, iA Writer, is now available on Android. The app creates a clean, simple and distraction-free writing environment for when you really need to focus on your words. It’s delightful to use, and I find it really does help me write. The iA Writer app costs $5.Advertisement