By MOLLY WOODMARCH 11, 2015
GOOGLE’S Chromebook Pixel is a mysterious beast.The Chromebook Pixel computer, a made-by-Google exercise in staggering specs, was first released in 2013 as the top-of-the-line Chromebook, a laptop that runs Google’s Chrome operating system. Most Chromebooks sell for $250 to $500, but the Pixel came out at an eye-popping $1,300.The original Pixel included mostly top-of-the-line technology and some indulgent impracticalities, like an extremely high-resolution multitouch display. Yet it was burdened with outdated connection ports, mediocre battery life and a web-only operating system that baffled some users.Now, the second-edition Chromebook Pixel has arrived. It’s just as confounding as the first, and, oddly, just as appealing.The second-generation Pixel, like the original, is made of squared-off aluminum. And it has a complete lack of visible screws and vents. It feels solid — too solid, in fact, at a beefy 3.3 pounds.Its high-resolution screen has higher pixel density than an Apple Retina display, and it’s still a touch screen. That’s a novelty that you’ll rarely use, unless you need to pinch and zoom, in which case it’s unbelievably useful. (But then you’ll need to immediately reach for a chamois to wipe down the display.)AdvertisementIn terms of speed and power, the Pixel is impressive, to say the least. It comes in two models, and Google refers to the higher-priced version as the “LS” model, short for Ludicrous Speed. How Google of them. Those prices are a bit lower than they were for the previous version, but the Pixel is still an expensive laptop at $1,000 for the base model and $1,300 for the faster one.AdvertisementThe Chrome operating system has matured to where it’s not only usable but feels somewhat similar to the Mac or Windows operating system, as long as you primarily use your laptop for email and web surfing.Its battery life is said to be greatly improved — about 12 hours of consistent use, according to Google. And in a cute touch, a strip on the laptop’s cover displays how much power is left if you tap on it while the lid is closed.Certain other quirks will take getting used to or might never be considered valuable. For example, Google has replaced the caps lock key with a dedicated search key on its otherwise excellent keyboard. The keyboard, by the way, is backlit — and the light fades when you take your hands off it and comes up again when you come close.But all of that said, the Pixel is not really meant to be a device for the masses to buy; its specs, its price and its usability aren’t really the goals. It is, by Google’s own admission, a device meant to test and demonstrate improvements that could eventually find their way into cheaper Chromebooks — whether those are outward-facing hardware improvements like better trackpads or power efficiencies that lead to longer battery life.In the case of the second-generation Pixel, the big, flashy proof-of-concept feature is its all-in-one connection port, known as USB Type-C (try typing that without a caps lock key).The new connection replaces not only older USB ports, but also the power input and display-out ports commonly found on laptops. It can charge, transfer data and power an external display, all in one.The USB Type-C port had a bit of a coming-out party this week, since it’s also featured on the new MacBook that Apple announced — a machine so tiny it has room for only one port and a headphone jack.AdvertisementUnlike Apple, Google put two USB Type-C ports on the Pixel, one on either side. That lets you charge the device from either side, which is nice when you’re traveling and don’t know where the power outlet will be. But it also lets you attach external devices and charge at the same time.Molly Wood reviews Google’s Chromebooks, whose wide range of web apps and low price tags have helped the company take on big competitors in Apple and Windows.The new connection standard is interesting all on its own. Google says it supports fast charging, so the Pixel can gain two hours of juice from being plugged in for just 15 minutes. USB Type-C plugs are reversible, so you can’t insert them the wrong way, which means they last longer than previous connectors, which tend to get damaged from repeatedly being shoved in the wrong way. And the new USB connector has higher power capacity than previous-generation USB connectors, so it can be used to charge devices big and small.That means that if, as Apple, Google and many other companies are hoping, USB Type-C eventually becomes standard across the industry, you could use the same charger to power any phone, any tablet and even any laptop. That would be a huge improvement. While most non-Apple phones use standard micro-USB cables to charge, laptop chargers come in every shape, size and expensive-to-replace variation.So at the end of the day, Google doesn’t really care if you buy a Pixel. (Let’s be honest, it’s doing fine without a marginal number of laptop sales thrown on the pile.) A few die-hard Chrome fans will get it, and it will be a great executive giveaway.If you are looking for a minimalist laptop that requires an odd little collection of adapters and dongles, the new MacBook is a heck of a lot lighter and, hey, it comes in gold.But as a technology platform and a demonstration of tech we might all be using in the somewhat near future, the Pixel impresses. Now, where did I put that chamois?A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: The Chromebook: Turbo Edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.