By J. D. BIERSDORFERMARCH 9, 2015
Q. My husband recently asked me to download a boat manual onto my Dell laptop. Not only did the manual not load, but all of a sudden I am getting too many pop-ups that make working from my laptop all but impossible. And there’s now a search tool bar atop the screen and instead of Mozilla, the default page is Yahoo search. Is there a solution?A. The flurry of pop-up ads, the unfamiliar search toolbar and the changed home page on your computer are all symptoms of infection by malicious software — or at least aggressive adware. When trying to download the boat manual, you may have unknowingly agreed to install the new browser toolbar and make other changes to your PC, or your computer may have simply been hijacked by a rogue website.At any rate, an anti-malware program can probably clean up your PC by removing the unwanted toolbar and other annoyances — just install and run the software, then have it delete any malware it finds on your computer. Microsoft has a security scanner and general guidelines for keeping a computer protected from invasive programs at  www.microsoft.com/security . The company also has a free malicious software removal tool that can be downloaded at  bit.ly/19RSCsO .If you want to look around for other solutions, many other companies also make antivirus and anti-malware programs that may suit your preferences better. Malwarebytes Anti-Malware, AVG Free and Avast are just some of the options available, with both free and paid versions of their security products. Mozilla also has its own page of tips for removing malware from the Firefox browser at  http://mzl.la/1xKrH3p .AdvertisementBackups Everywhere on iOS DevicesQ. I’ve been backing up my iPhone to iCloud and I just got a new iPad. Instead of downloading all the same apps to the iPad, can I just put the content of the backed-up iPhone on the tablet?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. According to Apple, you can put data backed up from one iOS gadget onto another. All the hardware in the mix, though, needs to be running the same version of the iOS software. On iPhones running the older iOS 7 system, photos in the Camera Roll are not restored to other devices from the iCloud backup.AdvertisementYou may also find that not every program on your iPhone shows up on the iPad if you choose to put a backup of the phone’s contents on your tablet. While apps that are universal and compatible with both devices should be installed on the iPad, that will not be the case for apps with versions written specifically for the iPhone.TIP OF THE WEEK If the long winter has you dreaming of a place without weekly snowstorms, the recently revamped Google Flights service might help you find an affordable — yet warmer — place to spend a week. Like Kayak, Expedia, Orbitz and other travel sites, Google Flights lets you plug in a destination and search for flights across multiple airlines at once. In addition to showing the range of fares to a particular destination, Google Flights also suggests “best flights”; these match your search with a combination of both price and expediency (like a nonstop connection).If you are looking for a low-cost fare and have flexible travel dates, the calendar feature in Google Flights displays the lowest fare for your destination each day of the month; you can also use the filters for nearby airports, number of stops and other factors to see how the prices change on the calendar. If you are not sure where you want to go, Google Flights lists popular destinations and has a world map that displays the lowest fares to cities around the world from your current location.  J.D BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Fighting Back Against Malware.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.