By J. D. BIERSDORFERMARCH 12, 2015
Q. Sometimes I’ll go to an old website and find it’s been replaced with a page of advertising. Where do all the original sites go?A. Many live websites have gone dark over the years as their owners have unplugged the servers that hosted the pages for public viewing and given up the registered domain names that once guided visitors to the site. Other entrepreneurs have been known to snap up expired domain names to use for other purposes, like posting pages of advertising links (or other content) to greet people looking for the original website.If you are feeling nostalgic for the way some old sites used to look, you might be able to see copies of the pages the way they once appeared by visiting the Wayback Machine, an expanding collection of 455 billion web pages — and growing. (And yes, the site was named after the time machine used by the Mr. Peabody character from the television cartoon series that first aired in the late 1950s.)Although the Wayback Machine’s holdings date back to the mid-1990s, not every website is included in the collection. But you can probably find samples of most commercial sites from the past 15 years or so. Just type in the address of the site you are looking for to see what may have been saved.AdvertisementThe Wayback Machine is part of the Internet Archive, a free online library of digital media and electronic artifacts. In addition to the collection of web pages, the Internet Archive also hosts a research library of television news programs, live music recordings and other audio and text files and e-books, movies, and thousands of old computer programs — including video games for arcades, computers and consoles. AdvertisementFinding the Right Broadband SpeedQ. My current broadband service is slow and it takes forever to download a movie. I want to upgrade to a faster level, but it gets expensive. How much speed do I need to stream a Netflix movie without stalling, make a video call or download a digital rental in less time than it takes to watch it?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. When calculating your speed needs, take into account all the online activities you wish to do (streaming, downloading, gaming, videoconferencing and so on) and check the minimum connection rates needed for each. You can usually find the recommendations listed on the websites of the companies and services you use. Video-related activities typically require more network speed and bandwidth than things like audio streaming or basic web browsing.For example, Netflix recommends a connection of at least three megabits per second for streaming video in standard definition and a connection of five megabits per second for watching high-definition content without stuttering or buffering. (If you are shopping for a new broadband company based on your video-streaming needs, Netflix posts its own speed rankings of Internet service providers each month on its blog.) As with streaming, file download speeds can suffer from general Internet and server congestion, but a connection at 25 megabits per second can let you download a six-gigabyte movie file in less than 20 minutes.Microsoft’s Skype video-calling service recommends a connection of 1.5 megabits per second for high-definition video calls, and a Google Hangouts support page  suggests a connection speed of 2.6 megabits per second as the “ideal bandwidth for the best experience.” The support sites of most online video games should also list the minimum broadband connection speeds among the requirements for processor, memory and other hardware factors. If you plan to post photos or videos of your own online, a plan that offers decent data upload speeds will make you wait less for that as well.Once you have gathered your findings on the connection speeds for your preferred online services, check the packages available from local ISPs offering cable, satellite, fiber optic or DSL broadband. For instance, if you primarily want smooth streams of high-definition movies from Netflix, get a service plan that offers at least the recommended five-megabits-per-second connection. The number of people using the broadband connection at one time should also be factored in, so you may want to get a faster plan if the household includes online gamers as well as movie buffs.As Internet service providers have built up their broadband networks over the years, they have been able to increase their offerings to appeal to a wider range of customer needs and budgets, so you may see four or five service plans offered; maximum speeds for downloads and uploads should be listed for each tier of service. This past January, the Federal Communications Commission updated its 2010 benchmark for “broadband” from a download speed of four megabits per second to 25 megabits per second, so the labels and types of plans offered by the ISPs may shift again in the future.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.