Hampton Creek, a high-profile food start-up that has attracted investors and talent from the technology industry, laid off nearly a fifth of its work force last month, just months after announcing it had raised $90 million in funding.Changes at the company included the layoffs of about 12 of Hampton Creek’s roughly 65 employees, according to several people briefed on the moves who spoke on condition of anonymity because Hampton Creek had not publicly announced the layoffs. Several more employees left Hampton Creek voluntarily around the same time through a severance offer the company extended to other staff members, the people said. Counting employees who left voluntarily and were laid off, Hampton Creek reduced its staff by nearly a quarter.In a brief phone conversation, Morgan Oliveira, a Hampton Creek spokeswoman, confirmed the reduction but downplayed its significance and declined to discuss it in detail. “We’re just doing a reorganizing of employees,” Ms. Oliveira said. “Now we’re hiring more.”According to two of the people briefed on the changes, Hampton Creek told some affected employees that they were being laid off for performance reasons, while others were told they were being let go for being negative.While layoffs at start-ups are not uncommon, it’s unusual for them to occur so soon after their coffers have been replenished with cash. In December, Hampton Creek announced that it had raised $90 million in a fund-raising round led by existing investors Khosla Ventures and Horizons Ventures. Other technology luminaries, including Marc Benioff, the chief executive of Salesforce, and Eduardo Saverin, a co-founder of Facebook, also contributed.New technology companies can burn through cash quickly. Hampton Creek has garnered outsize attention from Silicon Valley royalty partly by portraying itself as a technology disruptor with plans to shake up the food services market with big data.The company, headquartered in San Francisco, was founded and is led by its charismatic chief executive, Joshua Tetrick, whose mission is to find plant-based ingredients that can be substituted for most costly, environmentally wasteful ingredients in common food. Hampton Creek’s best-known product is a mayonnaise that uses a type of Canadian yellow pea as a substitute for eggs. The product, Just Mayo, is widely sold in retail stores like Whole Foods, Walmart and Costco.The increasing sales of the product prompted a lawsuit against Hampton Creek by the food giant Unilever, maker of Hellmann’s mayonnaise, which accused Hampton Creek of falsely advertising its egg-free product as mayonnaise. Unilever dropped the suit in December, in a major victory for Hampton Creek.In one eyebrow-raising episode involving the company, Ali Partovi, a prominent technology investor and entrepreneur, joined Hampton Creek last September as its chief strategy officer, then resigned after only nine days on the job. Neither party was willing to discuss the reasons for Mr. Partovi’s quick departure. But while Mr. Tetrick said Mr. Partovi would remain an adviser to Hampton Creek, Mr. Partovi said that was not the case.Among the people laid off by Hampton Creek were Shweta Rao, its director of bakery innovation; Bianca Ruffin, director of people operations; and Douglas Ivey, a senior scientist at the company, according to the people briefed on the changes.Ms. Rao and Ms. Ruffin did not respond to requests for comment sent to them through Facebook’s messaging system. In a message, Mr. Ivey confirmed that he was no longer at the company, but declined to comment further. Ms. Ruffin’s LinkedIn profile said her employment with the company had ended in February.A version of this article appears in print on 03/23/2015, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Hampton Creek Slashes Staff.