The chief executive of Orange, the big French telecommunications company, said on Tuesday that he was seeking a foreign partner for Dailymotion, the Web-based video-sharing service that is France’s answer to Google’s YouTube.‘‘I don’t think the future of Dailymotion is French,’’ said Stéphane Richard, chairman and chief executive of Orange, the company formerly known as France Télécom.Mr. Richard was speaking to analysts and journalists in the Grand Palais to introduce Orange’s new strategy, which calls for the company to invest 15 billion euros, or $15.8 billion, between now and 2018 to improve its networks and gain customers.‘‘By definition, the Internet is global,’’ Mr. Richard added, noting that Dailymotion, which is growing about 30 percent a year, receives only about 20 percent of its revenue in France.The company is a rare example of a globally recognizable “Made in France” Internet brand, but it nevertheless remains a pipsqueak compared with YouTube, Mr. Richard said. YouTube has about 50 times the revenue and six times the monthly video views.By putting Dailymotion into play, Mr. Richard is venturing into what could be a political minefield.In 2013, Arnaud Montebourg, then the minister of industry, invoked state interest to stop Yahoo’s proposed acquisition of a 75 percent stake in Dailymotion for $300 million. Mr. Richard has continued to seek a powerful partner to develop the site; last year he expressed confidence — prematurely, as it turned out — that a proposed alliance with Microsoft would come to fruition.Mr. Richard said the attitude expressed by Mr. Montebourg, who has since left the government, did not make sense in the Internet era.‘‘If you want to kill companies that have succeeded in France,’’ Mr. Richard said, ‘‘then let’s go on like this.’’Mr. Richard was responding to a question about an article that appeared on Friday in The Wall Street Journal that said Orange had entered exclusive talks to sell about 49 percent of Dailymotion to PCCW, the Hong Kong conglomerate founded by Richard Li.PCCW, which has interests in telecommunications, media and property development, would be a strong partner, Mr. Richard said, particularly in gaining access to the Chinese market. But, he added, Orange wanted to keep its options open.Benoît Maynard, an analyst at Natixis Equity Research, said he thought that Mr. Richard would find it easier this time around, as ‘‘the people in the government have changed.’’‘‘Yahoo would, for me, have been the best partner,’’ Mr. Maynard said, but Dailymotion needs a partner for growth and credibility, and PCCW might work.