Since T-Mobile USA introduced its simplified phone plans for consumers in 2013, the carrier has significantly grown its customer base. Now it has another target: business subscribers.The company on Wednesday said it had revised phone plans for businesses with a simpler price structure. In the past, T-Mobile had given quotes to professional customers that were designed to lure them to the negotiating table. Now that practice is getting jettisoned in favor of more transparency: Plans with multiple lines will cost $15 a line. Clients that have 1,000 lines or more can pay $10 a line. Each line comes with 1 gigabyte of data and unlimited voice minutes and text messages. How is this very different from AT&T and Verizon? T-Mobile says its competitors still deliberately quote businesses high rates, forcing them to negotiate down. And the discounts can vary wildly from business to business.“What we’re doing has never been done,” said Mike Sievert, T-Mobile’s head of operations, in an interview. “We put our rate card out there and it’s a no-negotiation deal. Our best deal is our only deal.”T-Mobile also highlighted a major distinction from its rivals: It does not charge customers for exceeding their data limits. By contrast, business customers on AT&T’s mobile share plan can be charged at least $15 for going over their data capacity.All of this is in keeping with how T-Mobile has in the past two years taken aim at things that make people angry about their phone carriers. The company shook up the wireless industry in March 2013 with simplified phone plans that eliminated traditional two-year contracts. Instead, T-Mobile allowed customers to pay the full cost of a smartphone over installments, and once that was done, their cellphone bills would decrease. AT&T, Verizon and Sprint each reacted with similar contract-free plans.T-Mobile has also abolished the hefty fee that customers normally have to pay just to use their smartphones overseas. It also offers to cover people’s early termination fees when they break up with their carrier to switch to T-Mobile. The company has added millions of subscribers as a result of these offerings.But T-Mobile isn’t even remotely close to making a dent in the business sector. Across the industry, Verizon and AT&T account for about 87 percent of business subscribers, Sprint has roughly 10 percent and T-Mobile has the rest, according to Mr. Sievert.On top of that, AT&T, the No. 2 carrier, has repeatedly noted in financial earnings calls that its business customers are loyal because it is tough for businesses to move so many different devices into a new account on a competitor’s service. Mr. Sievert said the company was up for the challenge. Business customers are “far from trapped,” Mr. Sievert said. “We showed that on the consumer side. We’re about to show them how wrong they are on the business side.”