Generation after generation, computers have become smaller, faster and cheaper. If technology companies have their way, they will soon be smaller and astronomically expensive. On Thursday, TAG Heuer, the Swiss watch company, announced that it was building a new smartwatch — a wrist computer, in essence — as part of a collaboration with Intel and Google. The companies made a joint announcement at Baselworld, an annual show in Basel, Switzerland, for high-priced watches and jewelry. The watch will be released later this year, but aside from that the announcement was light on specifics. No exact release date. Nothing about what it will do. No price. But it seems likely that the watch will be very expensive, given the number of synonyms for the words “technology” and “luxury” in an accompanying news release. In the release, David Singleton, Google’s director of engineering for Android Wear, talked about “fusing beauty with technology” for a “unique blend of emotion and innovation.” Google is not the only company lately to try to fuse technology with a high price tag. Apple’s soon-to-be-released line of Apple watches has a gold version, – the Apple Watch Edition, that begins at $10,000. The chip maker Intel already has MICA, My Intelligent Communication Accessory, a watch/bracelet that is a result of a collaboration between it and Opening Ceremony. It sells for about $500 at Barneys.  Or there is Tory Burch, which makes a $200 bracelet that can hide the Fitbit Flex, a fitness tracker that counts its wearer’s steps. The forthcoming TAG Heuer watch will be designed and manufactured by the Swiss watchmaker. The technology bits will come from Intel’s chip technology and Google’s Android software. Google announced Android Wear about a year ago. A few months later, it announced its first watches at the Google I/O developer conference. Those were the LG G Watch and Samsung Gear Live; the Moto 360, from Motorola, followed shortly after. They range from about $200 to $300 on Google’s online Play Store. Google has said it will work with essentially anyone who wants to use the Android Wear platform, so the  high-end partnership with TAG Heuer is likely to be the first of several. The bigger question is how many people want any kind of smartwatch, much less one that costs as much as a small car and contains technology that will be obsolete in a year. The first batch of smartwatches got poor reviews and have not sold well. And since it’s still not entirely clear what a smartwatch does that a smartphone cannot, the success of the category is likely to hinge on the creation of new “killer apps” that make people want to have one. Nevertheless, fears of a coming revolution in smartwatches have been a major topic at Baselworld.