

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
MARCH 17, 2015
In the week and a half since the technology news site Gigaom stopped publishing, it has been held up as a cautionary tale for media in a go-go era. Here was a news organization that once looked promising, but collapsed so unexpectedly that its reporters were working on articles right up to the moment they were told they were out of jobs.Could the same fate befall other apparent darlings of media’s new gilded age — companies like Business Insider, Recode, Vice, Politico, Vox and BuzzFeed? Many of them, like Gigaom, have raised boatloads of financing and have tried to create a mix of businesses, including advertising, conferences and subscriptions, to turn a profit.But Gigaom’s downfall does not offer easy lessons for media start-ups. Gigaom, pronounced Giga-ohm, was special, and not in a good way, according to more than half a dozen staff members and executives, many of whom spoke on the condition of anonymity, citing nondisclosure agreements with the company. It was a company troubled by poor leadership, a history of spending beyond its means and an inattention to major problems that had dogged its businesses for years.Chief among those problems was a bet on a division that sold specialized market research reports to corporate customers. That division became Gigaom’s largest business, but it became less clear over time that it could deliver on those expectations.AdvertisementIn the days since the shutdown, a telling disagreement has emerged among people associated with the company. Some say that Gigaom was a business that, in retrospect, could never have worked as it was structured. Others say that it may have paid off one day, if only its investors and creditors had given it a bit more patience and a lot more money.AdvertisementNeither story is much of a testament to the way the company was run.Gigaom’s troubles were not obvious to readers. Founded in 2006 by the technology journalist Om Malik, the site covered technology news with unusual depth. It eschewed slide shows, hype-ridden headlines and other sensationalist tricks known in the trade as “clickbait.”Though Gigaom claimed a relatively small readership of about 6.5 million visitors per month, its audience was coveted by advertisers. The company also ran several conferences each year. And then there was the research division, which executives often described as the company’s golden goose.Gigaom, it seemed, had found a business model that could fund serious journalism. Investors poured more than $30 million into the company in several rounds of financing.But on March 9, Gigaom’s staff members received an email requiring them to attend a meeting that afternoon. Mr. Malik, who had long ago stepped back from day-to-day management of the company and was now a venture capitalist, and Michael Rolnick, Gigaom’s chief executive since January, gathered employees in the front lobby of Gigaom’s San Francisco headquarters. Dozens joined by telephone and Google Hangouts. A staff member in Germany had to be awakened for the call.Mr. Rolnick broke the news so quickly that some people had not yet made it onto the call by the time he was done. Gigaom, which owed $5 million to $10 million in bank loans and short-term financing, could no longer meet its financial obligations, Mr. Rolnick told employees. It would halt publication immediately, and most of the company’s 68 employees would be laid off.Workers were stunned. “It came totally out of the blue,” said Stacey Higginbotham, a writer for Gigaom since 2008. Others were more blunt: “It was like a brick hitting me behind the ear,” said Stowe Boyd, a freelance analyst for Gigaom’s research division.A conference that Gigaom had planned to hold in New York this week was hastily canceled. Tickets, which sold for more than $1,000 each, have not been refunded.AdvertisementSome employees who were in that final meeting recalled hearing Mr. Rolnick say that the company’s assets had been seized by creditors, including Silicon Valley Bank and Western Technology Investment, which provides loans to fast-growing start-ups. Recode reported last weekend that Gigaom had accumulated significant debts and its monthly payments on rent and interest approached $400,000. (One source disputed that number, saying interest and rent costs were about $200,000 a month.)But Gigaom’s assets have not been seized. Instead, executives and the board decided that even with a cash infusion, the business could not be fixed.Their concerns revolved primarily around Gigaom’s market research business. According to an employee who has seen the company’s finances, last year’s revenue from the web advertising business totaled around $2.5 million, while the events business brought in about $5 million. Research, meanwhile, accounted for more than $8 million in revenue, and it was growing more quickly than any other segment.The division made money in a few ways. Gigaom contracted with a large freelance network of research analysts, and it offered their reports for a subscription beginning at $300 a year. Its analysts also produced custom reports for clients at much higher prices — say $10,000 or more for in-depth research meant to answer a host of questions in the tech business. In this way, Gigaom had modeled itself on companies like Forrester and Gartner, small but lucrative stalwarts of the tech research industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For many years, the company believed that the research business was highly profitable.But the business had fundamental problems. First, research required a lot of time. After Gigaom sold its reports, its analysts — all contractors — had to produce them. That could take as long as four months, and the company was not paid until those reports were delivered.To the analysts doing the reports, it appeared as though the number of sales and marketing people in the research group — a peak of 20, while the rest of Gigaom had four — did not justify the work they were bringing in.“I was dealing with two or three sales and client fulfillment people all the time, and it seemed like too much for the business we had,” said Mr. Boyd, who prepared many research reports for the company.And there was not enough repeat business. Gigaom’s executives had been attracted to research because unlike the news website or conferences, it looked as if it could grow without expanding an expensive staff. But that did not turn out to be the case, because many reports were one-time sales.In the last year or so, Gigaom’s executives and its board re-examined the research department’s finances. They determined that despite its growth, and contrary to the company’s long-held belief, research was not the cash cow they believed it could be. And when money became tight, they could not bank on the research group.AdvertisementPaul Walborsky, the company’s former chief executive and a champion of the research business, left last summer. (He is now a consultant for The New York Times.) Elias MurrayMetzger, the company’s former vice president for finance, left in February.Strangely, even as finances worsened, Gigaom did not aggressively cut costs. Staff members were given leeway to travel, and right up until the end, many were planning reporting trips. Its staff ballooned to as many as 80 at one point; it never made any mass layoffs. And in the last two years it signed leases for spacious offices in New York and San Francisco.Just as damaging to the young company, it was left without a chief executive for many months. In the time between Mr. Walborsky’s departure and Mr. Rolnick’s hiring, decisions about the future of the research business were put off, and research sales declined.Though Mr. Rolnick had a plan to prioritize the web business, staff members say he did not inspire confidence. Particularly troubling to them was his delay in putting his name anywhere on the site. He is not listed as the chief executive of Gigaom on the company’s team page, on his LinkedIn page or on his social media profiles.It is an odd story, and probably not the best example from which to draw grand conclusions about the future of the media business.“People are shaken,” said Sarah Lacy, the founder and chief executive of Pando Daily, a three-year-old tech-media company that also used venture funding to get started. In the wake of Gigaom’s announcement, Ms. Lacy said she was besieged with calls from investors and friends about what it meant for her site and industry. She does not think it means much.“People want to feel like it’s a sign of a bigger thing,” she said. “But it is such a unique thing. It appears to have been a mismanagement of the company.”Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjooA version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Demise of Gigaom Doesn’t Faze Its Rivals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »