The federal government is offering the public a window into its web traffic. On Thursday, it introduced a new site that gives real-time insight into how many people are navigating to many government websites.The traffic dashboard, at analytics.usa.gov, draws on a Google Analytics account that tracks visits to nearly 300 executive-branch government domains, amounting to roughly 20 percent of all federal sites, including those of every cabinet department.  The site is a project of the Digital Analytics Program, a division of the General Services Administration, and it grew out of President Obama’s Digital Strategy report, released in May 2012. Gwynne Kostin, director of the Digital Services Innovation Center at G.S.A., said the project expected to expand the number of domains it tracks in coming months and hopes ultimately to track traffic to all public federal domains. Around 2 p.m. on Thursday, just over 140,000 people were visiting the government pages in question, according to the analytics site. That number is about 20 percent of the 670,000 people who were simultaneously viewing Buzzfeed’s post on the white and gold (or black and blue?) dress at its peak last month.Far and away, the most popular government Web destination on Thursday – and also over the last 30 days – was IRS.gov. With high tax season upon us, on Thursday afternoon there were more than twice as many visits to the Internal Revenue Service’s “Where’s My Refund?” tracking tool as there were visits to the National Weather Service’s regional forecasts site, the second-most popular page.Perhaps the most surprising takeaway from the government’s data? Most people — more than two-thirds — visited the federal sites from desktop computers. Only 25 percent used mobile devices and 8 percent used tablets. That dominance of desktop use is atypical in the United States, where smartphone and tablet traffic accounts for about 60 percent of all online activity, according to comScore.The most popular browser used by visitors to the federal sites was Google Chrome, and the most popular operating system was Windows. The project also follows the geographical spread of web visitors, though it hasn’t made that data public yet and plans to add it to the analytics site within several months. Ms. Kostin of the G.S.A. called geographical patterns of web visitors particularly interesting, noting that after Mr. Obama made an announcement on immigration a few months ago, not only did traffic spike at the United States Customs and Immigration site, but a large number of visitors were located in specific parts of California, Iowa and Texas.As to the motivation behind making the numbers public, she said the government hoped the private sector might benefit from seeing the data — benefiting from a sense of what issues or agencies were most important to site visitors, and when — and that agencies themselves might be able to set benchmarks and compare their traffic patterns to those of other government sites. She said the Digital Analytics Program did not track individual user data or I.P. addresses.“It’s really interesting to see the zeitgeist of what’s happening on government sites,” Ms. Kostin said. “The snapshot is great, but we’re going to see a lot of value from looking at this data over time and asking, ‘what are the trends?'”