By J. D. BIERSDORFERMARCH 20, 2015
Q. Is there a way to turn off that bar of suggested words on the screen that comes up when I’m using the keyboard on my Android tablet?A. You can modify the look and behavior of the keyboard software in the Android settings. In Android 5.0, open the Settings icon from the All Apps area, or swipe down from top of the screen to open the Quick Settings box and select the gear-shaped Settings icon there. Once you are on the Settings screen, go to the Personal section and tap Language & Input.In the Keyboard & Input Methods area, tap Google Keyboard. Tap Text Correction and then turn off the button next to “Show correction suggestions.”If you wish, you can make further adjustments in the Text Correction settings, including those that let the system provide increasing levels of auto-correction as you type, as well as suggestions for the next word you may be trying to enter. Settings for your personal dictionary and any foreign-language dictionaries you have added are in the Text Correction settings, too.AdvertisementIf you choose to let it, Android can also offer suggested names from your contacts list. If you have the feature enabled here, the software can learn from your typing so it knows what kinds of words to offer for “personalized” suggestions. A control to prevent Android from helpfully suggesting certain words that some people may find offensive is also available.AdvertisementWeeding Out Broken Firefox ExtensionsQ. The Firefox browser on my Mac updates itself frequently, and I keep getting messages about incompatible extensions being disabled. What should I do to make these messages go away?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. If the extension developers do not keep up with the changes Mozilla makes as it updates the code for its Firefox browser, you get warnings and the affected add-ons will most likely not work anymore. You can see a list of such sidelined browser extensions in Firefox by going to the Tools menu and choosing Add-ons.On the Add-ons Manager page that opens, click the Extensions icon on the left side of the window to see a list of all the optional little programs that have been installed to work with the browser. The Settings menu icon at the top of the page has options for checking for and viewing recent updates, as well as for instructing Firefox to update its extensions automatically. Incompatible extensions are highlighted in the center of the page, and you can use the Remove button next to each disabled extension to just yank it from the browser completely.Once removed, the extension should stop generating those error messages each time Firefox updates and does its self-check of installed add-ons.If you liked the extension before it became outdated or otherwise incompatible with the evolving browser, you can try finding a more modern alternative or substitute to use instead. On the Add-ons Manager page, click the Get Add-Ons icon (right above Extensions) to visit Mozilla’s library of extensions you can directly install right into Firefox.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.