The wait is over — and it wasn’t long.On Monday, two lawsuits were filed against the Federal Communications Commission’s new rules for broadband Internet service, the beginning of what is expected to be a flurry of legal challenges to the new regulations.The United States Telecom Association, a trade group that represents some of the nation’s largest Internet providers, filed suit in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. On the same day, Alamo Broadband, a small broadband provider based in Texas, sued in federal court in New Orleans.The lawsuits came sooner than many experts had expected, months before the rules — voted on last month — are even set to take effect: 60 days after they are eventually published in the Federal Register. Both filings seemed to acknowledge that they were potentially premature, with USTelecom asserting that its filing was “protective,” and Alamo calling its own action one taken “in an abundance of caution.”The new rules, released 11 days ago, reclassify broadband Internet providers as common carriers under Title II of the Communications Act and are aimed at prohibiting service providers from blocking, speeding up or slowing down users’ access to certain content. The F.C.C. has said they were necessary to protect an open Internet, a concept often referred to as net neutrality.Internet providers have argued that the concerns of such activity — prioritizing some content over others — are unfounded. On Monday, Jon Banks, a senior vice president of USTelecom, reiterated that. “We do not block or throttle traffic and FCC rules prohibiting blocking or throttling will not be the focus of our appeal,” he said in a statement.Walter B. McCormick, the president of USTelecom, said the organization’s case would center on the choice to reclassify providers under Title II as telecommunications providers, rather than as information services. “We do not believe the Federal Communications Commission’s move to utility-style regulation invoking Title II authority is legally sustainable,” Mr. McCormick said on Monday. “Our member companies conduct their business in conformance with the open Internet principles.”Asked about the two filings, a spokesperson for the F.C.C. said on Monday: “We believe that the petitions for review filed today are premature and subject to dismissal.”By JEFF SOMMERExcerpts from and analysis of rules and explanations released by the Federal Communications Commission regarding an Open Internet.