A three-year-old learning games company wants to raise the bar on how education technology start-ups measure and market the effectiveness of their products.Yogome, an educational games developer with offices in San Francisco and Mexico City, on Tuesday announced a partnership with play2Prevent, a lab at Yale University where researchers develop and evaluate video games designed to improve education, health and social intelligence. As part of the two-year, low six-figure deal, the academic researchers plan to conduct a randomized, controlled trial – the kind of rigorous study that pharmaceutical companies undertake to evaluate the effectiveness of novel prescription drugs — of Yogome math and science games with more than 100 children ages 5 to 11. “We decided to do this so we could tell parents our games are educational not just because we say so, not just because we have teachers on our team, but because a research team at a prestigious university is studying the real impact of our games on kids’ learning,” Manolo Diaz, the chief executive of Yogome, said in a phone interview.Yogome has developed 20 learning games aimed at elementary school-age children and their parents. Among them are Math Heroes 2, an adventure game involving multiplication; Science Heroes: Digestive System, an animated game in which players must fight off bacteria to keep nutrients moving through the body; and Heroes of Knowledge, a compilation of educational mini games. The games are available in both Spanish and English. The company has raised nearly $2 million in seed financing, Mr. Diaz said.Mr. Diaz said his company sought out the Yale play2Prevent lab because researchers there create digital games with the idea of improving knowledge and employ scientific methods to measure the games’ effects on players.The lab previously developed a game called PlayForward, which is designed to reduce risky behaviors — such as unprotected sex and using drugs — associated with H.I.V. With financing from the National Institutes of Health, the researchers conducted a study of PlayForward on several hundred children, aged 11 to 14, in the New Haven area. The study compared the knowledge and attitudes of children who played the behavior intervention game to those who played consumer games like Angry Birds. The study is not yet completed.Dr. Lynn E. Fiellin, the director of the play2Prevent lab who is an associate professor at the Yale School of Medicine, compared her lab’s methods for studying video games to the drug-placebo comparison trials conducted by pharmaceutical companies.“It’s like getting a medicine F.D.A.-approved,” Dr. Fiellin said. “You have to have the data. The data is everything.”For the Yogome research, Dr. Fiellin said she hoped to examine not just how the games might change children’s knowledge, but also how they might affect their motivations.“We may be able to teach them the rudimentary skills of algebra,” Dr. Fiellin said. “But if there is something about game play that enhances the enjoyment of learning, that’s the golden ticket. Then they can apply that to geometry and algebra 2.”