AdvertisementSupported byBy David StreitfeldSAN FRANCISCO — Silicon Valley is usually measured on its products and profits. Now, in a rare turnabout, it is about to be judged on its behavior.The venerable venture firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, which nurtured such famous Internet start-ups as Google and Amazon, has been on trial here for the last month. Ellen Pao, a former junior partner at Kleiner, says it discriminated against her, retaliated when she complained and ultimately fired her.In closing arguments that began Tuesday before a packed courtroom, the top-flight litigators trying the case had one last opportunity to sway the jury. The ethnically diverse collection of men and women who will render a verdict — a subway station manager, a painter, a prison nurse — watched intently but gave nothing away, the way they have watched the whole trial.“We are all here today because Kleiner Perkins broke the law,” said Alan B. Exelrod, Ms. Pao’s attorney. “Men were judged by one standard and women by another.”He described Kleiner as a place where inventing the future hinged on preserving a sexist past. Where a woman complaining of sexual harassment is told she should be “flattered.” Where sweet words were spoken about diversity but the vast majority of the young hires were male. Where a female junior partner could have a better investment record than her male peers but watch them be promoted instead of her.The men who ran Kleiner, including its best-known partner, John Doerr, “set the tone,” Mr. Exelrod said. “No woman was going to challenge them.”Kleiner’s lawyer, Lynne C. Hermle, drew a rather different picture, arguing that Ms. Pao, now 45, could not make her fortune in venture capital so she turned to an older method of compensation: baseless accusations. “The complaints of Ellen Pao were made for only one purpose: a huge payout for Team Ellen,” Ms. Hermle said.Ms. Hermle said the most important person at Kleiner, Mr. Doerr, had encouraged Ms. Pao, opened doors, provided a sympathetic shoulder and endless advice, and yet she still could not get ahead. “She was already a success in her own mind, and she didn’t need to fix or improve anything,” Ms. Hermle said.Ms. Pao is asking $16 million. The judge in the case, Harold Kahn, ruled last weekend against an attempt by Kleiner to exclude punitive damages. If the jury finds Kleiner acted with malice, oppression or fraud, punitive damages could total tens of millions of dollars.The trial has garnered widespread attention because, whatever the truth of what happened to Ms. Pao, it is undeniable that women have a minimal presence in venture capital. They are doing only marginally better in the executive ranks of tech companies.Some in Silicon Valley argue that this is a consequence of the lack of female participation in the sciences in school, and that society must change before the tech community can change. Others point to Silicon Valley’s aggressive frat-boy culture and old boys’ network as equal culprits.Mr. Exelrod twice cited the testimony of Ted Schlein, a senior Kleiner partner, who said he had met only a handful of female venture capitalists in his whole career. Mr. Schlein is a former chairman of the National Venture Capital Association.Ms. Pao began in 2005 as chief of staff to Mr. Doerr, became a junior investing partner and was dismissed in 2012, not long after she filed her gender discrimination suit.Kleiner sought to demonstrate she was fired for poor performance through both testimony and her annual evaluations. Ms. Pao was often criticized for being too quiet, at least when she wasn’t being too forceful.In what might be the ultimate insult in technology circles, Ms. Hermle also said Ms. Pao was not a “thought leader,” which is Silicon Valley jargon for someone who can tell a room of their peers and superiors things they did not know and make them appreciate it.The trial pits two Bay Area legal powerhouses against each other — one with a record of championing employees who feel they were mistreated, the other who has succeeded in defending employers from workers making claims.Ms. Hermle, 58, is reputed to have never lost a case at trial. She declined to comment on her record or, for that matter, on her age. Mr. Exelrod, who reluctantly said he was 71, might have lost a case or two but is well-known in legal circles for his role in winning a multimillion-dollar judgment in the early 1990s for a secretary who was sexually harassed by her boss at a large Silicon Valley law firm.The California Superior Court courtroom, which holds more than 150 spectator seats, was filled to overflowing Tuesday with journalists, lawyers and interested members of the public. But the atmosphere remained, as it has all along, a study in California informality.Judge Kahn does not use a gavel or require people to stand when he enters the court. Lawyers for both sides often wandered the audience during breaks in the weeks of testimony, greeting friends and colleagues. So did Ms. Pao.The Silicon Valley folk sometimes displayed their take-charge attitude on the witness stand, trying to question the lawyers about their questions. Judge Kahn would gently reprove them.“May I ask a question?” said Mary Meeker, the star Morgan Stanley Internet analyst turned Kleiner partner asked during her testimony.“Typically that’s not how we work but give it a try,” Judge Kahn said, according to a recap from the tech site Recode.“When will this all be online?” she asked, apparently referring to the Kleiner documents piled high in front of her.Ms. Meeker’s question underlined how, even if Kleiner is not found liable by the jury, the trial has fulfilled the hype that it would open a window onto an unseen side of Silicon Valley. Kleiner is not only the most famous venture firm but the one that has tried the most to institutionalize the gut-level process of deciding to give a bundle of money to two guys in a garage who have a dream.From the evidence in the trial, it was clear the task of training the next generation of investors at Kleiner was imperfectly done. The rules for promotion were particularly ill-defined. But Kleiner says it is a different firm now.After many harsh years, some investments are now paying off. A reported $20 million investment in Nest turned into $400 million when the thermostat maker was bought by Google. A $14 million investment, in Flexus Biosciences, did equally as well. MyFitnessPal, a tracking app that drew early Kleiner money, was just bought by Under Armour for $475 million.Closing arguments are expected to conclude Wednesday. Advertisement