AdvertisementSupported byBy Nathaniel Popper and Conor DoughertyGoogle, which is facing questions about increased spending in the face of slipping prices for its ads, has turned to the big bank Morgan Stanley for its new chief financial officer, one of the most visible examples yet of the talent that has been flowing from Wall Street to Silicon Valley.Ruth Porat, Morgan Stanley’s chief financial officer since 2010, has been one of the most powerful women on Wall Street, and she will immediately become one of the most powerful women in Silicon Valley, an industry that similarly has been criticized for its lack of gender balance.Less than a decade ago, Wall Street firms were the premier destination for young college graduates and talented executives. More recently, though, the financial industry has been struggling to continue growing as it faces a raft of new regulations and a lack of public confidence as a result of the financial crisis.Silicon Valley, on the other hand, has been growing rapidly and is snapping up much of the talent that used to end up on Wall Street.“Smart people go to where they feel there is the most growth,” said Robert Reffkin, who left Goldman Sachs in 2012 after seven years at the firm to found a start-up, Compass, that is focused on real estate.At the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a premier source of young recruits, only 9.9 percent of undergraduates went into finance in 2013, compared with the 31 percent that took jobs on Wall Street in 2006, before the financial crisis. Software companies, meanwhile, hired 28.1 percent of M.I.T. graduates in 2013, compared with 10.5 percent in 2006.Wall Street is certainly not hurting for talent. It remains the top destination at many business schools and is still one of the most selective industries for hiring. But in the past, banks had their pick of the top talent, even among programmers and mathematicians.Google’s announcement of Ms. Porat’s hiring on Tuesday morning comes just two weeks after its current chief financial officer, Patrick Pichette, announced his retirement on the company’s social network, Google Plus, in an unusually personal message that jokingly cited his membership in the “Fraternity of Worldwide Insecure Overachievers.”As Google’s principal liaison to Wall Street, Ms. Porat is inheriting a tricky position. Google in recent years has expanded into an array of speculative investments like self-driving cars, biotechnology and space travel. That wanderlust has made Wall Street nervous, especially since the company continues to make close to 90 percent of its revenue from advertising.Growth in Google’s primary business, search advertising, has flattened out at about 20 percent a year for the last few years while the company’s financial results have failed to meet consensus analysts’ expectations for five straight quarters. And the company’s dominance of the search business is expected to erode as more Internet traffic shifts to mobile devices. Google is expected to claim about 72 percent of the overall search market this year, but that share is projected to drop to 66.7 percent by 2016, according to the research firm eMarketer.Of particular concern to investors, Google’s research and development spending increased to $2.8 billion in its most recently reported quarter, from $2.1 billion in the same quarter a year ago.Unlike many large companies, Google does not give quarterly earnings guidance, and the company has routinely been asked if it has any plans to distribute some of its $65 billion in cash.For now, at least, analysts are optimistic that Ms. Porat’s Wall Street background and big company pedigree will make her more receptive to their concerns. Google shares were up about 2.7 percent in midday trading after Ms. Porat’s appointment was announced.“I expect she’ll be more investor friendly than Google traditionally has been,” said Ben Schachter, an analyst with Macquarie Securities. “I would imagine that’s one of the reasons Google chose her.”Ms. Porat, 57, who started at Morgan Stanley in 1987, will be succeeded by Jonathan Pruzan, who has been overseeing the bank’s work advising other financial institutions.During the financial crisis, Ms. Porat was a top figure in Morgan Stanley’s efforts to advise the government on its dealings with A.I.G. and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. In 2013, she was on a short list of people being considered for deputy Treasury secretary, but she eventually asked for her name to be withdrawn.In the 1990s, Ms. Porat was the co-head of Morgan Stanley’s technology investment banking group. She attended Stanford University and said in statements on Tuesday that she was eager to get back to California. Her father was an engineer at the Stanford Linear Accelerator and Ms. Porat and her husband recently established the Dan Porat Fellowship at the university in his name.“Growing up in Silicon Valley, during my time at Morgan Stanley and as a member of Stanford’s board, I’ve had the opportunity to experience firsthand how tech companies can help people in their daily lives. I can’t wait to roll up my sleeves and get started,” Ms. Porat said in the announcement released by Google.Ms. Porat will be the first woman in Google’s senior ranks, and the fourth in the company’s Google’s 20-member senior leadership team, which includes Susan Wojcicki, chief executive of YouTube, Lorraine Twohill, Google’s senior vice president and chief marketing officer, and Rachel Whetstone, senior vice president for policy and communications.Several of the most prominent women in technology are former Google executives, including Marissa Mayer, chief executive of Yahoo, Sheryl Sandberg, chief operating officer at Facebook, and Megan Smith, the U.S. chief technology officer.There has been significant turnover among top financial executives in the technology industry over the last year. Apple and Amazon recently filled chief financial officer positions through internal promotions while Uber, the ride-hailing company, is on the hunt for a new finance chief. Twitter last year hired Anthony Noto, a former Goldman banker, as its financial boss.Ms. Porat will officially succeed Mr. Pichette at Google in May.At Morgan Stanley, Mr. Pruzan, 46, has established himself as an expert in dealing with the Federal Reserve stress tests and other regulatory issues that have become the dominant concern among bank executives.Morgan Stanley’s chief executive, James Gorman, wrote in a memo to the bank’s employees that Mr. Pruzan “understands the current regulatory environment.”“He brings both great technical skill and proven leadership,” Mr. Gorman wrote.Mr. Gorman has been aggressively repositioning Morgan Stanley to suit the new priorities of regulators after the financial crisis, in large part by emphasizing Morgan Stanley’s wealth-management division. The firm, though, has struggled to bring up profitability to match competitors.“These changes are part of our continued path forward from a period of repositioning to a period of growth,” Mr. Gorman wrote.Advertisement