Facebook, which bought Oculus VR for $2 billion last year, has been dancing around Wall Street’s questions about when Oculus, a developer of virtual reality technology, was going to start bringing in some real money.Now we have an answer: this year.Mike Schroepfer, Facebook’s vice president of engineering, demonstrated a spaceship game called Eve: Valkyrie to hundreds of developers gathered at the company’s F8 developer conference in San Francisco.  According to an audio recording of Mr. Schroepfer’s remarks, after showing the game demo, he said, “You’re going to be able to do this this year in VR. This is going to be incredible. And you’re going to be doing it in something shipped by Oculus.”That was the first statement by a senior Facebook executive regarding a release date for Oculus’s flagship product, a virtual reality headset called the Rift. A test version of the headset is currently available for software developers.Earlier this month, the founder of Oculus, Palmer Luckey, said at the South by Southwest conference that he was “pretty confident” the product would be released in 2015.That puts a lot of pressure on Oculus to deliver not just one, but two, complex products in the next nine months.John Carmack, Oculus’s chief technology officer, told game developers in early March that the company would do a wide-scale consumer release this fall of a mobile version of its technology, the Gear VR, that works with Samsung’s top-end smartphones and tablets. “We’re going to hang ourselves out there and be judged,” he said.If Oculus also plans to release the Rift — a more complex, PC-based headset — in that time frame, it means the company is running flat out, probably with a lot of help from Facebook.After I tweeted about Mr. Schroepfer’s comments, he took to Twitter (a rarity for a Facebook executive) and tried to walk back his on-stage statements. Here is the exchange:It appears that Facebook’s @schrep just confirmed that Oculus Rift will be on sale this year. $FB #f82015— Vindu Goel (@vindugoel) 26 Mar 15.@schrep showed an Oculus space game at Facebook’s developer conference and said you will be able to play it this year. $FB #f82015— Vindu Goel (@vindugoel) 26 Mar 15@vindugoel did not announce anything regarding shipping just said pc hardware available this year can create these experiences— Mike Schroepfer (@schrep) 26 Mar 15After another journalist, Tim Bradshaw of The Financial Times, tweeted that he heard Mr. Schroepfer say, “You’re going to be able to do this THIS YEAR… & going to be doing it in something shipped by Oculus,” the Facebook executive said he had misspoken:@tim @vindugoel I know what I meant to say was just this tech is here this year – *not* announcing this game or oculus shipping this year— Mike Schroepfer (@schrep) 26 Mar 15@tim @vindugoel sorry if it was confusing but don’t know exact dates on these things yet— Mike Schroepfer (@schrep) 26 Mar 15Through a spokesman, Mr. Schroepfer refused requests to talk — rather than tweet — about what he did and did not mean. Facebook later put out a statement that contradicted Mr. Schroepfer’s actual words. “Schroepfer said that the technology is ready today, like GPUs, CPU and 3d engine technology, to make Virtual Reality happen in the future,” the company said.A version of this article appears in print on 03/27/2015, on page B2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Facebook Says Oculus Headsets May Ship Sometime This Year.