In 1971, Herb Kelleher, a founder of Southwest Airlines, had an idea: As competition in the burgeoning airline industry intensified, he wanted to make his small, regional carrier stand out among aviation giants.His idea was branding. Use sex — or rather, sexual undertones — to sell the airline’s identity; flight attendants regularly wore hot pants or short skirts, and were billed as symbols of hospitality and “love,” as it were. It worked. By 1998, Southwest was one of the largest airlines in the United States.Lyft, the San Francisco-based ride-sharing start-up, looks to be taking a page from Mr. Kelleher’s playbook.Unlike Uber, the giant ride-hailing start-up with its powerful name and sleek, black-and-silver branding, Lyft has gone for a warmer, fuzzier exterior. Lyft drivers eschew fit and finish for large, pink dashboard mustaches to identify themselves. The company encourages lively conversation between passengers and drivers. It is, to some degree, a kinder, gentler and perhaps more convivial form of taking an Uber car.Expect more of the same in the future. On Thursday, Lyft plans to add user profiles for drivers and passengers to its app, essentially adding another personal touch to the act of taking a ride somewhere.The additions are not extreme. People are asked to provide their hometown, music tastes or other things about themselves that may be interesting topics of conversation. If a user has connected their Facebook account, the Lyft app can show if drivers and passengers have mutual friends in common.“It’s our first step on the road map to personalizing that in-car experience,” said Tali Rapaport, vice president of product at Lyft, who was tasked with creating the profiles. The feature is entirely optional, and users aren’t forced to turn it on.Part of the exercise is certainly branding. Lyft recently brought on Kira Wampler, a former executive at Trulia, to be its chief marketing officer. Since joining in December, Ms. Wampler has helped revamp Lyft’s image, swapping the furry mustaches that Lyft drivers stuck to their cars with the “glowstache,” a luminescent replica that sits atop a driver’s dashboard so that passengers can spot their rides.But profiles speak to Lyft’s broad vision of the company. Lyft is pushing Line, its car pool product, as the future of the company, one where there’s a “butt in every seat,” as Ms. Rapaport put it.Instead of hailing a personal car, calling a Lyft Line offers passengers a discount for picking up one or two more people who are traveling along a similar route. As they travel the route, passengers are dropped off at different points along the way. Passengers save money and, in theory, net income goes up for both Lyft and the driver.Lyft’s ideal version of the future is to have as many people using Lyft Line as possible, cutting down on the number of cars on the road. So an addition like user profiles, however small, may make the experience of traveling by car pool more enjoyable. Topics of conversation are easily available, for instance, or a driver may play a track from a passenger’s favorite band.“When you build a product that touches millions of people, it should be human, not transactional,” said John Zimmer, co-founder and president of Lyft.Uber has made stabs at personalization options like this. Last November, it launched a partnership with Spotify, the streaming music service, which allows a user to control the music while riding in an Uber car.But unlike Lyft, which is striving to differentiate itself so it is not seen as a commodity form of car-hailing transportation, Uber is ubiquitous in many urban areas and has a far larger footprint globally. Lyft is based entirely within the United States.Lyft has made clear that its ambitions are much bigger than being an also-ran to Uber. But for now, its biggest goal is to woo both drivers and passengers with a more personal touch.