
App Smart By                     
 KIT EATON
 
MARCH 25, 2015
Old-fashioned board games like Monopoly and Life get a new spin when they migrate to the smartphone.WE still play board games in my family, with real bits of cardboard and plastic. But we also love to play classic games that have had an app-based refresh. They’re frequently worth the money, sometimes for new features, but also because the apps do all the onerous scoring for you.Take the classic board game Monopoly. EA Games has made an app version that’s $1 on iOS and $2 on Android. The app sticks closely to the rules of the original game (which, if you’ve never played, is about buying property and businesses with faux money and trying to outsmart your opponents). Monopoly has 3-D graphics and cute animations, which make playing on an app more entertaining that on a 2-D board. The pieces even move as you’d expect: The cat token saunters between properties and the thimble awkwardly hops. You can play against a computer opponent, by passing your phone between friends in the same room or even with a friend on another device connected over Wi-Fi or Bluetooth.I like this app for the life that EA has injected into it. But I do find the design slightly old-fashioned, and the game controls and menus can be confusing. It’s also probably better if you already know how to play the game, because the pop-up instructions are not great. If you’re playing this app game with children who have never played the board game, you’ll have a lot of teaching to do.Still, one nice feature is being able to choose the background music, including listening to your own tunes. And some of the rules can be customized: It’s neat to be able to double the $200 bonus for passing Go.AdvertisementIf Monopoly isn’t your cup of tea, the family classic Game of Life is also available as an EA Games app. Like Monopoly, the app reinvention of Game of Life sticks closely to the original. It’s playable alone or with a group, and has some nice animated 3-D effects — your car rolls along the map, for example. The 3-D number spinner is almost — though not quite — as satisfying to spin as the original.AdvertisementAgain, the in-game help is a little limited so it’s best if you already know how to play. The app’s graphics also look dated, but this doesn’t detract from the gameplay. Game of Life Classic Edition is $1 on iOS and Android. There’s also a $5 iPad special edition that lets you see the whole board on the bigger screen. You can play with as many as six people.My favorite board game is Carcassonne. It’s a complex pieces-and-dice game played on maplike representations of a medieval city in France. Surprisingly, for such a classic tabletop game, it has transitioned into an excellent on-screen app. The app, which is $10 on iOS, uses the same detailed painted images on the playing pieces as the board game, and its interface is elegant and easy to use.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The app also does a good job of helping you understand how to play. You can play with human opponents in person or over local Wi-Fi connections, and the app’s built-in opponents are also excellent. Best of all, the app takes care of Carcassonne’s difficult scoring. Expansion packs are available as $1 to $2 in-app purchases that add interesting aspects to the game (the “Princess and Dragon” one is great).An Android version of Carcassonne, built by a different company, exists for $5. The two versions are similar, including the high quality of images and the gameplay.Another tabletop board game, similar to Carcassonne in strategy and gameplay, is Settlers of Catan — think Risk crossed with Sim City. The Catan app is faithful to the original, with great graphics. It’s $4 on iOS and Android.The classic word game Scrabble really tests your thinking power, and the app version will, too. The board game works well on mobile devices because the perennial “shall we look up that word in the dictionary?” question is averted by an in-app dictionary that checks words as you play. The app is free for iOS and Android, and has some nice extra elements like being able to play with strangers online and chatting about your games in-app. But this reimagining of a classic board game doesn’t feel as polished as some of its rivals. Some iOS users also complain of crashes, while Android users mention annoying in-app ads. Quick Call A new image-editing app has roared onto the iPhone and iPad in the form of Enlight. The app puts several photo-tweaking features in one place, like Instagram-esque special effect filters and more professional-level image adjustments like lighting curves. It’s complex to use, and its many menus take a while to get used to, but it is powerful and costs $4.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Classic Board Games, Reimagined for Mobile Screens.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »