AdvertisementSupported byGadgetwiseBy Mike Hendricks and Roxie HammillWE simply can’t see enough of ourselves, or so it would seem from today’s selfie craze.Twitter declared 2014 the year of the selfie, and 2015 is shaping up as the year selfie gear for smartphones goes mainstream, with items as diverse as selfie-shooting tools and novel ways to display those images — even burned onto a piece of breakfast toast.Out in front, by more than an arm’s length, is the selfie stick.Many of us saw President Obama wielding one in a recent video. And news accounts have told of museums and some sports venues banning their use, for fear something or someone will get poked.Despite all the buzz and ridicule these devices have prompted, the monopod for smartphones is not all that easy to find in stores in the United States.They are easy to find online, however, with the two most common varieties selling for $50 or far less. But a word of warning: The consensus of online customer reviews is that the cheapest models — some selling for under $10 — are flimsy.Today’s selfie sticks are patterned along the same basic design of one patented 30 years ago that allowed photographers to take self-portraits at a distance with cheap point-and-shoot film cameras.They range from simple poles that hold the phone securely while the phone’s timer clicks the shutter, to sticks with built-in Bluetooth triggers in the handle that allow the holder to point and shoot at will.There are also selfie sticks that hark back to the 1980s, with a cable from the hand-held end to the shutter control.The Looq 2G for iPhone and Android is one example of that variety. Its trigger is built into the grip, controlling the camera shutter through a cable that plugs into the phone’s earphone jack.With a list price of $45, it requires the download of a free app that also comes with filters.An app-free version for iPhone only, the Looq S, is listed for $25 on the company’s website. The poles on both models adjust from 5.5 inches to 24 inches and weigh just under four ounces.Ipow and Noot are two other examples of wired sticks. Both telescope out to more than three feet and cost about $15.The makers of these selfie sticks say they offer a distinct advantage: There are no Bluetooth-matching problems between it and the phone and no risk of interference with other devices.For wireless fanciers there are also plenty of choices.The Minisuit Selfie Stick Pro, for one, has a built-in Bluetooth remote shutter control. It works with Apple and Android phones.Walmart was selling it for $18 online recently, discounted from the $30 list price.Another choice is the CamKix, which gets generally good reviews for its durability, extends to 40 inches and sells for around $25.Whether the stick you buy is wired or wireless, think about what you will carry it in. And try to keep movement to a minimum: A tiny wrist movement is amplified into a blurry photo when you put a camera on a long stick. That is why some people prefer a simple stick without any sort of built-in trigger. They can then either rely on the phone’s shutter timer, or use a wireless remote shutter button held in the other hand.Plastic remotes selling for $10 and under are easy to come by online. They typically have a range of up to 30 feet and do not require an app to work with most iPhones, iPads or Android devices. Most have a changeable button battery.There are some higher-end options as well. The JoyGeek Ultrathin Wireless Remote Control Camera Shutter Release is made of zinc alloy and waterproof. It supports iOS 7 and Android 4.4 and above, and is 4.2 millimeters thin.Unlike the cheaper models with changeable button batteries, this remote has an internal battery with an advertised two-year life.Amazon lists it at $70 but discounts are available.What article about selfies would be complete without at least a mention of what to do with them. Sure, you could share them on Instagram or Facebook. That would be ... predictable.Then there’s the Selfie Toaster — a device that converts those self-portraits, or any picture, really, into an image on toasted bread.The Vermont Novelty Toaster Corporation, which started out offering toasters that transferred images of Jesus and a peace sign onto browned bread, saw its sales shoot up 1,000 percent since it began offering the Selfie Toaster last May, said Galen Dively, owner and chief executive. The appliances are now in Hammacher Schlemmer and soon to be in Bed Bath & Beyond, he said.Twenty-five dollars buys the toaster. It costs $45 more for the company to custom-make sheet metal plate stencils out of the photos customers submit, Mr. Dively said.The plates work like a negative, with the open parts allowing the heat to darken the bread. The most workable pictures are those with good lighting that haven’t been run through any filters, he said. Discounts are offered for customers who order more than one plate.Advertisement