By J. D. BIERSDORFERMARCH 23, 2015
Restoring the IconFor iCloud DriveQ. I was clicking around in an open folder window on my Mac and accidentally deleted the icon for the iCloud Drive on the side of the window. I use iCloud Drive a lot and found the icon useful, so how can I get it back?A. If you have accidentally whacked iCloud Drive — or any other icon — out of the sidebar panel of a folder or Finder window on the Mac, you can restore it in a couple of steps. First, go to the Finder by clicking into the Mac’s desktop background, or by selecting the Finder icon on the Dock. Under the Finder menu in the top-left corner of the screen, choose Preferences.When the Finder Preferences box opens, click the Sidebar tab. In the Favorites area, turn on the checkbox next to iCloud Drive. This preferences box lets you choose which icons you see in the side pane of an open folder window, so you can turn off the icons for things you may never use here. Click the red button in the top left corner of the Preferences box when you are finished.If you like, you can also rearrange the order of the icons in the sidebar. Click on an icon and drag it to a new position on the list.AdvertisementWatching Windows Fix ItselfQ. Why does Windows need to sometimes restart itself to finish installing updates?AdvertisementA. Microsoft pushes out regular updates and security fixes for its software, but Windows often has to do a bit of a juggling act when it is applying these patches to itself. If any of the updates are for certain files, programs or services that the operating system needs to function, you get prompted to restart the computer so Windows can install and load the new software.Updates to Windows and other Microsoft software (like the Office suite) arrive at least once a month — usually the second Tuesday — but can come more frequently if needed. To help prevent problems with Windows updates interfering with open files on your PC, you should close the files and quit any running programs before installing updates.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.TIP OF THE WEEK If you have always wanted to have someone write down your spoken words, you usually do not have to look any further than your smartphone. Although plenty of third-party dictation apps exist, the major mobile platforms all include built-in software that can translate your speech to type for use with email and other text-focused applications. Just look for a microphone icon on the screen or keyboard.Google (which also includes Voice Search in its app for Android, iOS and Windows Phone) lets you type by speaking when you tap the microphone icon on the Google Keyboard app; you can make adjustments by opening your device’s Settings icon, going to Language & Input and choosing Google Voice Typing or the other options in the Speech area. The company’s “Ok, Google” command can also create reminders and perform other chores when dictated.If you do not see a microphone icon on your keyboard to start dictation in Apple’s iOS 8.1, you can enable the Dictation feature by opening the Settings icon, tapping General, then Keyboard and pressing the button next to Enable Dictation. The Siri personal assistant responds to voice commands and can compose emails, messages and more.Likewise, Microsoft’s Cortana assistant for Windows Phone also responds to spoken-word commands. You can also dictate email messages and more, as explained at bit.ly/TmZcpE.J.D. BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Restoring the iCloud Drive Icon.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.