Updated, 6:40 p.m. | The tech industry is applying its economic muscle well outside of Silicon Valley.On Thursday, Marc Benioff, the chief executive of Salesforce.com, announced he would cancel all company events in Indiana, following passage of law that many in the Valley and elsewhere see as discriminatory against lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transgendered people.“Today we are canceling all programs that require our customers/employees to travel to Indiana to face discrimination,” Mr. Benioff wrote in a Twitter post.The move was soon followed by a letter from the Yelp founder and chief executive Jeremy Stoppelman to states considering similar laws, saying that “it is unconscionable to imagine that Yelp would create, maintain, or expand a significant business presence in any state that encouraged discrimination.”Timothy D. Cook, the chief executive of Apple, is gay and has been vocal about gay rights. He also weighed in on Twitter Friday morning. “Apple is open for everyone,” Mr. Cook wrote. “We are deeply disappointed in Indiana’s new law and calling on Arkansas gov. to veto the similar #HB1228.”Apple is open for everyone. We are deeply disappointed in Indiana’s new law and calling on Arkansas Gov. to veto the similar #HB1228.— Tim Cook (@tim_cook) 27 Mar 15He wrote in a second tweet: “Around the world, we strive to treat every customer the same — regardless of where they come from, how they worship or who they love.”Salesforce is perhaps uniquely positioned to exert financial pressure in Indiana. In 2013, the San Francisco cloud-computing company acquired ExactTarget, an email marketing company based in Indianapolis, for $2.5 billion. Salesforce employs more than 2,000 people in the state and was considering expansion plans there.It is unclear what impact the new law will have on those plans. But Mr. Benioff has already said Salesforce would move from Indianapolis to New York a customer conference that last year drew 10,000 people. “We can’t bring our customers or our employees into a situation where they might be discriminated against,” he told the technology news site Recode.We are forced to dramatically reduce our investment in IN based on our employee’s & customer’s outrage over the Religious Freedom Bill.— Marc Benioff (@Benioff) 26 Mar 15Gen Con, a video gaming convention held in Indianapolis, is also threatening to move the event out of the state. Gen Con drew 56,000 people last year and is under contract with the city until 2020, according to a letter to attendees from Adrian Swartout, the chief executive of the company that puts on the event.“What does the future hold for Gen Con in 2021 and beyond? Planning and bidding for our convention is a long-term process that begins five years prior to contract-term commencement,” he wrote. “Discussions whether to remain in Indy or move elsewhere have begun.”On Facebook, Mr. Benioff cheered the move by Mr. Stoppelman, as well as statements against the Indiana law by San Francisco’s mayor Ed Lee, California Lt. Governor Gavin Newsom, and the N.C.A.A., which said it was concerned about the possible effects of the bill.The bill, officially known as Senate Bill 101 and called the Religious Freedom Bill, prohibits the government from “substantially burdening a person’s exercise of religion, even if the burden results from a rule of general applicability.”Indiana’s governor, Mike Pence, who on Wednesday signed the bill alongside religious and social conservative figures in a meeting closed to the public and the press, has denied that the bill is discriminatory.The tech community has long championed gay rights.  A number of prominent Silicon Valley investors are gay, and several big tech companies like Apple and Facebook participate in San Francisco’s annual Gay Pride parade.The chief executive of CA Technologies wrote about his disappointment with the law Friday afternoon on a company blog. And Brad Smith, Microsoft’s general counsel, wrote in a tweet: “Our goal is to empower all people. Laws should not separate people of goodwill from businesses that should serve them. #LGBT.”General support of gay rights is also strong among the industry’s rank and file. Anger at a donation to a California measure banning gay marriage ultimately led to the resignation of the leader of the foundation that makes the web browser Firefox.