High school students in Tennessee can see and manipulate ocean plankton under a superhigh-resolution microscope in Southern California, with a biologist in California serving as their tour guide.Surgeons in Cleveland and Los Angeles share insights and run through a simulation of brain surgery on a biologically exact image of the patient’s brain just before the real operation begins.Harnessing data from sources ranging from environmental sensor networks to patient records, researchers in Dallas and elsewhere are working to someday be able to send personalized alerts to people who are particularly sensitive to tiny airborne particles — notably, the 44,000 Americans who have an asthma attack each day, with 1,200 of them having to be admitted to a hospital.Those were three of the projects shown off at a gathering last week that focused on what ultrahigh-speed Internet communications and advanced software can make possible. The conference, in Arlington, Va., brought together participants in two initiatives supported by National Science Foundation: the Global Environment for Network Innovations project, or GENI, and US Ignite.The attendees included White House officials, local community leaders, university researchers and corporate scientists. Their shared interest is in accelerating the spread of next-generation Internet technology to stimulate scientific discoveries, economic development, education and public health.Listening to the speakers and seeing the presentations, two themes stood out — one about policy, the other about technology.The first is the crucial role government leadership and public funding can play in moving new technology forward. That reality tends to be underappreciated at a time when a flood of private money is pouring into tech companies and start-ups. But science comes before commercialization, and that can take time.The GENI project focuses on ultrahigh-speed networking — 40 to 100 times faster than today’s broadband networks — and tailoring networks with software for peak performance and security. Mark Berman, GENI’s project director, described it as a technology for “precision cyberinfrastructure, the resources you need to solve the problem at hand.”The GENI initiative was begun in 2007, but it started slowly. Suzanne C. Iacono, a senior official for National Science Foundation computing programs, said that in the early years, skeptical colleagues called the project “PowerPoint GENI” for its lack of tangible progress.But the pace picked up as more than 300 networking researchers from dozens of universities helped build GENI. Today, GENI has 3,500 users at 180 universities in the United States and 30 foreign countries.The N.S.F. has invested about $80 million in GENI since its inception. It has already paid dividends, by making significant contributions to the emerging market for software-defined networking. That market is growing rapidly, and is projected to reach up to $35 billion by 2018.GENI represents the classic government role — funding basic research at universities that sometimes makes its way into the marketplace, occasionally in spectacular fashion. Google, for example, began as work by Larry Page and Sergey Brin as part of the Stanford Digital Library Project, funded by the N.S.F.US Ignite is different. Begun in 2012, it is a national initiative to encourage the building of software applications that exploit the capabilities of the GENI infrastructure. Glenn Ricart, chief technology officer of US Ignite, called GENI and US Ignite a “hand-in-glove effort” to “turn the technology into things that really help people.” The targeted fields for application development include health care, education, public safety, energy, transportation and manufacturing.US Ignite has a diverse set of supporters — the N.S.F., community groups, corporations, universities and foundations. About 40 communities have committed to building out ultrahigh-speed broadband networks — at least one gigabit per second, and often faster. They range from large cities like Cleveland to smaller towns like Ammon, Idaho. Corporate supporters include Amazon, AT&T, Cisco, Comcast, Hewlett-Packard, Juniper Networks and Verizon. For US Ignite, each dollar of federal funding is matched by four dollars from other sources.The other theme at the conference was the anticipated impact of the so-called Internet of Things. Corporate and community representatives alike predicted that connecting sensor-laden devices from jet engines to appliances to smartphones to the Internet will drive the demand for next-generation networks and the smart software needed to find useful patterns in all the data.Joseph J. Salvo, manager of the complex systems engineering laboratory at General Electric, said he thought the concept of “big data” would be seen as a misnomer and an understatement. Instead, the near future, he said, will be one of “infinite data.”Lev Gonick is chief executive of OneCommunity, a nonprofit begun in 2003 to deploy high-speed fiber-optic networks to stimulate economic development and innovation in northeast Ohio. Its projects include a Health Tech Corridor in Cleveland, which includes Cleveland Clinic; University Hospitals, the main teaching hospital of Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine; and a growing collection of start-ups.The Internet of Things, Mr. Gonick said, will be both a “massive bandwidth consumer” and “an ecosystem of limitless possibility.” The danger, he said, is that corporations may seek to have proprietary islands of self-interest instead of open technology standards like the web.“We need an Internet of Things infrastructure that actually serves the public good,” Mr. Gonick said. “It doesn’t happen because the infrastructure is there,” he added. “It takes leadership,” by communities, the national government and corporations that recognize open standards are in their long-term interest as well.