OTTAWA — It didn’t take long for Canada’s transport minister to exploit the promotional possibilities of Amazon testing its drone delivery service in the country — testing that the company confirmed on Monday.“In terms of Amazon and companies like that, Canada Post, whoever wants to utilize this technology in their day-to-day businesses, I’d encourage them to talk to Transport Canada,” said the minister, Lisa Raitt, referring to the government department she leads. “We have a wealth of experience and we certainly want to keep up with the times.”Ms. Raitt’s enthusiasm for miniature, unmanned aircraft stands in stark contrast to the Federal Aviation Administration’s approach. The American agency has granted only 69 authorizations for commercial drone use compared with 1,600 permits issued by Transport Canada last year alone. It took a protracted effort by Amazon for it to finally get restricted permission for outdoor drone tests in the United States this month. But about 110 companies in Canada now provide commercial drone services, which are regularly used by the movie and television industry, oil and gas companies, forestry companies and farmers.“We get a lot of calls from prospective clients in the U.S. who are absolutely frustrated by the F.A.A.,” said Diana Cooper, who heads the drone and robotics legal practice at LaBarge Weinstein in Ottawa. “It says a lot about the U.S. system that one of the greatest American companies has to go abroad to do development.”Not that Amazon has gone very far. The Guardian, which first reported Amazon’s experiment, said that the company’s secret Canadian drone test base is somewhere in British Columbia and within sight of the border with the United States. Neither the newspaper nor the company has disclosed its precise location.Ms. Cooper said the biggest distinction between the two countries was that Canada takes a much more flexible, case-by-case approach to commercial drone users. In general, she said, companies are initially given permits that last about a month and set out terms for a specific project in a particular location. Users that prove to the department that they operate safely and within its guidelines eventually graduate to a certificate that allows them to operate nationwide at any time without first obtaining permission.Canada’s warm embrace of tiny helicopters also includes a test center for unmanned aircraft in Alberta, run by a nonprofit group, and a research and test center in Quebec.Robert Kendall, the executive director of Unmanned Systems Canada, an industry and educational group, said that Canada committed about seven years ago to develop an unmanned flight industry in Canada. The Canadian industry’s hope now, he said, is that when the F.A.A. finally allows widespread commercial use of drones, it will be able to take its years of knowledge and experience south.But Mr. Kendall did allow that Canada’s regulator has one advantage not enjoyed by the F.A.A. He estimates that there is about 20 times more air traffic in American skies, adding to the risks created by testing drones.A version of this article appears in print on 04/06/2015, on page B6 of the NewYork edition with the headline: In Canada, Wooing Drones for Work.