AdvertisementSupported byApp SmartBy Kit EatonKeeping track of the latest news about technology and devices can be overwhelming. But many apps are built specifically to sort through the latest tech industry innovations for you.My favorite app is called Appy Geek. It is a news aggregator, pulling in fresh reporting about technology from a long list of news sites, and presenting articles in an easy-to-use interface. Appy Geek’s interface is the reason I love it, because it’s so good-looking.You personalize the front page of the app by selecting categories from a list. The articles are sorted into those categories, and the app shows images from recent news reports on the buttons to act as a visual aid. Each category you choose gets a labeled button along with an image from a news article related to the topic. Tapping on a category takes you to a list of recent articles on that topic; each has a thumbnail image, a headline and an indication of how many pages the content is. Tap on an article to open and view it.The app uses intuitive navigation to help you reach your chosen categories, and you can, of course, search for articles of interest. One neat feature is Appy Geek’s tag cloud, which is a sort of text-based visual catalog for news categories that are trending at the moment. If you’re not obsessive about technology but still want to keep on top of the news, the tag cloud is quite a useful way of seeing what’s generating a lot of interest.Appy Geek is slick, easy to use and, if you set up a free account, the service promises to get better at recommending relevant news items to you over time. It’s free for iOS and Android (with a special tablet-friendly version for Android to make the most of bigger screens).A decent alternative to Appy Geek is iGeeky, a free iOS and Android app. Despite the “i” in its name, the app is more than just a portal for Apple news.Instead, it aggregates the latest news from a long list of well-known tech news sources. In terms of functionality, iGeeky feels a lot like Appy Geek, with its graphics-driven home page and easy interface.But iGeeky aggregates articles from one news source at a time instead of sorting news into categories. This probably works best if you already know which tech news websites you like to read.If you’re keen for breaking tech news, this app works well, and it’s more visually appealing to read than many rivals. IGeeky’s news sources may not be particularly diverse, though, and if you’re interested in reading hard science articles as well as news on the latest devices, then perhaps this isn’t the app for you.Advances in technology are propelled by scientific advances, and the PopSci app from Popular Science magazine is a handy place to keep informed about both new scientific discoveries and devices. You can choose to see an image-heavy list of all the content coming from Popular Science, for example, or filter by categories like “environment” or “gadgets.”This app is simple and clean, and the articles are served up with PopSci’s usual high quality and simplicity. Of course it presents content only from PopSci, and the app hasn’t been updated for a long time, which may be why some reviewers complained about malfunctions, particularly on Android. The app is free on iOS and Android.Like Popular Science, the well-known news outlet CNET has a free Android and iOS app that presents its own content in app form. The CNET app looks great, with an emphasis on large images. It has easy navigation through on-screen icons and swipes to scan through articles.This app is also not a bad place to see lots of different technology news items and gadget reviews, but it is frequently criticized as being buggy and having intrusive advertising. I didn’t encounter technical problems, but I did find the video ads irritating and sometimes very loud. Turn the volume down when you view CNET in public.It’s also worth taking a look at Digg, which is available for both iOS and Android. Digg used to be one of the premiere online places to find breaking technology news as well as general news, and it still thrives as a site and as an app. The app is attractive and easy to use, and works well as a category-based tech-news aggregator.But Digg has been reinvented many times and has lost a lot of its news-breaking punch. It’s also text-centric, which may or may not suit your news reading style.Quick CallDrupe is a new contacts app for Android that tries to solve a 21st-century problem: keeping track of which of your friends and family you most-frequently contact over WhatsApp, Skype, Facebook Messenger and so on. It’s simple, great to use and could save you a lot of effort. It’s free.Advertisement