By J. D. BIERSDORFERMARCH 31, 2015
Q. Aside from seeing “retweets” and “favorites,” how can I tell if anybody is looking at my Twitter posts?A. Twitter itself includes a Tweet Activity Dashboard that you can use to see how many people viewed or engaged with your posts each month. You can also find third-party Twitter management and analytics tools around the web that can give you a better picture of who your online audience might be.To use Twitter’s own dashboard page, go to analytics.twitter.com and log in with your account name and password (if prompted). The dashboard displays a variety of statistics about your account, including a summary of your actions on Twitter, like the total number of posts you have made within a specific time period. The page also lists your “Tweet impressions,” (the number of times other users saw the posts on Twitter), and how many visits your profile page received.On the Twitter mobile apps for Android or iOS, you can see how a selected post performed from within the app. When you have the post open on screen, tap the View Tweet Activity button below the text to see the total number of impressions and other information.AdvertisementIf you want to move beyond Twitter’s own tools for looking at your account’s activity, you have plenty of other options to consider, including Twitonomy, Tweetchup, Tweet Archivist and Hootsuite. Some services are free and some — usually those aimed at business users — charge a fee for more detailed reports illustrated with charts and graphs.AdvertisementMoving the Mail ContactsQ. How can I duplicate the addresses in my Yahoo Mail in a new Gmail account?A. Many webmail providers allow you to copy your contacts list between services, as long as you save the file in a format both can read. A comma-separated values file, (which uses the .csv extension) is one format that generally has good compatibility for a number of webmail systems, and you can export your Yahoo contacts into a .csv file that can then be imported into your Gmail account.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Yahoo Mail, click the Contacts icon on the left side of the screen. Click the Actions drop down menu, select Export and then choose Yahoo CSV as the format. Click the Export Now button and make note of where the file is saved on your computer.In the Gmail account, click the Gmail menu on the left and choose Contacts from the menu. On the Contacts screen, click the More menu button, choose Import and click the Choose File button. Find the Yahoo CSV file you just saved, select it and click the Import button. Your Yahoo contacts should now be visible in your Gmail contacts list. If Gmail encounters issues with the import, you should see a message alerting you to entries you may need to manually adjust.TIP OF THE WEEK If you use Mozilla Firefox and have added a lot of plug-ins and extensions to the browser, there is a quick way to see if all the extra software is up to date. Using Firefox, visit https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/plugincheck, where you get an instant checkup.When you arrive on the page, you see a list of all the plug-ins and their current status. You can upgrade expired plug-ins with a few clicks and get links to more information about others that may have updates pending.If you do not feel like updating plug-ins you never use anymore, you can remove them from Firefox. Go to the Tools menu, select Add-ons and click the Extensions tab. Here, you can click the Remove button next to each bit of extra software you want to prune from the browser.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Analyzing Your Twitter Life.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.