AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I want to convert some old lectures on cassette tapes to MP3 files, but my MacBook seems to have only a headphone port. Many of the USB cassette gizmos for copying the recordings to the computer have software on CD — and my laptop doesn’t have a CD drive either. What can I do?A. Although some MacBook models once had a combination audio port that you could manually switch in the settings to accept sound input, this feature is not available on all of Apple’s hardware. But you have other options, like getting an inexpensive adapter that links a standard audio cable from the cassette player to the Mac’s USB jack.A dedicated USB-to-MP3 cassette converter can cost as little as $25. In most cases, it is one of the easier and least expensive solutions for transferring tape, because you do not have to find a working portable tape player, invest in a more expensive dubbing deck or cable the computer to the stereo components in the living room. This type of converter, which looks like a portable tape player with a USB cable for connecting to the computer, is usually sufficient for transferring spoken-word audio and other standard recordings. AGPTek and GGI are among the companies that make this sort of hardware and distribute it through major retailers like Best Buy and Amazon.Even if your Mac laptop did not come with a CD player to install the software, though, there are ways to make some USB-to-MP3 cassette converters work. If you cannot buy or borrow an external USB disc drive to use with the laptop, check the system requirements on the tape converter. Some models can work with the free Audacity audio-editing program that you can download right to your Mac from the Internet, which lets you skip the installation from a disc.Most Macs already come with the free GarageBand recording software that can also be used to import audio played through a device connected to the USB port. Just select the connected USB device as the input source in the GarageBand settings before you push Play on the tape player and the Record button in GarageBand. Once you record a tape in GarageBand (or Audacity), you can use the program to clean up some of the noise and hiss from the tape and then save the file as a MP3 track.Clearing Files on an Android TabletQ. My Android tablet is almost full, and I don’t have room to download a movie. Where do I look to see how much space I really have left?A. You can see a breakdown of your tablet’s storage space — and what types of files are eating it up — in the Settings area. If you are not there already in Android 5.0, swipe down from the top of the screen to open the Quick Settings box. Tap the bar at the top of the screen, and when the box expands, tap the cog-shaped icon.When you land on the Settings screen, go to the Device area and tap Storage. The next screen displays a color-coded graphic that shows how much total space your tablet has left, how much space you have filled, and what types of files (like Pictures or Audio) are taking up that space. Tap a category to see the list of files or programs included within it.If you need to make room on the tablet immediately, you can delete items right from these screens. Weeding out things like bad photos or old files in the Downloads area can reclaim significant space.When you tap the Apps category on the Storage settings screen, Android displays a list of all the apps on the tablet and how much space each one occupies. To make more room by deleting little-used programs, tap an app in the list. On the next screen, you can tap buttons to clear the app’s cache and other data eating up your megabytes. You can also delete the entire app from the tablet by using the Uninstall button.Advertisement