Competition for the corporate dollar didn’t take long to heat up.Soon after Hewlett-Packard said it would make the creation of so-called hybrid cloud computing systems a keystone of its new enterprise company, Amazon announced new inroads into the same business.Amazon Web Services, or AWS, on Wednesday began a series of meetings, which it calls summits, aimed at showing companies it can do much of what HP is offering in hybrid clouds, and suggested that working with Amazon was cheap, easy — and better for your career.Hybrid clouds combine flexible cloud systems inside corporations with the ability to move workloads into public clouds, like AWS, the Google Cloud Platform or Microsoft Azure. HP once thought it should operate its own public cloud, but appears to have decided this would not be a good use of capital or resources.Hybrids are considered a big part of the future of enterprise computing. Bill Hilf, the head of HP’s cloud business, said HP’s private cloud business was growing at a compound annual growth rate “in the high 30 percent” range, compared with an industry average of about 17 percent (and just 3 to 4 percent growth for sales of traditional computer hardware). He did not provide a dollar figure for this revenue.“Hybrid is our wheelhouse too,” said Stephen Orban, the head of enterprise strategy at AWS. “We have more features and services than any other cloud platform.” No doubt the sales teams at multiple companies will dispute that second sentence.At the meeting in San Francisco, the day included “how to” sessions on moving huge amounts of corporate computing to AWS, as well as security, application development, and management, as well as some pointed work advice. AWS had originally offered what amounted to raw computing power, leaving it up to engineers to decide what software to put on top of it. As AWS has become bigger, the company has developed lots of ways that corporate information technology workers with few skills can use Amazon’s online computing platform.At one point in the keynote speech of the meeting, Mr. Orban showed a slide with the increasing number of high-paying jobs available to people with AWS skills. This is a big deal to people in the information technology business, where knowing the latest skills commands a premium.“You’re likely to build some expertise” in even a simple corporate project, he said. Translation: Even if your company doesn’t migrate, you need to know about this stuff for your next job. That slide indicated much of what AWS, and probably other cloud providers, are selling as they go up against HP and others for corporate dollars. The big cloud companies will sell low prices and a deep knowledge of how this infrastructure works. A provider like HP will emphasize its relationship with the company, and a better knowledge of its issues.Mr. Hilf’s statistics on HP’s growth sounded good, but that was before AWS started this new push, which will include meetings in 16 cities, five in the United States and 11 overseas.The initial session was not that heavily attended, with fewer than 1,000 people at Mr. Orban’s keynote (most of whom seemed to lean forward at the sight of that job skills slide). That is about as many as you can find in a decent breakout seminar at Oracle’s annual event.Then again, “low and little seen” is how AWS managed to get such a big head start on all the other cloud competitors. And to paraphrase another Seattle-based great of the corporate computing business, it just keeps coming (“and coming and coming”).