A long-anticipated product from a showman of business technology — and who runs a company now valued in the billions — made its official debut on Wednesday. The product’s ambitions, and weaknesses, say much about the current state of a fast-changing market.Short version: Domo, as the company and product are known, shows how much companies are drawing on all sorts of online data to move quickly, and need ample amounts of flashy graphics to consume that information quickly. The problem is, plenty of other companies have figured that out too.This risks being a little creepy.“It not only looks internally at how a company is doing, but how to innovate around that,” said Josh James, Domo’s creator. “All of the data about your job is there, all of your peers see how you are performing, and you care about your data.” Somehow that sounds more attractive to managers than workers and like the kind of thing a lot of people will try to game.Mr. James is a likable Utah native who built the revolutionary Web analytics company Omniture, which he sold to Adobe in 2009 for $1.8 billion. That success, along with an outgoing nature, made Mr. James something of a fixture on the tech conference circuit. He first started talking about Domo onstage in 2010, soon after leaving Adobe.He’s been secretive since then about the product, he said, because Domo was hard to build and he needed to keep clear of industrial snoops. Companies like Oracle and IBM were asking him what he was doing, he said. “It seemed so obvious to us, we didn’t want them to see the recipe book,” he said.Omniture tracked the performance of websites and user behavior, giving companies a way to tell how their marketing and other external activities were doing on the Internet.Domo looks as if Mr. James is turning the same Omniture-like analytic capabilities internally. A sales manager, for example, can view where his group is relative to its quota and who may be underperforming. A marketer can see how the company is doing on social media.There are a number of services that do things like this, including Workday and Salesforce.com, which can deliver visualizations about the performance of their own software. Like Domo, Microsoft has business analytics products as well.Domo does seem to draw off a number of third-party and proprietary databases, giving it a relatively rich range of presentations. Mr. James is charging $1,500 to $2,000 per corporate user a year, with expectations of a minimum order of $50,000, so he does need to offer value for money.When Mr. James started working on Domo, the product was probably cutting edge. Now it looks like the nice kind of graphics available at good web shops. Newer companies  have nice presentation too and can suggest new data sources people might want to look at as they analyze a problem.That makes for an expensive and costly battle among a number of well-funded players. As if anticipating this, the company also announced it had received an additional $200 million in funding, which it said gave Domo a value of $2 billion. To date, Domo has raised a total of $450 million, or almost a quarter of that big valuation. Online computing may be cheaper, but building this kind of software, and a sales team to go with it, clearly isn’t.Mr. James said Domo had some analytic capabilities and would be adding more. The effects of the software are already being seen in his early beta customers, he said, like a media company that is changing its content in real time to meet changing tastes, or a retailer that can develop graphic representations of employee theft.