AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. My Windows XP computer, which is running perfectly, has space for 29 gigabytes of new data out of a capacity of 146 gigabytes. How much more of the 29 gigabytes can I safely use without running into problems?A. Windows will warn you when your drive is getting too full, but you should try to keep at least 15 percent of your drive space free so that the Disk Defragmenter program that comes with the system has enough room to work. So to preserve that 15 percent from your total 146 gigabytes of hard drive space, you should leave about 21.9 gigabytes free if you want to optimize your disk without Windows complaining about space.Running the Disk Defragmenter to rearrange where the files are stored within the hard drive so the system can find them more quickly can help speed up the computer, but running the Disk Cleanup tool helps you dump data you do not need (like Internet temporary files and items in the Recycle Bin) and reclaim some of that hard drive space. Most computer systems run more efficiently when the hard drive has plenty of room to use the free space for things like virtual memory and defragmenting, so the more free space you can conserve, the less you will have to worry about it.As Microsoft notes in many places around its website, it no longer provides support for Windows XP, including updates to its own security software. If you have not installed one already, a third-party security suite that still supports Windows XP (like Kaspersky Anti-Virus or AVG) can help protect your old system in a world full of new online threats.Keeping Your Ears on the RoadQ. Is it legal to wear headphones while biking?A. State and local laws vary, so check the regulations in your area. The League of American Bicyclists has a list of state-by-state laws, but visit your state’s website for its most current regulations concerning road safety and bicycle operation.Some states, like Florida, ban the wearing of earphones or a headset while operating a bicycle (presumably for listening to audio), but allow a headset that provides sound in only one ear, like those for use with a cellular telephone. In New York, you can use one earbud in general, but you must keep your other ear free for listening. New York City abides by the one-earbud rule, but it advises keeping both ears free from distraction while navigating city streets and bike lanes.Whatever the law happens to be, common sense should factor in as well because distractions can be dangerous. Blasting music through a pair of headphones while zooming through busy city streets is a potentially more hazardous situation than biking on a remote trail in a rural area while using a Bluetooth earpiece to get GPS directions or to accept an important phone call before stopping to finish the chat.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement