Amazon has long focused on delivering packages to customers as efficiently as humanly possible. It makes sense, then, that Lyft, a ride-hailing start-up, would want to hire staff from the online retail giant.On Thursday, Lyft named Rex Tibbens, a former Amazon executive, its new chief operating officer. Mr. Tibbens, who was vice president of Amazon logistics in North America, most recently led the infrastructure development of the Prime Now program, a one-hour delivery service being piloted in a number of cities in the United States. He also previously was an executive at Dell, the computer maker, as well as Toyota, where he worked in logistics and fulfillment.At Lyft, many of Mr. Tibbens’s duties will be similar to those of chief operating officers at other institutions, including scaling the start-up’s operations. But finding ways to differentiate Lyft’s service, a crucial focus for the company in a crowded ride-sharing market, will also be one of Mr. Tibbens’s top tasks.“To me, Lyft is about two key experiences: the passenger experience and the driver experience,” Mr. Tibbens said in an interview. “How do we create an experience for both of them that’s very differentiated from other companies?”Lyft has worked hard to portray itself as a friendlier alternative to Uber, which is a market leader among ride-hailing start-ups. In March, Lyft introduced user profiles to encourage more interaction among passengers and drivers. It doles out glowing pink mustaches for drivers to attach to their dashboards, a way to signal to passengers that their Lyft ride has arrived.Mr. Tibbens cited previous examples of how he has approached differentiation, pointing to Amazon’s “mayday” product, which lets owners of Kindle Fire tablet instantly video chat with Amazon customer support representatives.The new appointment comes about seven months after Travis VanderZanden, then Lyft’s chief operating officer, left the company on less than amicable terms. Lyft is pursuing litigation against Mr. VanderZanden, whom Lyft accuses of stealing trade secrets from the company. Just two months after Mr. VanderZanden left Lyft, he joined Uber.