

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
APRIL 8, 2015
I picked up my Apple Watch last Wednesday at Apple headquarters in Cupertino, Calif. After interviewing some of the designers and engineers who worked on the device, I was given a guided tour of the watch, similar to what customers will receive when they buy one at an Apple Store.The device that Apple lent me was the 42-millimeter stainless steel watch with a Milanese loop band, which sells for $699. The Apple Watch’s bands are interchangeable; I was also given an extra leather band (bright blue, $149) and a sport band made of a kind of rubbery plastic that sells for $49.Over a week, I took notes of the highs and lows of using Apple’s new device. Here’s my diary:In Cupertino, an Apple guide walked me through how easy it is to pair the watch with my iPhone (the device gets its Internet connection from a nearby iPhone) and then showed me the watch’s interface. While the demo looked simple, there are unseen depths to the watch. Figuring out what it can do, and how, takes a few days of adjusting.There are two primary input methods for the watch, the touch screen and the digital crown, or the little knob on the side of the device. The screen is similar to any touch screen you’ve used. The main difference is that it does not accept some actions you know from your phone, including pinch-to-zoom. It also accepts a novel gesture not found on phones, called Force Touch. With that gesture, you press the screen harder than you normally do to unearth extra controls on certain screens.The technology columnist Farhad Manjoo asks whether the Apple Watch’s new “taptic engine” will give us an alternative to constantly checking our phones.The crown, which turns with the weighty precision you would expect of a fine watch, performs a few functions. You press the crown in to switch between the clock face and your home screen of apps; sometimes, pressing the crown also acts as a back button. If you press and hold down the crown, you invoke the Siri voice assistant. You can also call up Siri by holding your wrist up and saying, “Hey Siri!” — which is awkward in public but addictive in private.AdvertisementThe crown’s main functions involve scrolling and zooming. When you’re on a screen with a list of items or a long screed of text, turning the crown will scroll up or down.AdvertisementAlthough you can also scroll by flicking the screen, scrolling with the crown can be faster and more precise than using the touch screen, and your finger isn’t covering what you’re trying to look at. When you’re on a screen with images or icons — like your home screen of apps, or the Photos or Maps app — turning the crown will zoom in and out of the image.In addition to these primary input methods, you’ve also got to remember four types of screens from which different functions can be performed. These are the clock face, the notifications panel, apps and glances.Let’s go over them here:The face is just what it sounds like, one of 10 different timepiece screens you can choose from that show the time, and, on some screens, lots of extra information, including the date, calendar entries, or the position of the sun in the sky. As with most smartwatches, the Apple Watch’s screen is usually off. It turns on to show the clock face when you turn your wrist toward your face.If you swipe down from the clock face, you’ll see the notifications panel. Think of it as you would the list of notifications on your phone — tiny missives from apps seeking to get your attention. Some notifications will also trigger alerts that will cause the watch to make a sound or to buzz its “taptic engine,” the mechanism that causes the watch to tap on your wrist.Apps on the watch are similar to those on a phone: They’re little programs that perform discrete functions. The watch comes with more than a dozen apps made by Apple, and many third-party developers, including The New York Times, have also built watch apps that are companions to their iPhone apps. The watch apps are packaged with iPhone apps; when you install them on your phone, they automatically become available for your watch.The final primary interface element — and the one that feels the least Apple-y, because it adds a layer of confusion without much attendant utility — is something called a glance. Glances are quick, summary views of certain apps that you can see by swiping up from the watch face. For instance, the glance for the Weather app shows you the current temperature and your location; the Calendar glance shows you your next appointment.If all this sounds complicated, you’re right. It is slightly difficult to get the hang of the Apple Watch, at least at first. The biggest problem is figuring out which types of actions are available on which screens. For instance, if you get an email notification, you can’t swipe left on the message to archive it, because that quick action is available only from the Mail app, not the notification for the Mail app — which is confusing, because the two screens are nearly identical visually. Or, if you’re in the glance for the Maps app, you can’t move the map around; to do that, you’ve got to go to the full Maps app, which looks initially just like the glance.AdvertisementIt took me at least a day to feel confident at shuttling around the different parts of the watch. Since it’s a brand-new device, it stands to reason there will be a bit of a learning curve involved. Still, the Apple Watch presents an uncharacteristic first impression, one that many may find daunting.For several years, some techies have argued that the best way to separate us from our phones is to add some new device to our lives, preferably something attached to our bodies. This was the main justification for Google Glass, and in the last few weeks it has become one of the major arguments in favor of the Apple Watch. The theory goes like this: Because it is fixed on your wrist, and because its interface is tuned for quick interaction rather than complex tasks, a smartwatch can let you take care of digital demands faster than your phone.This idea is nice, but to get it to work, you’ve got to decide which notifications you want to get on your watch, and which you don’t. When you first set it up, the watch generally mirrors the notifications you’ve set for your phone: If you now get an iPhone alert when a friend changes her Facebook profile photo, you’ll get one on your Apple Watch. (The system is smart enough to alert you in just one place — it doesn’t buzz your watch if you’re looking at your phone.) But because the phone and the watch are such different devices, mirroring notifications between them often makes little sense.For instance, since there’s isn’t (yet) a Facebook app for the Apple Watch, notifications for Facebook on the watch are essentially useless — your wrist buzzes with a note that your friend has changed her profile photo, but when you tap the Facebook notification, nothing happens.Even for apps that are available for the watch, mirroring the phone’s notifications is not necessarily the best decision. Do you want every email to buzz your wrist, or just those from your VIPs? How about social apps like Twitter — when should you let them ring your watch?I spent many hours pondering such questions, and there was a lot of fine-tuning in the notification screen on my phone. In other words, it didn’t just work.On your wrist, the Apple Watch feels like any other watch. It isn’t too big, it isn’t too heavy, and it is handsomely elegant without being flashy. The shiny Milanese band was my favorite of the three I tried, even though its magnetic clasp periodically loosens up during the course of the day, requiring adjustment. Like anything you wear for the first time, you’ll notice the watch in the early hours after you put it on, but you’ll quickly forget it’s there until you need it.I was surprised to discover that the Apple Watch didn’t command much notice from others, either. I used it in public in the San Francisco Bay Area and in Manhattan for a week, and only a handful of people asked what it was.Even when I made a show of using it, like holding it up to pay for groceries at Whole Foods or to present my digital boarding pass at San Francisco International Airport, nobody really said anything.AdvertisementBy the way, it worked perfectly at Whole Foods and at the security checkpoint at the airport, but there was a hitch before boarding the plane — my wrist couldn’t fit under Virgin America’s scanner, so, like a time traveler visiting from the olden days, I had to access the boarding pass on my phone. #Firstworldproblems.When Apple unveiled the watch last year, it did not specify how long the battery would last between charges. For me, the battery consistently lasted at least a full day. On a day of heavy use it got to about 10 percent of power left by bedtime. But on most days I noticed robust battery life, with 20 to 30 percent remaining on the battery bar at the end of a day, which is far better than I fare with my phone. The watch’s charger, a little magnetic disc that sits on your bedside table, is excellent. The watch attaches and detaches from it with ease, so charging it nightly isn’t difficult.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Another unexpectedly nice feature was making phone calls from my wrist. It sounds dumb. It looks dumb. But when I got a call in the middle of something else — cooking, slumping on the couch — tapping my wrist and chatting was easier than searching for the phone. You don’t have to hold your wrist up to your face like Dick Tracy; the microphone is powerful enough to pick up sound while you use your hands normally. In a strange way, the watch makes phone calling — which smartphones have been killing in favor of messaging — more interesting than texting, because the watch has no alphanumeric keyboard.You can send messages from the watch, but it’s limited. One way is to dictate your message, but that isn’t perfect. You can also send emoji or default responses (things like “O.K.” or “I’m on the way!”), but those options aren’t often sufficient to get across a range of emotions.For similar reasons, Apple has restricted outbound email. You can triage your messages — archive them, mark them as read or unread, flag them — but you can’t respond, not even with emoji or canned responses like my standard response to most emailers, “Thanks but no thanks, chump.” I found this less than stellar: I would have loved at least a set of canned responses. In general, I found the Mail app to be something of a pain to use, and I’m hoping that Apple or some third-party creates the perfect mailbox for the watch.There is something magical about having a computer that no one notices right there on your wrist. I first experienced this magic while at lunch with a colleague. I’m usually a wreck at such meetings, because while I try to refrain from looking at my phone, my mind is constantly jonesing for the next digital hit.Lunch today is different. My iPhone remains hidden deep in my pocket, and to all the world I am the picture of the predigital man. It is the middle of the workday, the busiest time for digital communication. Yet with the Apple Watch on my wrist, my mind remains calm, my compulsion to check the phone suddenly at bay. After spending the last few days customizing my notification settings, my watch is a hornet’s nest of activity. It buzzes every few minutes to indicate incoming email and texts, tweets or Slack messages.The buzzes aren’t annoying. They go completely unnoticed by my colleague, while to an addict like me they’re little hits of methadone — just enough contact with the digital world to whet my appetite, but not nearly as immersive, and socially disruptive, as reaching for my phone and eyeing its screen. I not only register the watch’s buzzes, but several times while we’re chatting, I surreptitiously check its screen. I scan some incoming messages and tweets, and even flag a couple of emails for later.AdvertisementAt the end of the meal, I ask my colleague if she’s noticed me checking my watch. She is surprised; she hasn’t seen it.The Apple Watch has two ways of measuring physical activity. One way is passive: In the background, it constantly measure your steps, how often you stand up and, periodically, your heart rate. It displays these three activities ingeniously; there is a diagram depicting three rings that become fully-closed circles as you get closer to completing your daily activity goals. As you go through the day, the watch prompts you to move around more often if you start to feel slothful. Every hour, it reminds you to stand up.I found the prompts helpful. There’s nothing revolutionary about it; I’ve tried lots of activity trackers in the past, and the watch doesn’t do much more than the cheapest ones. But as part of a device that you’ll wear for other reasons, having a general-purpose health app is pretty handy.The Apple Watch can also measure more strenuous exercise. There’s a dedicated app to track your runs, bike rides and other physical activity. After some initial calibration with your phone, the watch can measure your workout distance even when you leave the phone at home. I would love to tell you that the app put me through its paces, but that would be a lie. I spent most of the week as I normally do — with slight but hardly strenuous daily activity, and never quite approaching the level of an actual workout.The cynic might point out that even if the Apple Watch does liberate you from your phone, your escape is only illusory — you’re still attached to the digital world, and you’re only escaping for yet another screen. Is that really a positive direction either for you or for society? And to the extent that the watch begins to replace your phone, won’t you just start spending more of your time on its tinier screen, eventually rebuffing the real world again, just like you did on your smartphone?Surely smartwatches aren’t going to be a panacea for tech-induced antisocial behavior.But after a few days with the Apple Watch, I get a sense that they do more good than harm. It’s not just that interactions on the watch are speedier and less socially intrusive than those on the phone. The Apple Watch also has another, hidden benefit: It is far less immersive than a phone. There just isn’t that much to do on such a tiny screen, so you rarely feel yourself getting sucked in and lost.Consider this: The Apple Watch has no web browser. If you come upon a web link in an email message, a tweet or some other app, tapping it does nothing. This absence eliminates whole avenues of procrastination — there’s no Google, Wikipedia or BuzzFeed.While there are some news and entertainment apps for the watch, they consume precious little time.And that, to me, is the biggest difference between this device and a phone. The watch, for now, is all business, aimed solely at improving your productivity. For some users, that alone might be worth several hundred dollars.An article on Thursday about testing the Apple Watch misstated the price of the watch tested, a 42-millimeter stainless steel watch with a Milanese loop band. It is $699, not $649.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Dear Diary: My Week Wearing an Apple Watch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »