AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferITunes Problems With SyncingQ. My iPad, iPhone and Mac don’t seem to sync over my Wi-Fi network. I have checked my sync settings and don’t see a problem. I don’t often have my cellular data turned on and rely primarily on Wi-Fi. Am I missing something?A. Apple‘s iTunes software can automatically sync the content on iPads, iPhones and iPod Touch players with Mac and Windows computers, but even if the feature is enabled in the iTunes settings, a few other conditions apply. For instance, the iOS devices need to be plugged in to a power source and iTunes must be open on the computer, even if the mobile devices are not nearby. Everything must be on the same wireless network, too.Even if you do not have the iPad or iPhone plugged in for recharging, you should be able to manually sync it. Open iTunes on the computer, click the device icon in the iTunes window, select the iOS device you want to use and click the Sync button at the bottom of the window.If everything appears to be set up correctly and you still cannot sync wirelessly, Apple suggests additional troubleshooting steps. These include quitting and reopening iTunes, restarting the iOS devices, checking your Wi-Fi connections (including checking for interference from other wireless hardware like cordless phones) and rebooting your network router. You should also make sure your computer’s firewall settings are not blocking the connection.Internet Explorer In Windows 10Q. Is Internet Explorer being removed from the new Windows 10 upgrade that is supposed to come out this year?A. According to Microsoft, the Internet Explorer browser will still be available to use in the coming Windows 10 operating system this year, but it will not be the default browser anymore. The company is introducing a new program,  code-named Project Spartan, which will be the main browser for Windows 10.If you want or need to use Internet Explorer on Windows 10, you should be able to find it in the Windows Accessories area on the new system. Microsoft’s development team will still provide security patches for the older browser, but do not expect new features because the company’s focus will be on Project Spartan. This new browser will include faster performance, the ability to mark up web pages and Cortana, Microsoft’s voice-activated assistant software.TIP OF THE WEEK Have you ever wanted to rename a whole group of files at once? Although earlier versions of Mac OS X did not make it easy (without extra software or scripts), OS X 10.10 Yosemite can rename multiple files at the same time.Just select all the files you want to change (like a folder of vacation pictures), and right-click the selected group to see the contextual menu; you can also hold down the Control key while clicking to get the menu. Choose Rename Items from the menu. The box that appears offers multiple ways to rename the selected files, including replacing part of the existing name, adding text to the file name or creating a new name format and numbering system that changes the camera’s numeric photo titles to more descriptive file names like “Paris (1).jpg,” “Paris (2).jpg” and so on.Windows has included the ability to easily rename a batch of files since at least Windows XP. In Windows 7 and later, you can rename multiple files after you select them by right-clicking and choosing Rename from the menu. In the desktop mode of Windows 8.1, you can also rename selected files by clicking the Home tab at the top of the window. Select the Rename icon there and type in the new group name for the files. J.D. BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement