AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I have a fairly recent laptop, bought last year, running Windows 8.1. How do I tell if any of the three USB ports on there might be USB 3.0?A. If you do not have the manual or specifications sheet that come with the computer, there are a few other ways to check if you have the higher-speed USB port. The support area of the manufacturer’s website should also have the information on your model.But sometimes you can tell just by looking at the USB ports along the edge of the laptop. Compared with ordinary older UBS ports, USB 3.0 ports usually have a bit of blue around or within the jack itself. Some laptop makers will also label the faster port with a “3.0” or sometimes “SS,” which stands for SuperSpeed USB.If you do not see any physical evidence pointing to USB 3.0, you can look in the Windows Device Manager to see what is listed. To open the manager from the Start screen, point the cursor to the lower-right corner of the screen and then move it up to summon the Charms bar so you can click on the Search icon. (As a shortcut to open the Charms bar, press the Windows and C keys on the keyboard.) Type in Device Manager and hit the Enter key.If you are already working in the Windows 8.1 desktop mode, one fast way to get there is to press the Windows key and the Pause/Break key in the top row to open the System control panel. Click Device Manager on the left side.On the manager screen, click Universal Serial Bus Controllers and look for a USB 3.0 controller listed. Additionally, when you have a USB 3.0 peripheral plugged into a USB 3.0 port, Windows may also show you a notification that the device is connected to a USB 3.0 port or that it is operating at SuperSpeed.Choosing Between Fiber or CableQ. What is the difference between the Internet from the cable company and a fiber connection for home broadband service?A. Cable connections use coaxial cable (insulated copper wire) to send data through electrical signals. As one might guess, fiber is short for fiber optic, and fiber-optic networks are wired with cables made from thin strands of glass or plastic that use light signals to transmit messages over long distances. These cables can also be referred to as optical fiber and can carry much more data at faster speeds than traditional copper-based coaxial. (Some cable-based networks also use hybrid fiber coaxial cables, which combine the glass and copper strands to move data.)Because of the widespread use of cable television, which uses the same coaxial wiring, cable Internet service is usually less expensive and easier to get. Data speeds tend to be slower than with fiber networks, partly because of shared resources with other subscribers in the area. Depending on the company and your location, you might see tiered monthly plans offering download speeds of 1.5 megabits per second on the low end, to 100 megabits per second for the deluxe service.Fiber connections are newer, faster and often more expensive. The service can be harder to get because the networks are not as widespread as cable, and your area may not have been wired with optical fiber. If the service is available, you may also need to have extra equipment installed in your home. A variety of speed packages are also available with fiber; Verizon’s FiOS service, for example, has plans starting at 25 megabits per second and go on up to 500 megabits per second; the listed speeds are for downloading and uploading data.Other fiber-network services are even more robust. Google Fiber and AT&T’s U-verse GigaPower service claim data speeds of 1 gigabit per second (or 1,000 megabits per second), which is fast enough to download about 25 average pop songs in one second or an entire high-definition movie in 36 seconds. These gigabit networks are available in only a few cities, but are expanding slowly.Not to be outdone, some cable companies are adding fiber to their data networks to increase their speed and capacity. Comcast, for example, recently announced its new Gigabit Pro Internet service in the Atlanta area; Gigabit Pro speeds are advertised at 2 gigabits per second.Advertisement