

      By KELLY COUTURIER

UPDATED December 20, 2016

The biggest American tech companies face intensifying scrutiny by European regulators — pressure that could potentially curb their sizable profits in the region and affect how they operate around the world.
Related Article
European antitrust regulators recently ordered Ireland to collect billions of euros in back taxes from Apple as part of a broader crackdown on tax avoidance.The move was the latest attempt by officials on the Continent to aggressively stamp out sweetheart tax deals that countries strike with multinational companies, including American tech giants. Along with Apple, the campaign has also ensnared Amazon and its operations in Luxembourg. Taxation is one of many issues that have put American technology companies in the cross hairs of European officials. In recent years, companies like Google, Facebook and Apple have faced many regulatory challenges over antitrust, privacy and tax matters.In July, European officials approved a new agreement, known as the E.U.-U.S. Privacy Shield, to regulate how American tech giants and thousands of other businesses move people’s digital data — including social media posts, search queries, and information about workers’ pensions and payroll — back and forth across the Atlantic. The new safeguards, among other things, provide a greater say for Europeans on how their information is used. Here is a breakdown of European inquiries involving American tech companies:Antitrust: European antitrust authorities announced in July a new round of charges against the company — the third set since early 2015 — claiming that some of the company’s advertising products had restricted consumer choice. Google vigorously denied any wrongdoing in two previous European antitrust cases linked to Android, its popular mobile operating system, and some of its dominant online search services.  Google could face fines of up to 10 percent, or about $7 billion, of its global annual revenue if it is found to have broken Europe’s tough competition rules. European regulators began formally investigating the tech giant in 2010 over antitrust issues regarding search results. Over the years, competitors like Microsoft have also filed formal complaints against Google, as have media and telecommunications companies like Deutsche Telekom. Right to Be Forgotten: Europe’s highest court, the European Court of Justice, ruled in May 2014 that citizens had a so-called right to be forgotten, and that search engines, including Google, must honor some requests from users to delete links to personal information. European regulators have since called on Google to apply the “right to be forgotten” ruling beyond the borders of the European Union. In March, France’s data protection watchdog fined Google $112,000 for failing to comply with demands to extend the ruling across its global domains, including Google.com in the United States. Google filed an appeal in May to overturn the fine. As of April, almost two years since the court ruling, Google had passed judgment in over 417,000 cases — roughly 571 a day — from people wanting links to certain search results to be removed, according to the company’s records. It approved fewer than half of those requests, all behind closed doors, raising questions about the role of commercial interests in protecting people’s privacy. Taxation:  Margrethe Vestager, the European Union’s antitrust chief who has become the bloc’s chief tax inquisitor, said in January that she might look into the 130 million pound, or $175 million, settlement reached between Google and the British government over back taxes. Spanish authorities in June opened a new investigation into possible tax evasion by Google, and in late May, French tax authorities raided Google’s offices there as part of an investigation for aggravated financial fraud. Google is also in discussions with Italy over back taxes. Antitrust: European competition officials confirmed in April 2015 that they had sent questionnaires to music labels and music streaming companies in an attempt to gather evidence and decide whether to open an antitrust investigation into Apple’s new music service. Taxation: European antitrust officials opened an investigation in June 2014 into whether Ireland gave preferential tax treatment to Apple. In August 2016, Margrethe Vestager, the European Union commissioner for competition, ordered Ireland to collect as much as €13 billion from Apple because of what she said were illegal tax breaks. Antitrust: The European Commission opened an investigation in June 2015 into whether the company used its dominant position in the region’s e-books market to make it harder for rivals to offer lower prices. As part of the investigation, the commission said it was evaluating the legality of clauses that Amazon had used with European publishers, which required them to inform the e-commerce giant of more favorable terms for books that were offered to other digital retailers. Officials added, however, that the opening of the investigation did not yet indicate that Amazon had broken the region’s competition laws. Taxation: The European Union’s antitrust office released a preliminary finding in January 2015 that a tax deal between Amazon and Luxembourg appeared to amount to unfair state aid that might have enabled the company to underpay its taxes. Antitrust officials had opened the investigation in October 2014. In May 2015, Amazon revealed that it was changing its tax structure. Previously, it had recorded nearly all of its sales in Luxembourg, but the company said it would start paying taxes in several European countries. An Amazon spokesman declined to say whether the changes were because of growing pressure from European policy makers. Right to Be Forgotten: Microsoft, which operates the Bing search service, signaled in July 2014 that it planned to follow the lead of Google, which responded to the high court ruling that May by creating an online form to let individuals request removal of links to material they say violates their online privacy.  Antitrust: In a long-running antitrust case involving Microsoft’s software and interoperability, the company paid almost €2 billion in European fines over a decade, including a penalty in 2013 for failing to adhere to an earlier settlement.  Data Privacy: European competition officials filed charges in December against Facebook, accusing it of making misleading statements to receive regulatory approval for its purchase of WhatsApp. Facebook, which faces a potential fine of up to 1 percent of its yearly revenue, denies the allegations. Facebook announced in August that it would start sharing some people’s digital information between the two services. Margrethe Vestager, Europe’s competition chief, said the potential of such linking was not explained when Facebook sought regulatory approval for the purchase. A regulator in Hamburg, which has authority over Facebook’s activities across Germany, ordered Facebook in September to stop collecting and storing data on WhatsApp users in Germany. The regulator also called on the social network to delete all information already forwarded from WhatsApp on roughly 35 million German users. In late June, Facebook won an appeal of a Belgian court ruling that found the company inappropriately collected digital information on users and nonusers. The appeals court said the Belgian regulator had no international jurisdiction over Facebook, whose international headquarters are in Ireland. French and Spanish privacy officials announced in April 2015 that they had opened investigations into the social network’s privacy policies; similar inquiries had already been started by Dutch, Belgian and German officials. The regulators asked whether Facebook received sufficient approval from users when the company gained access to their online data.  Antitrust: The German competition authority opened an investigation in March into whether Facebook misused its dominant position to collect people’s digital information. Taxation: After Britain made changes in its tax laws that were aimed at forcing companies to pay more tax on revenue generated there, Facebook announced in March that it would soon alter how it paid tax in Britain. The changes will potentially lead to the company’s paying millions of dollars more on its operations in the country. Antitrust: The European Commission filed antitrust charges against Qualcomm in December 2015, saying that it had abused its dominant market position in Europe by offering financial incentives to smartphone and tablet manufacturers that agreed to buy equipment solely from Qualcomm. An earlier version of this article misstated when European antitrust officials opened an inquiry into Apple’s tax arrangement with Ireland. It was in June of 2014, not September. An earlier version of this article misstated when France’s privacy watchdog fined Google for failing to comply with demands to extend a European privacy ruling across its global domains. It was in March of this year, not March 2015.Advertisement