AdvertisementSupported byBy Farhad Manjoo and Mike IsaacEach Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Mike: Ahoy, Farhad! How are you? I’m just getting over being sick, which seems to happen a lot since I moved to New York. I’m considering carrying hand sanitizer, but I don’t want to come off looking like a dad before I even have kids.Farhad: Don’t worry, no one’s going to mistake you for someone who is safe to be around children.Mike: Thanks. On to the news!Quite an eventful week. Dell bought EMC in the single largest tech takeover ever. Reddit recently started its own news aggregation site — which, a source told me, was named “Project Buzzkill” internally — obviously to undercut BuzzFeed’s practice of profiting off Reddit content. Y Combinator, the start-up incubator, is starting to fund later-stage companies, a practice I’m already hearing rumblings about from the venture capital community. And of course Theranos, the biotech start-up valued by investors at $9 billion, seems to be melting down before our very eyes after The Wall Street Journal reported that not all of the company’s practices were what they seemed.Farhad: The Theranos story is incredible. In the past few years Elizabeth Holmes, Theranos’s 31-year-old founder and chief executive, has been hailed as a genius on the cover of just about every glossy magazine other than Garden and Gun. But per The Journal, the company is using its proprietary technology for just a single one of the more than 100 medical tests it offers. For most of the other tests, it’s using traditional lab equipment. The company says that it will go back to its own technology pending approval by the Food and Drug Administration, but for now things don’t look good — it’s like if we found out that Teslas were secretly running on gas.Mike: I want to focus on Square, the payments processing company run by Jack Dorsey, which just publicly disclosed the prospectus for its eventual initial public offering.It’s the first glimpse we’ve gotten inside a business that has battled rumors of struggles for more than a year. It’s revealing about Jack Dorsey’s method of running two — two! — companies at one time. And frankly, it’s a big test of whether a start-up can successfully go public in a market that has been highly unfriendly to I.P.O.s as of late.I have thoughts, but I know you have thoughts, because you always have thoughts. Some of them even good ones. So I’ll let you go first. What say you, Farhad?Farhad: I hate how you always expect me to have thoughts. But you’re right, I do have a few thoughts. My biggest thought: Huh, is that all there is to Square?Maybe it’s my fault, but a few years ago I was totally seduced by Dorsey into thinking that Square was more than a company that made a fancy card reader. Instead, Dorsey told me, his big idea was to alter the psychology of shopping by making payments invisible: You’d order a latte at your favorite snooty coffee shop, the barista would hand over your cup and the money would magically flow out of your account.Mike: Every San Francisco engineer’s dream! That and a sweet new hoverboard.Farhad: Square had even created a spectacular app to improve payments. The idea seemed sound: Invisible payments would remove friction from every transaction, making people much more likely to buy stuff — and, in the middle, Square would collect data and money from every purchase.Little of that came to pass. Square’s smartphone payment products have been scaled back, its deal with Starbucks tanked and, worst of all, its grand visions have been severely circumscribed. What’s Square now? According to its I.P.O. filing, it’s essentially a company that makes cash registers. They’re nice cash registers. And maybe cash registers and the services provided through them will grow into a fine business. But that’s hardly changing the world, right?Mike: A lot to unpack here. I agree with you on the first part. Dorsey had a grand plan for invisible payments, à la the now dead Square Wallet, and it sounded great. No cash! Only our phones! And Dorsey is very charismatic and convincing.He was also too far ahead of his time. It turns out that people still use cash and cards, and despite the Apple Pays and Square Wallets of the world, the way we pay for stuff is not going away for a long time.That leaves Square as a very different thing: Essentially a financial services provider for small businesses. They do cash advances, payroll, scheduling and even food delivery, all on top of the payments processing business. And according to its I.P.O. prospectus, the business is growing fast.All that said, it is not a gigantic business. Revenues last year were $850 million, 95 percent of which was derived from payments processing. Sure, there’s a lot of potential for growth in the other services Square offers, but is it a $6 billion business, as its current valuation suggests? Honestly, I don’t know.What I do know is that it’s more modest than we thought. And that’s fine, right? Does everything have to be the next Facebook? Plus, you could argue that they’re helping out a bunch of small-business owners. That’s noble, isn’t it?Farhad: I mean, technically you’re right: A not-gigantic business whose products are loved by customers — that’s totally fine. Except, did you forget that we’re talking about the tech start-up world? This whole place is set up to hit historic home runs, to create things that Change Everything™. Anything less feels like a disappointment.Mike: Welcome to mediocrity! I’ve been sitting comfortably here for years.Advertisement