Move over, Periscope and Meerkat. There’s about to be a lot more video out there.Twilio is a company that offers telecommunications services like texting, voice calls and image transfers as a software platform, so developers can put those things onto their applications. On Tuesday, Twilio detailed how it is adding video capabilities for both mobile devices and web browsers.As a result, the new video services like Periscope and Meerkat, which both offer ways to broadcast incidental personal videos, could be just the start of a new rush to video.Someone building, say, a mobile game, could cheaply add the ability for players to view each other in a corner of the screen. An insurer might use Twilio video on an app to document damage to a car, or a call center application could add the feature so a technician could look at a damaged appliance without arranging a personal visit. Airbnb, which already uses Twilio for other communications, could use it to arrange video tours of prospective lodgings.“Saying ‘Hi’ to Grandma or having a corporate video call are just a couple of use cases for video calls,” said Jeff Lawson, founder and chief executive of Twilio. “Real changes will come from embedding video into other applications.”Whether this catches on, and what, exactly, Twilio will charge developers, is unclear. Mr. Lawson said Twilio would move away from charging on minutes of usage, as it now does for voice calling. Twilio has already registered 500,000 developers and claims to be on 1 million applications globally. It says it has run over 1 billion minutes of voice calls through software it maintains inside Amazon Web Services. While there are already cheap or free peer-to-peer video calling services, like Tango, Mr. Lawson’s idea is to put video in as many places as possible.“When you have stand-alone products the usage and innovation can stagnate,” Mr. Lawson said. “We expect to see people do all kinds of new things.”Twilio’s customer list, which includes Uber and Coca-Cola, is still relatively small, compared with those served by telecommunications companies like Verizon or Deutsche Telecom. But Twilio’s service is much cheaper, and it is growing. 