Wearable gadgets and data trackers are taking notes around the clock on how much we run, walk, sleep, drink and eat. But what do you do with all that data?Nudge, a small start-up in Richmond, Va., has a suggestion: hire a human coach to help.The company last year released its free Nudge Health Tracking app, which integrates data from a number of fitness devices and apps. On Thursday, it went live with Nudge + Coach, which lets users connect with a personal coach. Coaches set their own rates, which typically run from $45 to $100 a month, and their own services, which might include advice on nutrition, exercise and lifestyle changes. Clients can flip through Nudge’s network of coaches, pick one who fits their needs, and interact with them through phone calls and video chats, as well as messages through the Nudge app. “We don’t have any automation built in here,” said Phil Beene, a Nudge co-founder. “This is a relationship with a real person.” The human layer being added to Nudge’s app emerged almost accidentally in response to requests from users. Health coaches and medical professionals began adopting Nudge as a way to monitor their clients’ activities.That prompted Nudge to expand its tools as an enterprise platform for providers and begin developing the Nudge + Coach feature. Steve Feyrer-Melk, who runs the Optimal Heart Attack and Stroke Prevention Center in Scottsdale, Ariz., in conjunction with his cardiologist wife, is an enthusiastic early adopter. Mr. Feyrer-Melk, who holds a Ph.D. in exercise science and wellness, is the center’s director of patient wellness. He has around 75 patients using Nudge’s app.“All of these tracking devices are great, but it’s just like an exercise program: people stick with it for three to six months, and then they get rid of them,” he said. “A coach can help you take all the data and relate into your life.” Nudge isn’t the only company thinking along these lines. Its rivals include Vida, which offers human health coaches for $49 a month, and Change Collective, where customers can dig through a catalog of coach-led fitness and health courses. One early mover in the live-coaching market, Sessions, was bought by MyFitnessPal, which was in turn acquired in February by Under Armour. One problem these ventures face is expansion. “Actual live coaches don’t scale as well as automated responses generated by app data,” said Brian Dolan, the editor in chief of MobiHealthNews. Finding a price point that’s palatable for consumers and profitable for providers is another challenge. Nudge’s coaches keep 70 percent of their monthly fee; the other 30 percent goes to Nudge. If each client takes up more than an hour or so of the  coach’s time per week, they could easily find themselves working for less than minimum wage. Despite those obstacles, Mr. Dolan thinks the market will keep growing — and that one of the field’s upstarts will figure out the business model to make it work.“People are more likely to be adherent and use their fitness apps if somebody on the other end is holding them accountable in some way,” he said. “Someone is going to  break out and really feel the power of combining these apps with a live coach.”