HONG KONG — The Segway scooter, the punch line of  countless jokes about overhyped gadgets since its invention more than a decade ago, may get the last laugh: On  Wednesday, a Chinese company that  makes a similar vehicle said that it  planned to buy the scooter’s maker.In an odd turn to the already strange  history of the short-distance electric  transport vehicle, the Chinese start-up  Ninebot said Wednesday it planned to  acquire the Segway company as part of  a strategic alliance. Ninebot did not disclose terms for the deal but said in the  same announcement that it had raised  $80 million in its newest fund-raising  round from the Chinese smartphone maker Xiaomi and the venture capital firm Sequoia Capital,  among others.Too speedy for sidewalks, too pokey  for roads and too expensive for regular  consumers looking for an alternative to  walking— with a goofy pogo-stick aesthetic to boot — the self-balancing electric stand-up scooter is a niche product  in the United States. It has also been  widely mocked in American popular  culture as an emblem of sloth.But in China, a country that often embraces novel and niche gadgets, the Segway is taken more seriously, and over  the years it has gained cultural cachet.Tourists across China use Segway- like vehicles to visit attractions —  groups can circle the track of Beijing’s  Bird’s Nest Olympic Stadium where  Usain Bolt won gold. The Jamaican  sprinter has run as fast as 27 miles per  hour; the Segway, by comparison, goes  about 13 miles per hour.Chinese police and antiterror squads  patrol and drill atop electric scooters,  the preferred ride in ‘‘Paul Blart: Mall Cop,’’ often armed with rifles and assault weapons. Stores selling Segway- like products feature in Chinese malls. The action movie star Jackie Chan even opened a Segway dealership in 2006.Perhaps most famously, in the 2013  corruption trial of the former high-ranking party official Bo Xilai, the well- known businessman Xu Ming testified  that he had purchased a Segway for Mr.  Bo’s son, Bo Guagua.Segway has faced competition from a  number of companies that produce similar and cheaper vehicles. In a 2014 trade  complaint to the U.S. International  Trade Commission, Segway said a number of Chinese companies were violating its patents.In a trade commission document  titled ‘‘Certain Personal Transporters, Components Thereof, and Manuals Therefor,’’ several different Chinese  companies are named, among them  Ninebot, the company that is planning  to buy Segway.Though the investigation continues,  Ninebot showed itself willing to do a bit  of borrowing from Apple with its official  slogan: ‘‘Think Differently and Innovate Sustainably.’’Under the terms of the deal on Wednesday, Segway will become a wholly owned subsidiary of Ninebot, and the two companies will collaborate on research and development, manufacturing, marketing and sales. “The strategic alliance with Ninebot will enable us to provide more intelligent and valuable products for our customers. We are fully confident about our future,” Segway’s president, Rod Keller, said in a news release. Segway is owned by Summit Strategic Investments, which acquired the company in February 2013 for an undisclosed amount. At the time, the private equity fund said it planned to refocus and grow Segway’s product portfolio and expand the company’s global operations.The Segway’s inventor, Dean Kamen, unveiled the device to much fanfare in 2001. He sold the company in 2009 to James W. Heselden, a British entrepreneur, who died a year later when his Segway plunged off a cliff.In a release, Ninebot’s chief executive, Gao Lufeng, said, ‘‘We believe that  this alliance will promote the short-distance transportation industry to develop and grow on the intelligent mobile robot platform.’’ The statement added  that the two companies would continue  to sell their respective products under  separate brands.Ninebot, founded in 2012, says that its  personal transportation robot, the Ninebot E, is distributed at 30 centers around  the world. 