AdvertisementSupported byBy Quentin HardySAN FRANCISCO — In a converted pipe organ factory in the city’s Mission District, Saul Griffith works on products that are smarter, cheaper and, above all, squiggly.Inside the cavernous building and a nearby garage occupied by Mr. Griffith’s research company Otherlab, small teams gather around laser cutters and machining tools. Some work on arrays of solar panels that follow the sun, guided by what look like ribbed soda bottles and powered by pneumatic pressure. Others fiddle with inflatable exoskeletons intended to help soldiers run far with heavy loads or to help paraplegics walk.These are the kinds of futuristic products promised for years by conventional engineering that are now being made real by a handful of low-budget inventors with an unusual vision: They want to replace traditional brawn and metal with unconventional materials to create cheaper and more effective soft machines.“Every problem in mechanical engineering has been addressed with more weight, more power and more stiffness,” said Mr. Griffith, co-founder and chief executive of Otherlab. “But nature — the real world — is squiggly.”Mr. Griffith is at the forefront of a movement known as soft robotics, which aims to revolutionize the way we think about building things. Researchers at Harvard University have released a tool kit to make loudspeakers and prosthetic hands using soft materials. Last summer’s hit movie “Big Hero 6” featured a squishy-bodied robot inspired by work at Carnegie Mellon University. Biologically inspired designs are also shared freely on the Internet by various user groups. And last year, soft robotics even got its own peer-reviewed journal.These are typically small-scale and academic endeavors that depend on funding from government and a few interested companies, and many of Mr. Griffith’s projects are a few years away from being offered to the public. Yet by creating a range of companies that are making soft robotics, Mr. Griffith hopes to accelerate an overall change in thinking.The work contrasts with more mainstream robotics. Amazon’s drones and factory pickers, or the welding robots at Tesla, are decidedly hard and use traditional mechanical engineering approaches. Many of those machines have heavy arms and need objects placed in the same position every time, so they can move fast to the correct location.Traditional bionic exoskeletons proposed for the military and paraplegics are also heavy. More weight in the robot or exoskeleton means it will take more energy for the parts to move. That translates into either short battery life or an external power source.Since squiggly things have less precise motions than hard things do, they need lots of sensors and semiconductors to correct their movements. Those once expensive parts have become cheaper thanks to the explosion of cellphones, which use many of the same components. Lifting things without crushing them, a problem with metal robots, is also easier with intelligent soft robots. And, with enough air, they can also be firm.“There was an assumption that pneumatic things were sloppy and slow,” said Gill A. Pratt, a program manager at the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, which has given Otherlab more than $3 million in grants for various projects. Now, he said, “you can do precision with modern sensors and controls.”Even the military initially had issues with the comical look of some pneumatics. An inflatable quarantine room “looks silly at first, because you say, ‘Oh, it’s a bouncy castle,’” Mr. Pratt said. “But it’s incredibly effective, and a lot safer.”Mr. Griffith, 41, has years of robotics experience and a reputation for unorthodox thinking. Born in Australia to a mother who was an artist and a father who was an engineer, he has a Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he wrote a thesis on “growing machines,” or devices that can assemble themselves from smaller units. He was awarded a MacArthur Foundation grant in 2007.Mr. Griffith’s first big project in the San Francisco Bay Area was Makani Power, a Google-backed effort to generate power by flying giant kites — and taking advantage of their soft shapes to withstand storms. He lost the company in the 2008 financial crisis, though Google is still pursuing the idea.He created Otherlab in 2008 along with James McBride, who is the company’s chief technology officer, and Jonathan Bachrach, who is now a professor at the University of California, Berkeley.After working together at M.I.T. on early ideas about turning two-dimensional shapes into three-dimensional objects using complex mathematics, Mr. Griffith co-founded Otherlab to bring young engineers in on the new ideas about soft shapes and computing.In 2013, Otherlab spawned the Other Machine Company, which makes a desktop industrial mill that can turn out personalized circuit boards, jewelry and other objects. In total, Otherlab has spun off five other companies and is nurturing three others.To keep costs down, Mr. Griffith tries to do things as cheaply as possible. The prototype for the solar panel manipulator was created with a soda bottle and a hot plate, instead of a proposed $150,000 machine.The work has drawn attention. Westport, the world’s biggest maker of technology for compressed natural gas engines, has invested in Volute, one of the companies Otherlab spun off, which makes soft gas tanks. By replacing a single tank with smaller tubes that can be bent, it is possible to hold more fuel in the same area or to create a shape that better fits the contours of the vehicle, with safety valves in each segment to minimize damage in an explosion. Mr. Griffith says he has had interest from more companies on other projects.Similar soft work is underway at iRobot, which makes the Roomba vacuum cleaner and hard military robots.“Arms and hands will be the first area” for development, said Chris Jones, iRobot’s director of strategic technology development. “Inflatable structures can be very strong but, if you lower the pressure, also very soft. It can relax the precision you need.”At Carnegie Mellon, Prof. Christopher G. Atkeson is working on “robot skin” that, on a bed, might measure sleep and adjust itself to make people more comfortable. “Otherlab builds bodies, while we work on sensing and changing,” Professor Atkeson said. “These seem like far-out ideas, but Saul is good at making them real.”Ideally, Mr. Griffith said, he can start some successful companies but, more important, prove his ideas about fusing textiles, plastics and computers to create a cheap and effective mechanical revolution.“If you’re going to make robots like you see in the movies, you have to change the game,” he said. “We’re trying to look at what manufacturing will be in 50 years.”Advertisement