By QUENTIN HARDYAPRIL 14, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  Intel, the world’s largest maker of semiconductors, on Tuesday reported first-quarter earnings that were slightly higher than the same period a year ago, reflecting aggressive cost management in a weak personal computer market.“We expect the PC market to remain challenging,” Brian M. Krzanich, the chief executive, said in a call to analysts after the earnings were released.Intel, based in Santa Clara, Calif., has for several years struggled with ebbing demand for PCs, as consumers turn to mobile phones and tablets.But Mr. Krzanich optimistically noted there were “600 million PCs out there, growing by the day, that are greater than four years old,” and Intel executives hope a new release of Microsoft’s PC operating system, scheduled for this summer, will improve demand for his company’s chips.AdvertisementIntel is also counting on continued strong demand for chips used in large computer centers and faster growth in connecting ordinary devices to the Internet.Intel reported that net income rose 3 percent to $2 billion, compared with the year-ago quarter. Intel’s per-share income rose 8 percent, to 41 cents a share, reflecting a smaller number of shares outstanding because of stock buybacks. Revenue was flat, at $12.8 billion.AdvertisementThe earnings were about even with Wall Street’s expectations. Analysts forecast that Intel would make 41 cents a share on revenue of $12.9 billion, a survey by Thomson Reuters said.Intel shares increased 3 percent in after-hours trading.The earnings were not surprising, given slow PC sales. Last week, the research firm IDC said that worldwide first-quarter PC shipments were 68.5 million, a decline of 6.7 percent from the year-earlier period. That was slightly better than expected. Chips for PCs and related items make up over half of Intel’s revenue.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Intel was slow to move into mobile devices and is overshadowed there by companies like Qualcomm and ARM. Under Mr. Krzanich, who took over two years ago, Intel has redoubled its efforts to get into mobile devices. Progress has been slow, however, with significant financial losses.Other areas of Intel’s business have fared better. Sales of chips for data centers were up 19 percent in the quarter. Intel expects that market to grow about 15 percent annually for several more years.A newer market, chips for the so-called Internet of Things, or appliances and other objects with a two-way network connection, grew 11 percent. That revenue was only $533 million, but Stacy Smith, Intel’s chief financial officer, said annual growth in this area should be about 20 percent for many years.“Retail and digital security businesses were particularly strong,” Mr. Smith said in an interview. “We’re in telecommunications, automotive, manufacturing, and industrial uses like heating and air-conditioning.” Most expensive machines, he suggested, will eventually be connected.A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Intel Profit Up 3%, Despite Slow PC Market.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.