Apple’s method of releasing products like the iPhone is straightforward: On the day of release, you buy the phone at a retail store or it is delivered if you ordered online. The process is a lot less clear for the Apple Watch.Apple first said in March that the Watch will be available starting April 24. Yet the company was vague about whether that meant the device, which starts at $350, would be as obtainable as iPhones have been on their first day in stores. Apple instead said the gadget would be available online or by reservation in retail stores.In a memo this week, Angela Ahrendts, Apple’s head of retail operations and the former chief executive of Burberry, was more explicit. She said in the note to retail workers that the Apple Watch would not be available for in-store purchases initially, reiterating that customers will have to order it online. Customers will begin receiving their Apple Watch orders on or after April 24, she added.“Many of you have been getting questions asking if we will have the watch available in stores on April 24 for walk-in purchases,” Ms. Ahrendts said in the letter, which was first reported by the blog 9to5Mac. “As we announced last week, due to high global interest combined with our initial supply, we are only taking orders online right now. I’ll have more updates as we get closer to in-store availability, but we expect this to continue through the month of May.”Apple also this week dropped reference of the April 24 release date from its web page promoting the Watch, in a nod to how the smartwatch won’t be available to consumers who just walk into a store. An Apple spokeswoman declined to comment.Apple has taken a radically different approach for releasing the Apple Watch. For the first time, the company invited consumers into stores to try on the Watch before the device’s official release. In the past, consumers typically couldn’t touch a new Apple device until it was publicly available.Ms. Ahrendts said in the memo that the company needed to come up with the preview approach for selling the Watch because “There’s never been anything quite like it.”