APRIL 15, 2015
In this week’s State of the Art column, Farhad Manjoo writes about the software company Intuit’s opposition to “return-free filing,” a plan that would allow the government to pre-calculate people’s tax returns with financial information that is already collected from employers, banks and other financial institutions.In response to a series of questions about its position on the program, David Williams, Intuit’s chief tax officer, sent the following statement outlining the company’s positions on various debates in tax policy.Return-free filing minimizes the taxpayers’ voice and control over the tax process by reducing their role in filing their taxes and getting their own money back. Instead, these systems place government at the center of the tax process. This makes the government both the preparer and collector of taxes, as well as investigator and enforcer. Those processes would rely only on information collected by the government, and would be dependent on the government collecting substantially more data about every individual than it possesses today.The return-free concept is advanced as a bill-presentment and payment model, working much the way property taxes are collected. It has been previously described as “You don’t fool with anything. You get it, and you pay the tax.” Common sense tells us that few citizens – and in particular few lower-income taxpayers — are likely to want to pick a fight with government, taking the time and expending the resources to object to what the government tells them to pay.Such a system necessarily prioritizes revenue generation for government but does not advance taxpayer rights, citizen empowerment or real simplification of the tax code.It also ignores the significance of the “tax time moment” – often the only time during the year when many people take stock of their financial lives. That moment is increasingly of interest to policy makers who recognize tax time is an empowering opportunity for all Americans to also take stock of, and ultimately improve, their personal and family financial lives. Return-free filing would eliminate this important policy tool.For more than 20 years, Intuit has taken the opposite approach. We exist to make tax preparation and compliance easy, giving people a simple and accurate way to file their taxes and get their own money back.The growth of the tax prep industry as a whole – and of tax prep software – is directly attributable to the complexity of the system that our government has created. Not the other way around.Our tax system operates as an instrument of social and economic policy, with incentives and credits designed to drive certain behaviors that government, and ultimately Americans as voters, have said are important. As a result of that fact, the tax code inherently includes a level of complexity. By enabling taxpayers to complete their tax returns despite that complexity, tax prep software fulfills a helpful role in advancing the social and economic policy underlying the tax code.That said, Intuit is a vocal proponent – as recently as the end of 2014 – for real tax simplification that eases the burden for American taxpayers. We see tax simplification reform as a national imperative to provide relief for the average American and small businesses across the country. Our tax code is incomprehensible, internally contradictory, excessively burdensome, and just plain painful. Consequently, too few Americans take advantage of the available tax incentives: It’s hard to use what you can’t understand. Our overly complicated tax code makes eligibility and compliance extremely difficult to understand and often intimidating to those who most need this money. It also impedes small business survival, growth and success.It also deprives government of a central feature of our tax system – namely using credits such the E.I.T.C. as levers to incentivize and reward behaviors.Intuit has long been a supporter of the Free File Program, a public-private partnership between the government and private industry that costs the government and taxpayers nothing. More than 70 percent of all taxpayers are eligible to prepare and file their taxes free with the best-known, most-trusted and innovative tax prep software programs available in the marketplace, under a set of standards and rules governed by the I.R.S. In addition, 100 percent of taxpayers can file their federal taxes free with the Free File’s simple “fillable forms” product.The annual donation of Free File returns currently totals about three million annually, the same as the I.R.S. VITA program, for a combined free service total of six million returns generated each tax season for low- and middle-income taxpayers. Free File does not cost anything, and according to the Free File Alliance has generated more than 40 million free returns since the program was launched, providing consumer choice with approximately 15 competing offerers to choose among.As part of empowering citizens to take control of their financial lives, we support the idea that tax preparation firms can, with taxpayer consent, obtain data from original sources in order to help them prepare their tax returns. Interest from bank accounts, wages and payments for services can all be obtained directly from the bank, employer or payer. In fact, in many cases, industry is already working with these institutions, on behalf of customers, to download financial data directly into the return.With regard to government acting as a national data warehouse, we support the ability of taxpayers to obtain data that government uniquely holds, such as their data from a prior year return. But government acting as central repository of all financial and personal data raises concerns from a cybersecurity perspective. Data today is widely distributed across industries, companies and locations in a highly decentralized manner, and is safer than if it were to be aggregated into a single, enormous central data repository.There is also the sensitive issue of individual privacy. There are longstanding concerns among privacy advocates around the role of government and personal information in American society – including the magnitude of personal information collected and held by government, and whether citizens are comfortable with one national database for centralized gathering and integrating of extensive personal and financial information on every citizen.The optimal strategy is for taxpayers to continue to access and download their data directly from its original sources, including taxpayer data uniquely held by government and not already available elsewhere.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.