AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. One used to be able to make an emergency start-up floppy disk that could boot up the computer if Windows was having serious problems. Floppy drives have been phased out of the hardware, and many laptops don’t even have CD drives anymore, so is there any way to make a similar tool for Windows 8.1?A. Floppies and CD drives have faded into the hardware sunset, but you can use a pocket flash drive as a start-up device instead. To make a USB recovery drive in Windows 8.1, you need a portable USB drive that you can fully erase. You will most likely need at least a 16-gigabyte model, but the size may vary based on your PC. (The recovery setup software eventually tells you the drive size to use.)In Windows 8.1, open the Charms bar by swiping in from the right edge of the screen and tapping Search. You can also press the Windows and F keys on the keyboard to open the Search box. Type “recovery drive,” select “Create a recovery drive” from the list and follow the steps on screen.When you are finished, tuck the drive away in a safe place for when you might need it. Some computer manufacturers use a chunk of your system’s drive space for a recovery partition you can also use for fixing Windows. Once you make a USB recovery drive, Windows may offer you the option to delete the partition from your computer to free up space.Gmail Help for an Older MacQ. I have an older Mac running OS X 10.5, and I’ve been getting messages from Gmail for months about using an unsupported browser. What does this mean?A. According to Google, Gmail supports the current versions of the Chrome, Firefox and Safari browsers, as well as the preceding version. Mac OS X 10.5 was released in 2007, however, and Apple stopped providing software updates for it long ago. Chrome and Firefox require Mac OS X 10.6 to run.Despite the “unsupported browser” message, Gmail should still work in its HTML view for basic mail chores, but standard features like the spell checker and rich formatting are not available. For possible alternatives, a browser like TenFourFox, designed to run on older Mac systems, may work better in general, or you could download your messages to a desktop mail program instead of using the browser. Google’s Gmail Help site has instructions.If your Mac has an Intel processor, you might be able to upgrade it to OS X 10.6, which gives you access to the Mac App Store where you can download even newer versions of OS X. Apple still sells OS X 10.6 discs in its online store.TIP OF THE WEEK Need a quick update on the stock market or a weather forecast for the day? Many helpful iOS apps have found their way to the Mac OS X 10.10 (Yosemite) desktop and can be found in the system’s Notification Center. If you have not used the Mac’s Notification Center before, click the three-line icon in the upper-right corner of the menu bar to open it; those with modern Mac laptops can take a two-fingered swipe to the left from the right edge of the trackpad.The Notifications Center is divided into two parts: Notifications and Today. As with earlier versions of OS X, the Notifications tab shows recent mail messages, social media posts and website updates. The newer Today tab offers several widgets that resemble the Stocks, Weather and Calculator apps for iOS. To rearrange the widgets or add new ones, click the Edit button at the bottom of the screen.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement