Snapchat made its name with photos that disappear after a few seconds. The length of a stint in the company’s executive ranks seems to be fairly ephemeral, too. The latest evidence of that came on Tuesday, when Uber said it had hired Jill Hazelbaker, Snapchat’s head of communications. Ms. Hazelbaker joined Snapchat slightly more than a year ago. Ms. Hazelbaker will be vice president for communications and public policy at Uber, helping the ride-hailing start-up deal with thorny regulatory policies in the United States and abroad. It is a natural fit for Ms. Hazelbaker, who previously worked in politics, running communications for Senator John McCain’s presidential bid in 2007 and 2008 as well as Michael R. Bloomberg’s 2009 mayoral campaign in New York. She later joined Google, working on crisis and policy communications for the better part of five years. “I am pumped to work with Jill,” Travis Kalanick, chief executive of Uber, said in a statement. “She’s an optimistic leader who understands how to campaign, which is so important to Uber’s success.” Ms. Hazelbaker, whose departure from Snapchat was earlier reported by Recode, joins the number of executives who have gone through the photo-messaging start-up’s revolving door. In 2014, Snapchat lured Emily White away from her post as business leader at Instagram to be its chief operating officer. Ms. White left the company 15 months later. Mike Randall, a former business development executive from Facebook, left Snapchat after only seven months. And Peter Magnusson, a former engineering director at Google, left Snapchat six months after arriving. Uber has also undergone changes in its top communications ranks. Last year, the company made headlines when it picked David Plouffe, a Washington insider and former Obama presidential campaign adviser, to be its senior vice president for policy and strategy.In May, Uber sharply changed course, hiring Rachel Whetstone, head of communications at Google, to be its senior vice president for policy and communications. Mr. Plouffe shifted to a more nebulous “chief adviser” position and was given a seat on Uber’s board of directors. Mr. Plouffe continues to lobby for Uber at a local level on some of its most contentious issues. In July, he took to the streets of New York to rally community leaders against Mayor Bill de Blasio, when the company faced a potential citywide cap on its growth. Mr. de Blasio eventually backed down from the standoff. At Uber, Ms. Hazelbaker rejoins her former Google colleague Ms. Whetstone, to whom she will report. Along with overseeing public policy in the Americas, Ms. Hazelbaker will also focus on corporate and executive communications. A Snapchat spokeswoman said the company wished Ms. Hazelbaker well in her new position. A version of this article appears in print on 10/26/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Uber Picks Up Snapchat Exec.