By STEVE LOHRAPRIL 20, 2015
IBM reported earnings on Monday that surpassed Wall Street’s estimates, helped by solid sales of its new mainframe computers, even as its revenue fell.Martin J. Schroeter, the company’s chief financial officer, called the performance a “pretty strong start to the year” — though IBM executives have said this will be a transition year as it invests to pursue new sources of growth while some of its traditional hardware, software and services business erodes.IBM is investing aggressively for growth in new fields, including data analytics, cloud computing and mobile applications for corporate customers. It has forged major partnerships with Apple for mobile applications and Twitter for data analysis. It has created new business units around its Watson artificial intelligence technology, and for managing and analyzing the data generated by the surge in low-cost sensors connected to the Internet, known as the Internet of Things.IBM said its strategic initiatives revenue grew by more than 30 percent over all. Cloud computing revenue surged 75 percent, and IBM’s large data analytics business grew by more than 20 percent, excluding the effect of currency fluctuations.Advertisement“We’re transforming our business and seeing signs that our transformation is succeeding,” Mr. Schroeter said in a conference call with analysts.AdvertisementIBM reported a 5 percent decline in net income to $2.4 billion. But the company reported a 4 percent increase, to $2.9 billion, in operating profits from continuing operations. On an earnings-per-share basis, earnings rose 9 percent to $2.91 a share. That was well above the consensus of Wall Street analysts of $2.80 a share.Revenue for the quarter fell 12 percent to $19.6 billion. But the falloff was almost entirely attributable to a strong dollar and the company’s planned exits from less-profitable businesses, especially its industry-standard data center computers, which it sold to Lenovo of China last fall.Most of IBM’s business is outside the United States, so a stronger dollar translates to lower reported revenue. In fact, eight percentage points of the revenue decline, or $1.7 billion, was because of the currency effect.Shares in the company were mostly flat in after-hours trading.Take away the currency effect and the sold-off operations, and IBM’s revenue would have been flat from the year-earlier quarter.Even so, flat revenue is not growth. IBM’s reported revenue has declined for 12 consecutive quarters. Some of the decline has been by design as IBM sheds operations with lower profit margins, as it has for years, getting out of personal computers, disk drives and most recently low-end server computers and chip manufacturing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the open question is how soon — and even whether — the new initiatives can grow faster than its traditional businesses retreats. That improvement should be seen eventually in revenue growth in IBM’s big services and software units, which represent 88 percent of the company’s revenue.That growth has not yet happened. Excluding the currency effect and discontinued operations, the services and software business each slipped by 2 percent in the quarter.“IBM is still a show-me story,” said A.M. Sacconaghi, an analyst at Bernstein Research.In a research report last week, Mr. Sacconaghi identified three major challenges confronting IBM. Cloud computing, he wrote, will most likely hurt IBM’s traditional hardware and software business more than the growth in its own cloud business will help.AdvertisementThe second threat, according to Mr. Sacconaghi, is the overall effect on hardware and software sales of the decline in its business that sells large servers running the Unix operating system. The third danger, he wrote, is the decline in its traditional outsourcing business, in which IBM runs the computer operations of its corporate customers.The IBM model, Mr. Schroeter noted in an interview, calls for a return to single-digit revenue increases. The new businesses IBM has earmarked for investment and growth, Mr. Schroeter noted, are showing real progress toward that crossover point, though he wouldn’t say when.IBM’s most lucrative hardware business, mainframe computers, showed its continuing capacity to evolve and appeal to corporate customers. The company began shipping its new z13 mainframe during the quarter, and mainframe sales more than doubled.The mainframe business remains critical to IBM. The machines themselves contribute only about 2 percent of the company’s revenue today. But when mainframe-related software, storage, services and financing are included, the overall business represents an estimated 24 percent of corporate revenue and 37 percent of operating profits.A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: IBM Operating Profits Rise, but Strong Dollar Takes Toll.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.