LONDON — Funding Circle, the British peer-to-peer lender, announced on Wednesday that it had raised $150 million in financing that valued the company at roughly $1 billion.The company, which allows people and institutions to bid online to lend money to small businesses, has now raised almost $300 million from investors including Index Ventures and Union Square Ventures. It is part of a growing number of start-ups that have used so-called peer-to-peer technology to connect people with others looking for financing.Last year, Lending Club, another peer-to-peer lender which allows people to lend directly to one another, raised $870 million through an initial public offering that valued the company at more than $5 billion. Funding Circle is now available in the United Kingdom and the United States, and Samir Desai, the start-up’s chief executive, said the company would use the new fund-raising to expand its operations on both sides of the Atlantic. In 2013, the start-up bought Endurance Lending Network, a smaller American competitor, to enter the United States market.He added that lending to British and American small businesses through the start-up’s online platform had now reached a combined $1 billion, adding that he expected a further $1 billion to be lent through Funding Circle over the next 12 months.“We are still tiny in the grand scheme of things in the financial services industry,” Mr. Desai said in an interview, adding that the company was now looking to expand beyond the United Kingdom and United States into new markets. “Less than 5 percent of businesses know who we are. We want to change that.”New investors in Funding Circle include DST Global, the investment firm founded by the Russian billionaire Yuri Milner that previously invested in the likes of Facebook, the asset manager BlackRock and Temasek, the sovereign wealth fund backed by the Singaporean government. Funding Circle was founded in 2010 by three Oxford University graduates. While peer-to-peer lending has gained traction with both investors and those looking for financing, critics say that it may not offer the same type of safeguards traditionally associated with banks.Mr. Desai, however, said that Funding Circle’s loan default rate stood at roughly 1.4 percent of outstanding loans, while American investors were now receiving returns in the low teens from lending money through the company’s online platform. Returns for British investors stand around seven percent, according to Funding Circle.He added that British businesses were now borrowing roughly $60 million a month through the company’s online marketplace, and American companies were receiving an additional $15 million each month.Funding Circle now employs 100 people in the United States and another 180 at its British headquarters, but some of the start-up’s investors expect that its American operations will soon outpace its British roots. “The U.S. is obviously a much larger market,” said Neil Rimer, a co-founder of Index Ventures, the European venture capital firm, who also is Funding Circle’s chairman.