Box announced changes on Wednesday that it hopes will take it into a new phase of growth, and potentially dominance of a critical part of the new way businesses use computers. As expected, Box is opening to outside software developers much of what it now has in secure content storage and viewing on a proprietary basis. But perhaps more than anything, Box’s choices illustrate how the $300 billion dollar business of corporate software is evolving, and suggest what may lie ahead for many technology companies.In a nutshell: Cloud computing and mobility are perhaps 10 percent of today’s enterprise software business but are rapidly becoming the assumed standard for most new software. The baseline work like selling data storage — or, though Box didn’t say it, making phones — are for just a few giants. Everyone else has to enable or create the end-user experiences, and will be rewarded on the quality of that experience. Even then, it’s good to get big fast, and you need strong partners, particularly in the emerging world of data analytics.Speaking to more than 1,500 software developers on Wednesday, Aaron Levie, a co-founder and the chief executive of Box, introduced ways that coders can rapidly build applications that draw off a broad range of arcane protocols for looking at images, documents and video, without having to create ways of presenting that content to their customers. The content can also be shared, and it is stored and managed in ways that already meet the security requirements of most companies.  Box was initially known as a way to store digital content cheaply online. No more. The developers who build applications using Box’s new software kits will eventually be charged by Box for each user of the application, at a price to be announced this summer. “Pricing on a per-user model really takes storage out of the equation,” Mr. Levie said. “You have to develop software on platforms that are more than basic infrastructure.” New kinds of software, he said, would need to be much more like a phone app, typically targeting a specific activity, but with a higher level of security, and with collaborative elements akin to social media. Box hopes it is providing a cloud-mobile tool set for doing that.Aiding Box’s goals, two venture capital firms, Bessemer Venture Partners and Emergence Capital , pledged up to $20 million each for developers that want to build software using the Box offering. If the idea catches on, Box could effectively pick up millions of new customers through the developers, rejuvenating growth it sorely needs. Box, which went public in January, had revenue growth of 74 percent in 2014, up to $216 million, but this year it is expected to rise only about 31 percent. Google, Oracle, Microsoft, and Salesforce, the kind of companies Mr. Levie aspires to emulate, experienced triple-digit annual revenue growth even after going public.But the move is based on necessity as much as opportunity. With Google and Amazon Web Services constantly undercutting each other’s prices (and Microsoft Azure following suit), other companies can’t count on selling basic stuff like storage or computing.  “It’s hard to duplicate what AWS has, impossible. We’ll get beat on price all day, every day,” said Chris Yeh, the senior vice president for products at Box. “But Amazon also feels like it has a lot of complexities to work with. The things we do around content, like giving you ways to search for things, encrypt content with easy management, or make it possible for readers to view all kinds of things, is what gives us leverage.”The developers that Box wants will also be, the company hopes, a means by which some yet-unknown great new software will be developed. “We’re trying to put innovation into as many hands as possible,” said Sam Schillace, the company’s head of engineering. “Our vision is that there is a universal content store, and lots of software is created and consumed on that. If you can do 100 cheap experiments, fast, and one of them produces something amazing, it’s worth it.”If that sounds like a lot of failure on the road to success, so be it. The cloud allows lower-cost failure, faster than was ever before possible, which means more experimentation than ever is possible.One element of Mr. Levie’s vision, data analysis, was mentioned during onstage visits with Eric Schmidt, Google’s chairman, and Marc Benioff, the Salesforce chief executive, that Box has yet to address. Mr. Schimdt called machine learning “the core thing” Google is doing. That ability is something Box does not do, which both Google and AWS are offering. As fast as he is moving, Mr. Levie may have much more to do.  