AdvertisementSupported byBy Vindu GoelSAN FRANCISCO — At Yahoo, the turnaround that investors are hoping for remains elusive.The Internet company reported first-quarter financial results that showed strong growth in newer areas like mobile advertising. But costs rose even faster, depressing profits.Yahoo’s results, which fell below Wall Street’s expectations, reflect the slow progress made by Yahoo’s chief executive, Marissa Mayer, in reviving the 20-year-old outfit. Yahoo was a gateway to the Internet for the first generation of web users but faded in importance as Google, Facebook and a legion of mobile apps outmaneuvered it for both ad dollars and users’ attention.“They are still in the middle of this transition and turnaround,” said Robert Peck, an analyst at SunTrust Robinson Humphrey. “While she’s cutting spending, she’s investing as well.”Yahoo posted net income of $21 million, or 2 cents a share, down sharply from the $312 million, or 29 cents a share, the Internet company reported a year ago.Excluding stock-based compensation and other items, Yahoo made a profit of 15 cents a share, falling short of the 18 cents a share that Wall Street had expected on that basis.Revenue for the first quarter was $1.23 billion, up slightly from the $1.13 billion that the company brought in during the same period last year, as search revenue and even old-fashioned display ads increased. After deducting payments to advertising partners, however, revenue was $1.04 billion, below the $1.07 billion predicted by analysts.Yahoo’s stock initially fell in after-hours trading following the release of its results. But it rose during Yahoo’s conference call with analysts, when Ms. Mayer said that Yahoo had hired advisers to explore how to maximize the value of the company’s 35.5 percent stake in Yahoo Japan, which is worth nearly $9 billion.Since Ms. Mayer joined the company in 2012, Yahoo’s stock has traded more on the value of its investments in Yahoo Japan and Alibaba, a leading Chinese e-commerce company, than on its core business. In January, she announced plans to spin off Yahoo’s 15.4 percent stake in Alibaba.In Yahoo’s operating businesses, Ms. Mayer is trying to refocus the company around mobile apps, native ads, video services and the Tumblr social network, while reducing staffing in the company’s other divisions, like its traditional web offerings. In the first quarter, Yahoo cut net employment by 1,100 jobs, Ms. Mayer said on the call. Since her arrival, she has reduced the number of full-time employees by 2,800 jobs, or 20 percent. “It’s really been about remixing and pivoting the company,” she said. Despite the cuts, the amount of money Yahoo paid to partners to acquire ad traffic quadrupled in the quarter, crimping profits. Ms. Mayer said the company was developing mobile search tools to anticipate what on-the-go users might need, like boarding information for a flight they are about to take.“The question I have is, how much are you willing to spend on it?” Mr. Peck asked.Last week, Ms. Mayer renewed the company’s partnership with Microsoft on search results and advertising, which accounted for 35 percent of Yahoo’s revenue last year. Under that deal, the two companies will continue to work together for five more years, with Yahoo now getting the ability to serve up its own search results and ads for up to 49 percent of queries. Advertisement