AdvertisementSupported byBy Steve LohrIBM on Monday reported sharply lower profits and sales in the third quarter, raising questions about the progress of its corporate transition to new businesses.Much of the decline from the same quarter a year ago was attributable to a stronger dollar and the sale last year of one of IBM’s computer hardware businesses. Still, even accounting for the slippage that was expected or by design, there were signs of weakness, analysts said. Revenue in IBM’s large and lucrative software business, for example, declined by 3 percent excluding the currency impact.The company’s net profit fell 14 percent, to $3.0 billion. Its operating earnings declined 9 percent to $3.34 a share. That performance was slightly ahead of the consensus forecast of Wall Street analysts of $3.30 a share, as compiled by Thomson Reuters.IBM’s revenue of $19.3 billion fell 14 percent from a year ago, and was below the consensus estimate of analysts of $19.6 billion.IBM lowered its earnings forecast for the year to $14.75 to $15.75 a share, from its previous guidance of $15.75 to $16.50 a share. In after-hours trading, IBM shares fell 5 percent.“The market is changing quickly, and IBM can’t move fast enough,” said A. M. Sacconaghi, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Company. “That’s what this suggests.”Most of IBM’s business is overseas, and the strength of the dollar was responsible for about 9 percent of the decline in revenue, the company said. A further 4 percent of the falloff was because the year-earlier quarter had included revenue from its unit making industry-standard server computers, which IBM sold to Lenovo of China last October.But even so, analysts say IBM is still straining as it increasingly relies on new fields to offset the erosion of some of its traditional hardware, software and services businesses. In recent years, the company has invested heavily in new areas that are growing rapidly, like data analytics, its Watson artificial-intelligence software, cloud computing, mobile applications and security. In 2014, its growth businesses delivered $25 billion in revenue, or 27 percent of corporate sales.IBM’s so-called strategic initiatives are expected to grow by at least 20 percent this year. The company reported on Monday that these businesses had grown by 27 percent so far this year, excluding currency translation. By 2018, the company predicts, the growth portfolio will generate revenue of about $40 billion, more than 40 percent of the corporate total.Virginia M. Rometty, IBM’s chief executive, has candidly said that this year will be one of difficult transition. In a statement on Monday, Ms. Rometty said the quarter showed the wisdom of its strategy. “We again made progress in the transformation of our business to higher value,” she said.In a conference call with analysts, and in an interview later, Martin Schroeter, IBM’s chief financial officer, focused mainly on the momentum in its growth businesses. He pointed to cloud revenue as an example, growing at 65 percent, reaching an annual run rate of $9.4 billion. Those figures include revenue from cloud technology that IBM builds inside customers data centers, not just from cloud services delivered over the Internet. Its new Watson unit, Mr. Schroeter noted, is another business receiving generous funding.“We will invest at a high level to accelerate the transformation,” he said. “And we will continue to manage the company for the long term.”Scaling back the 2015 earnings guidance, Mr. Schroeter said, was a “prudent” step. The move, he said, was prompted by three forces: a slowdown in parts of its software business, the cost of transforming its services business to focus on newer technologies and the need to keep investing aggressively in the growth fields.But investors and analysts are concerned that the decline at IBM’s large, lucrative businesses may accelerate faster than the new businesses grow. Until the new businesses account for more overall growth, those worries will most likely persist.“The math is working against them now,” said Frank Gens, chief analyst at IDC. “Modest declines in the older business overshadow the new businesses.”At IBM, Mr. Schroeter acknowledged the challenge. “The core is declining in a declining market,” he said. “We never said it would be a straight line.”Advertisement