For those who think the West is the center of the tech world, Xiaomi has a different opinion.The upstart Chinese maker of smartphones just hosted its biggest event outside of its home country to introduce a new flagship phone, and it wasn’t in the United States or even Europe — it was in India.The phone, the Mi 4i, was introduced on Thursday by Hugo Barra, a former Google executive who now leads  Xiaomi’s global division. The phone includes impressive specs and special features, like extra language options, in India, where it will go on sale Thursday. Sales of the Mi 4i will begin in May in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesia.As Lei Jun, Xiaomi’s chief executive, normally does in China, Mr. Barra guided an enthusiastic audience through the phone’s range of features. But for all the attention Xiaomi gives to technical details and its operating system, the climax came when Mr. Barra announced the price of the phone: 12,999 rupees, or roughly $200, a low price for a flagship device.While there are a huge number of reasons for Xiaomi not to push into markets like the United States — from potential patent lawsuits to having to develop relationships with carriers — perhaps the primary reason Xiaomi is entering India is because the country looks quite a bit like China did several years ago.India has a huge population with very few owners of smartphones. India’s users need multiple SIM cards and have data consumption concerns, just like users in China and other developing countries.Most important, Indians are expected to buy far more smartphones this year than they did in 2014, according to IDC, the research firm. Indians will buy 111 million smartphones this year and 149 million in 2016, IDC has estimated. India is expected to outpace the United States in smartphone sales in the coming years.With the growth of China’s smartphone market slowing, India is an obvious next stop for a company like Xiaomi, valued at $45 billion after its latest fund-raising round, in December. The only problem is that other Chinese phone makers — from the well-known, like Lenovo, to the unheard of, like Oppo — have the same idea. Xiaomi also faces Samsung, the South Korean giant, which holds top market share in India, and several local Indian companies, most notably Micromax. “I don’t expect them to have the exponential growth they had in China,” said Kiranjeet Kaur, an IDC analyst. “But if you don’t keep it as a comparison, there’s a lot of opportunity, because India is in that growth phase that China was in two years ago.”Yet the $200 price makes the Mi 4i far cheaper than the leading phones from other companies like Samsung, HTC, Motorola and Apple. Even so, the Xiaomi phone still ranks as expensive in India, about double the price of the mainstays of companies like Micromax.Mr. Barra said at the close of the event: “Today is a very, very special day for us. It’s the day when we’ve taken the biggest step as a young, five-year-old company that we’ve ever done into global markets by putting our best phone forward, by building a flagship phone designed just for India.”Xiaomi is hoping that people who lean toward low-cost phones will be tempted to spend a bit more, and those who are willing to spend far more on high-end Samsung phones to give it a try. Whether they reciprocate Xiaomi’s attention to India will go a long way toward showing whether the company can succeed in a big way outside of China.