AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I’m running Mac OS 10.6.8 and want to upgrade to the new OS X 10.10 (Yosemite). When installing, I got a warning that Yosemite won’t support Microsoft Office, so I stopped. Is there any way to use Yosemite and still have access to Word and Excel files?A. Microsoft Office for Mac 2004 and earlier versions of the suite do not run on Mac OS X 10.7 and later (including Yosemite). This is because the programs were written for the older PowerPC processors that Apple began to phase out of its computers in 2006 in favor of newer chips from Intel.But even with a Yosemite upgrade, you still have several ways to work with Microsoft Office files on your Mac. Microsoft has newer versions of the programs, including the free Office Online edition and its subscription-based Office 365 suite. The company is also gearing up to release Office 2016 for Mac this year and has a preview version available on its website.While you may have to fiddle a bit and remember to save files in Office formats, several other programs allow you to open, edit and save Word and Excel files too. Apple has built a level of compatibility with Microsoft Office files into Pages and Numbers, the corresponding word-processing and spreadsheet programs from its own iWork suite for Mac OS X; a browser-based version is free on the iWork for iCloud beta site online. The open-source LibreOffice suite can work with Office files, as can Google’s Docs and Sheets applications, which are free online with a Google account.Backing Up a Fire TabletQ. How do you back up the personal data on an Amazon Fire?A. Amazon includes a tool in the Fire’s software that you can use for a daily automatic backup when the tablet is in sleep mode and connected to a wireless network. Swipe down from the top of the tablet’s screen and select Settings. Next, choose Device Options, select Backup & Restore and tap the On switch next to Device Backup. You can also do a manual backup by tapping Back Up Now.The backup process saves your personal settings, tablet layout and bookmarks from the Silk browser; personal photos and videos can be saved to your Amazon Cloud Drive, the company’s online storage locker. All of the digital media bought from Amazon, like videos and music, is automatically stored online and can be downloaded again.TIP OF THE WEEK Although Android has a Quick Settings box you can use to quickly adjust certain preferences on the phone or tablet, not all the system controls are immediately available there. For those more obscure settings that you use regularly (like Data Usage or Accessibility), you can make your own direct shortcut widget for the home screen.To select your specific settings widget, tap the All Apps icon on the Android home screen. On the top of the Apps screen, tap the Widgets tab. Several screens’ worth of potential screen widgets appear; swipe to the left until you get to the Settings widget. Press your finger and hold your finger on the Settings widget until your device’s home screen appears and you can drag the icon where you want it.Once you have moved the widget into position, a menu of possible settings opens. Tap the Settings category you wish to use. For example, if you select “Sound & Notification,” the new widget becomes a shortcut that goes right to the screen of volume preferences for the device’s alarms and other audio cues. You can repeat the widget-creation process to make shortcuts for all your most-used settings.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement