By DAVID STREITFELDAPRIL 23, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO — Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, the venture capital firm, is offering a new deal to the former associate who unsuccessfully sued the firm, accusing it of gender discrimination: Promise not to pursue this case any further or pay us $1 million.The offer was made in papers filed this week in California Superior Court in San Francisco. The firm said the case, which drew an abundance of unfavorable attention to its inner workings and the fate of women in Silicon Valley, cost it $972,815 in witness fees, deposition and court reporter costs.As the winning party, Kleiner is asking the former associate, Ellen Pao, to reimburse it for these bills. But if she forgoes any appeal and lets the case die, the firm will forgive and forget, or at least move on.“We believe that women in technology would be best served by having all parties focus on making progress on the issues of gender diversity outside of continued litigation,” said Christina Lee, a Kleiner spokeswoman.AdvertisementA jury at the end of March rejected all of Ms. Pao’s claims. Legal fees, which must have been considerable on both sides, are not on the table.Ms. Pao’s chief lawyer, Alan Exelrod, did not return a call for comment. Ms. Pao has not said whether she will pursue an appeal, and the grounds on which she would do so are uncertain.The judge in the case, Harold Kahn, made no obvious rulings that seemed to favor the defense. If anything, the opposite was true. He declined to allow testimony about Ms. Pao’s husband, Alphonse Fletcher Jr., whose hedge fund is bankrupt.Debra S. Katz, a Washington, D.C., lawyer who specializes in gender discrimination suits, said Kleiner sounded a little punitive.“If Kleiner wanted to look classy, it could have said, ‘This was hard fought and we obviously disagree with your view, but it’s in the interest of all parties to walk away. In the meantime, there have been lessons learned and we are going to fund organizations that focus on glass ceiling issues,’ ” Ms. Katz said.AdvertisementThe vast majority of the fees Kleiner is trying to recover are for witnesses. The fees for Paul Gompers, a professor at Harvard Business School, were $131,400, the filing says.Other court filings revealed that last November, Kleiner had offered Ms. Pao $964,502 to settle, an amount based on the projected costs of the case.By making that offer, Kleiner can now ask for witness fees, which unlike deposition fees are not normally recoverable. Ms. Pao never responded, although she might wish she had.An article on Friday about Kleiner Perkins, the venture capital firm, which filed for reimbursement in a gender discrimination suit, misstated the fees paid to Paul Gompers, a professor at Harvard Business School who was a witness in the case. It was $131,400, not $92,700.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Venture Firm on Offense After Victory in Court.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.