By NICK WINGFIELDAPRIL 23, 2015
SEATTLE — No one was expecting big things from Microsoft in its most recent quarter, but its results ended up being far less grim than the worst case scenarios predicted for the company.Microsoft said its profit fell about 12 percent while revenue rose 6 percent.The lackluster results for the company’s fiscal third quarter, which ended March 31, stemmed from a combination of factors, including foreign currency fluctuations that crimped overseas sales and unflattering comparisons to last year’s results. Last year, Microsoft phased out technical support for its old Windows XP operating system, resulting in a temporary flurry of shopping for new software by customers.Then there are the deeper issues with the PC market, which is suffering from a gradual, multiyear descent to new sales lows. Microsoft is working on a new operating system, Windows 10, expected out later this year, that could give PC sales a lift.It also dreams that Windows 10 will improve its fortunes in the high-growth smartphone business and promising new markets like augmented-reality headsets.For now, Microsoft is in a lull, as its numbers showed. The company reported net income of $4.99 billion, or 61 cents a share, down from $5.66 billion, or 68 cents a share, in the same period a year ago.AdvertisementRevenue rose to $21.73 billion from $20.4 billion a year ago, Microsoft said. Wall Street analysts were especially pleased that Microsoft exceeded their profit forecasts. The average estimate of analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters was for earnings of 51 cents a share and revenue of $21.06 billion.AdvertisementMicrosoft shares jumped more than 3 percent in after-hours trading.Daniel Ives, an analyst at FBR Capital Markets, said that Wall Street was expecting to give Microsoft a C grade for the quarter after the company delivered disappointing results over the holiday period. He said the company ended up delivering a B-plus performance, adding that “it appears Microsoft is back on the right track after a head-scratching performance last quarter.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While Microsoft has diversified its business greatly in recent years so that Windows is no longer the foundation of the company, the malaise in the PC market is still a problem for it. During the first three months of the year, PC shipments declined 5.2 percent from the same period a year before, according to Gartner.That is a lot better than the double-digit declines the market was suffering from not long ago, but it’s still not a happy story. Much of the slowdown reflects a shift in enthusiasm among technology shoppers toward smartphones and tablets, where Microsoft is weak.A bright spot for Microsoft was the growth in its cloud business, a catchall category that includes Office applications that are sold as subscriptions and its Azure business, through which it rents computing capacity in Microsoft data centers to clients. The company said its commercial cloud revenue grew 106 percent during the quarter, and amounts to a $6.3 billion annual business based on its recent performance.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.