By J. D. BIERSDORFERAPRIL 23, 2015
Q. I want to be able to set programs to record on my digital video recorder from my iPhone, but the Time Warner Cable app keeps crashing on me when I try. What can I do?A. As with any mobile app that is acting erratically, make sure you have both the latest version of the TWC TV app and the most recent iOS update from Apple installed on the iPhone — and that the app is actually compatible with your phone’s version of iOS. If the app and the phone are up to date, try deleting the app, downloading a new copy and then reinstalling it on your iPhone. You can also try restarting the iPhone.If the crashing problem persists, Time Warner Cable does have a technical support area for the program on its website. The site also has a page to register for the username and password you need to log into the app so you can manage the DVR or stream live TV on your phone.If all else fails with the iOS app, you may be able to manage your DVR remotely by using the web instead. Time Warner Cable includes the DVR Manager tool on the My TV tab of your online account page.AdvertisementThe company also maintains a TWCTV.com site for viewing your channel content and setting the DVR through a desktop web browser, but the site requires the Adobe Flash Player — software that is not supported on Apple’s iOS system. As a no-frills alternative for simply setting the DVR to grab a show, Time Warner Cable’s old mobile webpage for DVR management may still do the trick; it can be found at https://mdvr.timewarnercable.com/login/ and it works in the iPhone’s Safari browser.System Recovery Tools for Windows 7Q. Can you use a flash drive for system start-up and recovery on Windows 7 like you can on Windows 8? And when will Microsoft stop doing updates for this version of the operating system?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. Windows 7 comes with tools to create a system repair disc with recovery options in the computer’s CD or DVD drive, but Microsoft also has a set of instructions online to install Windows 7 on a USB flash drive. This drive can then be plugged in to start up the PC when the version of Windows 7 on the computer is unable to function properly. In addition to a spare USB drive, you also need the 25-character product key that came with your copy of Windows 7.After you enter the product key, you can download a disc image of Windows 7 to use for creating a bootable USB drive. As Microsoft’s page explains, you also need the free Windows 7 USB/DVD Download Tool so you can install Windows 7 directly on the USB drive.Microsoft’s method results in a USB drive with a working copy of Windows 7 that can be used to boot up and troubleshoot the ailing computer. Other Windows-focused sites and blogs have their own tips for fixing a PC that won’t start properly. For example, the 7Tutorials site has an illustrated guide for installing the Windows 7 System Recovery tools onto a flash drive, and the Raymond.cc site shows how to install the files from a Windows 7 Recovery Disc onto a USB drive. (As with all do-it-yourself projects, though, you should proceed at your own risk.)AdvertisementAs for the life span of Windows 7 itself, do not expect any new features or enhancements to the operating system, as Microsoft ended mainstream support for it in January. Windows 7 will continue to receive extended support for security patches and critical updates for a few years longer, though. According the Microsoft’s Product Lifecycle Page, the extended support phase is scheduled to end on Jan. 14, 2020. If upgrading to Windows 8.1 does not appeal to you, remember that Windows 10 is due later this year and will be a free upgrade for Windows 7 users during its first 12 months of release.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.