AdvertisementSupported byBy Natasha SingerWASHINGTON — James P. Steyer came here from San Francisco last week on a whirlwind tour to try to engage the country’s power brokers in his new crusade to put children and education at the top of the nation’s political agenda.He went to the White House to enlist David Simas, an assistant to President Obama who directs political strategy.“Obama was in the Everglades,” Mr. Steyer said, explaining why he was not meeting with the president himself.He went to Capitol Hill to recruit Representative Nancy Pelosi, a California Democrat who is the House minority leader. He met with Representative Luke Messer, an Indiana Republican who is co-sponsoring a student privacy bill. And he went twice to the Federal Communications Commission to advocate subsidized Internet access for low-income families.In the corridors of political power, Mr. Steyer’s blond California-surfer mien and preppy garb may lend him an informal air. But behind his casual facade is a master networker and strategist.“How do you navigate the dysfunctional partisan politics of Washington?” Mr. Steyer, 58, asked as he strolled from DC Coast, a power-lunch spot on K Street, to the white-shoe law firm Davis Polk, where he was to hobnob with Jon Leibowitz, a former chairman of the Federal Trade Commission. “A lot of what I do is I meet people,” Mr. Steyer said. “You’ve got to know the right people.”Through a combination of sophisticated strategy and high-powered networking, Mr. Steyer and his children’s advocacy group, Common Sense Media, have quietly become a political dynamo. The nonprofit group, largely known for its reviews and ratings of children’s videos, now plays a role in influencing billions of dollars in government spending on education-related technologies, like classroom broadband access, as well as teachers’ choices of learning apps.On Monday, the group plans to introduce an even more ambitious national advocacy effort, called Common Sense Kids Action, to push for certain state and federal efforts to bolster education for children. After years of providing free children’s entertainment ratings, Common Sense Media now hopes to galvanize its user base, asking consumers to get behind issues like technical career training for students and technology training for teachers.“We want to create a constituency for children, an AARP for kids,” Mr. Steyer said, referring to the popular membership group for retirees. “We are going to activate an army.”Already, Mr. Steyer has teamed up with some of the biggest players in technology and education. With financing from the MacArthur Foundation and the Sherwood Foundation, for instance, his group developed a digital literacy curriculum that Mr. Steyer says has been adopted by about 90,000 schools. With financing from Bill Gates, it created a review site for digital education tools that effectively functions as a Yelp for teachers. The group also recently spearheaded the passage of two data protection laws in California that limit how online companies can use information they collect from children and students.“He has leveraged his power of persuasion, his connections and his personal passion to get Common Sense Media to a pretty important place of not only being a ratings platform, but an advocate for the appropriate use of technology in the classroom,” said Gary E. Knell, a Common Sense board member who is the chief executive of the National Geographic Society.Yet the new program may only magnify Common Sense Media’s tangled stance; the group has enthusiastically promoted digital learning while simultaneously challenging Facebook and other online giants on their privacy practices.The group’s growing political influence also underscores the increasing privatization of American public education — and the complicated financial interrelationships that are developing as education technology proliferates.Common Sense Media earned about $6 million last year through the licensing fees it charges companies — including Amplify, AT&T, Comcast, Cox, Discovery Education and Time Warner Cable — that distribute its reviews and ratings. It has also received support from a number of foundations set up by technology executives and telecommunications firms. If Mr. Steyer’s efforts to increase government financing for education-related technologies succeed, some of these entities, or their benefactors’ companies, stand to benefit.“What you’re seeing is an organization pushing an agenda to improve education through technology coinciding with the self-interests of companies providing funding to that organization,” said Joel R. Reidenberg, a professor at the Fordham University School of Law in Manhattan. “If you had municipal governments providing Wi-Fi in poor neighborhoods, you wouldn’t need to subsidize the private sector to do it.”Mr. Steyer dismissed any suggestion of conflicts of interest. He said that Common Sense Media was transparent about its financial relationships and that it had no problem biting the hands that fed it.“We exist for one purpose: to promote the best interest of kids,” Mr. Steyer said. “If you help us do that, we will enhance your brand for the good work you do for kids and families. If you do bad things, we will publicly criticize you and try to regulate you.”It doesn’t hurt Mr. Steyer’s cause that his younger brother is Thomas F. Steyer, a hedge fund billionaire whose political action committee, NextGen Climate Action Committee, has been a major contributor to Democratic campaigns. For its new advocacy effort, Common Sense has secured more than $20 million in pledges from donors, among them Tom Steyer.The Steyer brothers grew up on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and attended elite private schools. Their father was an antitrust lawyer on Wall Street.Mr. Steyer traces his interest in children’s education, and his gregariousness, to his mother, who was a schoolteacher in Harlem and the South Bronx. After he graduated early from Phillips Exeter Academy, he volunteered to work with his mother as a teacher at a high school for disadvantaged students in the Hell’s Kitchen neighborhood of Manhattan.Mr. Steyer later became a civil rights lawyer, but he never stopped teaching. For the last 28 years, he has taught popular courses at Stanford University on civil rights, civil liberties and education. His students have included Cory Booker, now a senator from New Jersey, and Chelsea Clinton.“When Bill Clinton once introduced me, he said: ‘The thing you have to know about Jim is that he is a teacher,’ ” Mr. Steyer recalled. “I have always wanted to be a teacher.”Mr. Steyer founded Common Sense Media in 2003 to help parents navigate the changing technological landscape for their children. The group’s consumer platform reviews the content of children’s books, videos, games, apps and other media for age-appropriateness, sex, violence, and profanity. With distributors like Comcast, DirectTV and Time Warner, the reviews reach millions of consumers annually.In 2012, the F.C.C. and the Department of Education tapped Mr. Steyer and James Coulter, a founding partner of the private investment firm TPG Capital, along with two other experts, to develop a national plan to improve education through technology. Called the Leading Education by Advancing Digital Commission, the privately financed group eventually recommended wiring all public schools with high-speed broadband; deploying more digital devices in schools; and promoting digital curriculums.“We had a market adoption problem,” said Mr. Coulter, who is a member of the Common Sense advisory board. “Until you wire the classroom, you cannot deliver the product. But if you wire the classroom, the V.C. community will see you can deliver the product and will invest a lot more money.”In 2014, the F.C.C. allocated up to $3.9 billion to support the installation of high-speed broadband in schools and libraries.As part of Common Sense Media’s new advocacy program, Mr. Steyer is promoting a similar plan. He wants the Federal Communications Commission to subsidize Internet access for low-income families so that their children can use the web and learning apps to do their homework assignments.“Here’s what I want to know,” Mr. Steyer said last week during a meeting with one of the commissioners. “Who are the 10 people who matter in Congress so we can pressure them to do the right thing for kids?”Of course, technology may not turn out to be the panacea for education that industry executives and investors envision it to be. Moreover, many of the parents who rely on Common Sense to tell them whether videos like “Furious 7” are appropriate for their 10-year-olds may be unmoved by issues like equitable access to broadband.But Mr. Steyer tends to be relentless once he has committed to a cause.“He is, not particularly quietly, obsessive about it,” said his brother, Tom. “And he’s very effective. That’s the truth.”Advertisement