As a reporter who covers tech industry data-mining practices, I’ve received my fair share of there-oughta-be-a-law-against-that calls and emails from outraged readers.So naturally I was skeptical when James P. Steyer, the chief executive of Common Sense Media, a children’s advocacy and media ratings group in San Francisco, called me in the fall of 2013 to announce that he was going to have a law passed in California to restrict how education technology companies use student data.At the time, I had just written an article on inBloom, a student data repository  that wanted to streamline how schools collected and used students’ information. The nonprofit corporation had received $100 million in seed money from prominent backers: the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation along with the Carnegie Corporation of New York. But some parents vehemently objected, contending that inBloom could potentially enable third-party developers to profit from their children’s records or exploit students’ personal details to market to them.That was when Mr. Steyer called. He was not just worried about possible commercial exploitation of student data, he said. He also foresaw that parents’ mounting privacy concerns could scuttle the adoption of education technology in schools — a cause he and his group have championed.“I said, ‘Holy Toledo, this is a mess waiting to happen,’ ” Mr. Steyer recalled last week during a conversation in Washington. “I said, ‘There’s a huge issue around student data and student privacy. We’ll draft a law.’ ”And so it came to pass. Last September, Gov. Jerry Brown signed the bill — titled the Student Online Personal Information Protection Act — that Mr. Steyer originally envisioned.Now, as I wrote in a profile of Mr. Steyer published Monday, Common Sense Media is planning a more ambitious national effort that  includes promulgating student privacy laws this year in about a dozen states, among them New Hampshire. The strategy his group used in California provides a window into its coming campaign.Mr. Steyer is a prolific networker who travels in social circles that include high-level legislators, government regulators and executives. He is directly connected to the chief executives of major telecommunications and media companies, as many of those companies pay licensing fees to distribute Common Sense Media’s reviews of children’s movies, videos and games. In addition, Mr. Steyer’s brother, Thomas F. Steyer, is a hedge-fund billionaire, environmental philanthropist and major donor to Democratic campaigns. So Mr. Steyer took his case for a student privacy bill directly to Darrell Steinberg, at the time the president pro tempore of the California Senate. “I knew he was the second most powerful guy in California,” Mr. Steyer said, explaining his thinking at the time.Besides, the two had already worked together on a law in California that requires websites to allow minors to delete content they posted online. Now Mr. Steinberg worked on enlisting his fellow legislators on the student privacy bill while Mr. Steyer met with tech and telecommunications industry executives.“He was Mr. Outside and I was Mr. Inside,” Mr. Steinberg said in a recent phone interview. Their message was simple, Mr. Steinberg said: “Education technology has remarkable potential to help all kids, but they should not have to worry that their personal information is being used for purposes unrelated to their schooling.”The California law that resulted from their efforts restricts how ed tech companies can use information about students from kindergarten through 12th grade. But it did not go far enough to satisfy some parents. When it takes effect in January 2016, the law will prohibit online services designed and marketed for school purposes from using students’ personal information for marketing, from compiling student profiles or from using students’ details for other nonschool purposes. But some parents complained that the law did not prohibit companies from using the information they collected from students’ data to improve their own educational products; nor did it give parents and students the right to sue if companies improperly exploited or failed to safeguard students’ information, causing harm.This week, Representative Jared Polis, a Colorado Democrat, and Representative Luke Messer, an Indiana Republican, are expected to introduce a federal student digital privacy bill, modeled in part on the California statute.