By J. D. BIERSDORFERAPRIL 27, 2015
Using Video On OneDriveQ. Can I store digital movies on my OneDrive server?A. Microsoft’s cloud storage service allows you to store and stream videos in common formats to your browser or in the OneDrive mobile app. Files in the .mov, .m4v and .mp4 formats should work, but those in incompatible formats can be downloaded first and then played.You can upload files as large as 10 gigabytes to OneDrive. Videos that have copyright restrictions built in will not play directly from OneDrive, and storing pirated videos on the site violates Microsoft’s Code of Conduct.How to ResetGiveaway iPhoneQ. I’ll be getting a new iPhone 6 and retiring my iPhone 4S. Can I give the old phone to a friend strictly for use with Wi-Fi, to surf and use various apps? Will it work on Wi-Fi once I transfer to the new phone?A. The Wi-Fi should work fine. Once you have transferred your information from the iPhone 4S to the iPhone 6, you should fully erase the older device before passing it on to someone else so that your personal data remains secure. You can wipe the phone’s memory by opening the Settings icon, going to General, setting Reset and then Erase All Content and Settings; you can also restore the device to factory settings by connecting it to the computer with its USB cable, opening iTunes, clicking the Summary tab and choosing Restore iPhone.AdvertisementOnce you completely erase the iPhone 4S, you will need to activate the device again to verify it with Apple. You can activate it over a Wi-Fi network or by connecting the iPhone to iTunes on the computer.AdvertisementTo activate, the phone needs to have a SIM card  (subscriber identity module) installed. If you did not remove the card when you got the new iPhone, you should not have a problem. If the iPhone 4S no longer has a SIM card, though, you can put in a SIM card from another phone just long enough to activate the iPhone 4S. (You will need a SIM card again to activate the device if you ever erase it.)Once the iPhone 4S is activated, you should be able to connect it to a Wi-Fi network for browsing and apps. You can also turn off the Cellular function in the settings.TIP OF THE WEEK Emoji, which originated in Japan in the 1990s, have been used for years to visually accent text messages with tiny graphics. Most major smartphone platforms, including Android, iOS and Windows Phone, support the playful pictographs, which can be turned on in the phone’s keyboard settings or summoned by pressing a special emoticon key. Third-party emoji apps and keyboards are also available.Twitter also supports standard emoji in mobile- and desktop-generated tweets. Browser extensions like Emoji Cheatsheet for Mozilla Firefox or Google Chrome or Emoji Input for Chrome can supply the characters, as can sites like PiliApp.com, which lets you cut and paste the desired graphic into your posts. The touch-screen keyboard in Windows 8.1 has an emoticons key that can be used to enter emoji into a tweet, and Mac users can press the Command key, Control key and space bar to open a window of emoji to choose.Twitter recently added some new — yet familiar — characters to the mix, although they are not part of the standard emoji character set and mainly work only on the Twitter website. As part of the hoopla surrounding “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” the company has begun adding its own Star Wars emoji and now converts the typed hashtags #C3PO, #Stormtrooper and #BB8 into tiny emojilike images that are embedded in the tweet. J.D. BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.