By J. D. BIERSDORFERMAY 1, 2015
Q. My old Nexus 7 tablet has a message saying I can update to Android 5.1. Will this fix the problems with sluggishness I’ve been having with Android 5.0?A. Google began to roll out Android 5.0 (Lollipop) last fall, but the update caused numerous problems on some devices. Owners of the original Nexus 7 tablet (first released in 2012) were among those complaining of slow performance, unexplained crashes, wireless connectivity issues and other erratic behavior. Google released Android 5.1 in March and said the update was intended to improve the system’s stability and performance. Some reviewers noticed a marked improvement on the Nexus 7.If you are on the fence about installing the upgrade, you may want to browse Google’s product forums to read the experiences of other Nexus 7 owners for a better idea of what to expect. Possible relief from the sluggishness may not be the only benefit of upgrading, either. In addition to Google’s claim of performance enhancements, Android 5.1 includes new features like quicker access to frequently used settings and increased data protection in case your tablet is lost or stolen.While Android 5.1 may fix some issues, it will probably not be the last patch in the near future, as memory issues are still a problem for some users. Developers have noted an Android 5.1.1 update has already begun to appear on Google’s official page of Android software for Nexus devices.AdvertisementFinding Open Programs on the PCQ. I share a Windows 7 PC with other teachers at my school. When I try to restart the computer, I get a message that other programs are running, but all I see are the desktop icons. How can I tell which programs are running so I can close them before restarting?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. You can use the Task Manager utility in Windows to see what programs are open, as well as what system services are running and how much memory is being used by various processes. To open Task Manager, right-click on the taskbar and select Start Task Manager from the contextual menu. As a keyboard shortcut, you can also just press the Control, Shift and Escape keys to open the utility.AdvertisementWhen the Task Manager window appears, click the Applications tab to see a list of all the programs currently running on the computer. You can close a program in the list by selecting and clicking the End Task button in the Task Manager window, although doing so will cause any unsaved changes made to open files on the program to be lost. Once you see which programs are running, you can select them and save the changes made to any open files lurking down in the taskbar or mostly out of sight on the desktop.If you try to shut down the computer without closing all programs or using the Task Manager, Windows typically shows you its “Force shutdown” screen that automatically closes all programs before turning off the machine. A forced shutdown also loses unsaved changes to files.Even if you close all the open programs before you restart the PC, you may see a Windows alert that other people are logged in to the system when you try to restart. This can happen if the teachers who share the computer forgot to log out of their user accounts on the machine. If the user accounts are not password-protected, you might be able to switch to a colleague’s user account to close files and programs there. If the accounts are password-protected, though, you may want to alert the other account owners to come and save any open files before you restart the computer.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.