By VINDU GOEL and RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLDMAY 4, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO — Dave Goldberg, the chief executive of SurveyMonkey and husband of Sheryl Sandberg of Facebook, died of head trauma Friday night after he collapsed at the gym at a private villa in Mexico, according to a Mexican government official.Mr. Goldberg, 47, was on vacation with family and friends at a private beach-front villa near the Four Seasons Resort in Punta Mita, a large development with two hotels and numerous private residences close to Puerto Vallarta in southwest Mexico, according to a spokesman for the prosecutor’s office in Nayarit State.Mr. Goldberg left his room around 4 p.m. on Friday, collapsed while exercising and died of head trauma and blood loss, said the spokesman. His brother, Robert Goldberg, found him on the floor of a gym at around 7 p.m., with blood around him. The spokesman said it appeared “he fell off the treadmill and cracked his head open.”Mr. Goldberg was transported to Hospital San Javier in Nuevo Vallarta, with weak vital signs, and died there, said the spokesman, who added that the episode appeared to be an accident. Mark Zuckerberg, chief executive of Facebook and a friend of the family, had said the death occurred while Mr. Goldberg was on vacation with Ms. Sandberg.AdvertisementMr. Goldberg’s death was announced by his brother and by SurveyMonkey on Saturday, but no cause or details of where it occurred were disclosed at that time. The lack of information prompted a wave of speculation about what happened to Mr. Goldberg, who was well regarded as an entrepreneur and mentor and was the less famous half of one of Silicon Valley’s most prominent power couples.AdvertisementMs. Sandberg, the chief operating officer of Facebook, has made no public statements about her husband’s death.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.John O’Sullivan, general manager of the Four Seasons Punta Mita, said in a phone interview that there had not been any incident at the areas of the resort managed by the company, which did not include the private villa where Mr. Goldberg was staying.The family is planning an invitation-only celebration of Mr. Goldberg’s life on Tuesday at Stanford Memorial Auditorium. Men planning to attend were urged not to wear ties “in keeping with Dave’s lifelong hatred of ties,” according to an emailed invitation sent to friends of the couple. The invitation added, “Out of respect for the family, please do not take pictures or post to social media” from the event.The Walt Disney Company said it would move the time of its second-quarter earnings release on Tuesday so executives could attend the funeral. Ms. Sandberg is a Disney board member.Mr. Goldberg, who worked at Yahoo and at a venture capital firm before running SurveyMonkey, lived with Ms. Sandberg in Menlo Park, Calif. They have two children. He is also survived by his mother, Paula Goldberg.SurveyMonkey, a start-up that makes web survey technology, has not yet named an interim successor to Mr. Goldberg. Selina Tobaccowala is the company’s president, and Tim Maly is its chief operating officer and chief financial officer.An article on Tuesday about the death of Dave Goldberg, chief executive of SurveyMonkey and husband of the Facebook executive Sheryl Sandberg, misstated his location at the time of his death. He was at a private villa near the Four Seasons Resort in Punta Minta, near Puerto Vallarta in southwest Mexico, not at the Four Seasons itself.Vindu Goel reported from San Francisco and Randal C. Archibold from Mexico City. Paulina Villegas contributed reporting from Mexico City and Jodi Kantor from New York.A version of this article appears in print on May 5, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Official Says Goldberg Died After Fall at Mexican Resort .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.