By VINDU GOELOCT. 20, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  After three years as Yahoo’s chief executive, Marissa Mayer is still searching for a viable turnaround plan for the company.Yahoo reported disappointing third-quarter financial results on Tuesday and said it would soon begin to use Google to power some of its search results and advertising.In a conference call and webcast, Ms. Mayer told investors that Yahoo was “continuing to face revenue headwinds in our core business” and that it would soon unveil a plan to streamline and focus the company.“We see a unique moment for Yahoo to narrow our strategy,” she said in the call to discuss the quarter’s results. She said she would provide more details within the next three months, but the plan is likely to include staff cuts and the shutdown or sale of some of the company’s operations.AdvertisementThe first area to take a hit was Yahoo’s video programming. The company, which has invested heavily in original web content such as the “Community” series, said it was taking a $42 million write-off in the third quarter on the value of its video assets.AdvertisementFor the third quarter, Yahoo reported revenue of $1.23 billion, compared with $1.15 billion in the same quarter a year ago. Net income was $76 million, or 8 cents a share, compared with $6.77 billion, or $6.70 a share, a year ago, when the company booked big gains from the sale of some of its stake in the Alibaba Group, a Chinese e-commerce company.Both revenue and profits fell below Wall Street’s consensus estimates, sending the company’s shares down 1.5 percent in after-hours trading.“The turnaround has not materialized as hoped,” wrote Robert S. Peck, an analyst with SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, in an email. “Investors are growing restless with the direction of the core after the C.E.O.’s 40 months of running the company.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yahoo plans to spin off its remaining 15 percent stake in Alibaba in the next few months despite lingering concerns about whether the deal will incur taxes for shareholders. The value of the spinoff, which Yahoo said could be delayed until January, accounts for most of Yahoo’s current stock price.Ms. Mayer, a former Google executive, said that Google and Yahoo had signed a web and mobile search deal this week, in which Google will supply advertising and search results for some search queries made by Yahoo users.Yahoo had previously relied on Microsoft’s Bing and its own in-house mobile search technology to handle queries, but now it plans to use Google, too.“We think having an agreement with both search providers really improves competition,” Ms. Mayer said.Given that Google dominates search results and advertising, however, the deal will face antitrust scrutiny from the Justice Department. In 2008, Yahoo and Google abandoned a similar deal after opposition from regulators, pushing Yahoo toward Microsoft, which was then the No. 3 search engine.Danny Sullivan, founding editor of Search Engine Land, said that the marketplace had changed since the last Google-Yahoo deal was proposed and the partnership could be more palatable to regulators now. “Yahoo lost all the market share it could lose, gave up its search technology and became this outer fiefdom of Microsoft,” he said.AdvertisementBut Mr. Sullivan said partnering with Google would not solve Yahoo’s longer-term problems in search. “Whatever numbers you look at, Yahoo’s the third-place player,” he said. “How do you get back to being a second-place player?”A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Yahoo Chief Pledges Plan to Narrow Strategy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.