MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif. — Early this year, Google unveiled renderings of several clear, tent-like buildings that would replace its current Silicon Valley headquarters, known as the “Googleplex.” Renderings may be about as far as the idea is likely to go. In a blow to Google’s expansion plans, on Tuesday the Mountain View City Council voted to give the search giant roughly a quarter of the office space it had requested for the project, and instead awarded the lion’s share of the city’s future office development –- 1.5 million square feet –- to LinkedIn. Google received about 500,000 square feet, or about enough to build one of the four buildings it had proposed. “We know the City Council had a tough decision to make last night and thank them and our community for more than six hours of debate,” said David Radcliffe, Google’s vice president of real estate, in an emailed statement. He added that the company would “continue to work with the City on Google’s future in Mountain View.”The vote was part of a years-long plan for how to redevelop Mountain View’s North Bayshore area, a mass of low-slung office parks that surrounds Google’s headquarters and is separated from Mountain View proper by Highway 101. At issue was how to allot just over 2 million square feet of future office space, as well as how to build more housing –- particularly affordable housing –- in a region that badly needs it. Underscoring this, during an earlier portion of the meeting several Mountain View residents, including a Google engineer named Brandon Jones, protested their imminent eviction from a townhouse development that was recently acquired by a developer. Google’s proposal was to tear down parts of its campus and replace it with a series of airy buildings with translucent roofs and modular interiors that could be moved around and reconfigured like Lego bricks. It was designed by a superstar duo of Heatherwick Studio, a London design firm known for works like the fiery caldron at the 2012 Olympics, and Bjarke Ingels, a Danish architect known for his innovative designs. For LinkedIn, it was a David vs. Goliath victory that was the result of several savvy moves and a project that was ambitious but not too ambitious. At the same time, it showed how Google’s size –- it is the city’s largest taxpayer, largest employer and owns three Empire State buildings worth of Mountain View real estate –- has become a liability in its hometown. Indeed, one of LinkedIn’s selling points was that it would “preserve business diversity,” meaning it would reduce Mountain View’s dependence on Google. LinkedIn currently leases just under 400,000 square feet in North Bayshore, with a lease that runs out in 2023. Hoping to stay in the area, last year it bought a seven-acre parcel with hopes of developing a new mixed-use development in partnership with a local developer who owns the adjacent land. That land “is the singular place in Mountain View where we could eventually develop and have enough space for our company without being encumbered by expensive leases, with rates being driven by companies larger and growing faster than ours,” said Jim Morgensen, LinkedIn’s vice president of global workplace services, in his 10-minute presentation to the council.Compared to Google’s clear, space-age headquarters, LinkedIn’s proposal, called the Shoreline Commons, was quite modest. It would be a cluster of offices and retail, including a movie theater and a gym with a pool and a basketball court, along with several bike and pedestrian paths. But modesty was part of the pitch. “We are doing this without asking for any variances in heights or density, with a project that can be built now with existing technology and union labor,” Mr. Morgensen told the council. It was a not-so-veiled reference to Google’s plan, which required height exceptions and engineering technologies that have not yet been developed. LinkedIn also made the savvy move of partnering with an affordable housing developer, which aims to build new housing projects nearby. Google also had plans to develop housing and is still likely play a role in whatever housing plan emerges, as it owns most of the land in North Bayshore. Despite the vote, this may not be the end of Google’s hope to build something new. They could still tear down some of their property and rebuild to a smaller footprint than what they asked for on Tuesday. Also, the council has set up a process for developers to ask for more office space in the future, so long as it doesn’t add traffic to the area. “The numbers last night are not the end of the story,” said Ken Rosenberg, a Mountain View city councilman who last night voted to delay the process until housing can be added. A version of this article appears in print on 05/11/2015, on page B9 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Google Loses Bid for Office Space.