Affirm, a San Francisco-based consumer lending start-up, is adding $275 million in debt and equity to accelerate its growth plans.The big Series B funding round is a vote of confidence by investors in one of the more ambitious entrants into the emerging field of financial technology. The firm is at the forefront of start-ups trying to use the new math of data science to more accurately assess credit risk than traditional scoring, which relies heavily on a person’s credit history.Conventional techniques, the new lenders say, do not do a good job of predicting the default risk on people with limited credit histories, like young people and recent immigrants. Traditional credit analysis tools, they add, tend to overly punish borrowers for single missteps such as a missed student loan payment or falling behind on medical debt.Affirm is building its business by focusing on lending to the millennial market, those under 35 years of age. They tend to have thin credit histories, and surveys show they generally have a lowly opinion of banks.“We’re building a financial technology company for the next generation,” said Max Levchin, the chief executive of Affirm, who was a co-founder of PayPal.To date, Affirm’s main product is a credit-card alternative for online merchants — installment loans from three months to a year. To seek a loan, an applicant provides a few items of personal information — name, cellphone number, birth date and the last four digits of the person’s Social Security number.Then, Affirm’s algorithms pore through all kinds of data from credit bureau reports to social networks. Affirm’s technology makes the underwriting decision almost immediately.More than 100 online merchants have signed up with Affirm, which has made more than $100 million in loans. Merchants using Affirm, the company says, report 20 percent higher sales, reflecting the appeal of Affirm’s alternative to credit cards.  The tryout phase for the two-year-old company’s technology, Mr. Levchin said, is over. “We’ve come of age, so we want to have the resources to expand,” he said.New products, Mr. Levchin said, are part of the plan, including a credit-card offering. The new funding brings the total Affirm has raised to $325 million. Most of the $275 million being raised is debt capital, but the company is not disclosing the debt and equity portions. The new round was led by Spark Capital Growth, joined by new investors Jefferies and Andreessen Horowitz and existing investors Khosla Ventures and Lightspeed Venture Partners.When asked, Mr. Levchin declined to disclose the value placed on the company in the new funding round. “It’s not time for us to brag about that,” he said. 