The pieces may be coming together for SAP, though it is still not clear what they might amount to.The German software giant on Wednesday announced that it was making cloud-interoperable various of its properties, including the Ariba online procurements product, and SuccessFactors, used in personnel management, inside S4, its core business product.What that means is that it will be possible for customers of SAP, along with independent software developers, to make software applications that can take data from different elements of their business and build new kinds of information services. Since S4 runs with SAP HANA, its online method for doing data analysis in near real time, the applications can also offer analytic insights.Both Ariba and SuccessFactors were independent online software companies that SAP purchased to hasten its transition from selling packaged software to a rental model. The features and data from another SAP acquisition, Concur, which does travel procurement and management, will also be integrated into S4 in the near future.The new integration is being offered as a sort of “multi-tenant” business, akin to the public clouds of Amazon Web Services or Microsoft Azure, only for a set of fewer, but more high-level, functions. In addition, SAP announced a HANA cloud platform for sensor-derived data, the so-called “Internet of Things.” Billions of such devices are expected to go online in the next few years, creating new awareness about the behavior of machines, markets, people and nature. SAP is hoping customers will use the analytics service to build new businesses, and monitor existing ones with more efficiency.Under William McDermott, who moved from an unusual shared chief executive position to become the company’s sole boss in 2013, SAP has been scrambling to become a comprehensive online software company for the world’s biggest businesses. Cloud-based revenue in the first quarter of the year was about $564 million, up 129 percent from a year ago. That was still a relative sliver of the $5 billion in total revenue the company scored, but total revenue was up 22 percent. If SAP can bring in more online features, data and ways to mix and match information to create new insights, Mr. McDermott may be able to sustain his growth.