Wickr, the free messaging app, is scheduled to announce on Wednesday that it is splitting into two businesses.Mark Fields, a finance veteran, will take over as chief executive, freeing Nico Sell, co-founder of Wickr, to take the helm of Wickr’s new nonprofit initiative, the Wickr Foundation, which will promote privacy and encourage teenagers, dissidents, journalists, and human rights activists to rethink the privacy of their communications.Ms. Sell, who helped organize DefCon, the annual hacker convention, and Asylum, a nonprofit organization dedicated to teaching children how to hack responsibly, helped found Wickr in 2011 to enable people to send self-destructing messages that it says are anonymous, private and secure. In the process, her team helped develop an encrypted messaging protocol that Mr. Fields plans to license to businesses like hospitals and banks that rely on secure communications.Wickr would not disclose its pricing strategy or how many users it has, but to date over one billion messages — including text, voice, video, photos and files — have been sent by Wickr users in 190 countries.The start-up caught the eye of several big name venture capitalists. Jim Breyer, the first to commit money to Facebook from a venture capitalist fund, led a $30 million round of financing last year from his personal venture firm, Breyer Capital. Other investors have included Gilman Louie, the founder of In-Q-Tel, the venture capital arm of the C.I.A.;  Thor Halvorssen, president of the Human Rights Foundation; Richard A. Clarke, a former United States counterterrorism official; and the Knight Foundation.As the free messaging app attracts more venture funding, it comes under pressure to generate real revenue from its anonymous customers. The start-up recently turned its focus to licensing its technology to businesses, where it can earn reliable revenue that does not depend on advertising.In an interview on Monday, Mr. Fields said he would focus on taking Wickr’s core technology to more businesses. Banks, for instance, could use Wickr’s technology to securely store communications for the seven years required by the Securities and Exchange Commission.“Messaging is much more than an app,” said Ms. Sell. “Our protocol secures communications of all formats — voice and video and payments. High value communications are what we’re looking to secure of all sorts.”Some security and privacy experts have criticized the app since it was created four years ago for not making its protocols open source.Ms. Sell said that, eventually, Wickr plans to make its encryption protocols open source and has enlisted Whitfield Diffie, one of the inventors of public key cryptography, to help it get there. In the meantime, Ms. Sell noted that Wickr has leaned on her relationships with some of the world’s top hackers for constant security audits, though critics note that none of these audits have been made public.Increasingly, Wickr faces new competitors like Cyber Dust, Mark Cuban’s new disappearing messaging app, and Yovo, a photo messaging app that thwarts any effort by a recipient to copy the photo message.“The biggest reasons why I trust us is that we’ve been used in the field for the past four years, in the most hostile areas in the world and no one has died,” Ms. Sell said.Ms. Sell argues that Wickr is the only secure messaging app that has not had a “zero day bug,” a term for a previously unknown flaw that allows hackers to break into a system.In January, one such bug was found in Silent Text, a Wickr competitor, that gave hackers the ability to decrypt its messages, steal users’ contacts and control critical functions on its BlackPhone, a device that was marketed as ultrasecure. Other competitors, like Snapchat, have had significant security problems. And Wickr has outperformed many of its competitors in rankings like the Electronic Frontier Foundation’s “Who’s Got Your Back” evaluation, which ranks consumer metrics based on various privacy metrics.“There are a lot of ways you can build trust,” Ms. Sell said. “Open -source is just one of them. We’re leading the way in so many other directions and we’re always trying to be better.”