By MARK SCOTTOCT. 20, 2015
Companies are scrambling. American and European lawmakers are upset. And no one really knows how to respond.The cause of the anxiety? The decision two weeks ago by Europe’s highest court to strike down a 15-year-old international agreement, known as safe harbor, that had allowed companies to move digital information like people’s web search histories between the European Union and the United States.The ruling has left businesses like Facebook and Google, which rely on the easy transfer of online information to make money from digital advertising, on uneasy legal footing.A new safe harbor agreement between Europe and the United States could help ease some of that uncertainty, but negotiators have been unable to reach a new deal for two years.AdvertisementAnd in a sign of increased tension, European privacy regulators say they will start to enforce tougher oversight of data transfers, including issuing fines and banning overseas data transfers, by the end of January if a new agreement is not reached.AdvertisementYet despite the uncertainty, a group of leading global privacy experts says government officials in Europe and America should use the ruling to their advantage — as a way to create better cooperation between agencies. The group, whose project is called Privacy Bridges, will publish recommendations on Wednesday that offer regulators a series of specific steps to help officials work better together.“We should never waste a good crisis,” said Jacob Kohnstamm, a member of the group and the data protection regulator in the Netherlands. “We’re trying to make things a little less onerous with these practical steps.”In particular, the group wants greater cooperation between Europe’s privacy regulators and the Federal Trade Commission, the American agency primarily in charge of data protection issues. Such collaboration could reduce misunderstandings on each region’s stance toward privacy, build trust between global regulators and share the best ways to handle new tech trends like cloud computing, according to the group.The experts’ conclusions, which can be put into effect within current privacy rules, will be presented at a global privacy conference in Amsterdam next week. Many of the world’s data protection regulators, including those from the United States, are expected to discuss the European court ruling at the conference.The group, whose members include Daniel J. Weitzner, a former deputy chief technology officer at the White House, will recommend that countries give individuals greater control over how their data is used. In addition, they say, companies should be more transparent when government agencies request access to people’s online information.But even if all of the recommendations were adopted, many legal questions would remain.“It seems like the European court just pulled the plug on the whole thing,” said Mr. Weitzner, who is now leads the M.I.T. Cybersecurity and Internet Policy Research Initiative, in reference to the recent legal decision. “We felt a sense of urgency; we needed to move things forward.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Despite these efforts, companies are still grappling to find ways to stay on the right side of Europe’s tough privacy rules.Some American cloud computing companies, for instance, have contacted European rivals in efforts to reduce their legal risks when providing online services within the 28-member bloc. That could involve American tech companies transferring legal responsibility — and data — of their European users to local cloud computing competitors, which already comply with the region’s tough privacy rules.Advertisement“People who wouldn’t give us the time of day are now pursuing us,” said James Kinsella, an American entrepreneur who runs Zettabox, a cloud computing company whose data is held only within Europe. Mr. Kinsella declined to name the American companies with which he was discussing partnerships.“These deals won’t make or break our business,” he added. “But we clearly have a solution to this privacy problem.”The ruling also has added new wrinkles to some longstanding legal disputes.On the day of court’s decision, Microsoft, which is in a fight with the United States government over attempts to seize a customer’s data stored in Ireland, also filed a letter to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, citing the European privacy ruling as grounds for not sharing the user’s information with American authorities.Microsoft’s lawyers said the court’s decision showed the company would violate European privacy law if it moved individuals’ personal data to the United States without sufficient guarantees in place.And the company is considering additional data centers in Europe to serve its users in the region, in part as a response to the court’s recent privacy ruling, according to two people with knowledge of the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly. “Individuals should not lose their fundamental rights simply because their personal information crosses a border,” Bradford L. Smith, Microsoft’s president and chief legal officer, said in a blog post. “This principle underlies every aspect of the European Court’s decision, and it makes sense.”A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Group Sees European Privacy Crackdown as Chance to Make a Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.