By NICK WINGFIELDMAY 6, 2015
Zynga said on Wednesday that it would cut its work force by 18 percent and leave the sports video-game category, moves meant to narrow its business and improve the quality of its video games.The company, whose headquarters are in San Francisco, said 364 people would lose their jobs as a result of the layoffs. Zynga also plans to shut down data centers that it used for its games and other computing needs, moving those functions to servers it will rent from Amazon. In all, it expects the changes to reduce its annual costs by $100 million.The plan, announced as the company reported a narrower net loss for the most recent quarter, is the first public move by Mark Pincus, the founder of Zynga, since he returned to the company as chief executive last month. Mr. Pincus replaced Don A. Mattrick, who had spent nearly two years trying to reinvigorate Zynga by shifting its emphasis to mobile games and entering new game categories like sports.In a phone interview, Mr. Pincus praised Mr. Mattrick for making the company a “contender in mobile.” But he said that under Mr. Mattrick, and during Mr. Pincus’s own first stint as chief executive, the company had been unable to resist the temptation to do too much.Advertisement“What I believe we need is to narrow our focus,” Mr. Pincus said. “We have plenty of great opportunities in front of us. What we need to do now is intensify our focus around these opportunities.”AdvertisementHe said that the company would shut down an N.F.L. game and cancel a Tiger Woods golf game under development. It also will close a development studio in Orlando, Fla. The company, which had previously planned to release up to 10 games this year, will now release six to eight.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Pincus said Zynga intended to increase its technology investments in certain areas like data analytics. The company has long used data to closely study player behavior, modifying games to increase the amount of time and money users spend in them. He said that running its own data centers was not a key part of Zynga’s mission and that it could hand that side of its operations to Amazon, as so many other companies have.For the first quarter, Zynga reported a net loss of $46 million, or 5 cents a share, from a loss of $61 million, or 7 cents a share, during the same period a year ago. The company’s revenue rose to $183 million from $168 million.Shares in the company rose more than 5 percent in after-hours trading.Evan Wilson, an analyst at Pacific Crest Securities, said that Zynga had been cutting costs, including reducing its staff, for some time, but that those actions had not helped make the company any better at producing popular games.“Unfortunately, cutting your less effective developers doesn’t make your best developers any better, so the probability of a hit is no higher,” Mr. Wilson said. “We still don’t see that hit in its pipeline.”A version of this article appears in print on May 7, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Zynga Is Trimming Its Staff and Its Game Ambitions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.