AdvertisementSupported byApp SmartBy Kit EatonThe deadly earthquake in Nepal serves as a reminder that natural disasters can strike at any time. But being prepared and informed can help, and a smartphone can be a vital tool for that.The FEMA app, from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, can help before, during and after a disaster. It has several important sections, beginning with its “prepare” menu. This area includes clearly written advice on how to prepare for many different kinds of natural catastrophes, including drought, earthquakes and even volcanic eruptions. It also has advice on how to assemble emergency kits to keep in the home for different types of disasters.In addition, there is a section for keeping notes on emergency meeting locations that users can prearrange with their families. This is information that could be easily forgotten in the event of a disaster.FEMA offers weather alerts for up to five locations in the United States, and will send notifications if severe weather threatens any of them. There is a section for finding out where official shelters are, and even help on applying for postdisaster financial assistance.A photograph-sharing system could be useful to help disaster workers and others understand what is happening on the ground. Users can see what others have uploaded, and upload their own photos.FEMA’s plain style, straightforward menus and clear writing make its advice and instructions easy to understand. Its text is interesting as well as informative, so it is great to read even when a disaster is not looming. Most of the features work without a cellphone connection, which could be critical if communications are disrupted. It is available free for iOS and Android.GIf a disaster strikes, you may find yourself having to help people with injuries. That’s where First Aid by American Red Cross is useful. Here you’ll find step-by-step guidance for dealing with minor cuts and burns and more serious injuries like broken bones and serious bleeding. It is primarily an educational app, with text, diagrams and videos to help teach first aid, along with quizzes and a badge-based reward system.Guidance is given in clear, simple language, easy to follow in stressful circumstances. Emergency services can be contacted from inside the app, and most features work without needing a cell connection. It is free for iOS and Android devices.Disaster Alert from the Pacific Disaster Center pulls together warnings and advisories from around the world, alerting users to earthquakes, approaching hurricanes and cyclones, and floods and wildfires.Disaster Alert’s main interface is a map that shows where disasters either have happened or are threatening. Users can also choose to see the alerts in list form. Tapping on an alert brings up more detailed information, like the exact area affected and when the alert was issued. Free for iOS and Android, Disaster Alert is easy to use and quite informative. But the free version simply presents all alerts as they happen; filtering the list by location or severity costs up to $10 a year,.Disasters can separate families, and that is where ReUnite can help. Users can share information on people who are missing or post the whereabouts of people who were separated from their families. The hope is that separated people will eventually be able to find each other. It is simple to use, and encryption protects sensitive personal information in the event a device gets lost. ReUnite requires a network connection. It is free for iOS and Android devices.Quick CallZero can help with the annoying issue of a flooded email inbox. It helps get to the fabled “inbox zero” state by helping users scan quickly through incoming mail. This is a different approach from other email clients, and an interesting one. The app is not perfect, but it could help and it is free to try now on iOS.Advertisement