AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. How do you take a screenshot on a Windows 8.1 tablet if you don’t have a real keyboard with a PrtScrn key?A. There are at least three ways to take tablet screenshots without using a third-party app. On Microsoft’s own Surface tablets, hold down the Windows button on the front, then quickly press the Volume Down button on the device. Once you press and release the Volume Down button, the tablet’s screen should dim slightly to indicate that the screenshot has been captured.The resulting image is saved in the .png format (Portable Network Graphics) inside the Screenshots folder tucked in the tablet’s Pictures folder or Photos app. The screenshot process is similar on many Windows-based Dell and Nokia Lumia tablets, but check with the manufacturer for instructions if the Windows and Volume Down button combination does not work on your device.As an alternative, you can quickly mail images of your current tablet’s desktop by way of the Windows Charms bar; just drag your finger in from the right edge of the screen to reveal the Charms icons. Tap the Share icon and under Screenshot, tap Mail to capture the image and attach it to an outgoing message. If you have social media accounts, you should see their icons for sharing in the Charms bar, too.For more screenshot control, you can also use the Snipping Tool utility, which first arrived with Windows Vista and lives on in the current Windows 8.1 operating system. To find it, open the Charms bar, tap the Search icon and enter “snipping tool” in the box. In the search results, tap Snipping Tool.When the Snipping Tool program opens, tap the New button and select the type of “snip” you want to use, like a full-screen or a single-window screenshot. Tap the screen to capture your shot. You can edit and save the image from the Snipping Tool to your Pictures folder.Q. I don’t care for the Photos app that replaced iPhoto in the latest Mac update. Can I get iPhoto back?A. Apple’s new Photos program is intended to replace both its older iPhoto and Aperture software for picture-editing and management. The Photos icon even supplants iPhoto in the Dock after you upgrade to OS X 10.10.3, but iPhoto is not removed from your Mac and you can still find it in the Applications folder.When you open iPhoto, however, Apple does remind you that your photo library has been moved to the Photos app. You can still work in iPhoto, but new pictures you add or edit there stay in the now-retired program.TIP OF THE WEEK If entering your password to download a free app seems like an unnecessary step, you can skip it with Apple’s recent iOS 8.3 update. If you do not receive a message asking if you would like to turn off the password requirement for free downloads, tap the Settings icon on the home screen, then iTunes & App Store and then Password Settings. In the Free Downloads area, turn off the button next to Require Password. Note that if you have turned on the Touch ID option to authorize your purchases by fingerprint, you do not see these Password Settings options.If other family members share your iOS device, you can also make adjustments in the same Password Settings area to require the Apple account’s password for in-app purchases and other paid content. Those with Android devices (and equally eager family members) can set similar password restrictions for purchases from the Google Play store. Open the Google Play store app, tap the Menu icon, select Settings and then “Require authentication for purchases.”Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement