The Federal Communications Commission announced on Tuesday that Verizon Wireless and Sprint had agreed to pay a combined $158 million to settle investigations into millions of dollars of unauthorized charges that appeared on customers’ cellphone bills through a practice known as cramming.Under the agreement, which was negotiated in coordination with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and state attorneys general, Verizon will pay $90 million and Sprint $68 million.The unauthorized charges came in the form of third-party premium text messaging services, the F.C.C. said. Most charges were $9.99 a month, though they ranged from 99 cents to $14. Verizon received at least a 30 percent share of each third-party charge it billed, and Sprint received about 35 percent.The F.C.C. said it had received “numerous” complaints from consumers who said they had never requested such third-party messaging services. When they complained directly to the carriers, they told the F.C.C., they were denied refunds.“Consumers rightfully expect their monthly phone bills will reflect only those services that they’ve purchased,” Travis LeBlanc, chief of the F.C.C.’s enforcement bureau, said in a statement. “Today’s settlements put in place strong protections that will prevent consumers from being victimized by these kinds of practices in the future.”Last year, AT&T and T-Mobile both reached settlements in similar investigations. AT&T agreed to pay $105 million, and T-Mobile agreed to pay $90 million. Since the start of last year, the F.C.C. has taken 19 actions for similar types of violations, totaling $391 million, according to a spokesman for the agency.In addition to requiring the carriers to pay the agreed amounts, the agency will require them to “clearly and conspicuously” identify third-party charges on bills going forward.A spokesman for Verizon said that the company had already stopped including such charges on customers’ monthly bills. “Well before any government action, Verizon Wireless stopped allowing companies to place charges for premium text message services on customers’ bills,” the spokesman said in an email on Tuesday. “Customers who believe they were billed improperly for these services may seek a refund. They can visit www.cfpbsettlementverizon.com for more information.”Sprint did not immediately respond to request for comment.A version of this article appears in print on 05/13/2015, on page B2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Verizon And Sprint To Pay $158 Million For Bad Charges .