

      By GREGORY SCHMIDT

MAY 13, 2015

The annual road trip is a summertime tradition for many families, but being cooped up in a car for days on end can test your patience. Here are some notable gadgets to help make the trip smoother.Navigation apps for smartphones are a great convenience, but they can also be battery hogs. A portable navigation device like the NuviCam LMTHD from Garmin is a smarter option. Garmin makes some of the best dashboard navigators on the market, offering features like an easy-to-read interface, high-resolution graphics and a handy point-of-interest search.With the new NuviCam LMTHD, Garmin packs in more functionality, including a forward-facing dash cam that continuously records the road ahead. If an impact occurs, the device automatically saves the event on a microSD card. Other driver-assisted safety features include voice-activated navigation and warnings if the driver is too close to the car ahead or drifting off the road.A tablet loaded with movies, television and music can be a better way to pass the time in a car than, say, playing the license plate game. But tablets are limited by their memory and battery life. You can increase both with the Mophie Spacestation, a combination backup battery and external hard drive.The Spacestation provides up to 128 gigabytes of extra storage and can triple the battery life of an iPhone 6, Mophie says. Files can be transferred to the Spacestation wirelessly or via USB cable, freeing up space on your device.Those files are managed with Mophie’s redesigned mobile app Space, which organizes any file downloaded to a smartphone or tablet, including photos and documents, making media easier to locate. Space is free and available for iOS and Android devices.A reliable Wi-Fi network can be hard to find when you’re out on the road. Netgear has a simple solution with the Around Town, a mobile Internet device that creates a 4G LTE hot spot using the Sprint network.The compact, lightweight device provides a secure wireless connection for up to 10 devices, and Netgear says the battery will last up to 10 hours on a full charge. The first gigabyte of data is free; refills are $25 for each additional gigabyte. The data does not expire and there’s no contract or commitment, which is not the case for similar devices on the market. Because you don’t have to pay for a monthly data plan, you can tuck the Around Town away between trips.Avoid a tussle over the car radio with Polk  Hinge Wireless headphones, which allow you to listen to music in peace without disturbing the driver. Polk uses 40-millimeter drivers in a design it calls Polk Optimized Electro-acoustic Tuning to provide a deep, rich sound, with an emphasis on the bass. The headphones’ rechargeable battery provides 12 hours of play time, according to Polk, and an audio cable is provided for a wired connection in case the battery dies. The flexible headband and padded ear cushions provide a comfortable fit, and the two-tone, faux-leather exterior gives the headphones a vintage look (Polk says it was inspired by the interior of classic luxury cars). A single dial behind the right ear cup controls the headphones’ functions with a flick up or down or a push inward. As an added benefit, the hinged design makes the headphones compact and easy to store in a glove compartment or seat pocket.These days, cable networks offer some of the best programming in the summer. But don’t fret about missing something while on the road. With TiVo Roamio Pro, you can manage your recordings and even stream recorded shows on a mobile device, even if you are hundreds of miles from home.The TiVo app is easy to sync to a Roamio and simple to use, and it was recently tailored for Android devices, too. TiVo’s OnePass management system creates an easy way to organize programs available through your cable operator as well as streaming services like Netflix and Amazon Prime. Catering to binge-watchers, OnePass can offer a variety of options for watching entire seasons of shows.The Roamio Pro, which offers up to 3,000 hours of recording capacity, costs $600; for those looking for a less expensive option, the Roamio Plus offers 1,000 hours for $200 less. A one-year commitment to the TiVo service is $15 a month.You want to make sure your home is secure while you’re away, and a home surveillance camera can offer peace of mind. Dropcam, which was acquired by Google’s Nest Labs last year, makes some of the best cameras on the market. Its latest product, the Dropcam Pro, offers high-definition video that is two times as sharp as the previous model and a 130-degree field of view.Setup takes only a few minutes, but you need a Wi-Fi network. Once the camera is connected to your network, find a good placement and it’s ready to go. The Dropcam Pro’s zoom feature can enhance a corner of the room up to eight times, and a built-in microphone and speaker allow for two-way communication.Live viewing is free, and Dropcam offers video recording services for as low as $10 a month (or $99 for one year). So keep on driving, knowing that your pets and plants are safe.Advertisement