Labor groups and the White House on Wednesday praised Facebook’s plan to require its contractors to pay workers at least $15 an hour and offer paid time off.Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said in a news briefing on Wednesday that Facebook thinks “it’s good for business, and the president thinks it’s good for business, too.”Debra L. Ness, president of the National Partnership for Women and Families, called the announcement “groundbreaking.” She wrote: “The company won’t be party to poverty wages and practices that force workers to choose between job and family. This may well be what a tipping point looks like.”Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook’s chief operating officer, detailed the new standards in a blog post on Tuesday, noting that some changes had already taken place at Facebook’s headquarters in Menlo Park, Calif. In addition to the minimum hourly pay, Facebook will require that contractors and vendors who support the company in the United States receive at least 15 days off for holidays, sick time and vacation. The stipulations will apply to companies that have more than 25 employees doing work for Facebook.By making the change, Facebook joins some other well-known brands that have pushed higher wages. In April, both Walmart and McDonald’s raised their minimum pay. Facebook’s new policy, offering indirect raises, follows a model that Microsoft embraced in March, which forces the companies whose services it retains to adopt new standards or lose out on business.“We hope and expect that many more corporations will follow suit,” said Ms. Ness.For workers without paid parental leave, the company will stipulate that a $4,000 “new child benefit” be awarded to new parents. Ms. Sandberg, whose husband unexpectedly died 11 days earlier, called that benefit “an important step for stronger families and healthier children,” saying it would allow men and women equal flexibility to take paid parental leave.Silicon Valley has faced a debate over inequality in recent years, with tech workers often paid handsomely while those who provide them with child care, gourmet meals and transportation services earn minimum wage. The controversy has been encapsulated in a furor over Google buses, which transport Google workers from San Francisco to the Internet company’s headquarters in Mountain View, Calif. Protesters have complained about the buses as an elite symbol of the industry’s disparities, with tech workers ferried to and from work in their own private vehicles.Some labor groups took some of the credit, saying the company’s move was partly a response to pressure from workers.“Facebook’s decision is a direct result of security officers and shuttle drivers joining together for a stronger Silicon Valley,” said David Huerta, president of Service Employees International Union United Service Workers West, in a statement. “We see this as a great first step.”A version of this article appears in print on 05/18/2015, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Reddit Sets New Rules on Harassment.