By DAVID STREITFELDOCT. 22, 2015
Amazon is selling a lot of things to a lot of people, and is even managing to carve out a little profit in the process.The Seattle-based e-commerce, computing and entertainment company reported on Thursday that it made $79 million in the third quarter, or 17 cents a share. That is pocket change, considering the size of Amazon, but it was an unexpected development. Analysts had been forecasting a small loss, which would have been an improvement from last year’s bigger loss.Investors were so thrilled by the news, as well as the fact that Amazon made $500 million more in revenue than they had anticipated, that they pushed up the stock 10 percent in after-hours trading. That added another $25 billion or so to Amazon’s ever-swelling market capitalization, which stands at more than $260 billion.“The expectation is, Amazon is on the cusp of monetizing its revenue,” said Colin Gillis, an analyst with BGC Partners.AdvertisementThat is what investors have been waiting for. Amazon revenue has grown strongly and consistently. This year revenue will exceed $100 billion for the first time, making Amazon one of the country’s largest retailers. But profits have often been minimal or nonexistent as the company has kept investing, building over 100 fulfillment centers around the world, pouring money into sectors as disparate as India and video, and expanding its cloud computing division, Amazon Web Services.AdvertisementMore recently, Amazon has recorded profits more frequently, albeit tiny ones, eking out gains in nine of the last 15 quarters.That’s partly because the cloud is raining money. In the third quarter, A.W.S.’s operating income was $521 million, up more than fivefold in a year. Without A.W.S., Amazon’s results might have dismayed investors instead of thrilling them.Amazon’s chief competitors in cloud computing are Microsoft and Google. Jonathan Atkin, an analyst with RBC Capital Markets, said Amazon had a not-so-secret weapon: It innovates faster than everyone else.“Even though they’re large, they’re quite nimble,” Mr. Atkin said. “The number of new products and the tweaks in developer tools dwarf that of anyone else. And they’re putting capital into the ground, building data centers to make sure they have scale. That offers greater reliability and resiliency.”Operating margin as a percentage of net A.W.S. sales rose to 25 percent in the third quarter, up from 8 percent last year.“When you get scale, it comes hard and fast,” said Mr. Gillis, the BGC Partners analyst. But sustainability is another issue. “If I were the competition, I’d be waving that number around to everyone and saying Amazon is making money off your back.”Another factor helping Amazon is that more than any of the big tech companies, it is measured against the size of its potential market.AdvertisementThe global e-commerce market totaled $1.32 trillion in 2014, according to eMarketer, a research firm, and is expected to grow 21 percent more this year. Amazon’s share of that is less than 10 percent, indicating, at least in theory, there is a long way to go.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If profits at Amazon have often been somewhere between minor and irrelevant, revenue is routinely expected to increase at a 20 percent clip. It did more than that in the third quarter, rising 23 percent to $25.4 billion.The number of employees is rising even faster. Amazon now has 222,000 workers, excluding contractors, up 49 percent over the last year. It said this week it would hire another 100,000 temporary holiday workers.At other retailers, the harsh winds of winter came early. Walmart surprised Wall Street this month when it warned that it expected revenue in its current fiscal year to be flat, and said earnings in the 2017 fiscal year would be down as much as 12 percent. Disappointed investors immediately shaved off 10 percent of Walmart’s market capitalization.For the future, Amazon gave only very general guidelines. It said sales in the fourth quarter, its biggest, would rise in the range of 14 to 25 percent compared with the fourth quarter of 2014. Operating income could be as much as double last year’s fourth quarter, the company said, but it also could be so small as to be negligible.That fuzziness did nothing to dent investors’ enthusiasm. Amazon shares, which have nearly doubled in the last year, moved up $8 during regular trading, to $563.91. After hours, the stock quickly moved up more than $50, topping $600.If the gains in after-hours trading hold up when regular trading resumes on Friday, Amazon‘s founder, Jeffrey P. Bezos, will be worth another $5 billion, give or take a billion. That solidifies his position as the fifth-richest person in the world as charted by Forbes.The only disappointing news for Mr. Bezos comes from the November issue of The Harvard Business Review, where the annual list of the world’s best-performing chief executives is presented.Last year, Mr. Bezos was No. 1. This year, the formula for ranking the leaders changed to include the company’s environmental, social and governance performance, as well as what a company’s stock does. With those elements added, Mr. Bezos fell to No. 87.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Thanks to Its Silver-Lined Cloud, Amazon Surprises With a Profit; Its Shares Soar .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.