Hackers from China infiltrated the computer systems of Pennsylvania State University‘s College of Engineering, gaining usernames and passwords in what investigators described as a sophisticated cyberattack that lasted more than two years.The university has pulled the College of Engineering’s computer network offline and expects to keep the system down for several days as workers shore up security, the university said in a statement Friday.Penn State administrators were first alerted to the attack last November by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Penn State hired Mandiant, the incident response company owned by FireEye, the Milpitas, Calif.-based security firm, to investigate.Mandiant discovered two sets of sophisticated attackers — at least one of which is a known group in China. They appeared to be after the college’s intellectual property. The Chinese group has been responsible for attacks on victims in industries like aerospace and defense, as well as other universities, said Nick Bennett, a senior manager from Mandiant. In this case, the group deployed various so-called back doors and attack tools starting in September 2012.The other group, which Mandiant has not yet identified, started its attack last year and appeared to be after usernames and passwords. Investigators did not find any evidence that hackers had stolen personal information, like Social Security numbers or credit card numbers. But there is evidence that they may have gained access to such information, primarily Social Security numbers, for 18,000 people. The university said it would offer those individuals free credit monitoring.The university also said it was in the process of notifying more than 500 public and private research partners that have worked with the College of Engineering since the initial intrusion.In a statement issued Friday, Penn State said that it was a frequent target of cyberattacks. On an average day last year, the university said that Penn State alone blocked more than 20 million hostile cyberattacks from around the world.That stunning number is not unique to Penn State, Kevin Morooney, the vice provost for information technology at Penn State said in an interview. “That is typical for a research university,” Mr. Morooney said. “We are having intense conversations with our colleagues in higher education.” Mr. Morooney said Penn State was using a security measure called two-factor authentication, which requires a second, one-time password for anyone trying to access its networks remotely. The plan is to to roll out two-factor authentication across the College of Engineering, and eventually to the entire university. Universities are a frequent target for hackers because they handle vast amounts of personal and financial information for students and employees, as well as  sensitive research.“This new threat must be faced head-on, not just by Penn State but by every large university, business and government the world over. This is a new era in the digital age, one that will require even greater vigilance from everyone,” Eric Barron, Penn State’s president, wrote in a letter to members of the university.More recently, universities have become a target for hackers looking to cause disruptions.In April, Rutgers University was attacked by hackers who managed to successfully flood the university’s computer systems with web traffic until they fell offline. The F.B.I. and the Department of Homeland Security are investigating the incident.The Penn State attack is another in a spate of cyberattacks that have led security experts have adopted the motto: There are only two types of companies left in the United States. Those that have been breached by China, and those that don’t yet know they have been breached by China.Despite increases in security spending and more aggressive prosecutions of those suspected of stealing data on behalf of China, the United States has found the cyberthreat from China nearly impossible to contain. The F.B.I. now lists cybercrime, which includes trade secret theft, as a top priority, behind terrorism and counterintelligence.In April,  President Obama signed a new executive order establishing financial and travel sanctions against anyone launching cyberattacks that posed a threat national security or financial stability.A version of this article appears in print on 05/16/2015, on page A13 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Pennsylvania: College’s Computers Are Hacked .