AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Why do the brightness and colors look so off in the prints I get back from photofinishing services after I upload them to my computer? Is there a way to make adjustments to the photos before I send them so the resulting prints look better?A. The colors you see on your computer monitor can be affected by several factors, including the light sources in the room, the color of the walls, your viewing angle or the display settings for the monitor itself. So what looks good on your screen after you tweak and enhance your images may look quite different when you get the finished prints back from the photo service.As part of the journey from pixels to print, the photographs are converted from the three colors (red, blue and green) used by computer monitors to display images, to the four colors (cyan, magenta, yellow and black) used in the standard printing process, so that translation can affect the look of the final product, too. The quality of your photo-printing service’s work is another factor. Some companies may make adjustments on their end to improve the look of your prints, while others just process the photos with the same standard settings used for all customers.Many photo-printing services have guidelines for color accuracy, so check your company’s website for tips. Shutterfly, Flickr and SmugMug all have advice, which typically includes calibrating your computer monitor so that it displays colors more precisely.The management of color between the computer monitor and a printed document is a precise science and can get quite technical. If you simply make an occasional order of photo prints and just want them to look better, though, you can take some starter steps to improve the pictures. If you have never calibrated your computer monitor, you can do so in the system settings for Windows 7, Windows 8 and Mac OS X.For more precise results, the TFT Central site has its own calibration guide and monitor settings database for hundreds of models. If you are really serious about color accuracy, you can also invest in specialized calibration software and a hardware color meter like X-Rite’s ColorMunki or Datacolor’s Spyder 5 system so that what you see on your monitor better matches what you see on paper.Helping an iPhone Find Its SIM CardQ. My iPhone has been giving me a “No SIM Card Installed” error message lately, even though I have the same card that was in there when I got the phone. The message goes away if I restart the phone, but I’m getting tired of doing that. Is there a permanent fix?A. The iPhone may be having trouble recognizing the SIM (subscriber identity module) card for various software and hardware reasons. If you have not already done so, update your phone’s software to the latest version of iOS. Once you have backed up the phone’s contents to iCloud or iTunes, tap the Settings icon on the iPhone’s Home screen, select General and then Software Update to see if any new system software is available to download and install.If your iPhone’s system software is up-to-date, check for an update from your wireless carrier. In the Settings area, select General and then About. If you get a message that a carrier settings update is ready, install it. Apple has a few other suggestions for software solutions (like flipping the Airplane Mode setting on and off again), but if none of those steps stop the SIM card message from appearing, take a look at the hardware.To check that the card is firmly seated inside the phone, locate the tray to the SIM card slot along the edge of the phone. You should see a tiny hole on the end of the tray. To open it, gently push one end of an unfolded paper clip into the hole until the tray slides out. Be careful handling the card and try to avoid directly touching the gold contacts as you confirm the card is sitting squarely in its tray. Then push the tray back in all the way.If you are still experiencing the error, the SIM card may have some sort of damage that requires a trip or call to your wireless carrier’s customer service department. As one last-ditch effort, Apple suggests wiping the phone’s memory and restoring it back to its factory settings. If the SIM card is not damaged, starting from scratch with a fresh iOS installation might resolve the issue, but again, just make sure to back up the iPhone first before you erase its contents.Advertisement