By REUTERSMAY 15, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea — Samsung Group’s heir apparent, Jay Y. Lee, will take over from his father, Lee Kun-hee, as the head of two key foundations, the company said on Friday, suggesting that a transfer of leadership is underway at Samsung, South Korea’s largest corporation.Jay Y. Lee, 46, will succeed his 73-year-old father, who has been hospitalized since suffering a heart attack more than a year ago, as chairman of Samsung Life Public Welfare Foundation and Samsung Foundation of Culture from May 31, said a Samsung Group spokeswoman, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, citing company policy.The foundations hold stakes in Samsung Life Insurance, an important piece in Samsung’s vast and complicated ownership structure that enables the Lee family to control the group despite their relatively small stakeholding. The foundation appointments are the first time the younger Mr. Lee has formally assumed leadership roles from his father,  chairman of Samsung Electronics.“A key point in the succession process is controlling the foundations, because they hold stakes in key Samsung Group companies,” said Park Ju-gun, head of CEO Score, a research firm that monitors Korean corporations. “I think it’s safe to say that the succession process is near a final stage.”AdvertisementSamsung Group has undertaken a series of moves over the past year that investors and analysts see as preparing the way for a stable handover from the elder Lee to his three children.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There has been no official confirmation of any succession planning from the company itself, however, and the Samsung spokeswoman on Friday declined to comment on when or whether Jay Y. Lee would take over as chairman.AdvertisementIn one recent maneuver, the listings of Cheil Industries and Samsung SDS gave Mr. Lee and his two sisters financial flexibility to deal with what could be a more than $6 billion inheritance tax when their father passes away.Some investors and analysts say they spotted Mr. Lee’s newfound power in a spike in acquisitions by Samsung Electronics, as well as a decision to sell the company’s noncore chemical and defense units late last year.The Samsung Group spokeswoman said the elder Mr. Lee remained in stable condition.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.