Americans highly value the privacy of their personal information and communications, but they have little faith that the government and private companies will actually protect their data, according to a report to be published Wednesday by the Pew Research Center. The survey research, conducted online in 2014 and early 2015, found that more than nine in 10 adults said that controlling who gets access to their private information and what information those people can see is important to them. But half of the people surveyed felt they had little or no control over their data.Nearly two-thirds of the people surveyed said that the current limits on telephone and Internet data collected by the government were inadequate, even when the government says such information is needed to combat terrorism. Earlier this month, a federal appeals court ruled that the government’s current bulk collection of telephone data is illegal. The House has voted to change the program to keep such data with the phone companies until the government requests it, and the Senate is expected to consider the legislation soon.It’s not just the government that Americans don’t trust. Corporations fared no better in the survey, with 76 percent of adults saying they had little confidence in online advertisers to keep their information private.More than two-thirds of adults said they were not confident that social media sites, search engine providers or online video sites protect their information. Although the researchers did not ask about specific companies, those attitudes could easily be interpreted as distrust of the big companies that dominate those categories, such as Facebook, the largest social network, and Google, the biggest player in web searches and online video.Pew also found that Americans have a general aversion to being monitored, with more than half saying they did not want to be watched at work or in public. At the same time, there seemed to be a general acknowledgment that surveillance is pervasive, with 81 percent of the respondents saying it was difficult to avoid being monitored by cameras in public places.Although respondents said they had taken some actions to protect their privacy, such as deleting the web tracking software known as cookies or lying about personal information when asked to fill out a form, few had resorted to more serious measures such as encrypting their personal data. Perhaps that was because two-thirds of those surveyed said they didn’t believe it would be very hard for a determined person or organization to ferret out their personal information online.Pew’s report was based on two separate surveys. One, conducted in January and February, surveyed a representative sample of 461 American adults on an ongoing research panel and had a margin of error of plus or minus 6 percentage points. The other survey of 498 adults from the same panel was conducted in August and September, and had a similar margin of error of 6 percentage points.