AdvertisementSupported byBy Vindu Goel and Michael J. de la MercedMarissa Mayer’s plan to spin off Yahoo’s $34 billion stake in Alibaba tax-free could run into resistance from federal tax authorities.An official from the Internal Revenue Service told tax lawyers in Washington on Tuesday that the agency was weighing potential changes to how it treats some kinds of tax-free spinoffs. The I.R.S. is particularly concerned about spinoffs in which the operating business comprises only a small portion of the new publicly traded company, according to the official.That is exactly the type of spinoff that Ms. Mayer, chief executive of Yahoo, proposed in January. The Internet company intends to bundle its small-business services division with its 384 million shares of Alibaba into a new company and spin it off to Yahoo shareholders later this year.As reports of the I.R.S. review circulated on Tuesday in the last half-hour of trading, Yahoo shares plunged, closing at $40.98, down 7.6 percent. More than half of the company’s stock market valuation is based on its stake in Alibaba.Robert Peck, an Internet stock analyst with SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, said it was unclear whether any change in the government’s tax treatment of spinoffs would affect transactions already in the works, such as the Yahoo-Alibaba transaction.“It’s very ambiguous,” he said. “Does it apply to current deals they are looking at, or future deals only?”If Yahoo’s disposal of Alibaba were fully taxed, Mr. Peck estimated that the fair value for Yahoo’s stock would be about $40 a share, or roughly the current level. If the spinoff remains tax-free as Yahoo envisioned it, then Yahoo shares are worth closer to $55, he said.A Yahoo representative said that the company was aware of the I.R.S.’s plans but that there had been no change in applicable law. Yahoo noted that the company had filed its request with the I.R.S. in the first quarter of this year and still planned to complete the spinoff by the end of its fiscal year.Currently, a spinoff must include an operating business, not just assets like stock, to qualify as a tax-free transaction. The I.R.S. has not established firm guidelines about how important the operating business must be to the spinoff company.Yahoo Small Business, the operating unit that Yahoo is proposing to include with the Alibaba stake, is a strong business that never fit well with the rest of Yahoo’s portfolio, according to Amit Kumar, who ran the unit until last November.“The profitability and revenue profile were surprisingly strong, compared to many other businesses at Yahoo,” he said. “But certainly by the fact that Yahoo chose Yahoo Small Business as the division to spin off, they don’t consider it a core business.”The I.R.S. official, Isaac Zimbalist, cautioned in his prepared remarks that the agency had made no decisions on changes to its procedures, and that transactions already put before the agency would “continue to be handled in the normal fashion for now, but this may change.”A spokeswoman for the I.R.S. confirmed the comments by Mr. Zimbalist.In an April call with investors, Yahoo said that it had already submitted a request for a private letter ruling from the I.R.S. on the Alibaba spinoff.Other companies besides Yahoo have used this type of spinoff, notably Liberty Interactive, an outpost of the telecommunications empire run by the billionaire John C. Malone. Liberty spun out its 22 percent stake in TripAdvisor last year, bundling it with an online retailing subsidiary into a new publicly traded company known as Liberty TripAdvisor Holdings.Advertisement