By NICOLE PERLROTHMAY 19, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  The Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis confirmed on Tuesday that hackers had successfully attacked the bank, redirecting users of its online research services to fake websites set up by the attackers.The breach was just the latest in a spate of hackings against government systems in recent months, affecting the White House, the State Department and even the president’s own email account.In this case, the attack appeared to compromise the Internet’s routing system, known as the domain name system, or D.N.S.In a statement issued late Monday, the St. Louis Fed informed those who use the bank’s public economic data and analysis tools that in late April it discovered the breach. The bank said hackers compromised the domain name registrar, which sends traffic to the St. Louis Fed, and was able to redirect the bank’s web traffic to rogue sites.AdvertisementThe fake websites were meant to mimic the web pages of services provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, including Federal Reserve Economic Data, or Fred, a database of economic data culled from over 70 sources, and the Federal Reserve Archival System for Economic Research, which includes historical data. The hackers also mimicked the bank’s data mapping service and a service that allows users to look at vintage displays of economic data.Advertisement“As is common with these kinds of D.N.S. attacks, users who were redirected to one of these phony websites may have been unknowingly exposed to vulnerabilities that the hackers may have put there, such as phishing, malware and access to user names and passwords,” the agency said in a statement.The agency said the website of the St. Louis Fed had not been affected. The attack was first reported by Krebs on Security, a blog popular with security experts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A spokeswoman for the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis said that she did not yet know who was behind the attacks. The Federal Reserve had no comment about the attack.Security experts say that domain name system attacks require significantly more skill than a typical website attack. By attacking the domain name registrar used by the St. Louis Fed, it is possible that attackers may have been able to compromise the security for some or all of the sites that rely on the security of the domain name registrar.According to records filed with Icann, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, the St. Louis Fed’s domain name registrar is eNom Inc., which is part of Rightside, a company in Kirkland, Wash. According to the company’s website, Rightside has 16 million web domain names under management.Representatives for ENom and Rightside said they were aware of a “sophisticated attack,” but that they had “no evidence of customers personal information being accessed.”On Tuesday, security experts said that the hackers could have gained valuable personal information from the attack. Attackers may have been able to glean email addresses and passwords from bankers and currency traders in the attack, for example, information that could be used for a more sophisticated attack on more valuable websites.“Great way to phish the passwords and email addresses of bankers and currency traders,” said Dave Jevans, the chairman of the Anti-Phishing Working Group. “Since people reuse passwords, this is a ready font of juicy data to attack all users of the Fed’s data.”Binyamin Appelbaum contributed reporting from Washington.A version of this article appears in print on May 20, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Confirms a Hacker Attack.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.