AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferOn FacebookForeverQ. I heard you can assign someone to handle your Facebook account after you die so people can submit memories of you and so on. How do you make that happen?A. Facebook allows you to designate a friend or family member as a “legacy contact.” If you want to have your account memorialized after you die, this person basically serves as the executor of your Facebook account by managing your profile and can update your cover photo and profile photo, post information and accept new friend requests. (Memorialized accounts without legacy contacts cannot be changed.)To get started, go to your Facebook account settings from your browser or your mobile app and select Security. At the bottom of the Security settings page, choose Legacy Contact. Enter the name of the Facebook friend or relative you want to use and click the Add button. You have the option of sending a message to inform your contact of your decision. (For those who would rather not stay on Facebook after death, an option in the Legacy Contact settings lets you have your Facebook account permanently deleted.)Even without a designated legacy contact, family members can report your death and place a memorialization request by contacting Facebook. When a regular account is converted to a memorialized account, the word “Remembering” appears next to your name, and if your security settings permit, friends can post reminiscences on your timeline. Facebook says people with memorialized accounts do not appear in advertisements or birthday reminders on the site and are also excluded from the People You May Know list of friend suggestions.Saving Photos From CorruptionQ. What causes a camera’s new memory card to go bad all of a sudden? Is there any way to retrieve pictures still on there?A. Even without a mishap that physically damages the memory card, you can get error messages if the data stored on it becomes damaged or corrupted. This can occur if something interrupts a photo in the process of being written to memory — like removing the card before it is done copying data between devices, losing battery power or turning off the camera before all the images have been written.An image recovery program may be able to rescue photos still on the corrupted cards, but it is not a sure bet. These programs usually cost around $40 and can be easily found online.TIP OF THE WEEK Is your broadband service acting up? With a smartphone and a Twitter account, you might be able to skip the lengthy wait times on hold for a customer-service representative and use your cellular connection more productively.Many telecommunications companies offer technical support through direct messages to dedicated Twitter accounts; you may also be able to schedule technician appointments too. AT&T U-verse (@ATTCares), Cablevision’s Optimum (@OptimumHelp), Comcast (@comcastcares), Google Fiber (@googlefiberhelp), Time Warner Cable (@TWC_Help) and Verizon (@VerizonSupport) are among those offering tech support via Twitter. While reaching out through Twitter may not provide an instantaneous connection with the help desk, you do not have to waste valuable minutes of your life listening to bad music on hold while you wait to report your problem.If you do not have a Twitter account, you might be able to use your phone’s (or tablet’s) cellular connection to have a live chat with a customer-service representative if the company’s site has been designed for use with mobile browsers. Visit your Internet provider’s technical support webpage and look for a Live Chat icon; you may also find basic troubleshooting advice or notice of general Internet disruptions posted there as well. J. D. BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. Advertisement