AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie Benner and Andrew PollackLAGUNA BEACH, Calif. — Being the self-proclaimed leader of a medical revolution can have its downside.Elizabeth Holmes, a 31-year-old Stanford dropout who became a billionaire by starting the blood testing laboratory Theranos, is now waging a public battle to defend her reputation and that of her closely watched Silicon Valley company.Her campaign began shortly after two articles published in The Wall Street Journal last week questioned the accuracy of the company’s blood tests and the extent to which Theranos is using unique technology.Ms. Holmes now says she is planning to release a 16-page point-by-point rebuttal of the articles, a document that concludes by accusing the articles’ author of having an agenda that considered Theranos “a target to be taken down.”The rebuttal even dissects the motivations of various people quoted in the articles.“We’ll put this out there and let people judge for themselves what the facts are,” Ms. Holmes said on Tuesday in an interview with The New York Times.Ms. Holmes ventured into the lion’s den on Wednesday, defending her company in an onstage interview here at The Wall Street Journal’s own WSJ.DLive technology conference, where she drew applause for showing up.“We know the integrity of what we’ve done,” Ms. Holmes said at the conference. She characterized criticisms of her company as “a few people who want to say bad things about us.”Ms. Holmes has complained that critics are out to get her company because it threatens the traditional lab industry.But the company, which is highly secretive about its technology, has not announced any new policies in response to the criticism.Theranos, Ms. Holmes said, had no immediate plans to do what skeptics say would most persuade them: publish data in peer-reviewed medical journals showing that its test results were as accurate as those of more established laboratories.She said that other institutions testing Theranos’s products might eventually publish papers, but that the company, for now, was concentrating on getting its tests approved by the Food and Drug Administration. That, she said, would provide even better external validation. One test, for herpes simplex 1 virus, has already been approved, and the company has submitted 120 others to the agency.“We’ve never been against peer review,” Ms. Holmes said in the interview with The Times. “We decided that the studies we were doing would be the F.D.A. submissions.”Theranos, based in Palo Alto, Calif., says that it can do many different medical tests using only a tiny amount of blood taken with a finger prick. It has also said that it used proprietary lab equipment to deliver results much faster and more cheaply than traditional blood tests, which in some cases require several vials of blood to be drawn from the arm and several days to get a result.Theranos lists the prices of its tests on its website, and they are typically far lower than most other labs’ prices.Investors have poured money into the privately held company, which was recently valued at more than $9 billion. Ms. Holmes, who started the company at age 19 and has said that she devotes nearly every waking hour to it, has graced the covers of magazines including Fortune, Inc. and The New York Times’s T magazine, and she is a frequent presence on the conference circuit. She recently appeared at Vanity Fair’s New Establishment Summit alongside Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, and Walt Disney’s chief, Robert A. Iger.The Wall Street Journal article last week, citing an unnamed former senior employee, said that as recently as December, Theranos was routinely performing only about 15 of the more than 200 tests it offered using its proprietary equipment, with the rest being performed on standard machines bought from laboratory equipment vendors.In its rebuttal, which Theranos plans to post on its website the company said that it performed more than 80 of the tests using its own technology that month. It said that 57 percent of customers in the fourth quarter of last year had blood drawn from a finger prick.Last week, the company said that it was not using finger pricks at the moment — except for the herpes test — because it was following F.D.A. advice that its “nanotainer,” the tiny tube that holds the blood from finger pricks, needed regulatory approval as a medical device. The company is now seeking that approval. But Ms. Holmes said that the need to get approval for the tube did not reflect on the accuracy of the machines that analyze the blood samples.A spokesman for The Wall Street Journal thanked Ms. Holmes for attending the conference but added, “Nothing said at the conference by Ms. Holmes refutes the accuracy” of the articles.The Wall Street Journal is not the only one raising questions. Jean-Louis Gassée, a former senior executive at Apple, wrote in a blog post on Sunday that the results of two tests from Theranos raised alarms about his health when results for the same tests on the same day from Stanford Hospital did not. Moreover, the Theranos results varied more widely from one day to the next than those from Stanford, he said.In January, William Quirk, an analyst at Piper Jaffray, wrote that a member of his team had gone for common blood tests at a Theranos center in Phoenix and at two hospitals. The Theranos results came back in 70 hours, compared with about 25 hours for the other two labs, despite Theranos’s claim to deliver “results in hours, not days.” At the conference here, Bill Maris, the head of venture capital firm GV, formerly known as Google Ventures, told The Times that when the company was thinking of investing in Theranos, one of his employees went to a Walgreens pharmacy for a Theranos blood test and was later asked to return to give more blood. Theranos did not seem able to deliver on its promise of testing small amounts of blood, he said. Business Insider reported earlier on Mr. Maris’s remarks.Ms. Holmes said that she had never spoken with Mr. Maris and that GV had once “reached out to us and we said no to meeting them.” She said a few anecdotes did not cast doubt on the technology, asserting that the company has done more than 3.5 million tests.Ms. Holmes said the company has always said that some tests would require more conventional blood draws, though even for those, she said, Theranos tends to use smaller needles and smaller amounts of blood than other labs. She said the company wanted to provide a complete roster of tests, so it began offering tests that could not yet be performed with finger samples on its own machines.Still, this caveat about conventional blood draws has often seemed more like a footnote for a company that has at times proclaimed, “Say goodbye, big bad needle.” Certainly, the impression from interviews and numerous articles has been that Theranos performed the vast majority of tests using finger pricks and its proprietary machines.“The general public was under the impression that Theranos was further along in their development than they currently are,” said Eric Lakin, an analyst at DeciBio, a consulting and market research firm that follows the diagnostics industry.Mr. Lakin said he thought that Ms. Holmes, in her talk at the conference, “directly addressed many of the concerns people raised.”Nonetheless, he said, “There’s still going to be doubts about why won’t you compare your results directly” with those from established labs like Quest Diagnostics and LabCorp. While Theranos does post some performance data on its website, it is not sufficient, he said.Katie Benner reported from Laguna Beach, and Andrew Pollack from Los Angeles. Mike Isaac contributed reporting from New York.Advertisement