By J. D. BIERSDORFERMAY 22, 2015
Q. Can I forward an iPhone 6 text message to someone who wasn’t in the original conversation? Also, how long do messages last before they disappear?A. You can forward a text message received in Apple’s Messages app to another person with a couple of steps. With the message you want to forward on the screen, press and hold the message bubble until a menu with Copy and More… buttons appears. Tap the More… button.Next, make sure the message has a blue check mark next to it and then tap the arrow icon in the bottom-right corner of the screen. The New Message window appears with the selected message attached. In the To: field at the top of the screen, enter the name or number of the person getting the message and hit the Send button.As for the life span of text messages on the iPhone, you can keep them around indefinitely, or give them an expiration period. On the Home screen, tap the Settings icon, flick down the list on the next screen and select Messages. Move down the list of settings and tap Message History. Here, you can choose the specific length of time you want to keep the messages on your phone: 30 Days, One Year or Forever. AdvertisementTracking Pages Read in the Kindle AppQ. Is there any way to turn off the Amazon automatic page synchronization if two people are reading the same book with the Kindle app on two different tablets and don’t want to keep seeing alerts about what page number the other person is on?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. Amazon allows you to read the same book on multiple devices without losing your place, but the system is meant for one reader using the same book. For instance, you can start reading on a Kindle tablet at home, pick up where you left off on your phone’s Kindle app during your commute and then continue from your last stopping point when you return to the Kindle. The company uses its online Whispersync technology to track your page progress across each device you use, as long as the e-readers and Kindle apps are all registered to the same Amazon account.When two people are using one Amazon account while reading the same book on separate devices, Whispersync still notes the furthest page read each time and offers to update other devices in the mix with an alert box noting the new stopping point. This can be especially annoying if one person reads faster or more frequently than the other.AdvertisementYou can always choose No in the alert box to keep your own place in the pages, or you can turn off Whispersync — at least until you both finish the book. To temporarily disable the automatic synchronization, log into your Amazon account and proceed to the Manage Your Content and Devices page. Select the Settings tab, scroll down to Device Synchronization (Whispersync Settings) and turn the button to Off. Later, if you both are reading different books on multiple screens, you can return to the settings and reactivate Whispersync to keep track of the page progress through each title.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.