By SAM SIFTONMAY 24, 2015
A sommelier, a gastroenterologist, a personal trainer and a Times dining reporter tested out Soylent to see if it could one day replace food for them.Imagine a meal made of the milk left in the bottom of a bowl of cut-rate cereal, the liquid thickened with sweepings from the floor of a health food store, and you have some sense of what it is like to consume the protein-packed shakes that have replaced Flamin’ Hot Cheetos and Red Bull in the diets of some tech workers in Silicon Valley.Some of them elevate Ensure, the liquid nutritional supplement used in hospitals and to force-feed prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, to the status of fine wine.I tasted three varieties in my capacity as food editor of The New York Times. For verisimilitude, I ate at my computer while lurking among my Times programming colleagues on Slack, the hot new group-messaging app that recently reached a $2.8 billion valuation in Silicon Valley.“Hey, fellas, just doing a code review on some new features for Cooking” — which is The Times’s online recipe resource — “and drinkin’ some Soylent!”AdvertisementThe powdered drinks were uniformly bland in flavor, though they held significant differences in what a particular sort of food professional calls “mouth feel.”AdvertisementMy glass of Space Nutrients food, for instance, was fairly chunky with flax seeds. (The company’s motto: “Eat Like Astronauts!”) The one filled with Schmilk (“Fuel Your Body. Free Your Life”) left a blanket of oat flour over my tongue and a lasting taste of the worst glass of milk ever beneath it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Soylent (“Free Your Body”) was designed by its founders, according to the company website, “after recognizing the disproportionate amount of time and money they spent creating nutritionally complete meals.”The drink they came up with certainly delivered nutrition — around 250 calories for my small portion, according to the Soylent site. But despite a delicate sweetness to the fuel, the company’s promise of “improved satiation” fell short. I left my laptop and ate a banana.But I’m not running Pig scripts on Hadoop mode for a living, whatever that means. These instant meals are meant for work warriors for whom good and delicious food is secondary to perfect and unassailable engineering.They recall Emilio Estevez’s character, Otto, in the 1984 science-fiction film “Repo Man.” He fishes a can marked “food” out of his parents’ refrigerator and eats it standing up at the kitchen counter.“Put it on a plate, son,” his mom tells him. “You’ll enjoy it more.”Otto says: “Couldn’t enjoy it any more, Mom. Mmm, mmm, mmm, this is swell.”A version of this article appears in print on May 25, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Sip Test: The Taste That Doesn’t Really Satisfy .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.