By J. D. BIERSDORFERMAY 27, 2015
 Q. Is it true a smartphone can embed map coordinates in the photos you take with it?A. Smartphones have the ability to capture a lot of information about each photo snapped, including the camera’s settings at the time and place the picture was taken. This material is commonly called “metadata” or the “EXIF data” (short for Exchangeable Image File) and it is stored within the image file itself. You can see the coordinates with a program that displays EXIF data, or even by looking at the photo’s Properties or Info box on a Windows PC or Mac.Having this information can be great if you want to easily arrange your geotagged photos on an online map, but not if you have privacy concerns. Someone could, in theory, copy the photo’s listed longitude and latitude coordinates (like 40° 44’ 52.8” N 73° 59’ 6” W) into a program like Bing Maps and pinpoint the location in seconds. (Many social media sites, including Twitter, do strip out EXIF data from photos posted online.)To stick with undisclosed locations, turn the GPS feature off entirely while you are taking pictures. Open your phone’s Settings icon and select Location (on Android and Windows Phone) or Privacy (on iOS 8) to get to the controls for Location Services.If you prefer to leave the Location Services feature on because you use it for other programs, you can prevent your phone’s camera app from using the information. The steps may vary based on the phone and the app involved, but if you do not see controls for the camera app in the Location Services area, check the separate settings for the camera app.Finding Dried-Up YouTube StreamsQ. The YouTube app that came with my Smart TV no longer works. Is there anything I can do?A. YouTube has been doing something of an internal overhaul lately and according to a note on its Help site, it no longer supports older versions of its app used by certain smart televisions, Blu-ray players, set-top boxes and mobile devices. If your Smart TV was made in 2012 or earlier, it is likely among those products left by the wayside. First- and second-generation Apple TV boxes, devices running iOS 5 and earlier, and the Sony PlayStation Vita have also been shut out.Most smart television sets, Blu-ray players, game consoles and other gadgets made in 2013 or later (including the third-generation Apple TV) should still work with the built-in YouTube app. You may have to update the software in the device’s settings area.If your TV is one of the older models — but it has a web browser that supports HTML 5 or Adobe Flash — you might still be able to watch YouTube from its website. If not, investing in an inexpensive streaming device like the Amazon Fire TV Stick or Google Chromecast can return YouTube to your TV.TIP OF THE WEEK: Tired of flat overhead views in your Google Maps when you leave the Satellite mode? In the Google Maps app for Android and iOS, press two fingers and drag them up on the screen to tilt the angle of the current map and get more depth and a different perspective. You can still pinch and zoom in for a close-up in the tilted view, and use two fingers to spin the map around.When you zoom in the tilted view, you can also see 3-D models of the buildings Google has added to many maps in populated areas, especially tall buildings in major cities. When you want to switch back to the flat, roadmap-style map view, drag your fingers from the top toward the bottom of the screen.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. A version of this article appears in print on May 28, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Hiding Photo Location Data.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.