AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Does the Mac automatically install updates to programs from the Mac Store, or just OS X Yosemite system patches?A. Along with OS X system updates, you can have the Mac install any app updates it finds during its daily check-in with Apple’s servers. If you are not sure what your Mac is set to do, open the System Preferences icon from the Dock, or go to the Apple Menu in the upper-left corner of the menu bar and select System Preferences.In the System Preferences box, click the App Store icon. In the box that appears, you can turn on (or off) the check boxes to automatically check for updates and download those files in the background when your computer is connected to the Internet. Note that especially large updates from Apple can bog down your connection if your broadband plan is on the slower side. (If your surfing speed seems balky, a hefty OS X update may be downloading behind the scenes.)In addition to installing Mac Store app updates and OS X patches, you also have the option of automatically installing data files and security fixes. (These are usually what Apple pushes out quickly to protect the operating system from Internet threats.) If you have multiple Macs around the house, the App Store preferences also give you the option to automatically download the applications purchased on the other computers with the same Apple ID.To turn on automatic downloads for iTunes music and video purchased on other Mac or Windows PCs with the same Apple ID, open the iTunes program. Press the Command and comma keys on the Mac (or the Control and comma keys on the PC version) to open the iTunes Preferences box. In the box, click the Store tab and under Automatic Downloads, turn on the check boxes next to the type of content you wish to download to the machine.Moving a Router to a New ModemQ. I am switching from DSL to a cable modem. Can I use the same router I bought to use for my wireless network with DSL broadband with the cable modem?A. If you have been using a router you bought yourself — like a Netgear model or an Apple AirPort Express — you should be able to unplug it from the DSL modem and use it with the new cable modem. Depending on how you set up your network with the old modem, you may have to adjust the router’s settings (like taking it out of bridge mode) to get it to work with the cable modem.Your results may vary with the hardware, but routers supplied from your old ISP for use with your DSL service may be more problematic to switch over and reuse. Check with your cable company about compatibility.The cable provider may have different types of equipment to lease or sell you, and some may be modem-router combination models. Some providers now charge a monthly rental fee for the cable modem itself. If you do not wish to lease the modem, you can usually buy your own and connect it, as long as the model you choose is compatible with the company’s network. Your Internet service provider should have a list of approved modems posted in the technical-support area of its site.Advertisement