AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferLendingKindle BooksQ. I have a Kindle e-reader and my friend has an Android tablet with the Kindle app on it. Can we lend each other e-books?A. Amazon does not require ownership of one of its Kindle e-readers to lend and borrow its Kindle e-books. One or both people can use one of the company’s many Kindle reading apps for mobile devices and computers to share.To lend a Kindle book to a friend, log in to the Amazon site and go to the Manage My Content and Devices page from the Your Account menu. In your list of purchased Kindle books, select a title in the list and click the Action button next to it. In the Actions menu, select Loan This Title. On the next screen, enter the email address of the book borrower and send the message.The message includes a link to download the lent book. The person then has 14 days to read it, and during that time you will not be able to use that same title. To return a borrowed Kindle e-book, your friend should log into Amazon, go to the Manage My Content and Devices page, select the book and on the Actions menu choose Delete From Library.A book can be lent only one time. If a loan is not accepted after seven days, the book becomes available in your library, and you can lend it out again. Not all Kindle books Amazon sells can be lent, either. Watch for the Loan This Title option when you select a book from the list on your Amazon content page.Locking Up An iPhoneQ. I updated my iPhone 5 to iOS 9 and it asked me to enter a passcode, which I did. But I’m tired of having to type in the number all the time, so how do I turn it off again?A. Apple  recommends using a passcode to protect data if your phone is lost or stolen, but you can turn it off or change the setting so that you have to enter it less frequently. On the iPhone 5, open the Settings icon and tap Passcode.Enter your passcode number. On the Passcode Lock screen, you can now turn off the setting or give yourself up to a four-hour window of not having to enter the code to use the phone.TIP OF THE WEEK Even on a supersharp computer display, it is still possible to lose sight of your mouse pointer in a sea of open windows. The latest version of Mac OS X (10.11, also known as El Capitan) offers an easy way to locate your cursor. Just shake your finger back and forth on the trackpad — or jiggle the mouse — to see the small black arrow turn into a big black arrow until you stop wiggling. (If you find the feature annoying while gaming, you can disable it by opening the Settings icon, selecting Accessibility, then Display, and turning off the checkbox next to “Shake mouse pointer to locate.”)In many versions of Windows, you can turn on a checkbox on the Pointer Options tab in the Mouse control panel that highlights the cursor position on screen when you press the Control key. In Windows 10, you can even turn the white mouse pointer black and change its size. From the Start menu, select Settings, then Ease of Access. From the list on the left, choose Mouse to see the options for pointer size and color. J.D. BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. Advertisement