In a recent note, Chris Sacca, a former Google employee and early investor in Twitter, criticizes the social media company and recommends changes.Chris Sacca isn’t just one of the earliest investors in Twitter. He has been one of the company’s most vocal cheerleaders, too.But now Mr. Sacca, a former Google employee and angel investor who has made hundreds of millions of dollars with early bets on companies like Instagram and Uber in addition to Twitter, has gone public with an 8,500-word analysis of what Twitter could be and how to get there. Some on Wall Street have been clamoring for new leadership at Twitter, which has struggled with weak user growth and advertising missteps. While Mr. Sacca said he was not slamming the management team, his public critique nevertheless puts more pressure on Twitter’s chief executive, Dick Costolo, to prove that he is the right man to turn around the company. Shortly after the essay was published on Mr. Sacca’s blog on Wednesday, Mr. Costolo fielded some tough questions from Twitter stockholders at the company’s annual shareholder meeting.In his essay, Mr. Sacca stressed that he loves Twitter, remains a large investor and thinks that many of the company’s recent changes are improvements in the right direction. But his manifesto calls for a much deeper rethinking of Twitter’s service, which is still focused on 140-character text messages, to attract new users beyond the 302 million active users it reported for the first quarter.The document is nuanced, but Mr. Sacca boiled his advice down to three main ideas:Make Tweets effortless to enjoy,
Make it easier for all to participate, and
Make each of us on Twitter feel heard and valuable.Elaborating on those points, he offered up ideas such as employing human editors to compile the best accounts and tweets around topics and specific live events so that both regular Twitter users and casual visitors would have an easy way to understand what was happening. Twitter has long opposed such intensive curation, preferring to take a more hands-off approach.Mr. Sacca also urged Twitter to do more with Periscope, the real-time live-streaming service it acquired this year. “The current 24-hour expiration of videos is heartbreaking,” he wrote. “All broadcasts on Periscope need to be archived for playback permanently, unless the broadcaster chooses to delete the recording. So many treasured moments have been shared on Periscope only to vanish a day later.”Over all, Mr. Sacca said, the company needs to be faster, bolder and more willing to experiment. “It needs to question aspects of Twitter it has taken for granted. It needs to operate with smaller teams that require less permission to make change happen,” he wrote. “Twitter can afford to build the wrong things. However, Twitter cannot afford to build the right things too slowly.”A Twitter spokesman said the company had no comment on Mr. Sacca’s blog post.Robert Peck, an analyst at SunTrust Robinson Humphrey who turned bearish on Twitter before last quarter’s earnings report sent the stock down 18 percent, wrote a note to investors on Wednesday praising Mr. Sacca’s suggestions as “spot on,” but said that many of the ideas would take a long time to put in place. If Twitter’s financial results disappoint investors in July, as they have for the past two quarters, Mr. Peck said, “we think it’s possible that the company may look to make some changes” in leadership.