LAS VEGAS — Meg Whitman, chairwoman and chief executive of Hewlett-Packard, explained her dream Tuesday for Hewlett Packard Enterprise, the new company she’s creating after HP is split in half. She also indicated her dilemma. Ms. Whitman told an annual meeting of big-business customers that Hewlett Packard Enterprise,  which sells  servers, storage, software and networking products, as of Nov. 1 will be remade for the growing business of cloud computing, mobility and big data.“We’re living in an idea economy,” she said, and it has never been easier for someone to turn a concept into reality. Hewlett Packard Enterprise will be the means by which older companies will move into the new world. And Hewlett Packard Enterprise will have a strong consulting arm to make that happen — perhaps contradicting the notion that turning concepts into reality is now easy.Much of the company’s current services business consists of doing things like running call centers cheaply, not leading huge changes for corporate customers. Moreover, it’s not yet clear how well Hewlett Packard Enterprise is recreating itself. Ms. Whitman also showed off the new company’s logo, which is the old HP symbol under a green rectangle. The green, she explained to a room largely full of engineers, symbolizes growth and sustainability, while the rectangle is a window on the future.HP Inc., where personal computers and printing will go, was little discussed. Ms. Whitman will be the nonexecutive chairwoman of HP Inc., and chief executive of Hewlett Packard Enterprise.For Hewlett Packard Enterprise, “Our services are the tip of the spear, where we begin the journey together” with customers, Ms. Whitman said. Mixed metaphors aside, while some updates on the company’s progress were expected later Wednesday, a real understanding of how this company will function is still five months away.Right now, the company’s most basic function is delivering computer hardware. The so-called change management Hewlett Packard Enterprise will provide may ultimately be baked into the sales price of products and services, some of which were on shown at the Las Vegas convention. HP also showed a new data storage array that offered very fast flash memory at a low price. The company announced a new version of its cloud computing product with an easier user interface, the ability to run applications from Amazon Web Services inside HP computers, and easier ways to create software applications. HP also teamed up with Arista, a maker of very fast networking switches, to offer faster cloud and data analysis systems.Even those announcements showed how much the world has changed around HP, however. Arista’s switches and operating system were the more dominant part of the joint offering, which could also dent HP’s existing network business. The same day HP announced its flash array, Pure Storage, like Arista a company built for the new computing world, announced its own flash products for the cloud.Also on Wednesday, HP is expected to announce new technologies and partnerships for creating “composable” corporate software, or applications that are easy to write and move around a company. A key part of Ms. Whitman’s strategy, and an area where HP has previously not excelled, is to attract lots of software developers to work on HP products.