By REBECCA R. RUIZJUNE 2, 2015
Republicans pushed back on Tuesday against a plan from the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission to subsidize broadband Internet for poor Americans.At a Senate subcommittee hearing, no one disputed that broadband can be critical to filing job applications and completing schoolwork. But many lawmakers questioned just how costly the undertaking might be.The plan from Tom Wheeler, the chairman of the F.C.C., would extend the reach of Lifeline, the program now used to provide low-income Americans with mobile and landline phone service. But Republicans at the hearing said that the program had been mismanaged and that it made little sense to expand it before eradicating what they called excessive fraud.“There are many benefits of broadband,” said Senator Roger Wicker, a Republican from Mississippi and chairman of the Senate subcommittee on communications, technology, innovation and the Internet, who called the hearing. Still, he said, “before again expanding the program, we need to consider what problems remain and how we can address them since consumers are funding the program with increasing phone bills.”AdvertisementIn a proposal circulated to his fellow commissioners last week, Mr. Wheeler suggested that Internet access had become as essential as a phone connection and ought to be covered by Lifeline. The $1.7 billion program now funds phone service to more than 12 million households; it is financed through a charge applied to phone bills in the United States.AdvertisementA single subsidy is allotted per household, but over the last decade, with lax oversight and the rise of mobile phones, households fraudulently claimed more than one subsidy.In 2012, the F.C.C. added new safeguards, including a central database that confirmed each address had only one subsidy associated with it. Since then, enrollment has fallen by about a third, according to the Government Accountability Office.Still, many on Tuesday suggested that the changes in 2012 may not have gone far enough. Even Democrats conceded as much. “The program does need an overhaul,” said Senator Brian Schatz, a Democrat of Hawaii and ranking member of the subcommittee. He supported tackling the two things at once: “That means reforming Lifeline and expanding it to broadband at the same time.”Mr. Wheeler proposed exactly that last week, suggesting that the F.C.C. tighten controls over the program while it explores subsidizing broadband.Mr. Wheeler did not appear at the hearing on Tuesday, which had been scheduled before last week’s announcement and in response to a report by the Government Accountability Office. That report, released in March, suggested that the F.C.C. re-examine the Lifeline program and enact a few additional changes it had promised to adopt in 2012.Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, expressed frustration that the “boogeyman of waste, fraud and abuse” had been repeatedly invoked to argue against giving poor Americans, disproportionately black and Hispanic, access to broadband.“The so-called digital divide threatens to become a digital chasm,” he said, referring to disparities between those with access to technology and those without it.AdvertisementA few lawmakers on Tuesday took issue with the basic premise of the subsidy program, regardless of what technology it paid for. Senator Deb Fischer of Nebraska called it “a regressive tax” embedded in her constituents’ phone bills.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Senator Kelly Ayotte, Republican of New Hampshire, said she was concerned that rural areas might not have opportunities to take advantage of a broadband subsidy if it were approved.“We can expand Lifeline all we want,” she said, “but if you don’t have infrastructure for broadband, it’s not going to help.”This week, some Democratic lawmakers introduced bills in the House and Senate to expand the program to cover broadband, in a show of support for the F.C.C.’s proposal. Verizon, the National Cable and Telecommunications Association and CTIA, which represents the wireless phone industry, expressed support for the legislation.Meanwhile, the F.C.C. proposal has drawn praise from service providers like AT&T. James W. Cicconi, a senior executive vice president of AT&T who worked in the Reagan White House when the Lifeline subsidy was created in 1985, said this week that he saw Internet access as “the more important Lifeline technology for the 21st century.”But he took issue with the burden the program put on service providers. Under the current framework, carriers like AT&T bear the sole responsibility of confirming eligibility, verifying income levels or enrollment in Medicaid or the food stamp program. Lifeline is unlike any other federal low-income support program in outsourcing eligibility verification.Even among those who support the idea of subsidizing broadband, questions remain about the cost of the program. Mr. Wheeler has suggested that funding hold steady at $9.25 monthly per household, but some have wondered how feasible that is when offering broadband, or a mix of broadband and wireless phone minutes and texts.Adam Clayton Powell III, a senior fellow at the University of Southern California’s Center on Communication Leadership and Policy, who has supported improving emergency mobile alerts, said he was hopeful that funding for the program did not need to increase.“It’s not just reasonable but politically essential to keep funding stable,” Mr. Powell said. “We have the wonderful advantage of the increasing power of technology year over year. For the same price, you can buy more.”A version of this article appears in print on June 3, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Senate Republicans Resist an F.C.C. Proposal to Subsidize Broadband.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.