Sheryl Sandberg helped women think about their careers. Now she may also help people manage their grief.Ms. Sandberg on Wednesday posted a message on Facebook marking the end of the 30-day religious mourning period for her husband, Dave Goldberg. Since then, the post by Ms. Sandberg, Facebook’s chief operating officer and the author of “Lean In,” has gone viral. The post has been liked more than 635,000 times on Facebook and shared more than 271,000 times. On Twitter, her message has been called “moving” and “beautiful.” The post was featured on numerous media outlets — broadcast, online and print. Ms. Sandberg ignited a global conversation with her advice to women on balancing career and family, and her decision to publicly talk about her grief over her husband’s untimely death may do the same. Her Facebook post resonated with many people who have gone through their own loss. In comment after comment, people thanked Ms. Sandberg for sharing her feelings and offered their own stories of coping.On Time.com, David Wolpe, the Max Webb Senior Rabbi of Sinai Temple in Los Angeles, wrote that “Sandberg helps make the loss matter, helps make it meaningful, by bringing us lessons from the depth of her own pain. She ensures that her husband’s death is not in vain by teaching us how it touched one sensitive heart, what she learned, and how she was forced to grow.”Mr. Goldberg, who was chief executive of the web survey firm SurveyMonkey, died of head trauma last month in Mexico. He had been vacationing with Ms. Sandberg and friends at a private seaside villa. Officials said he appeared to have fallen off a treadmill. He was 47 years old. In Ms. Sandberg’s 1,700-word post, she wrote of the confusion and limbo and loss she was feeling. “I have lived 30 years in these 30 days,” she wrote. “I am 30 years sadder. I feel like I am 30 years wiser.”She wrote about how her children had screamed and cried, how her mother was helping her by filling the empty space each night, how she has leaned on others for help. “I have learned to ask for help — and I have learned how much help I need,” Ms. Sandberg wrote. “Until now, I have been the older sister, the C.O.O., the doer and the planner. I did not plan this, and when it happened, I was not capable of doing much of anything.”She also wrote that resilience can be learned, that she has found going back to work to be a savior, that she feels real gratitude to her friends and family. And she promised to honor her late husband by raising their children “as they deserve to be raised.”Ms. Sandberg closed with the following words: “As Bono sang, “There is no end to grief . . . and there is no end to love.” I love you, Dave.”By VINDU GOEL and QUENTIN HARDYMr. Goldberg was a serial Silicon Valley entrepreneur and venture capitalist who was married to Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer of Facebook.By QUENTIN HARDYThe worlds of technology, entertainment and politics converged to remember the chief of SurveyMonkey, who was the husband of Sheryl Sandberg of Facebook.By JODI KANTORThe late chief executive of SurveyMonkey and husband of the Facebook executive Sheryl Sandberg was raised around “woman power” and was an avid supporter of female achievement.