AdvertisementSupported byApp SmartBy Kit EatonApple, which helped popularize digital music, has watched from the sidelines in recent years as consumers have moved toward streaming music services and away from music downloads through its iTunes service. Next week, Apple is expected to begin a streaming effort of its own, based on Beats Music, which it acquired last year.So it’s a good moment to take stock of the streaming music apps that are already available. There are many that you can try, and they are often free.Spotify may be the best known of the bunch. Instead of having just a few music files stored on your phone, you can get access to the roughly 20 million songs in Spotify’s catalog and listen to the tracks streamed over the airwaves to your device.The app — free to download on iOS, Android and Windows Phone — is similar on all three operating systems. You can search for a particular track or artist, and stream free music. You can build a playlist of various tracks like a mix tape, or just play a single song or album. A social media feature lets you see what music your friends have been listening to, and share your music choices.In addition, Spotify has a radio stationlike system that will play a sequence of tracks from a particular artist, a genre like pop or even moods like “chill.” The downside is that you may find yourself frequently pressing skip because of poor track choices.On Spotify’s free service, you cannot play a single track at a time; you have to shuffle-play a particular artist or playlist, and you are allowed only six skips an hour. Ads embedded in the audio stream can become annoying and might encourage you to buy the ad-free service for $10 a month.Rdio is similar to Spotify, with more than 35 million tracks. It can be searched for songs, albums or artists, or users can take advantage of recommendations to find new music based on a chosen genre or mood.Rdio has a “You FM” radiolike streaming service that is particularly good because it is tailored to your musical taste. It also has some social media features based on Twitter and Facebook, so you can see other users’ listening habits and share your own. Like Spotify, it has an offline mode so if you know you are going off the grid for a while, you can download tracks you want to listen to then. And the interface is less complex than Spotify’s.The app is free on iOS, Android and Windows Phone. It offers good audio quality as part of its free ad-supported subscription level, but if you pay for the premium levels, you can choose higher quality. Premium services start at $5 a month for an ad-free experience that has limited offline downloads, and rises to $10 a month for a level without restrictions.Google, too, has its own music streaming system, Google Play Music. The system has about the same number of tracks in its catalog as Spotify, with similar audio quality. The app works best on Android devices, as you might expect since Google helped develop Android. If you already buy music from Google Play, Google Play Music is a great companion service. There is a limited iOS version of the app.While Google Play Music has a free listening subscription level, you still have to enter your credit card details. The app is also less visually attractive than its rivals. Its paid version is $10 a month.Tidal, backed by Jay Z and other artists, is a newer streaming music app. The selling point for Tidal is its high-quality audio; it also pays artists more than other services. Tidal has more than 20 million songs in its catalog, as well as thousands of music videos and interesting articles. Yet its interface is nothing special, and there is no free listening tier. Subscriptions start at $13 a month, and very high-quality audio costs $25 a month. The app itself is free on iOS and Android.Lastly, Noon Pacific is an unusual streaming service. This app delivers a playlist of 10 songs every Monday at noon, Pacific time. The tracks are curated by a team that scans top music blogs to discover the most interesting new music. Though Noon Pacific updates weekly, you can also listen to more than 100 previously curated playlists. Noon Pacific is free on iOS and Android.Quick CallThe productivity app expert Readdle has a new email offering for iOS called Spark. The intent is to take the strain out of managing your email accounts. Spark also has Apple Watch integration, which allows you to respond to emails from your watch. Try it free.Advertisement