By J. D. BIERSDORFERJUNE 3, 2015
Q. I don’t like the standard font that Microsoft Excel 2010 uses and I find myself switching it to something else more often than not. Is there a way to just have new files start out with a different typeface?A. Just as you can set a new default font for the documents you create in Microsoft Word, you can also choose your own typeface and point size for Excel files. In recent versions of Microsoft Excel for Windows, click the File tab in the Ribbon toolbar and then click Options. In the Excel Options box, click the General tab.In the “When creating new workbooks” section of the Options box, use the drop-down menus to choose a new default font and a different font size. The General Options has other settings to adjust too, like the overall Excel color scheme and the number of sheets in a workbook.When you have made your changes, click the OK button and restart Microsoft Excel. The new workbooks you create from now on should reflect your new default font settings and whatever else you changed in the Options box.AdvertisementSnapping Your Self-PortraitQ. How do “selfie sticks” work if the phone’s camera button is so far away?AdvertisementA. Those telescoping monopods typically connect to the phone wirelessly over Bluetooth, or by a cable that plugs into the phone’s headphone jack. Once the phone is linked electronically to the accessory, you press a button on the end of the stick to capture your self-portrait.Some models include a small Bluetooth remote control to use as a shutter button. Certain cheap selfie sticks are basically just long poles with clamps to hold the phone; you take a photo by setting the timer in the camera app.If you plan to get a stick to document your summer vacation travel, you may want to check ahead. Many museums have banned the sticks because of safety and crowd-control concerns.TIP OF THE WEEK The inability to distinguish colors can make navigating a computer’s operating system harder, but the accessibility features built into Windows and Mac OS X might help. (Mobile devices have similar settings of their own.)In Windows 7 and Windows 8, you can increase the color contrast for some of the text and images on the screen so you can see them better. To turn on High Contrast mode in most editions of Windows 7, go to the Start button, select Control Panel and search for “Change window colors and metrics.” In the Basic and High Contrast Themes areas, select the color combination that is easiest for you to see. In Windows 8, you can get to the High Contrast settings in the desktop mode by pressing the Windows and U keys, or by clicking (or tapping) the Ease of Access icon in the lower-left corner of the Windows 8 sign-in screen.In OS X, click the System Preferences icon in the Dock. In the box that appears, click the Accessibility icon and then Display to adjust the screen colors. Mac keyboard shortcuts let you change the screen even faster. On a Mac laptop, press the Function, Command, Option and F5 keys to open the Accessibility Options box, where you can invert the screen colors and adjust the contrast; on a Mac desktop computer, press the Command, Option and F5 keys instead.Browser extensions that help compensate for partial colorblindness can be another aid for some people. The recently released Color Enhancer extension (free in the Google Chrome Store) is one such option out there; it uses an adjustable filter to help with color perception when web-browsing.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.