By VINDU GOEL and KEN BELSONJUNE 3, 2015
Yahoo may be well past its glory days, but its quarterback, Marissa Mayer, can still score a touchdown now and then.The company announced on Wednesday that it had struck an exclusive deal with the National Football League to host the first free, live global webcast of a regular-season game, the Oct. 25 matchup between the Buffalo Bills and the Jacksonville Jaguars, which will be played in London.For the N.F.L., the streamed game is an experiment to understand the complex economics of digital streaming and gauge the audience for watching American football in the rest of the world.For Yahoo, winning the digital rights to the popular game is a rare victory against more successful rivals like Google and Facebook, who compete with it for attention and ad dollars.Advertisement“It’s a real kudo for Yahoo, a company that’s trying to regain its confidence,” said Brad Adgate, senior vice president of research at Horizon Media. “It will really help them do a lot of promotions for their other content, like for Katie Couric.” Ms. Couric is the Internet company’s global news anchor.AdvertisementMs. Mayer, Yahoo’s chief executive, personally wooed the N.F.L.’s commissioner, Roger Goodell, during the negotiations, according to people at both organizations. Under her leadership, Yahoo has been trying to vastly expand its exclusive video content as it seeks to expand its user base and rebuild its weakened business.The N.F.L. deal could give Yahoo an inside track in future negotiations if the league expands the number of games it streams.“You’re seeing where the world is going and how and where people are getting their content,” said Hans Schroeder, the N.F.L.’s senior vice president for media strategy, business development and sales. “Over a longer period of time, there will be different parties that want to get into the sports distribution business.”Yahoo and the N.F.L. declined to disclose how much Yahoo had agreed to pay for the digital rights.However, Ed Desser, a sports media consultant, said he believed that the league would receive a seven-figure fee from Yahoo. “The N.F.L. didn’t get where it is by giving things away gratis,” he said.Adam Cahan, the Yahoo senior vice president who oversees video and several other emerging businesses, said that under the deal, his company would sell TV-style video ads and sponsorships around the game and keep the revenue.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He said that if the N.F.L. experiment was successful, Yahoo could try to expand further into live sports. “It’s an area that could be truly exclusive and unique and differentiated,” Mr. Cahan said. “If you look at platform shifts historically, many of them have been defined by sports rights.”Yahoo, whose sports sites remain popular, will show the Bills-Jaguars game free to football fans around the world. Viewers will be able to watch via smartphone, computer, game console or smart TV. The game will also be broadcast on television in the Buffalo and Jacksonville, Fla., markets and shown on Sky’s cable network in Britain. Rights in China will be sold separately, the N.F.L. said.Mr. Schroeder said the N.F.L. chose Yahoo as a partner because of its connections to advertisers, its wide reach of a billion users worldwide and its technical ability to handle a large number of simultaneous viewers.AdvertisementAlthough the league has offered overseas fans the ability to buy a digital subscription to a season’s games for several years, that viewership is small compared with what the free game is expected to draw.The digital distribution rights to many N.F.L. games are locked up until 2022 and 2023, Mr. Schroeder said, but the league is on a year-to-year contract with CBS for “Thursday Night Football” and is considering whether to open streaming of those games to new partners.“We’ll see,” he said. “We’ll know a lot more after we do this test with Yahoo.”For the N.F.L., the long-term question is how to generate more revenue from streaming games without cannibalizing its lucrative broadcast deals. The foray with Yahoo may be a way of prompting the networks to pay more for rights fees that include streaming rights in the future.“Is this an effort to eventually create a bidding competition for streaming rights to N.F.L. games? I would suspect yes,” said Neal Pilson, a media consultant who was president of CBS Sports for 14 years. “But I’m convinced they won’t take any steps that imperil or dilute their current television arrangements.”A version of this article appears in print on June 4, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Yahoo Wins Digital Rights to a Regular-Season N.F.L. Game .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.