By REBECCA R. RUIZJUNE 4, 2015
At the center of the merger talks between T-Mobile and Dish Networks is the value of spectrum, the airwaves that carry communications signals.Spectrum brings to life everything from baby monitors and motorized garage doors to cellphone connections and television shows. But it is a limited resource, which puts it in high demand, particularly among wireless carriers who must respond to ever-rising data use on mobile phones in the United States.Different types of spectrum — ranging in frequency from low to high — are suited to different uses; the type that carries mobile phone communications most reliably, known as low-frequency spectrum, can travel far and through buildings and trees.In the wireless industry, three-quarters of low-frequency spectrum is in the hands of AT&T and Verizon, giving those companies a major competitive advantage and leaving T-Mobile, Sprint and other smaller phone carriers struggling to deliver reliable service and expand their networks.AdvertisementRecognizing that, the federal government is seeking to redistribute low-frequency spectrum from local TV stations — who claimed significant swaths of that desirable spectrum in the days before cellphones existed — to wireless phone carriers.AdvertisementThe Federal Communications Commission is planning to buy spectrum from TV stations and auction it off to phone carriers, a complicated exchange that is expected early next year.The F.C.C. plans to set aside some of the prized resource for smaller carriers, who have said they cannot afford to bid against AT&T and Verizon. But just how much spectrum is carved out for those smaller carriers, and just how deeply it is discounted, has been a major point of contention.The questions surrounding the auction may be partly motivating T-Mobile to engage in merger negotiations. Dish Network has amassed a large amount of spectrum in recent years, to the puzzlement of many in the industry, with analysts left wondering what the satellite provider’s plan for that resource was.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“T-Mobile is holding on by a thread,” said Ellen Satterwhite, a former F.C.C. employee and director of Glen Echo Group, a strategic communications firm focused on technology and telecommunications issues. “And if the F.C.C. isn’t going to make enough low-band spectrum available, I can see the agency offering approval of this merger as a chew toy to advocates for competition.”But much of Dish’s spectrum is mid-frequency spectrum, not low, meaning it cannot travel as far but has the capacity to carry more information.“It doesn’t stand to reason for me that a T-Mobile-Dish merger would mean immediate competition,” Ms. Satterwhite said. “How do you use that mid-band spectrum to get the kind of coverage you need to compete with AT&T and Verizon?”Still, some have suggested that as technology evolves, the value of various types of spectrum might change, perhaps making Dish’s mid-band spectrum, with its capacity to carry more data, more valuable to carriers like T-Mobile.Craig Moffett, senior analyst and partner at MoffettNathanson Research, called low-frequency spectrum critically important for offering service in rural areas. But, he said, it is less important in urban areas, where signals do not have to travel as far. And in a world in which phones are regularly used for Internet access, the ability to transport more information over shorter distances might prove increasingly important.“There’s a legitimate debate now over what’s most valuable,” Mr. Moffett said. “It may have been true once upon a time, in the world of voice, that low-frequency was the best. But in the world of data, higher frequency may be just as good.”A version of this article appears in print on June 5, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Spectrum Has Central Role in Dish’s Merger Talks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.