AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Should I always install updates of Mac OS X and individual applications? I’ve heard that over time, they can really slow down one’s computer. How do you know which are important?A. Any update with “security” in the name is usually important, and some versions of OS X can even install those automatically for you. Security patches are designed to close off vulnerabilities in the software and generally keep your Mac safer.Apple has been annually updating OS X for the last several years and the new versions can bring some nice features. As with any operating system update, though, you could experience quirks, bugs and a learning curve as you get used to it. Depending on your hardware, a new system may run more slowly on older Macs than on the newer models, although system updates are usually intended to improve speed. Apple has a list of suggestions if your Mac feels sluggish, including clearing space on an overstuffed hard drive. Mac-themed sites usually have their own advice as well.If you are nervous about updating to a new version of OS X or installing a major upgrade to a favorite app, wait a few days after its release and then check Apple’s Mac Support pages or Mac-blog forums; the support pages for your other Mac apps may also detail any known issues. If there are major problems plaguing the software, odds are someone will be complaining about it online and you can better decide if the update is worthwhile for you. The crowd-sourced Roaring Apps application compatibility table has tested more than 600 apps to see if they run on various versions of OS X, and is another good site to consult.Apple is not shy about advertising each new edition of OS X in the Mac App Store, even if you have decided to skip it. To avoid seeing OS X update notices all the time, open the App Store by clicking its icon in the Mac’s Dock. When the Store window opens, click the Updates tab. When you see the large banner urging you to upgrade, right-click (or hold down the Control key and click) on the banner and choose “Hide Update.”Apple’s Worldwide Developers Conference begins on June 8, and the company traditionally uses the event to announce its next iteration of OS X. If you have not upgraded to the current OS X Yosemite yet, another new version of the Mac’s operating system will most likely be available before the end of the year.Checking a Laptop Charger That Gets Too HotQ. The electrical adapter to my laptop gets very warm when I have it plugged in to charge my computer. Is this normal, or should I be worried?A. Most power adapters do feel quite warm to the touch, especially if you have the laptop turned on and are working as you recharge. This is normal. Just make sure you have plenty of ventilation around the charger and laptop while they are plugged in so heat does not get trapped under mounds of magazines, papers and other desk debris.But if the charger is so hot that it hurts to hold it — or it smells like burning plastic when it is plugged in — you should disconnect it immediately and investigate further. Check the length of the cord for damage to the outer casing, particularly if you have house pets that like to chew, as some animals have a taste for electronic accessories.You should also examine the tip of the cord and the power jack on the laptop. Look for broken or bent pins inside — or anything else obstructing the plug and port. An incomplete or faulty connection could be preventing the charger from working properly.If you have the power adapter plugged in and the laptop on, check the computer’s battery icon to see if it is actually charging. If the charging icon in not steadily visible, the adapter may be malfunctioning.Broken power adapters for electronic devices are potential fire hazards. To be on the safe side, consider getting a replacement approved by your laptop’s manufacturer, or just ordering another one directly from the company. Third-party adapters are often less expensive but can vary in quality, so research any product before buying it. The Consumer Product Safety Commission has occasionally issued recalls for faulty power cords and chargers from manufacturers, and the agency’s database is worth a search if you want to be really diligent.Advertisement