POMONA, Calif. — A robot that evoked a human form paused in front of a door leading to a simulated nuclear power plant accident and inexplicably stood motionless. Suddenly, from the grandstands overlooking the scene, a group of schoolchildren began to chant: “Go Robot! Go Robot! Go Robot!”What has long been thought of as a brave new world in which mobile robots freely move about in factories, towns and cities is now approaching. Robots will advance from the dull, dirty and dangerous work that they do today to take on a range of tasks, from rescue work to elder care in close contact with humans. Just as software robots such as Apple’s Siri and Microsoft’s Cortana have rapidly become useful personal assistants, physical robots will occupy a place in the near future.That is the world imagined by government officials and technologists at the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the American military organization that is charged with the mission of avoiding a Sputnik-style technology threat to national security. Last weekend at the sprawling Los Angeles County Fairgrounds, Darpa concluded the Robotics Challenge, a two-year-long effort to jump start this next generation of smart and presumably helpful robots by offering a cash prize for the designers of a machine that could work in concert with human controllers in a hazardous environment.The $3.5 million competition was won by a South Korean team from KAIST, formerly the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology. The technology may still seem far-fetched, but betting against the agency that has had a remarkably far-reaching effect on the modern world —  from funding the work that led to both the personal computer and the Internet, to setting expectations that self-driving vehicles are only a matter of years away — might be a mistake.Darpa officials have taken pains to assure anyone who would listen that it was not primarily interested in designing Terminators, or killer robots. The agency is an arm of the Pentagon, and its futuristic robots are an example of what is described as a “dual use” technology that will have both military and civilian uses. Darpa, which is also known for pioneering the Internet surveillance system that was exposed last year by Edward J. Snowden, has, under its current director, Arati Prabhakar, expanded its watchfulness over the  potential effect of the technologies it helps foster.In introducing a workshop for discussion on the effect of robotics held at the end of the challenge competition on Sunday, Dr. Prabhakar described the agency as being committed to a broader mission: “We work together to build the future of robots that can help extend the capabilities that we have and build the technologies that will aid humanity in the future. That has been become something of a personal cause for Gill Pratt, the roboticist who has overseen the Robotics Challenge. A former Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Olin College engineering professor, Dr. Pratt gave an impassioned speech about the positive potential for humanoid robots.“You would assume that all the people who watched these machines would be filled with fear and anxiety because after all, all we hear about in the news is people saying robots are going to take over the world, they are going to kill all of us, we should run away,” he said. “There is a new discovery that we made here besides all the technology. That discovery is that there is some new untapped affinity between people and robots that we saw really for the first time today.”Under Tony Tether, who was Darpa’s director from June 2001 to February 2009, there was less concern at the agency about questions of societal impact. Dr. Tether oversaw the DARPA Grand Challenge in 2004, which had a narrower goal of helping meet a congressional mandate that one-third of the military’s land vehicles would become autonomous by 2015.While that goal remains far off, the earlier contest has had an effect on the world’s automakers after Google hired Sebastian Thrun, a Stanford professor who led the original winning team in 2005, to begin a self-driving car research project. Since then, virtually all of the world’s major automobile makers have set up research laboratories in Silicon Valley.In a similar fashion, it now appears that the new Robotics Challenge may have a direct role in jump starting an imaginative new commercial industry making mobile humanoid and even more flexible robots.“You won’t go in and replace all these people all at once with robots,” said Rodney Brooks, who has founded several robotics companies including iRobot and Rethink Robotics. “We’ll see robots creep into our lives, getting the robots to do a few of the tasks at a time.”Traditionally, robots have done tasks that are dangerous, dirty and dull. But Dr. Brooks has proposed a new generation that will perform useful tasks like working in a human kitchen or helping an elderly person at home.That focus underscored a stronger emphasis by Darpa on human-machine interactions at the finals of the challenge last weekend. Dr. Pratt said that the contest, which featured robots with a relatively small amount of autonomy that were controlled by humans, was a model for a coming world in which humans and machines would collaborate.“I don’t know of a single dry eye in the audience when those robots fell down,” he said at a news briefing on Saturday after just three of the 25 robot competitors had ended the challenge with perfect scores.