It will take years for smartphone-based wallets, like those offered by Apple and Google, to have a chance to truly catch on with mainstream consumers. But with the help of payments processors, mobile wallets may catch on a bit faster.To that end, Square, the San Francisco-based payments processing start-up, unveiled a new credit card reader on Monday, one capable of accepting mobile payments like those made through Apple Pay and Android Pay, among other methods.The new reader, which Square said will be widely available this fall, operates wirelessly for merchants who want to accept contact-less mobile payments. It also accepts so-called EMV enabled credit cards, a technology that includes a chip built into credit cards for added security.Square said the new reader will cost $49. The company is giving away about a quarter of a million of the new devices to encourage adoption by small and medium-sized businesses.“We want more and more people to move to authenticated payments,” Jack Dorsey, co-founder and chief executive of Square, said in an interview. “For us, this feels like a tipping point — smaller and medium-sized businesses really complete the cycle.” For Square, the timing of the release is crucial. Credit card processors and merchants across the greater retail industry are up against a deadline later this year, when merchants must switch over to accepting EMV-based credit cards. If they fail to do so, the merchants will become liable for any potential credit card fraud on the transactions they process.But to prepare for EMV — which stands for EuroPay, MasterCard and Visa, the major credit networks that created the new standard — merchants must update their payments acceptance terminals, a process that for some may prove costly.That is where companies like Square — along with rivals like First Data‘s Clover, Poynt and Shopify — are inserting themselves. To capitalize on the EMV shift, these companies are offering their next-generation payment-acceptance terminals to small and medium-sized businesses that are required to switch to updated technology in any case.Many larger retailers are already rebuilding their own in-house payments infrastructures to accept EMV transactions and, in many cases, mobile wallets like Apple Pay and Android Pay. But options like Square’s reader, as well as those like Clover and Poynt, cater to small businesses that need only buy an off-the-shelf hardware terminal to become EMV compliant.In the long run, that’s good for companies like Apple and Google. The more EMV readers small merchants buy, the more places those companies’ mobile wallets will be accepted.All of this will come at a cost to Square with its giveaway of about 250,000 of the new readers to businesses. At $49 for each reader, the handouts will cost Square around $12.25 million, assuming the cost of materials, shipping and manufacturing is equal to what the company is charging businesses. And a cashless future remains far off, as even beyond the EMV deadline it will very likely take years for merchants to accept all the new forms of payment. For now, it’s safe to say you should probably hold on to your current wallet.