LONDON — James Kinsella is an unlikely champion for European technology. The 55-year-old American is a former Microsoft executive who previously ran MSNBC.com, the news website.Yet Mr. Kinsella, who has spent the last 15 years in Europe, is now backing Europe’s efforts to enforce its tough data privacy rules across the region — and potentially further afield.On Wednesday, Mr. Kinsella and his American co-founder, Robert McNeal, will unveil their latest start-up called Zettabox, a cloud computing service that will take on the likes of Google, Dropbox and Microsoft to offer people and companies the ability to access documents, video files and photos from anywhere in the world.To compete with much larger American rivals, the start-up, with 25 employees divided between London and Prague, is playing up its European roots and people’s growing appetite for greater online privacy.The company says that it will only store people’s data within Europe, where privacy laws are more stringent than those in the United States. It also will allow individuals and companies to retain information in data centers in specific European countries, so that they can comply with tough domestic rules that often restrict what type of data can be stored internationally.“Europe needs a European service,” Mr. Kinsella said. “Europeans have no say over where their data is held by American companies. We’re offering an alternative to that.”Zettabox, which has received less than $10 million in private financing from Mr. Kinsella and Mr. McNeal, is one of a growing number of European cloud computing providers trying to take on American competitors by playing up their privacy credentials.Across the continent, start-ups, telecom operators and other tech companies are promoting their own cloud computing services by highlighting how they comply with Europe’s tough data protection rules compared to United States counterparts.  Those differences are only expected to grow when the European Union completes long-awaited privacy reforms by the end of the year. Under the new legislation, international companies with European customers — even if they do not have offices in the region — will have to comply with the region’s tough data controls or face fines of up to 5 percent of their global revenue, or $112 million, whichever is greater, if they flaunt the new rules.The privacy reforms, which are currently being negotiated between European policy makers, also will give the region’s 500 million residents a much more vocal say of what type of data companies collect on them, how that information is stored, and for how long companies can hold onto that data.And the European Commission, the executive arm of the European Union, is promoting a European cloud computing program as part of its recently-released digital single market reforms to boost the region’s fledgling industry that has so far failed to compete with the United States.“There are growing concerns about data privacy for our European clients,” said Phillipp Strube, a co-founder of CloudControl, a cloud computing provider in Berlin, which generates almost three-quarters of its revenue from the 28-member bloc. “Being based in Germany is an advantage for us.”Despite European companies’ ambitions, they face an uphill battle to compete with the deep pockets and tech savvy of the likes of Amazon and Google.As Europe’s policy makers push for greater privacy rules, many of these American companies have opened new data centers in Europe in a bid to placate local customers’ fears over how they data is handled. That includes Amazon, whose cloud computing unit last year opened a facility near Frankfurt, Germany, where local rules demand that citizens’ personal data must be stored locally.But in a sign that American companies may yet struggle to comply with Europe’s tough data protection rules, Microsoft is facing a bitter legal battle with the U.S. government over data held in one of the company’s data centers in Ireland.American judges have ordered Microsoft to comply with a domestic search warrant that demanded the company hand over data stored at its Irish facility. In response, Microsoft has argued federal prosecutors cannot seize the data in Ireland because United States law does not apply there, even though Microsoft controls everything in its data center there. A ruling in the case is expected potentially by late summer. Other American tech companies, including Apple, Amazon and Verizon, are following the case closely. Many fear that if the United States government successfully uses a domestic search warrant to access data held overseas, companies’ international clients — which now represent the lion’s share of their customers — will start looking for non-American services that offer higher levels of data protection.A version of this article appears in print on 06/11/2015, on page B9 of the NewYork edition with the headline: European Tech Companies Play Up Privacy to Challenge Bigger American Rivals.