WASHINGTON — Washington is thinking hard about the sharing economy these days.On Tuesday, the Federal Trade Commission held a daylong workshop dedicated to examining Internet peer-to-peer platforms like Uber, Airbnb and Postmates, and their offerings of on-demand rides, beds and slices of cake. Regulators, academics and industry representatives got together to consider the government’s place in overseeing those businesses.The conversations were not uncontroversial. Sitting next to the head of global public policy for Airbnb, Vanessa Sinders of the American Hotel and Lodging Association warned against “rogue commercial interests” like Airbnb that were going unregulated. In some places, she said, “they are simply illegal hotels.”Others said it was too soon for the government to intervene in a bigger way. Liran Einav, an economics professor at Stanford University, said he did not think regulations should be extended to the sharing economy just yet. “We should let it play out for a few years to get an idea of how it will operate, and then customize a level playing field,” he said.Not everyone saw things that way. “It’s wrong that uncertainty should lead to forbearance,” said Glen Weyl, a senior researcher with Microsoft Research. “I’m not sure we have the luxury of saying, ‘We don’t know what’s going on here, let’s wait and see.’ ”Some companies spoke up to say that they were regulating themselves. David Hantman, head of global policy for Airbnb, invoked ratings systems and background checks as practices that reduced the need for regulatory intervention.Joshua S. Gans of the University of Toronto echoed that opinion, saying he trusted his teenage children to ride with Uber but not the Toronto taxi system. “It’s because I know there’s no privacy,” he said. “I know where they’re going, and I know who the driver is. That’s pretty tough regulation right there.”Matthew W. Daus, former commissioner and chairman of the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission, took issue with calling Uber a member of the sharing economy.“We’re coming up with these incredible definitions and clarifications, and I’m just trying to throw some water on everybody’s faces,” Mr. Daus said. “There’s no sharing going on. This is about for-hire transportation, and there needs to be a level playing field,” he said, suggesting that capping the number of vehicles on the road was necessary.Across town at the exact same time, at another conference focused on the intersection of technology, business and government, the sharing economy was also under the microscope. The conference, called Techonomy Policy, included participation from the F.T.C. and the Federal Communications Commission.“How sustainable is this?” asked Arun Sundararajan, a professor at New York University’s business school.It was a question raised repeatedly at both conferences on Tuesday, and one left largely unanswered.“We have no predictive power,” Mr. Gans said, referring to what share economy sharing platforms might someday make up in the overall economy. Twenty percent, 50 percent, 80 percent? Speakers speculated without casting votes.“The issue is the nature of work,” Mr. Gans said. “Are people going to prefer a lifestyle that allows them to pick and choose more?”The tension between flexibility and uncertainty, entrepreneurial opportunity and job insecurity was also central to Tuesday’s conversations.Mr. Sundararajan of N.Y.U. said he thought that at the heart of debate over regulating the sharing economy was the fact that it had blurred the lines between personal and professional realms, commercializing some tasks historically performed for friends. “We’ve always given people rides to the airport,” he said. “We’ve lent our apartments to friends and cooked meals for them.”He said it was important that regulators acknowledge that, and that they recognize self-regulation as not only an option but also as a way to let the government take on new burdens. “Maybe there are things the third parties can shoulder that the government used to shoulder,” he said.In a statement on Tuesday, Gary Shapiro, president and chief executive of the Consumer Electronics Association, said he was grateful that the Federal Trade Commission was examining the sharing economy, which he called “free-market economics at its best.”“We look forward to participating more fully, as the F.T.C. continues to work with stakeholders and achieve a better understanding of these new and innovative economic models,” Mr. Shapiro said.