Americans own about 22 million recreational boats, and on average they use them just 11 days a year, according to the latest data from the Coast Guard.Smelling opportunity in those underexploited resources, several Silicon Valley start-ups are trying to become the Airbnb of boating, acting as online matchmakers between owners whose vessels are sitting idle and the boatless masses yearning to get on the water.A look at how technology is changing how we get around“A boat is a relatively expensive asset to own and maintain,” Sascha Mornell, the co-founder and chief executive of GetMyBoat, said in an interview. To recoup those costs, he said, it makes sense for owners to rent their vessels out from time to time.Like generations of sailors before them, the entrepreneurs running what they call “pier to pier” companies are not above telling fish tales about themselves and their competitors as they scramble for position in what is still a microscopic industry.Mr. Mornell claims to run “the world’s largest platform of boat rentals,” with 30,000 boats for rent in 3,300 locations in 135 countries. His competitors, he says, offer less than a thousand boats each for rent. “We’re aggregating the entire boat rental and charter industry,” he said.Jaclyn Baumgarten, the founder and chief executive of Cruzin, says she has thousands of boats on the company website and was the first to solve the biggest hurdle in boat rentals — finding a way to provide adequate insurance to protect the owner and renter in case of an accident — only to see her archrival, Boatbound, copy her.Aaron Hall, chief executive of Boatbound, speaks dismissively of his competitors and asserts that his company created the insurance that has made the industry possible. He says Boatbound is the only substantive operator, with 10,000 boats listed by owners, although only about 2,000 are actually available to rent. Cruzin, he declared in an email, is “running on fumes.” As for GetMyBoat, “99 percent of their boats are charter boats where the companies don’t even know they are listed.” (Mr. Hall’s company, it should be noted, began life as a tool for wedding planning before it shifted to boats.)For all the hyperbole and smack talk, the reality is that online boat rentals are such a tiny niche market that the entire industry merited just three paragraphs in Piper Jaffray’s most recent 76-page report on the sharing economy. “We haven’t looked at it as much because it’s so much smaller than some of the other markets,” said Michael Olson, the lead author of the brokerage firm’s report.That hasn’t dissuaded Boatbound and Cruzin, which were founded in 2012, from trying to raise their first round of venture capital to fund their expansion plans.“This is a new market with huge potential,” Ms. Baumgarten said in an interview. “The fact that there are competitors in the space only proves there is a market.” She said Cruzin had seen strong interest from venture investors in funding the next stage of the company’s growth.Online boat rental is far more complicated than, say, Airbnb. The rental companies need to ensure that vessels are seaworthy, renters have the necessary skills to pilot the boats and local laws are followed. Most important, the marketplaces have to win the trust of boat owners, many of whom are leery of handing over their precious sloops and sailboats to strangers.Monica Houston, a Seattle-based organizer of high-tech hackathons, has rented out her 1974 Ericson, the Infinite Sloop, through Boatbound several times in the last year.“I feel bad when my boat sits,” she said in an interview. “I’d rather have someone else use it than no one using it.”Ms. Houston said the insurance policy offered by Boatbound helped ease her concerns about renting out the boat. She communicates with potential renters about their experience level and has extensive instructions on her boat about various features, including the finicky toilet. In some cases, she has served as captain for more novice sailors for an extra fee.If she rents just the boat, the renter is charged $260 a day. She gets about $180 of that, with the rest going to Boatbound for insurance and other fees.Boat rentals have traditionally been handled by charter companies, which owners hire to manage and market their vessels. The start-ups are trying to make it easier for even owners of smaller boats to offer their vessels for rent and for potential renters to find them.But renting a boat is inherently more complex than other transactions in the sharing economy. “This is not an Uber app where you press a button and someone picks you up. There’s much more conversation back and forth between owners and renters,” Mr. Mornell said.Although costly, insurance is crucial to the peer-to-peer boat rental market, because most owners’ policies exclude commercial rentals and the cost of an accident could be high. Boatbound and Cruzin offer similar custom policies with up to $3 million in coverage per rental through Concept Special Risks, with the underlying coverage underwritten by a unit of Munich Re. (GetMyBoat offers a much more basic policy from another carrier with $25,000 in coverage.)According to Tony Usher, the managing director of Concept Special Risks, neither Cruzin nor Boatbound created the boat insurance policies they use, which involve an elaborate review of boats’ conditions and the experience of potential renters.“We came up with the program to do this,” Mr. Usher said in an interview. “Nobody knew how to insure it except us.”Despite the insurance, getting people to use the new platforms has been challenging. Although all three companies say they have strong growth, only Mr. Mornell would disclose the actual number of boats rented on his service: 300 reservations, worth half a million dollars, in April.Ms. Baumgarten is focused on recruiting marinas as marketing partners and creating a pool of freelance captains who can be hired to helm boats rented through Cruzin.Mr. Hall has received an investment from Brunswick, one of the biggest makers of recreational boats, and is exploring the possibility of dealers offering boats for rent through Boatbound as a way of allowing potential buyers to try before they purchase.Like the car-hailing apps, peer-to-peer boat rentals will quickly separate into one leader and some also-rans, he said.“It’s a big market, but there’s really only room for one,” Mr. Hall said in an interview.A version of this article appears in print on 06/11/2015, on page F6 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Start-Ups Clamor to Be the Airbnb of Boats.