Stop? Or gun it? Those are often the competing voices running through drivers’ heads when they approach a yellow light.Grant Thomas of Chattanooga, Tenn., hears another sound in that situation: a disapproving beep emanating from under the dashboard of his 1998 Honda Civic.The noise comes from a device provided by his insurer, Progressive, that beeps when it detects hard braking. The more the device beeps, the more Progressive considers him an accident-prone driver, one of several pieces of data that the device sends to the company to help calculate his insurance rate.A look at how technology is changing how we get aroundSince the earliest days of the automobile, actuaries have hungered for a way to price insurance premiums based on the daily driving habits of customers. But they have had to fall back on group-based statistics like age, gender and marital status to help determine someone’s risk behind a wheel. That has begun to change in recent years, as insurance companies like Progressive began promoting “telematics” devices that tell them how much, when and how aggressively their customers drive. Customers who install the devices can get up to 30 percent off their premiums.Insurance companies are only getting started, though. Vehicle telematics devices are becoming smaller and cheaper, which will encourage insurance companies to push them more heavily to customers. Some companies are testing smartphone apps that can track driver behavior instead of telematics devices, which could further lower barriers to consumer use.Even bigger changes are expected in the types of data collected and how it is analyzed. Some companies are beginning to examine vehicle location data, for example, which could offer insights into how often someone speeds and drives on highways, both helpful for determining risk.  Some roadblocks lie ahead for vehicle telematics. Already, many have blanched at the idea of letting an insurer track every car movement. Consumer advocates are concerned that insurance companies will use the driving data in inscrutable ways to set premium prices. Those advocates also worry that insurers will use the data to penalize consumers who work a late shift, for example, or in a low-income neighborhood.“Telematics hold great promise, but pose dangers,” said Birny Birnbaum, executive director for the Center for Economic Justice, a nonprofit group that acts as an advocate for the economic interests of low-income and minority consumers. “Right now the balance is to the dangers side.”Still, even skeptics concede that telematics offer potential benefits, enabling a shift to a concept called usage-based insurance. The technology can be used to reward good drivers with lower premiums, forcing risky drivers to pay more. It could help make roads safer by giving drivers constant feedback on their behavior — like those beeps during hard braking.In theory, if insurers decide telematics data surpass other methods of determining driver risk, it could reduce the widely criticized reliance on factors like credit scores and education. By enabling insurance companies to charge higher-mileage drivers more, telematics gives motorists an incentive to drive less, reducing road congestion and environmental impact.“I do believe that usage-based insurance, because of the fairness of it and practicality of it, will be the dominant form of delivery for car insurance in the U.S. and worldwide,” said Robin Harbage, a director with Towers Watson, a company that helps insurance companies run their telematics programs.Just over two dozen United States carriers offer usage-based insurance programs, Mr. Harbage said. Progressive’s Snapshot program is by far the most popular, representing nearly 15 percent of the company’s overall business and generating about $2.6 billion in premiums last year.The palm-size, oblong Snapshot device has a wireless connection that transmits data to Progressive automatically. It tracks the time of the day the car is driven, miles driven and hard braking, which the company defines as sudden decreases in speed of seven miles per hour or greater. Dave Pratt, general manager for usage-based insurance at Progressive, expects that by next year the company will be able to start using smartphones to track Snapshot customers, which will lower the cost of the program for the company.In most states, Progressive calculates a preliminary insurance discount for a driver after the device has been installed in a car for 30 days. The rate is locked in after the customer has driven with the device for about six months. (In some places the company has begun offering the preliminary discount as soon as customers sign up for Snapshot.) Customers return the device after the rate is locked in.For the first years of the Snapshot program, Progressive sought to entice customers by offering only discounts or no increase in rates. In a sign of the future, Progressive in December began charging riskier drivers in Missouri up to 10 percent more after observing their behavior with Snapshot. It recently began doing the same thing in Indiana and Nebraska, with more states to come.Some of Progressive’s Snapshot devices are capable of tracking driver location, but for now the company says it is using that data only for research purposes. Mr. Pratt predicted that location would eventually be a factor in setting insurance rates. That data could help Progressive determine when drivers are using highways and when they are on city streets. Miles driven on highways are generally safer than those driven on city roads.“I think we will wind up having better insight into how you’re driving, and we will come up with better models to predict who’s risky,” Mr. Pratt said.Location-tracking and use of smartphone telematics apps by insurance companies, though, is likely to only accentuate the privacy concerns that many drivers already have. About a third of Progressive’s customers say they have no interest in the Snapshot program for privacy reasons, which is why the program will remain voluntary, Mr. Pratt said.One car insurance start-up, Metromile, focuses only on how much — not how — someone drives. Dan Preston, chief executive of Metromile, cited studies that said most of the risk drivers pose is associated with miles driven, rather than behavior.Metromile customers are charged a base rate that varies based on demographic factors and the type of vehicle. The company uses telematics devices to track mileage, charging customers anywhere from a couple of pennies to 6 cents or so a mile. Its drivers like the straightforwardness of its pricing. If they drive more, they pay more.“I think over all our message has been, have a clear per-mile rate that’s transparent to you so you know how to play,” Mr. Preston said.Mr. Harbage of Towers Watson said most customers, especially younger ones, were not put off by the idea of letting their insurers track them if they get some benefit. “On a generational basis, this will only get more popular as people who have used locations-based apps for years see this as an extension of that,” he said.Mr. Thomas, the driver from Chattanooga, is one such customer. Although he’s 23 years old, he calls himself a “grandma driver,” consistently obeying the speed limit. He says he’s not worried that the device is spying on his driving habits.He isn’t crazy about its nagging, though. During the first month the Snapshot device was installed in his car, it beeped at him 11 times — 10 of them when he slowed for yellow lights — though he said he still received a 5 percent discount on his premium. He felt as if he were being rebuked for making the safer driving choice.“That’s really annoying to me,” Mr. Thomas said. “It almost makes me think to run the yellow light.”A version of this article appears in print on 06/11/2015, on page F9 of the NewYork edition with the headline: How’s My Driving? The Insurer Knows .