
When Trae Vassallo’s children hop in the car to head to their after-school sports practice in the San Francisco Bay Area several times a week, it is not Ms. Vassallo, a full-time working mother of three, who drives them. Nor is it her husband, a nanny or any other caregiver.Instead, Ms. Vassallo, a venture capitalist with her own firm, has scheduled regular rides for her children using Shuddle, a start-up that lets parents book trips around town for their offspring. In Silicon Valley parlance, Shuddle is the Uber for kids.A look at how technology is changing how we get around“It’s obviously leveraging the infrastructure that companies like Uber have figured out how to do well,” Ms. Vassallo, a former partner at the venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers who has invested in Shuddle, said of the start-up.Shuddle is just one of a growing number of services to piggyback on the groundwork laid by Uber, the popular ride-hailing service that lets users request cars with a few taps of their smartphone. Apart from an Uber-like service for the under-16 set, there is now also a service for Bay Area commuters (Chariot), a service for Manhattan (Via) and even a service for vans (Leap Transit).But unlike Uber, Lyft and Sidecar, which are disrupting the transportation market with all-purpose ride-booking services, these new companies focus on specific markets.The new companies are being fueled by venture capitalists, who are pouring money into these mini-Ubers and mini-Lyfts. In March, Shuddle raised $9.6 million and has amassed a total of more than $12 million. Via, a car-pooling app serving only Manhattan, garnered $27 million in venture capital in April. Chariot, a car-pooling app aimed at commuters, has been operating in the Bay Area for less than a year and has raised $3 million for early expansion.In total, American transport-related start-ups like Uber and others have raised $7.1 billion in financing since 2010, according to CB Insights, an investment research firm.“Look at the economics of all of this,” Ms. Vassallo said, pointing to Shuddle and the ubiquitous need for child care and general transport services for children. “It really makes sense not only in the Bay Area but everywhere.”Yet many of the start-ups face tough odds of success: Uber and Lyft have big head starts in many markets. Uber operates in more than 300 cities worldwide, while Lyft is in about 60 markets in the United States. Trips on those services can go for as little as a few dollars, depending on distance and time. The competition led Hailo, a British ride-booking service similar to Uber, to withdraw from the United States recently.The founders of some smaller, niche start-ups said their companies could work even though they concentrate on a subset of the market because they could develop loyal, repeat customers in a handful of cities and expand across the country over time.They added that they could learn from where Uber failed, altering their business models and best practices to win new users. Uber, for instance, faced criticism for its driver vetting process after several rape and assault allegations against some drivers.Shuddle said it conducted a rigorous background check and an in-person interview and required two employer references before hiring drivers. It also monitors employee insurance and license records. Shuddle is primarily a child-care service that costs $9 a month for membership and mileage-based fares per ride. The company said that more than 95 percent of its drivers were women because it tended to attract female applicants. “For women drivers on other services, there’s a perception that it might be unsafe,” said Nick Allen, founder and chief executive of Shuddle. “Our average driver is a 50-year-old mom.”To make their services work as businesses, Leap Transit and Loup, a shuttle-based ride service, have targeted services like Uber and the greater public transit industry, focusing on relatively low fixed prices and standardized routes along commuter lines. That way, commuters may pay slightly more than they would for a public transit ride, yet avoid the potentially higher cost of taking an Uber or Lyft.Leap Transit, the van-pooling start-up backed by the venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz, has luxury shuttles catering to fixed routes and is offering rides for $2 for a limited time to gain traction.Via, a car-pool service that is restricted to most of Manhattan, will drive users anywhere between 110th Street and 14th Street for a fee of $5 to $7, depending on how passengers pay. The service also works with commuter benefits programs offered by some employers, which lets users buy ride credits with pretax income.Chariot, a ride service app for commuters in the San Francisco Bay Area, runs 14-passenger vans equipped with Wi-Fi along fixed, high-traffic commuter routes. Trips cost $3 to $5, depending on the number of prepaid rides purchased, which is slightly more than the $2.25 cost to ride the local MUNI bus and rail transportation.“I asked people, ‘Why aren’t you taking an Uber?’ ” said Ali Vahabzadeh, chief executive of Chariot. “They would pull out their phone and Uber would be at a two or three times surge price,” he said, referring to Uber’s practice of increasing fares during times of high demand. “Instead of taking a $2 bus ride, it was comparable to a $20 Uber ride.”Uber declined to comment.The start-ups are still working out kinks. Leap Transit recently suspended its service in San Francisco after the California Public Utilities Commission sent the company a cease-and-desist order for operating in the state without a license. The company said on its Facebook page that it would remain offline until it worked through the regulatory issues.Other ride-hailing companies like Uber and Lyft have faced similar regulatory hurdles and are slowly changing regulators’ opinions. Uber has won approval from officials in Colorado, California, Oregon and New York, among dozens of the other cities where it does business. But historically, Uber and its ilk have often operated with or without lawmakers’ blessings.Uber and Lyft are not taking the proliferation of new competitors lying down and are adding new services. Each company now offers a car-pool service, Uber Pool and Lyft Line, that picks up and drops off multiple passengers in one trip, cutting the cost of a trip to a fraction of what it would have been for one rider.In March, Lyft’s chief executive, Logan Green, said Lyft Line rides accounted for a majority of rides taken in San Francisco, and the company was experimenting with “hot spots,” high-trafficked areas for pickup, similar to some of the commuter start-up methods.Others say that ride-booking is not a winner-take-all market and the various types of ride services that are popping up are only the beginning.“Travelers are becoming more multimodal, having different needs for different trips and corresponding mobility choices,” said Susan Shaheen, co-director of the Transportation Sustainability Research Center at the University of California, Berkeley and an adjunct professor at the university. “There is no silver bullet to solving urban passenger transportation issues.”A version of this article appears in print on 06/11/2015, on page F9 of the NewYork edition with the headline: New Ride Services Forge Own Specialized Paths.