
UPDATED June 12, 2015

In the last three years, most of the top executives at Twitter have come and gone. Many of the changes were seen as a consolidation of power under the chief executive, Dick Costolo, who announced in June that he would step down.
Related Article
Mr. Costolo joined the company as its chief operating officer. In 2013, he helped take the company public, but more recently struggled to attract new users to the service.Mr. Rowghani first served as chief financial officer, having come from a strategy position at Pixar. In 2012, he became the chief operating officer, a role he held until his departure.Initially in charge of media partnerships, Ms. Sladden eventually was responsible for promoting Twitter in the news media, in Hollywood and on television, now a major area of focus for the company.Having come from Salesforce.com, Mr. Fry served as the vice president for engineering, and later led the department, where he oversaw the development of Twitter's core technologies.Mr. Sippey served as the head of product, and oversaw the design and user experience of Twitter's services and apps. He was pushed out of the company to serve in an unspecified advisory role.Ms. Schiller, a veteran news executive, joined the company from NBC News to oversee Twitter’s partnerships with news and journalism organizations.Mr. Graf, who worked on Google’s Maps app for iPhones, replaced Mr. Sippey. His task was to make Twitter’s service as easy to use as Google Maps. Within months, he was replaced by Kevin Weil, a trusted lieutenant to Mr. Costolo.Mr. Gupta came to Twitter from Zynga to serve as treasurer. Within a month, he rose to chief financial officer, succeeding Mr. Rowghani. Last year, he was named to a role overseeing the company’s investments in start-ups.Mr. Noto replaced Mr. Gupta as the company’s chief financial officer after leaving Goldman Sachs as one of its top technology bankers. While at Goldman, Mr. Noto led Twitter through its initial public offering process.Advertisement