AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Amazon, Apple, Barnes & Noble and Google seem to be the big mainstream sources for e-books now, but are there any independent bookstores online, with files that work on smartphones and tablets?A. While you can find independent authors selling their works on sites like Smashwords, most locally owned or regional booksellers do not have their own online catalog of commercial e-books to buy and download. Sites like Inktera and Zola Books sell e-books, though, and some independent brick-and-mortar booksellers have partnerships with the bigger e-bookstores.For example, Kobo, which sells its own Kobo Reader line of e-readers, has deals with a large number of independent bookstores around the country. When you buy a Kobo Reader from that physical store and create an online Kobo account there, that bookstore will get a share of money from each e-book you buy online from the Kobo Store.If you already have a smartphone or tablet and do not want an e-reader Kobo has its own stand-alone app for its online bookstore, which has millions of titles. The app works on major mobile and desktop platforms. When you create your user account on Kobo’s website, you can link it to a particular independent bookstore to support it.Kobo’s site lists participating bookstores, and you can also check the website of your preferred shop to see if the owners are working with Kobo. Politics and Prose in the District of Columbia, the Concord Bookshop in Massachusetts, Diesel Books in California, Powell’s City of Books in Oregon and the Housing Works Bookstore Cafe in New York are among the dozens of independent booksellers in the program; some stores sell Kobo e-books directly on their sites.Amazon has a similar deal for independent shops that agree to sell its hardware. The Amazon Source program gives retailers discounts on Kindle devices and 10 percent of sales from e-books purchased on those Kindles. Check with your preferred store and ask if it is part of Amazon Source.Q. Are computers and tablets affected by humidity, and if so, how humid does it have to be to cause problems?A. Excessive heat and humidity can affect a computer or tablet, causing erratic performance, shortened battery life and a buildup of condensation inside the device — especially when it is moved between temperature extremes. Air-conditioning, fans, desiccants or a dehumidifier in the room can help keep heat and humidity under control.Your computer manufacturer should have environmental guidelines for its products listed online or in the manual. Apple, for instance, states that its laptops should be operated in locations that are 50 degrees to 95 degrees Fahrenheit (or 10 degrees to 35 degrees Celsius) and with a relative humidity up to 90 percent (noncondensing).TIP OF THE WEEK: Quick tricks make learning a new device easier, and Apple now includes an official Tips app as part of its iOS 8 software for iPhone, iPad and the iPod Touch. You can even set up an alert for when Apple adds a new tip — open the Settings icon, go to Notifications, select Tips and choose the type of Notification you want. (The tips can also be viewed on Apple’s website.)Microsoft has a similar app for devices running its Windows Phone 8.1 system. The company’s Help + Tips app can be downloaded free from the Windows Phone Store. It also has a Help + Tips app for Windows.Companies selling Android-based phones often have their own suggestions for using the software, like Samsung’s page of tips for Galaxy owners. For those with Nexus devices and Android One phones (as well as the now-discontinued “Google Play edition” handsets) running Android 5.0 and later, Google has its own free Device Assist app for tips and troubleshooting advice.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. Advertisement