By QUENTIN HARDYJUNE 11, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  Facebook showed the world its first commercial version of virtual reality on Thursday — and offered tantalizing hints of how it hopes to turn three-dimensional goggles into a new kind of computing and communications device.At an event in San Francisco, Facebook executives discussed the goggles, called Oculus Rift. While the device is initially designed to be tethered to a high-end gaming computer, Facebook said the product would in time employ microphones for communication, voice recognition software to recognize computing commands and laser-based high-speed wireless data transfers.“This is a teleportation device,” said Michael Schroepfer, Facebook’s chief technical officer. “What people are missing is that we have a clear path of research and development.”Teleportation and its ilk have been in the wings of technology for decades, with few results and many failed virtual reality products. Oculus Rift, which Facebook got last year in a $2 billion acquisition of Oculus VR, will not be available until the first quarter of 2016.AdvertisementAt the event, Facebook did not give a demonstration of the actual product, settling instead for standard projections of several games that are expected to appear on Oculus Rift.AdvertisementFacebook did not say what Oculus Rift might cost, but the goggles will work only on expensive computers running costly processors. The wire between the computer and Rift is necessary because of data inputs about half as big as the already demanding level of existing VR goggles.Facebook held the event in advance of next week’s Electronic Entertainment Expo, or E3, the gaming industry’s largest annual event. If the company had had nothing to show for Oculus after a year, it would have been a black eye.To showcase Oculus Rift’s gaming possibilities, Facebook said the device would work with the gaming controller made by Microsoft for its Xbox One console. This could make the goggles easier for established gamers to get used to, and raises the prospect that lots of Xbox games — like Halo and Minecraft — could be played on Oculus and upgraded to a more immersive kind of 3-D.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Facebook also showed off its own controller, called Oculus Touch, which looks like a pair of half-moons that fit over the hands and can be used to manipulate objects with a button and a trigger.Palmer Luckey, the founder of Oculus, described Touch as “an input device that allows people to interact.” Touch, he said, would be available in the first half of 2016; its cost was not disclosed.Oculus Rift has several subtle but important design changes compared with the heavyweight model that Oculus VR initially produced. Besides weighing less, images are produced by two round screens that are adjusted to be the right distance from a user’s eyes. Facebook reduced the size of the headphones and employed fuller 3-D audio, so objects sound as if they are moving in the right relationship to distance.The head strap is somewhat heavier in the back, so the goggles feel less as if they are hanging on a user’s face. The changes, along with better software, are designed to help people wear the goggles for hours at a time.Nate Mitchell, the head of product at Oculus, said the Rift’s fabric covering is to help a user’s skin breathe better under the goggles and make the device feel like a piece of clothing. A microphone for Oculus will allow gamers to talk to each other and eventually might be used for commands, he said, adding that this may be announced as early as September.Facebook appears to be spending significant resources trying to make the Rift a success.“They fly engineers to our offices and give us tips on new ways to do things,” said Eric Nofsinger, the chief creative officer at High Voltage Software of Hoffman Estates, Ill., which is developing a game for Rift.A version of this article appears in print on June 12, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Facebook Offers a Glimpse of Virtual Reality Goggles.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.