AdvertisementSupported byBy Rebecca R. RuizThe Federal Trade Commission on Thursday announced a settlement in its first Internet crowdfunding case, which involved a board-game maker who investigators say took in more than $120,000 on Kickstarter to fund a project but spent the money on personal expenses, including rent.The F.T.C. says Erik Chevalier advertised in May 2012 that he planned to produce a board game called “The Doom That Came to Atlantic City,” designed by two prominent board game artists. In all, 1,246 people gave pledges of $75 or more to Mr. Chevalier. The project was expected to conclude within six months.But rather than deliver copies of the game or promised pewter figurines to those donors, as he had promised to do once he reached his $35,000 goal, Mr. Chevalier took in money until he had raised nearly four times that amount.He then announced in July 2013 that the project had been canceled. He pledged to deliver refunds; they never arrived, nor did any of the promised mementos.Mr. Chevalier instead put that money toward moving himself to Portland, Ore., paying his rent and financing licenses for unrelated projects, according to the F.T.C.“Many consumers enjoy the opportunity to take part in the development of a product or service through crowdfunding, and they generally know there’s some uncertainty involved in helping start something new,” said Jessica Rich, director of the F.T.C.’s Bureau of Consumer Protection. “But consumers should able to trust their money will actually be spent on the project they funded.”The settlement is the first action the agency has taken involving such a funding scheme.Some Kickstarter policies seek to protect against fraud, stipulating that participants must have a “clear goal” and must deliver a return to the funders. If a fund-raiser on the site does not raise sufficient money within a designated time period, the fund-raiser receives no money and no backer is charged, according to the F.T.C.Asked about the case on Thursday, David Gallagher, a Kickstarter spokesman, wrote in an email: “Kickstarter creators have an incredible track record when it comes to following through on their promises. But creators who abuse our system and backers’ trust expose themselves to legal action.”Mr. Gallagher noted that another game maker had stepped in to produce the game and deliver it to Mr. Chevalier’s backers, calling that “a testament to the good will and spirit of the Kickstarter community.”Under the terms of the settlement, Mr. Chevalier is prohibited “from making misrepresentations about any crowdfunding campaign and from failing to honor stated refund policies.” The F.T.C. settlement also imposed a $111,794 judgment, though it was suspended because of his inability to pay.“Defendant promised consumers that he would provide an accounting of his expenses, but he has not done so,” the F.T.C. complaint read. “Consumers continue to file complaints regarding defendant’s failure to provide the promised products and rewards, or refunds.”Advertisement