By J. D. BIERSDORFERJUNE 12, 2015
Q. Is there an easy way to show my iPhone’s screen on my MacBook and then record a video of the demonstration on the phone?A. Software for the Mac that lets you mirror and record the phone’s display on the computer screen is available, but you may not have to download a separate program to do the job. If you are running OS X Yosemite on the MacBook and have iOS 8 on a newer iPhone, you can record videos of the iPhone’s screen actions with the QuickTime Player program that comes with the Mac. The iPhone (or iPad or iPod Touch) needs to be one of the more recent models, one that uses the small Lightning connector and cable that Apple began to include on new iOS hardware in late 2012.If you have all the hardware and software in place, connect the iPhone to the MacBook with the Lightning cable. If you do not have an icon for the QuickTime Player in the Dock, open the MacBook’s Applications folder on the hard drive and open the program there. (As a shortcut to the Applications folder from the Mac’s Finder, press the Shift, Command and A keys.)When the QuickTime program opens, go to the File menu and select New Movie Recording. A new window appears, most likely showing you in front of the MacBook’s webcam. Next to the red Record button, click the menu arrow and change the Camera input from FaceTime HD Camera to iPhone. If you want to record the audio from the phone, as from a game or app, select the iPhone for the microphone input as well.AdvertisementOnce you have selected the iPhone, click the Record button in the QuickTime window and then perform the tasks on the iPhone you wish to capture as a video. After you finish and click the Stop button to have QuickTime finish recording, you can save the newly recorded clip to your Mac’s hard drive.If you are not using OS X Yosemite or have older iPhone hardware and software, a third-party program may still work. The AirSquirrels Reflector 2 program is one of the options. It works with Macs running OS X 10.7.5 or later and phone models as far back as the iPhone 4s running iOS 7.AdvertisementReflector 2 uses Apple’s AirPlay streaming technology to wirelessly link the two so the iPhone’s display appears on the Mac’s screen for viewing and recording. You can try before you buy to see if the software suits your needs — although it adds a watermark to your files, a free seven-day trial version of the program is available to download from the AirSquirrels site.The full, unwatermarked edition for the Mac is $15; a Windows version of Reflector 2 is also available. Along with iOS devices, the Reflector 2 desktop program can mirror and record the action from the screens of certain Android devices using the “Cast screen” feature.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Getting Notifications from GmailQ. I use the office email program at work, but I like to check my personal Gmail account through my web browser. Is there a way to get alerts to new Gmail messages as they come in as my regular mail program does, in case my browser is buried under other windows?A. If you are checking your Gmail in the Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox or Apple Safari browsers, you can turn on the desktop notifications option in your Gmail account settings. To see the notifications on your screen, you need to be logged into your account with Gmail open in a tab or window and you should make sure your browser’s preferences are also set to allow desktop notifications.To turn on desktop notifications, go to your Gmail window, click the gear-shaped menu icon on the right side of the window and select Settings. Make sure you are on the General tab of the Settings screen and scroll down to Desktop Notifications. Here, you can turn on alerts for new messages. If you use Google’s Inbox category tabs, you will be notified when new mail arrives in your Primary Inbox.Should you prefer, you can also limit the notifications so they appear only when you receive new messages from senders you or Google have designated as Important; these are the messages tagged with a little yellow icon next to the sender’s name. When you have turned on the notification level you want to use, click the Save Changes button in the Settings window.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.