By DINO GRANDONIJUNE 16, 2015
In mid-April, 33 executives from rival Silicon Valley companies hurried from building to building on Capitol Hill to push lawmakers to grant President Obama the authority to finish a trade deal with Asian countries. Showing a rare cooperative front, they told the lawmakers that the deal would protect intellectual property and the companies’ ability to sell electronics across the Pacific Ocean.The executives left optimistic that a deal would pass. “There was great evidence and hope that things would move this year, which is something new for Congress,” said Linda Moore, president of TechNet, the lobbying group that organized the meetings.Two months later, that optimism has largely vanished, leaving computer chip makers and other technology companies scrambling to make a final plea to pass the legislation.The deal, a cornerstone of Mr. Obama’s economic policy agenda, hit its biggest roadblock last week, when the House voted against a program that could be needed to get the larger trade deal approved. Labor unions and other groups say that the deal could threaten American jobs. On Tuesday, in a sign of how much more work will be necessary to persuade lawmakers, a second vote on the program was pushed back for six weeks.AdvertisementThe proposed 12-nation trade agreement known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership aims to remove some barriers to trade. It would touch nearly every corner of the American economy, including Silicon Valley. Companies that write software and run websites say the trade deal with Japan, Singapore and other Pacific Rim nations will help ensure that data sent from these sprawling multinationals flows freely across borders, while trade secrets stay put.This is the most ambitious trade deal since the North American Free Trade Agreement in the 1990s.The deal has become a cornerstone of President Obama’s trade policy in his final term.Who would win? American service industries. Who would lose? Manufacturing workers.For the technology sector, one product in particular may be at stake in the trade talks: computer chips, a core component of many of today’s electronic devices, including smartphones and computers.American chip manufacturers argue that, without the trade deal, they will be squeezed out of the growing Asian market for computer chips by competitors in countries like China. Although China is not part of the deal, it has aggressively pushed into the semiconductor market, with the government announcing a $5 billion fund for Chinese chip makers in 2013.AdvertisementFor months, Lisa Malloy, a senior manager of policy communications at Intel, has been meeting with members of Congress and their staffs to persuade the lawmakers to vote for the trade agreement.“That’s a build-here, sell-elsewhere dynamic that’s only supported by trade with other countries,” Ms. Malloy said. Two-thirds of the value of all the chips made by Intel comes from those made in the United States, the company said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Intel may be an exception among American chip makers. Labor unions argue that freer trade with Asia has already cost Americans work at semiconductor plants, where American labor groups have long had difficulty organizing workers. As chip factories have moved overseas, jobs in the United States for making semiconductors and other electronic components have fallen to 370,000 from a peak of 700,000 in 2001, according to William Spriggs, chief economist at the A.F.L.-C.I.O.“They say, ‘Oh, you labor unions are only concerned about dying industries,’ ” Mr. Spriggs said. “Except semiconductors are not buggy whips.”Chip makers counter that, compared with other companies, they have kept a large portion of both high- and low-skill jobs in the United States. The Semiconductor Industry Association, a trade group that represents American chip makers, said American semiconductor companies did 56 percent of their manufacturing domestically.Unlike many other goods made in the United States, including automobiles and airplanes, computer chips already have low or no tariffs from earlier trade agreements. But many of the electronics that contain semiconductors are taxed between borders.“Letting iPhones and all these electronic goods flow tariff-free in Southeast Asia is a tremendous value to our industry,” said John Neuffer, who leads the Semiconductor Industry Association.The companies say the tariffs could increase. Many new computer chips, including those being developed by Intel and others, are not covered by earlier agreements and could be taxed when sold abroad. Chip makers also say that Asian governments may begin to pass laws that require any device sold in a country to have a certain percentage of its components made there.“To put it simply,” said Mark Hung, an analyst at Gartner, the research firm, “if the U.S. is not part of the trade deal, then American semiconductor companies will be at a significant disadvantage.”A version of this article appears in print on June 17, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Chip Makers Renew Pleas to Congress for Trade Bill.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.