AdvertisementSupported byBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. An icon appeared on my computer offering me a free upgrade to Windows 10. Is this real? And if so, should I sign up?A. While programs suddenly appearing on your desktop can often be suspicious (and malicious), the small notification icon shaped like a Windows logo is part of Microsoft’s Get Windows 10 app that has been recently delivered as part of Windows Update. Windows 10, Microsoft’s newest operating system, will be available starting July 29 for most computers running legitimate copies of Windows 7 and Windows 8.1.The Get Windows 10 app checks your PC for compatibility and lets you sign up to “reserve” your copy of the system. After you place your reservation, your computer will download some preliminary files to speed the overall upgrade process once Windows 10 is officially available. Microsoft estimates the actual installation time for the upgrade will be 20 minutes to an hour, depending on the computer.Even if you sign up, you can cancel your upgrade reservation before you install Windows 10. Microsoft says you will need to upgrade before July 29, 2016, to get the software free.As for whether you should sign up, that is entirely up to you. Windows 10 may resolve issues some users found with the Windows 8.1 interface. Keep in mind that mainstream support for Windows 7 has already ended, although security patches will continue until early 2020. Upgrading any operating system typically requires an adjustment period and basic troubleshooting to feel comfortable with the software, but new features and better security are the rewards.To help you decide, a prompt on the Microsoft.com home page will direct you to more information about Windows 10, including a frequently asked questions section, demonstration videos and details about the upgrade process. You can also find a complete list of the hardware requirements that your PC must meet to run the system.Editing the Apple TV Screen Q. Is there a way to ditch some of the channel apps on the Apple TV home screen so the kids can’t see them?A. You can hide Apple TV channels in a couple of ways. With the remote, select an unwanted icon and hold down the center select button. When the icon begins to wiggle, press the remote’s play/pause button and choose Hide This Item from the menu.Another method is to open the settings icon on the Apple TV screen. Choose Main Menu and then go down the list of channel apps. Select a channel and press the remote’s select button to either hide it or show it.TIP OF THE WEEK Twitter continues to adjust its service and is introducing a new feature to better display exchanges between users. The company is also adding a new way to easily block accounts that have a reputation for abuse.As announced recently on its company blog, Twitter has started to group conversations (replies to a particular post) on an tweet’s details page by connecting them with a line that highlights the dialogue between users; to delve more deeply into a specific tweet’s responses, a button that reveals more replies is available. The new conversation groupings for Tweet pages arrived first for Twitter.com website users, but users of Twitter’s mobile apps will get the feature, too.The company is also furthering its efforts to help stop abuse and trolling on its service by letting users share their personal lists of blocked accounts — which could be useful among friends or organizations targeted by the same harassers. For those who want more information, the Twitter Help Center has detailed instructions for exporting and importing “blocked lists” at support.twitter.com/articles/20172663.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement