There are few types of information that Google isn’t busy organizing for its users. But on Friday, it said it would add another: so-called revenge porn.The company announced in a blog post that it would soon begin to remove links to websites hosting revenge porn, or revealing images published online by former romantic partners without permission from those depicted in the photographs. This summer, Google will post a form online in which victims of revenge porn can ask the search engine to remove from its search results a link to a website with these images.If Google deems an image revenge porn, it will still be accessible to someone who knows the direct web address of the image. But once delisted from Google, the image could not be found through the search engine.Under federal law, websites generally cannot be held responsible for photos or other information third parties post to them. But technology companies, heeding the calls of lawyers and activists, are beginning to act on their own to limit access to revenge porn images.In February, Reddit banned revenge porn against the protests of many of its freewheeling loyalists. In March, Twitter and Facebook, the latter never friendly to pornography to begin with, explicitly banned users from posting intimate photos without consent.In the blog post, Google explained that the decision was consistent with its current guidelines.“This is a narrow and limited policy, similar to how we treat removal requests for other highly sensitive personal information, such as bank account numbers and signatures, that may surface in our search results,” wrote Amit Singhal, senior vice president of Google’s search engine.Mary Anne Franks,  a professor at the University of Miami School of Law and vice president of the Cyber Civil Rights Initiative, said she welcomed the policy change by Google as it will mean fewer victims of revenge porn in the future. Ms. Franks, an advocate of legislation to outlaw revenge porn, said she has been advising Google for more than a year on developing an improved policy for protecting individual’s sexual privacy. “I’ve been advocating for them to treat sexual information the same way they treat other forms of sensitive private information,” said Ms. Franks.Google has often been put in the position of removing links from its search results, whether it wants to or not. Under the Europe Union’s “right to be forgotten” rules, people with connections to Europe can ask the search engine to remove links to websites containing an individual’s name.Matthew Goldstein contributed reporting.