By J. D. BIERSDORFEROCT. 19, 2015
Q. Why are some pictures really clear in Google Earth while others are noticeably blurry? Aren’t they all taken from a satellite?A. You may see blurry images in Google Earth for a couple of reasons. If your Internet connection is slow or unstable, the pictures may not be downloading properly at the time. If the problem is persistent and affects the visibility of numerous locations within the program, try Google Earth’s troubleshooter page for server issues to see if any of the suggestions help you fix the problem.Some locations depicted in Google Earth may just be blurry, though. In order to create a smooth and continuous image of a place, the program must combine photos of varying quality. While many urban areas are shown in high resolution, images of more remote areas might not offer as much detail.Google regularly adds new satellite photographs to its Earth database, so areas that are currently a bit fuzzy may improve over time. And parts of some images in the Street View mode may be intentionally blurred, as Google accepts requests to have identifying information like license plates or visible faces blurred out for the sake of privacy.AdvertisementQ. I have the option to use the free upgrade to Windows 10 on my PC, but I’m worried I won’t like it. If I don’t, can I go back to my old version of Windows?AdvertisementA. Microsoft says you have up to a month after upgrading to Windows 10 to ditch the new operating system and return to your previous version of Windows. Within that time period — when you have Windows 10 in place and have decided that it is not for you — go to the Start menu, select Settings, choose Update & Security and then Recovery to see your available options.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you choose to roll back to a previous edition of Windows, the process reverses any changes you made to your system settings and removes driver software and other apps that were installed when you upgraded. Your personal files should remain intact, but if you used any Windows 8.1 apps that were retired from Windows 10, you may need to download and reinstall them again from Microsoft’s online Windows Store.You may also need a few things from your older system, like the account passwords you had on the PC. If you used a USB drive to upgrade your PC to Windows 10 in the first place, you may need it to downgrade, as well.If more than a month has passed since you upgraded to Windows 10, check to see if your computer came with a recovery partition that lets you wipe the drive and reinstall the version of Windows that came with the machine. (In the Recovery box, look for a Reset This PC option.)Should none of these choices exist for you, the time-honored method of backing up your personal files and doing a clean installation from the original Windows disc or drive is another way to return to your previous version of the operating system. But remember, you will probably need to enter your lengthy Windows product key to activate the software, so have it handy.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.