AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I am trying to leave iPhoto behind and get used to the Photos app for OS X on my Mac, but all the familiar controls for adjusting the color, contrast and other aspects of the image seem to have moved or have disappeared. For example, where are the Sharpness and De-Noise sliders that were under the Adjust tab in iPhoto?A. The Adjust tab in the older iPhoto program included handy sliders for changing the exposure, contrast, saturation, sharpness, noise and other elements of the image. Despite the interface overhaul, Apple’s Photos for OS X software still offers many editing tools to help you improve the look of your pictures. The streamlined look of the new program happens to tuck things away under small icons and menus, so you have to poke around a bit to find them.In Photos for OS X, you can find these tools after you select a photo to work on and click the Edit button in the top-right corner of the window. Once the program’s background changes from white to black and you are in Edit mode, click the Adjust icon in the list on the right of the screen.The Adjustments panel opens with a few default groups of sliders, like those for Light, Color and Black & White. If you do not see individual sliders under these groupings — like the exposure and contrast controls under Light, move the cursor to the right side of the label and click the large downward-pointing menu arrow to reveal all the individual sliders for that category.To add sliders for other editing tools, like sharpening and noise reduction, click the Add button in the top-right corner of the Adjustments panel. From the menu that opens, you can add those sliders to your panel, along with controls for a picture’s white balance, levels, vignette and overall definition. If you do not see it already, you can also choose to show the histogram for the photo you are editing. Use the Save As Default option on the Add menu if you would like to keep this arrangement of tools.For basic instruction in using Photos for OS X, go to the program’s Help menu and select Photos Help. If you do not have the Photos program open and still want to do some background reading on the subject, you can find the same Photos for OS X guide on Apple’s website.Hushing a Noisy NarratorQ. I sometimes hit certain keys and Windows 8.1 starts describing the screen out loud. I have to restart to make it shut up. What is this and how can I stop it?A. If you accidentally press the Windows and Enter keys at the same time in Windows 8.1, you turn on the Narrator feature. You can turn off Narrator by pressing the same Windows-and-Enter key combination again.Narrator is one of the accessibility features built into the Windows 8.1 operating system, and the program has been included in Windows 7 and earlier versions of Windows, too. The utility helps make using the computer easier for people with visual impairments because it describes things like alert boxes and recites text on the screen aloud. (For Mac users, Apple has a similar set of accessibility tools built into OS X, including its own screen reader program called VoiceOver.)Advertisement