For many American tech companies, Ireland has often been the first port of call when expanding overseas.The country’s corporate tax rate — one of the lowest in the European Union — has led the likes of Facebook, Twitter and Apple to establish their international headquarters in a country smaller than Indiana.Ireland’s oversize role in the tech world also has extended to the growing debate about how companies use the reams of online data that they regularly collect on individuals’ online habits and activities.As home to many tech companies’ non-American headquarters, Ireland and its data protection watchdog are responsible for overseeing how the data from the combined hundreds of millions of users of Facebook and Twitter is protected.That role has become increasingly contentious after a number of other European regulators opened their own privacy investigations into some of the data practices of American tech companies. Many of those authorities have been eager to take a tough line on what type of information tech companies can collect on their users. And some have criticized the Irish regulator for taking a somewhat lax approach to policing the companies that fall under its jurisdiction.Yet Helen Dixon, Ireland’s privacy chief, says the country’s central role in Europe’s tough data protection rules is unlikely to change.“Ireland will be the leading regulator when dealing with U.S. tech companies,” Ms. Dixon said. “We want to work actively with other regulators. But we will be the lead.”Her comments come as the Irish data protection regulator published its annual report on Tuesday outlining the watchdog’s activities for 2014.As people’s interest increases over how their online data is collected and used, the authority’s annual budget has almost doubled this year, to $4.1 million, and its staff expanded 70 percent, to 49 regulators. Still, the Irish regulator’s financial resources pale in comparison with those of its American counterparts, which have hundreds of millions of dollars at their disposal to ensure that tech companies comply with domestic legislation.To ensure that American tech companies play by Europe’s privacy rules, the Irish regulator is expected to conduct data protection audits of Adobe, Yahoo and Apple, among others, this year. The investigations, which do not imply any wrongdoing by the companies, are part of the regulator’s efforts to enforce Europe’s data rules.“We are responsible for millions of users,” Ms. Dixon said. “The companies accept pushback from us. They want to be compliant.”These regular audits come as the region finalizes a series of reforms that will give Europeans greater control over how their online information is used. They also may lead to fines of $1.1 million or 2 percent of global revenue, whichever is greater, according to the latest proposals.Still, some policy makers remain unconvinced that a country that relies heavily on tax receipts from tech companies can properly curtail their use of people’s online information. A lawsuit has been filed with Europe’s top court because an Austrian law student was not satisfied with how the Irish authorities dealt with his concerns about Facebook.And others have questioned why a company like Facebook would choose to put itself under Ireland’s supervision when the majority of its international users are elsewhere.“Of course Facebook would go to a country with the lowest levels of data protection,” said Peter Schaar, a former federal data protection commissioner in Germany. “It’s natural they would choose Ireland.”