By MIKE ISAAC and NICK WINGFIELDOCT. 24, 2015
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Mr. Manjoo is off this week, so Mr. Isaac is conversing with fellow tech reporter Nick Wingfield.Mike: Hello, Farh— wait a minute. You aren’t Farhad. It’s special guest and able-bodied reporter Nick Wingfield! Hello, Nick!Nick: What am I doing here? I feel like I walked into the wrong restroom.Mike: You have no idea how often I hear that.So it has been another busy week in tech. Which seems to be a theme for, oh, the last two decades.YouTube introduced a fancy, questionably named new service this week, YouTube Red, where folks can pay 10 bucks a month for an ad-free version of the online video site. Sounds like a deal!AdvertisementJack Dorsey, chief of Twitter and Square, keeps giving away huge chunks of his stock to employees and foundations, which also sounds like a good deal.AdvertisementOh, and Amazon and The New York Times got into a very public sparring match over a rather unflattering article on Amazon’s grueling work culture. Jay Carney, Amazon’s head of public relations, said the company got a raw deal. Our boss, Dean Baquet, disagreed big time. And the tech pundits had a field day because the whole thing played out on Medium, the blogging platform.Nick: I think the name YouTube After Dark would have been better. Not to change the subject on Amazon, did you notice that Jeff Bezos bought something big from Costco this week?The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mike: Whoa, a jet. My biggest Costco purchases are usually 40-packs of toilet paper and five-pound wheels of Parmesan.The thing I want to talk about is Microsoft — a sentence I never thought I would hear myself say. Apparently the company did quite well in its earnings report this week, and it has had a spate of news recently around new devices and other stuff. I guess folks are more bullish on Microsoft than ever, or at least that seems like the positive sentiment I’m hearing lately.You, Nick, are our resident Microsoft expert. Tell me everything, starting with why they seem to be on a roll lately.Nick: One word: the cloud. Actually, that’s two words. The money they are making from it is now big enough ($5.9 billion) and growing fast enough that investors feel as if the company has a grip on one of the most important technology trends out there.Mike: The cloud! I can’t say the cloud without yelling it feverishly. I don’t really know what it means other than servers and Amazon Web Services and Google.AdvertisementWhich, in my tiny mind, is something that makes me wonder whether Microsoft will be able to lock in that cloud power. What makes Microsoft better than Amazon — which has a booming business in A.W.S. — or Google, which also offers a bunch of cloud stuff?Nick: Why is Microsoft better? I’m not sure they are, but there are some differences with Amazon. Microsoft says it is a “hybrid” cloud company. Customers can put all their stuff in Microsoft’s data centers, or if they’re just getting comfortable with the cloud, they can keep some of their data on their own premises. The choice with Amazon is more binary — you’re in their cloud, or you’re not.Mike: O.K., cool. So the cloud is the future, and that’s good. Or something. I’m on board with that.So what else? The Steve Ballmer era is over. Are you into this new guy they have running the company? And by new I mean “for the last 18 months.”Nick: I think it helps that the newish chief executive, Satya Nadella, is realistic about what the company can achieve in mobile. It has sharply scaled back its ambitions in smartphones, while it is getting lots of people using Office apps on other mobile devices.Mike: This is interesting to me. At some point someone realized that Microsoft Windows Phones were probably not going to be the next iPhones. Which was nice to see, since that seemed delusional. That Mr. Nadella seems to be a big proponent of acquisitions — he bought Acompli, Sunrise and a few other cool start-ups, as you have noted — seems like a good thing. Build or buy is the motto, and building, in some instances, hasn’t worked that well for Microsoft.Do you think they’ll keep breaking out the checkbook?Nick: For sure, at least for small deals. I think Microsoft struggles with the idea of a mega-acquisition — think Salesforce — because of the crazy valuations of some of these companies.Mike: Before we get out of here, can you help me understand Microsoft’s Xbox strategy? With music, Kinect, video games and movies, it all feels a bit scattered over the last few years.AdvertisementAlso I would like to go on the record saying Assassin’s Creed III for Xbox is awesome. I love hunting both deer and human alike. Uh, in the game.Nick: Mr. Nadella has made productivity the mantra of Microsoft. Xbox is the opposite of that. It’s all about killing your productivity with cool games. Still, you would be hard pressed to name another brand that Microsoft has created, ever, that has connected so well with consumers. Microsoft needs that connection.You’re right that it has flip-flopped a bit with Xbox, which Sony has capitalized on to sell more PlayStations. But Microsoft seems to be doing better now that it has made the Xbox marketing message more about games, rather than other kinds of entertainment. Go figure.Speaking of which, Halo 5 comes out Tuesday. Are you calling in sick that day?Mike: Way to blow my cover, man. When is Farhad back again?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.