AdvertisementSupported byBy Ian AustenOTTAWA — BlackBerry’s introduction of two phones aimed at its traditional base of corporate users failed to reverse the company’s slide in the handset market, the company said in releasing its earnings on Tuesday.BlackBerry, a Canadian smartphone maker, said it sold only 1.1 million phones in its first quarter, a decline of 500,000 from the previous quarter. The company, led by John S. Chen, also reported an adjusted loss of $28 million, or 5 cents a share, on revenue of $658 million, compared with a loss of $60 million, or 11 cents a share, on revenue of $966 million in the period last year.From the earnings, it was unclear whether Mr. Chen’s strategy of transforming BlackBerry into a company focused on selling software was advancing as quickly as planned. On Tuesday, shares of BlackBerry fell more than 4 percent to $8.81.Colin Gillis, an analyst with BGC Partners, said that Mr. Chen’s turnaround plan still remained unproved.“We’re in the early stages of Phase 2,” Mr. Gillis said. “Phase 1 was: Make sure we survive as a company. Phase 2 is: Let’s get some growth and move to the software model.”The software and patent licensing business of BlackBerry grew 150 percent, to $137 million, over the previous quarter. But in a conference call with analysts, Mr. Chen, the company’s chief executive and executive chairman, said that the bulk of that growth had come from a patent licensing deal with Cisco Systems, as well as one with another company, which he declined to identify.While Mr. Chen said that a legal agreement with Cisco and the other company prevented him from disclosing the amount of money BlackBerry will receive or the terms of the arrangements, he said that he did not expect the overall software business to grow in the current quarter.Some analysts estimated that the company’s software business, excluding the patent deals, had not grown substantially during the quarter, although it was higher than a year ago.Not long ago, Mr. Chen was raising expectations that two new and expensive phones, the Passport and the Classic, would revive interest in BlackBerry handsets among corporate and government users.Mr. Chen characterized the sales of the Passport, which has an unusual square screen above its physical keyboard, as “rather steady.” He said sales of the Classic, which uses the company’s new operating systems while emulating BlackBerry’s traditional physical design, were still rising. Mr. Chen acknowledged that the design of the BlackBerry Leap, a relatively inexpensive phone, was disliked by some consumers, particularly traditional BlackBerry customers, and that it was still too early to assess its sales.Speaking with analysts and then later with shareholders at the company’s annual meeting, Mr. Chen suggested that the phones’ problems were mainly related to weak marketing and advertising. “We just need to bring awareness up,” he said.During the annual meeting in Waterloo, Ontario, Mr. Chen said that despite the sluggish sales, the company was sticking with plans to introduce more new phones later this year.“Why are we in the handset business?” he asked. “I think we have a chance to make money in the handset business.”Mr. Chen said that two contract phone manufacturers based in Taiwan, Wistron Corporation and Compal Electronics, have agreed to share in the development and inventory costs of future phones. BlackBerry reached a similar arrangement with a unit of Foxconn earlier.But Mr. Chen repeated that software was his focus and said that he planned to reallocate hardware spending. In the first quarter, phones accounted for about 40 percent of BlackBerry’s sales, services were 38 percent and software was 21 percent.Mr. Chen estimated that 60 percent of BlackBerry’s software sales, excluding the patent licenses, involved new software that allowed corporate and government information technology departments to manage and bolster security, not just on BlackBerrys used by employees but also on iPhones from Apple and phones using the Android operating system from Google.Mr. Chen said he was confident that software revenue, excluding patent licenses, would rise throughout the coming year.“I feel the direction and momentum,” he said.Advertisement