AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. My tabletop Internet radio occasionally drops a station I’ve been listening to for many months because the station changes its address — but the URL the radio uses never gets updated. Is there an Internet radio that lets me input the new stream address instead of searching its preprogrammed database?A. Some radio makers may occasionally update their database lists and make them available via software updates to the hardware. Check your manufacturer’s website for information and instructions for how to update the radio.If an updated station list is not an option with your model — and the company’s technical support is no help — you have other ways to find your favorite stations and keep them streaming. For example, the Sonos music system (which uses TuneIn and other software to stream radio content) has instructions on its site for manually adding the URLs of streaming stations.In lieu of a dedicated Internet radio, you can use apps and programs on mobile devices and computers to bring in the station streams you want to hear. Hooking your gadgets up to wireless speakers or powered speaker docks can then boost the sound around the house.TuneIn also has apps for iOS, Android, Windows Phone, Amazon Kindle and several smart televisions and set-top boxes. Desktop programs like Microsoft’s Windows Media Player and Apple’s iTunes program can also add, save and play streams from online radio stations.Editing Word Files in DropboxQ. Can I make changes to Microsoft Word files from the Dropbox app on my Android tablet, or do I have to use Word to fix the file in the computer’s Dropbox folder?A. Dropbox integrated its service with Microsoft’s Office Online software this year, so you can now edit Word, Excel and PowerPoint files right from the Dropbox app on your mobile device. (The computer’s files must be in Office 2007 or later.)When you open a document from the Dropbox app, tap the Edit icon at the bottom of the screen. Dropbox then prompts you to download the free Office apps needed for editing. You can find full instructions for Android and iOS at https://www.dropbox.com/help/6999.TIP OF THE WEEK To help keep things organized, many parents set up separate user accounts for their children on the family’s shared Windows PC or Mac. But for those who worry that their children are spending too much of their summer vacation in front of the computer, both operating systems include a time-limits feature that can be set to lock a child’s account after a designated number of hours have passed.To set the timer on a child’s account in Windows 8.1, go to account.microsoft.com/family and log in with your Microsoft account user name and password. Select the child’s account from the list and then on the next screen, choose the “Time limits” controls. Once you adjust the time-limits button, you can set the number of hours the account can be used on both weekdays and weekends. The Curfew option can be configured to prevent late-night surfing sessions. (Windows 7 can also restrict children’s user accounts; just go to the Start menu and search for “parental controls” to get started and follow along.)In recent versions of OS X, open the System Preferences from under the Apple menu, or by clicking the System Preferences icon in the Mac’s Dock. Select the Parental Controls icon. Click the lock icon on the Parental Controls window and type in your administrator password. Choose the child’s account from the list and turn on the checkbox next to “Enable parental controls.” Click the Open Parental Controls button, click the Time Limits tab and set the computer allowance as you see fit.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement