By DINO GRANDONIJUNE 25, 2015
The country’s top communications regulator on Thursday rejected calls to dedicate more airwaves for smaller wireless carriers in an auction expected next year.Tom Wheeler, the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, wrote in a blog post that he wanted to keep the level sold exclusively to smaller carriers at the level agreed to last year. T-Mobile US and other smaller wireless carriers lobbied for months to increase the size.As Americans spend more time using their cellphones, the F.C.C. wants to dedicate a larger portion of available spectrum to cell service. Spectrum is the airwaves through which television, radio and many other signals are sent.To do so, the agency is buying back rights sold to local TV stations decades ago. It then plans to sell them back to cell carriers, helping them improve service nationwide.AdvertisementThe F.C.C. said that to increase competition, it would limit the amount of spectrum that could be sold to AT&T and Verizon, the two dominant wireless carriers. Already, AT&T and Verizon own the majority of the span of airwaves that are best for sending cell data.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But smaller carriers — in particular, T-Mobile US and its outspoken chief executive, John Legere — pushed Mr. Wheeler to set aside even more for them. The company found allies within the government: This month, the Justice Department sent letters to the F.C.C. urging it to earmark even more spectrum for smaller carriers.AdvertisementMr. Wheeler’s response was that the F.C.C. was already doing enough to increase competition.“There will be significant spectrum made available in all markets of the country to all bidders,” Mr. Wheeler wrote. “As a result, consumers will benefit directly from competition in all parts of the country.”The auction rules are expected to be voted on by all five commissioners, including Mr. Wheeler, next month. That seemed to give Mr. Legere room for optimism.“A lot of noise coming out of Washington today,” Mr. Legere told his followers Thursday afternoon on Periscope, a live-streaming app. “I want you to understand, this is going to go on for another month or so. So don’t give up hope.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.