AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I often find that the GPS coordinates included in my smartphone photos are way off. How does this happen and can I fix it?A. If you began snapping photos with your smartphone before its GPS function had time to properly pinpoint your location, you may see incorrect coordinates embedded in your picture files. The data may reflect your last known location, or someplace else entirely. Interference from the terrain or a weak signal from the cell tower are among the other factors that can affect your phone’s GPS accuracy.Additionally, the quality and capability of your phone hardware can contribute (or not) to accurately determining your location. To prevent getting the wrong coordinates because the phone is still trying to lock onto a signal, wait a minute or two after turning on the device so it can find a network link and get updated information.Even if the camera app embedded the wrong location into your picture files, you can manually adjust the coordinates. You just need a program or app that edits Exchangeable Image File Format (EXIF) data, which is the part of the photo file where the GPS coordinates and other information are stored.Dedicated programs for photo editing can help as well. Google’s free Picasa software can edit location information in a picture. Exif Pilot Editor for Windows or the Exif Editor for Mac OS X are among the many programs that edit the EXIF data woven into the picture file. For those comfortable with using the computer’s command-line interface, ExifTool software works on several platforms and has many positive comments from users, but it may not be for the technical novice.Q. I have Windows 8 and I don’t see the icon to update to Windows 10 in my taskbar. How can I get it?A. Microsoft’s support site for Windows 10 lists a few things to check on your computer if you do not see the Get Windows 10 app icon popping up in your PC’s notifications area. First, run the Windows Update program to check for, download and install any available updates for your computer.If you are running plain Windows 8 and have not upgraded your system software all the way to Windows 8.1 Update, you will not see the Get Windows 10 icon. Computers deemed incompatible with Windows 10 will not display the icon either, although Microsoft plans to enable it after Windows 10 is released so that you can manually check your system for compatibility.If your computer has not been updating itself regularly, check its settings to see if the Windows Update tool has been turned off — and check that security software on the computer is not preventing Windows from updating itself. Microsoft also points out that computers running on counterfeit copies of the Windows operating system software will not display the Windows 10 icon.Windows users who meet all the requirements still may not see the Get Windows 10 icon because of software problems or other reasons. Engineers and other contributors on Microsoft’s Windows 10 community forums have posted workarounds and suggestions that may help certain people, and other users have offered help for those with questions about Windows 10. Microsoft’s official Online Answer Desk has links to support articles and interactive help, although you may need to dig up your Windows product key to proceed.On the flip side, for users who have the Get Windows 10 icon and do not want to be nagged to upgrade, several sites have published instructions for ridding your notifications area of the icon. You can simply hide the icon from the notifications area by right-clicking the taskbar, selecting Properties and using the Customize options for the Notifications area. If you would like to remove the Get Windows 10 app entirely, you can find unofficial advice from sites like InfoWorld, AskVG and Windows Central.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement