Many in the tech community expressed dismay at a Supreme Court decision on Monday not to hear the appeal of a copyright decision against Google.But it could be years before lower courts provide clarity around an important component of big software systems, called Application Programming Interfaces.Google had asked the Supreme Court to revisit a 2014 federal appeals court decision that A.P.I.s in the Java programming language owned by Oracle, used by Google to create the Android smartphone operating system, are entitled to copyright protection.In that ruling, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit reversed a 2012 decision by Federal District Court in San Francisco, which had concluded that the software in question was not subject to copyright.Monday’s Supreme Court decision, which was specific to this appeal, means the Oracle-Google saga will now move back to the lower courts to determine another aspect of the case: Even though Google was using copyrighted software, was it only making “fair use” of it, something akin to quoting a few lines of a copyrighted book, which does not require payment?Oracle acquired Java with the purchase of Sun Microsystems in 2010. After some initial discussions with Google, Oracle sued Google later that year.“I don’t think this decision will have much effect” on the software industry, said Pamela Samuelson, a law professor at the University of California, Berkeley. She added, “Some of us were hoping for a little more clarity on copyright, but that will come from other courts.”Should Google eventually lose in the lower courts, both the cost to it and the impact on Android, the most widely used software for smartphones, are uncertain.There are also considerations for the industry. A.P.I.s are elements of software code that allow pieces of software to share data and behavior. They are critical when computing moves to smartphones, apps and increasingly popular cloud computing.“You shouldn’t let the owner of an A.P.I. end up owning the other person’s program,” said Michael Barclay, special counsel to the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a tech nonprofit devoted to civil liberties. “I don’t think we’ll find out how bad a day this is for a long time.”Both Google and Oracle have enormous financial resources and indicated that they were committed to more litigation.“We will continue to defend the interoperability that has fostered innovation and competition in the software industry,” Google said in a statement issued after the Supreme Court decision.In a statement, Oracle’s general counsel, Dorian Daley, said, “Today’s Supreme Court decision is a win for innovation and for the technology industry that relies on copyright protection to fuel innovation.”Oracle currently licenses Java to a number of commercial companies, including Hewlett-Packard and Sony. The licensing terms are negotiated, which means that Google cannot calculate what it might have to pay. Buyers are also required to make programs that are compatible with Java, something Google has not done.Oracle’s concern, said an executive close to Oracle who was not authorized to speak on behalf of the company, is that apps developed for Android won’t work on other systems — contrary to the original “interoperability” goals of Java. A spokesman for Google declined to comment on those fears.Ms. Samuelson, who earlier wrote a court brief in support of Google, said that the Oracle-Google case had so many specifics that it would have been a poor case on which to establish general principles for the rest of the industry. The district court, she noted, was under no obligation to follow the court of appeals in future rulings about A.P.I.s.“There are a lot of things about A.P.I.s that are different now” than when Oracle first sued Google, Ms. Samuelson said. “We may see some more cases now brought to the Ninth Circuit, as people test out what the law says.”A version of this article appears in print on 06/30/2015, on page B3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Supreme Court Declines to Hear Google-Oracle Appeal.