Mark Zuckerberg may run Facebook, but that does not mean he actually controls the social network.Mr. Zuckerberg, co-founder and chief executive of Facebook, tried to conduct a question-and-answer session on his Facebook page on Tuesday afternoon, but the social network had trouble handling the load. (One company official described it as “an overload of likes.”) The Q. and A. session went offline for several minutes, and even after it came back, some people reported that all they saw was a blank screen. Finding Mr. Zuckerberg’s responses in the sea of questions posted on the page was also a challenge for people using Facebook’s mobile app — which is how most of Facebook’s 1.3 billion users worldwide gain access to the service.Still, Mr. Zuckerberg, who has been making a habit of taking questions from Facebook users online and during in-person town halls, managed to answer more than a dozen questions, from the silly to the philosophical, including several from celebrities such as the actor Arnold Schwarzenegger and the scientist Stephen W. Hawking.Mr. Hawking, a physicist and cosmologist, asked Mr. Zuckerberg a suitably cosmic question: “Which of the big questions in science would you like to know the answer to and why?” The Facebook chief responded, “I’m most interested in questions about people. What will enable us to live forever? How do we cure all diseases? How does the brain work? How does learning work and how we can empower humans to learn a million times more? I’m also curious about whether there is a fundamental mathematical law underlying human social relationships that governs the balance of who and what we all care about. I bet there is.”One Facebook user, an auditor named Joe Byer, asked Mr. Zuckerberg why he collected a salary of only $1 a year. The reply: “I’ve made enough money. At this point, I’m just focused on making sure I do the most possible good with what I have.” (Mr. Zuckerberg’s Facebook stock is worth more than $36 billion.)Asked about the future of Facebook, Mr. Zuckerberg ventured into the realm of science fiction: “One day, I believe we’ll be able to send full rich thoughts to each other directly using technology. You’ll just be able to think of something and your friends will immediately be able to experience it too if you’d like. This would be the ultimate communication technology.” He also mused on the nature of happiness: “I think lots of people confuse happiness with fun. I don’t believe it is possible to have fun every day. But I do believe it is possible to do something meaningful that helps people every day.”Weighing in on the issue of real names on Facebook, a topic that has gained fresh currency since the Supreme Court decision legalizing same-sex marriage in all 50 states, Mr. Zuckerberg said the company was not trying to force transgender people to use their legal names. “Your real name is whatever you go by and what your friends call you. If your friends all call you by a nickname and you want to use that name on Facebook, you should be able to do that.” The publisher Arianna Huffington and the journalism professor Jeff Jarvis asked Mr. Zuckerberg about the future of news and Facebook’s role in it. He said Facebook’s instant articles format, which involves hosting content on Facebook so that it can be displayed more quickly, will eventually be the primary way people get news on the social network. “When news is as fast as everything else on Facebook, people will naturally read a lot more news,” he said. “That will be good for helping people be more informed about the world, and it will be good for the news ecosystem because it will deliver more traffic”Mr. Schwarzenegger, a former bodybuilder and governor of California, whose newly released film, “Terminator Genisys,” features killing machines from the future, asked Mr. Zuckerberg: “How you find time to train and what is your regimen like? And by the way — will the machines win?”Mr. Zuckerberg, who keeps a trim figure, responded: “I make sure I work out at least three times a week — usually first thing when I wake up. I also try to take my dog running whenever I can,” he said, which is hilarious because it is “basically like seeing a mop run.” He then added, “And no, the machines don’t win.” (Except, perhaps, the ones that were hosting Mr. Zuckerberg’s Q. and A.)A version of this article appears in print on 07/06/2015, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Zuckerberg Takes Usersu2019 Questions Amid Stoppages.