Think of it as Airbnb, with lots more fresh air.A company called Hipcamp now offers “land sharing,” a sharing economy term for campsites on private land. Listings include a swimming hole in the pines, a pondside space in Mendocino, Calif., and a yurt supposedly ideal for practicing Tai-Chi. Many more such sites are planned.“There are a lot of people seeking privacy in great spaces,” said Alyssa Ravasio, Hipcamp’s founder and chief executive. “How cool to have your own waterfall for a weekend?”And how reasonable, at least in comparison to the sky-high hotel costs in San Francisco, which is the nearest urban center to Hipcamp’s initial sites. The swimming hole, which does indeed appear to have a waterfall, runs $50 a night, though you have to bring your own tent. The yurt will set you back $100.Ms. Ravasio got the idea for Hipcamp a few years ago, when she had problems finding a place to camp on the seaside. Online information about national and state parks was spotty at that time, she said, so she built a site to organize that data.It was not a simple matter. The federal government has 90,000 campsites, and only recently created a database that made it easy to access the information in its recreation database. Hipcamp and other outfits, including the Sierra Club and Code for America, have created a site to agitate for better information about public camping land. It is still difficult to get information on state parks however, and online bookings for federal campsites are still made through a single private contractor.The land-sharing idea appears to be an effort to come up with an alternative method, as well as potentially generating extra income in rural areas. “If you live in the big urban centers, like New York or San Francisco, it’s hard to find enough good spaces in campgrounds,” Ms. Ravasio said. “For the owners, it could be an alternative of selling the land for timber, or building houses.”There are other such camping sites, such as Campinmygarden, which currently lists camping in a backyard in downtown San Francisco for $30 a night, and even a site in Manhattan for $75. A French site, Gamping, also offers motor homes (or “autocaravanes.”)Ms. Ravasio says Hipcamp has standards — albeit unscientific — for what may be listed. “Someone on our team has to look at it,” she said, “and say, ‘Yeah, I’d camp there.’ ” A version of this article appears in print on 07/06/2015, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Sharing Economy for Backpackers.