By ALISSA J. RUBIN and AURELIEN BREEDENJULY 3, 2015
PARIS —  Uber, the American ride-hailing company, agreed to suspend its lowest-cost service in France starting Friday evening, bowing to strikes last week in which taxi drivers blocked roads, burned tires and in some cases attacked drivers who they thought were working for Uber.In a statement issued Friday, the company said that the service, UberPop, would be suspended at 8 p.m. and would remain inactive until the resolution of a case pending before the French Constitutional Court.The service, which allows drivers who do not have a professional chauffeur’s license to pick up passengers who use an Uber smartphone application, has been assailed by the country’s taxi associations as unfair competition.“In the light of last week’s violence, we have today decided to suspend UberPop, our ride-sharing service,” until September’s court decision, said Gareth Mead, an Uber spokesman for Europe, the Middle East and Africa.AdvertisementUber’s other services, which rely on drivers with professional licenses, will continue to operate, he said.The government has said UberPop is illegal, but the company, based in San Francisco, has challenged the law that the government says prohibits the service; the court is expected to rule in the next three months. In a separate case, two Uber executives are expected to stand trial in September over the company’s practices in France.AdvertisementIn a distinct change to its usually combative style, Uber adopted a conciliatory tone in its latest statement, likely in recognition of the government’s support for the taxi drivers.“We believe there is a way forward that provides new opportunities for all drivers, including taxi drivers, as well as passengers who love the convenience of services like Uber, Heetch and Djump,” Mr. Mead said, referring to some of the French ride-sharing services that are similar to UberPop.The accessibility and low prices of all of Uber’s services, but especially of UberPop, have buffeted the heavily protected taxi industry here, precipitating outrage that last week tipped into violence. Taxi drivers nationwide went on strike, and a number of them took to the streets, blocking major urban access routes, causing traffic jams and at times burning tires and occasionally assaulting Uber drivers and their customers.While the government called for calm, it made only a limited effort to control the violence and it then acquiesced to the taxi unions’ demand for a crackdown on Uber. On Friday, the French prime minister, Manuel Valls, said that the government’s “firmness” in its dealings with Uber had paid off. However, his comments, made on the sidelines of a meeting in the city of Besançon, suggested that he was also aware that there might be problems with the current regulatory regime in France.“We are not against Uber, we are not against the V.T.C.,” he said referring to non-taxi companies that offer rides on demand using drivers who are licensed as professional chauffeurs. “We are elsewhere ready to examine the rules in this domain and consider all necessary changes, but UberPop must be forbidden.”Taxi drivers on Thursday blocked access to major airports and train stations in Paris to protest Uber, an American ride-sharing app that has been accused of creating unfair competition.Taxi drivers responded warily to Uber’s decision; some sounded as if they viewed it as a trick. Didier Hogrel, the president of the National Taxi Federation, when asked if he was pleased, said, “Not at all.”Advertisement“Uber is a specialist in communication and media hype,” he said. “We have to see if this declaration will be followed by results.”Jean-Michel Rebours, president of the Parisian Taxi Defense Union, sounded slightly more optimistic.“Is there a reason for satisfaction? Yes, but with lots of questions,” Mr. Rebours said. “This is just a suspension, and what will it result in?” he asked. “I am nevertheless happy that the heads of UberPop in particular have taken this decision. It allows everyone to calm down a little during this period.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Taxi drivers in France must acquire an expensive license — costing as much as $270,000 in Paris — and have felt betrayed that unlicensed UberPop drivers are allowed to operate freely without having to bear a similar burden.Uber has countered that there are too few taxis to satisfy demand in France and that with the country’s high unemployment rate of 10 percent, riders need low-cost alternatives. UberPop has 400,000 customers in France and about 10,000 drivers.The company said users of UberPop would see a notice Friday evening on the smartphone app saying that the service was suspended.A version of this article appears in print on July 4, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Uber Suspends Part of Service in France.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.