AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. My Sony camera sometimes produces two versions of each photo I take, one the way I originally framed it and one a weird close-up of someone in the shot. It seems to happen randomly. What is this? I end up deleting a lot of pictures I didn’t really take and don’t want.A. Many of Sony’s newer cameras include a feature called Auto Portrait Framing. As the name suggests, it detects a face in the picture you have composed, and then automatically creates a second image with a tighter crop to show more of that person and less of the background in your original shot. Depending on the subject and the cropping, the camera could come up with a vertically oriented portrait from your original horizontal photo.Instead of placing the subject in the middle of the cropped version, the camera’s software seems to go by the Rule of Thirds theory of photographic composition, which typically places the subject off-center. Auto Portrait Framing only works in certain camera modes (like single shooting) and with pictures of people, which is why it may have seemed random.Some people may find Auto Portrait Framing useful or educational, but for those who find it a waste of space, the feature can be easily turned off in the camera’s settings. Press the Menu button on the back of the camera and advance through multiple menu screens until you see “Auto Port. Framing,” where you can switch it from Auto to Off.Q. My desktop computer came with a Bluetooth wireless mouse and keyboard, which make for a mostly cord-free desk — but a lot of battery purchases. Can I just use a regular cheap USB mouse and keyboard instead?A. Most USB keyboard and mice should work just fine, as long as your computer and operating system meet the device requirements. Some may have drivers or software for special functions that only work on specific systems, but in most cases, you should be able to just plug in and play on a standard mouse and keyboard because the operating system automatically recognizes the hardware.Any power needed by the keyboard or mouse is supplied by the USB connection. If your computer does not have enough open USB ports because you have other peripherals jacked in already, you can get a USB hub that turns one port into four or more. Some USB hubs are very creative.Thanks to a faster response and lack of interference from a weak connection or other Bluetooth devices nearby, wired mice and keyboards are usually favored by gamers and others who do not mind a bit of cord clutter. Still, if you find yourself missing the cordless life, you can always return to the Bluetooth mouse and keyboard — and invest in a battery charger and a few alternating sets of rechargeable batteries to lower your overall costs. Just check the battery type and voltage needed by the Bluetooth gear before you buy.Advertisement