By the sixth minute of the United States’ victory over Japan in the Women’s World Cup final on Sunday, after midfielder Carli Lloyd scored her second goal, sales of “World Champions” T-shirts and other championship merchandise on Fanatics, the online retailer, had started surging.In the next 24 hours, sales of women’s soccer merchandise spiked 3,000 percent, said Fanatics, the country’s largest online seller of licensed sports merchandise. By the next day, the site had recorded almost double the sales of the highest-selling day for men’s gear during last year’s World Cup.But more remarkable was where the sales were coming from: 65 percent of all sales for the American team’s merchandise this year came from mobile devices, the company said, including 50 percent from smartphones, far higher percentages than seen at most online retailers. The Women’s World Cup final became the second-most-popular event for mobile shopping on the site, behind Duke’s college basketball title in April, Fanatics said.The new sales figure offers a little peek into what sort of shopping consumers like to do on their mobile devices. Though consumers regularly browse for products on tablets and smartphones, sales figures on mobile have trailed those on full desktop sites. David Katz, who heads product management at Fanatics, said that the immediacy of sports seems to get more shoppers buying from their smartphones and tablets.“We’ve seen across multiple sporting events that when the action gets hot, when a team wins a championship, customers reach for their mobile devices,” Mr. Katz said. “Consumers aren’t even thinking: Do I want to grab my laptop? It’s just natural to grab your phone.”Studies suggest that many shoppers feel they cannot inspect a product closely enough on smartphone screens to make a decision to buy, or are reluctant to enter shipment and payment details. Many wait until they are at a desktop or laptop computer to make the actual purchase — if they make that purchase at all. Simplified “buy buttons,” including those on social media platforms, are one way some sites are trying to make it easier for shoppers to buy on mobile, but some analysts are skeptical about whether the buttons will catch on. “I don’t think we’ll see a major shift in how shoppers buy anytime soon,” at least not with the mobile offerings that have been announced to date, Sucharita Mulpuru, an e-business analyst at Forrester Research, said in a note on Tuesday.To try to make mobile transactions even easier, Fanatics has reduced the clicks it takes to make a purchase from mobile devices, Mr. Katz said. The site asks a user to type in a ZIP Code first, for example, and automatically fills in the city and state.“Anything we can do to simplify the transaction, we’re doing, understanding how difficult it is to use the keyboard on mobile devices,” Mr. Katz said. The surge in merchandise sales for the United States team reflects intense interest in the women’s victorious World Cup run. Sunday’s game was seen by 25.4 million viewers on Fox, a record for any soccer game, men’s or women’s, shown on English-language television in the United States. New York City is considering honoring the team with a ticker-tape parade.A version of this article appears in print on 07/13/2015, on page B6 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Soccer Win Pushes Sales on Mobile.