By MIKE ISAACJULY 6, 2015
After widespread user outrage over an abrupt employee dismissal at Reddit last week, Ellen Pao, chief executive of the online message board, apologized to the site’s members for what she characterized as a history of broken promises and poor communication.Reddit’s management made errors, “not just on July 2, but also over the past several years,” Ms. Pao said in a post to one of the site’s forums on Monday. “The mods” — moderators — “and the community have lost trust in me and in us, the administrators of Reddit.”Large sections of the site were temporarily taken offline by users last week. The action was a protest by users after they discovered last Thursday that Victoria Taylor, a well-liked and publicly visible Reddit employee, was dismissed with no warning to the community at large.Reddit, a 10-year-old company based in San Francisco, is composed of topic-based forums, known as subreddits, where discussions take place on subjects like news and technology. Subreddits also host impromptu question-and-answer sessions with public figures like Bill Gates and President Obama.AdvertisementThe company has 70 to 80 employees and relies largely upon its thousands of dedicated power users to govern the site. Reddit has grown over the last few years, regularly having more than 160 million visitors every month.After Ms. Taylor’s departure from Reddit, hundreds of messages supporting her appeared.“The admins didn’t realize how much we rely on Victoria,” wrote one user, who goes by the user name Karmanaut. “We all had the rug ripped out from under us and feel betrayed.”In an interview last week, Ms. Pao and Alexis Ohanian, co-founder and executive chairman of Reddit, did not give a reason for Ms. Taylor’s dismissal. But the two apologized profusely for the way the company had handled what it called “a transition.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That did not placate many Reddit power users and so-called moderators of the site, who have repeatedly stated that Reddit management has shown poor communication for years. Ms. Pao, in particular, has been a target for personal attacks, many of them racist and misogynistic in nature. As of Monday, an online petition asking for Ms. Pao to step down had reached more than 190,000 signatures.When asked about her most vitriolic detractors, Ms. Pao said that those people represented a vocal minority of the site’s members, and that she appreciated most users, even if they sometimes disagreed on policies.In the days after Ms. Taylor’s departure, Reddit users complained the dismissal was the last straw in a long line of frustrations that community members had with the company’s leadership.Advertisement“Management appears to be focused on Reddit’s image, and not devoting any resources to actually running the site,” one prominent moderator, who asked to go by his Reddit handle Beernerd, said in an email. “It’s as if they’re trying to decide what color to paint the walls while completely overlooking a crack in the foundation.”Ms. Pao wrote that better moderator software tools for running the site were coming soon, and pledged to communicate better with members via a new liaison, who goes by the handle “KrispyKrackers.”She also promised to more frequently respond directly to the community herself.“I know these are just words, and it may be hard for you to believe us,” Ms. Pao wrote on Monday. “I and the team are committed to talking more often with the community, starting now.”A version of this article appears in print on July 7, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Reddit’s Chief Executive Apologizes After a Firing Draws Protests.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.