HONG KONG — As companies listed in China continue to suffer fallout from the stock market collapse, the Chinese ride-sharing app Didi Kuaidi on Wednesday showed why it is good to be private.The company, whose smartphone services connect users to taxis and private drivers, said in a statement that it had raised $2 billion in a new round of fund-raising, and might raise still more.Didi Kuaidi set out to raise $1.5 billion on June 22, according to its president, Jean Liu. Within five days, the goal had been met, and now the company has closed on at least $2 billion.‘‘All of our investors are super-long-term investors, and they won’t get affected by short-term hiccup’’ in the stock market, Ms. Liu said. ‘‘They see another Alibaba coming.’’After one of the largest private fund-raising rounds completed by a start-up, Didi Kuaidi’s ability to attract money shows that investor enthusiasm for popular and fast-growing Chinese start-ups remains unquenched, despite the recent downturn in the markets.The success of the round also highlights the differences between the top venture capital firms and ordinary investors. As individual investors scramble to pull their money out of sagging stock markets, professionals looking to capitalize on the longer-term growth of start-up stars like Didi Kuaidi remain undeterred.After the fund-raising round, Didi Kuaidi has cash reserves of $3.5 billion, which it said it would spend on building new services, financing research in data analytics and improving customer experiences.The success of the new round is probably a response to the fast growth of Uber in China. The American ride-hailing service has seen its popularity in China go through the roof since it began offering major subsidies to both drivers and passengers. It has inspired a gangsta rap fan song in China.But Didi Kuaidi was born in competition as the amalgam of two companies, Didi Dache and Kuaidi Dache, that spent heavily and competed ruthlessly for market share in 2013 and 2014 before joining forces.In response to Uber’s challenge, Didi Kuaidi began its own private car service, called Kuaiche, and said it would spend $1 billion renminbi, or about $160 million, on subsidies.Ms. Liu, the Didi Kuaidi president, was reluctant to say whether any of the company’s new cash would help the company compete with Uber. But she left the option open. ‘‘What I want to emphasize is, we have $3.5 billion in hand,’’ Ms. Liu said. ‘‘We can be disciplined and at the same time flexible in terms of how we enlarge the market.’’