By J. D. BIERSDORFERJULY 8, 2015
Q. I recently got a new laptop and lost my free Adobe Photoshop Starter Edition, which is no longer offered. Is there a free photo-editing program that can “correct” digital pictures, create slide shows and send them out to friends in email?A. Adobe Photoshop Starter Album for Windows was discontinued in 2009, and the company suggests users move their picture collections to Adobe Revel, its online photo-sharing and syncing service. Adobe Revel, which has Windows 8, Mac OS X and mobile apps, as well as a web version, can also handle basic photo-editing tasks like color adjustment and cropping. The service provides two gigabytes of storage free, and the premium edition with unlimited storage is $6 a month.Between its apps and the web version, Adobe Revel may have many of the tools you want, but for something more, the company also makes the free Adobe Photoshop Express for Windows 8.1. Its $80 Adobe Photoshop Elements program is not free, but has a huge number of features and a free 30-day trial version to sample.Microsoft has its own free image-editing programs included with (or available to download for) Windows, including the Photos app for Windows 8.1 and the Windows Essentials collection — which includes Photo Gallery and Movie Maker for editing and slide shows. Google’s Picasa and Google Photos apps are also free and can handle many standard photo chores. If none of those programs suit you, the Windows Store has plenty of other photo-editing apps to explore.AdvertisementCleaning Up the Share MenuQ. I like the Share menu in Safari for OS X Yosemite, but it has a lot of stuff in it I don’t need, like Twitter. Can I whittle down this list to make a shorter menu?AdvertisementA. The menu that appears when you click the Share button in the Safari browser toolbar can be easily edited to remove sites and programs you do not use — and add those that you do. (For those unfamiliar with it, the Share button looks like a square with an upward-pointing arrow coming out of the top.)To change the menu, click the Share button in Safari and choose More from the drop-down menu. This opens the Extensions preferences box with the Share Menu settings already selected. The box displays a list of all the items available for the Share menu, and you can turn the checkboxes on or off to display the options you want to see and use.The Share menu is also available in other OS X programs and places, like the Mac’s Finder. The Notes, Reminders, Photos and Photo Booth apps are among those programs that also use the Share menu and you may see specific menu items relating just to those apps in your list, like the “Set Desktop Picture” option in the Photos app.TIP OF THE WEEK: Google Earth, the company’s 3-D map software, celebrated its 10th birthday last week with the introduction of a few new features, including new content for the Earth View web gallery of high-resolution landscape images. An update for the Earth View extension for the Chrome browser, which shows off a new satellite photo each time a new browser tab is opened, is also available.Google has also added a new Voyager layer to the desktop version of the Google Earth program for Windows, OS X and Linux. Voyager has five color-coded sections of material, including 3-D views of major cities, Street View highlights of famous places and a map of Google’s most recent satellite photos of the earth — and can make for a nicely distracting lunch-hour travel adventure until you can get away for real this summer.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. A version of this article appears in print on July 9, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Free Editing Tools for Photos.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.