Updated, 9:19 p.m. | Added more details.Naveen Tewari, chief executive of InMobi, thinks the 1.2 billion people who see ads served by his company’s mobile ad network are tired of being bombarded with generally irrelevant marketing messages. He says advertising should be friendly, more tour guide than tout, and help people discover new products and services that they actually want to buy. To test that proposition, InMobi has developed Miip, an animated monkey character that follows you from app to app, watches what you’re doing and suggests products that you might want to buy. The Indian company unveiled the technology at an event in San Francisco on Tuesday evening.The idea is that instead of seeing a regular ad in your app, Miip would appear, with a text bubble inviting you to check out products from advertisers that it thinks are relevant. If you’re playing classic rock on an app like Spotify, for example, Miip might suggest a Led Zeppelin or Pink Floyd T-shirt and offer you the option to buy it right from the app. Over time, if the monkey makes smart suggestions, the company hopes, you will be more inclined to click on it when you see it pop up in other apps and perhaps even take the time to tell it what kinds of things you most want to see.“If you find value, maybe you will actually come in and put information in Miip,” Mr. Tewari said in an interview ahead of the product release. “For the first time, we’re putting the user at the center of the advertising.”It’s a new twist on the increasingly personalized ads that big Internet companies like Facebook and Google have been trying to deliver using the vast amounts of information they have collected about your activities, both on and off their services. InMobi has access to similar data, but instead of just showing you ads based on the inferred profile of your interests, the company is betting that smartphone users want more control and will respond warmly to the chance to tell the monkey the kinds of ads that they want to see.InMobi has been quietly testing Miip (pronounced Meep) for six months, trying it with about 5 million users. Early advertisers include the streaming music service Spotify, the travel agents Expedia and Orbitz, niche retailers like Joyus and TheRealReal, and several major American retailers that weren’t willing to publicly disclose their involvement.The Miip ads will begin appearing in 40,000 apps on Wednesday, and InMobi hopes to eventually convert most of the 200 million ads served by its network each month to the format.Built into Miip is the ability to buy products directly from the platform. The transaction technology, which is powered by Stripe, a leading payments service, required a great deal of technical work behind the scenes, Mr. Tewari said. But if it works as promised, it would be a big leap forward for advertisers touting specific products and services for sale. Pinterest, Facebook, Google and Twitter have only recently begun to use or announce buy buttons for their services.. Mr. Tewari said the potential of the Miip technology is a big reason why InMobi decided to stay independent, despite flirting with the possibility of selling itself to Google in March. The Bangalore-based company is one of India’s homegrown “unicorns,” a Silicon Valley term for start-ups valued at $1 billion or more.The Miip technology has won support from InMobi’s biggest investor, Softbank of Japan, which has put $200 million into the company.Deep Nishar, a former LinkedIn and Google executive who joined Softbank this month, said InMobi has flipped the usual advertising paradigm on its head. “Miip puts the user first: What is that you like, that you want?” he said.But will the chattering monkey annoy users, like Microsoft’s infamous Clippy digital assistant did a generation ago? Or will it endear them? “Time will tell,” Mr. Nishar said. “If it becomes like Hello Kitty and something people like to engage with, power to them.”A version of this article appears in print on 07/20/2015, on page B6 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Animated Monkey, Appearing in Apps.