Evan Williams is the chief executive of Medium, an online publishing platform. But who wants to talk about that? Mr. Williams was a featured speaker at Fortune’s annual Brainstorm Tech conference, but when he took the stage on Tuesday he spent a good deal of the time talking about Twitter, where he used to be chief executive and is now a board member. The company has embarked on a search for a new chief executive after announcing last month that Dick Costolo, who has led the company for five years, was stepping down July 1.Mr. Williams discussed Twitter during his interview with Walter Isaacson, chief executive of the Aspen Institute and author of “Jobs,” a biography of the Apple co-founder Steve Jobs, and later in questions from the audience. Here are excerpts from his responses; the questions have been paraphrased. What is Twitter’s board looking for in a chief executive?We’re looking for an exceptional leader who knows how to define the direction and the vision and make things happen.Should it be a product person or a sales and operational leader?I don’t think product is necessarily the right way to say it. They have to see the potential of the platform and know how to choose the direction.It’s more strategy than it is product per se. There’s lots of amazing product people in Twitter, and the potential of Twitter is so vast and always has been. The real challenge is deciding what to focus on and aligning the entire organization toward that purpose. And with 4,000 people, that’s the job of a true leader who knows both the strategic and vision components as well as the day-to-day operations piece.How far along is the search?I can’t say too much about it, but we’re doing the search.Why did the board feel the need for a change in leadership?That was really, as reported, driven by Dick. We were optimistic about where we were going and there is a lot of great stuff in the works, and Dick decided now is the time to step down for his personal choices as well as — as he said, he had really built the team to a point where if that was going to happen sometime it seemed like the best time to do it.What is the prospect that the next Twitter chief executive will face a board composed of several ex-Twitter chief executives?I think the board composition won’t be a deciding factor in the choice. I will say personally if the right C.E.O. would prefer one less C.E.O. on the board I’d be happy to — it’s more important that we get that person than I’m on the board. I can only speak for myself.Where is Twitter going?It’s not necessarily my place to define that. But I think Twitter has — I think Twitter primarily is a news system. Early on we didn’t necessarily know what it was. We thought social networks. Microblogging was the thing a lot of people called it. And around 2009 we made the distinction internally and in the way we started talking about that — rather than a social network, it was a real-time information network. I think the real value of Twitter that we have seen over the six years since then has been applications of that.Should Twitter remain an independent company?There’s probably all kinds of legal things I have to know in order to answer that question properly, so I’m just going to say that, as I said before, there is incredible potential in Twitter and blah blah blah … the board will do what it’s supposed to do. 