AdvertisementSupported byBy Quentin HardySAN FRANCISCO — Intel showed on Wednesday that it was grappling with one of the greatest transitions in its history: putting itself at the center of a world of computation.The company, based in Santa Clara, Calif., is one of the largest makers of semiconductors, thanks to global demand for personal computers. Yet the PC business has steadily deteriorated as people have migrated to using mobile devices for computing. Intel  reported on Wednesday that second-quarter revenue from chips for PCs fell 14 percent. For the year, Intel said PC chip sales would be lower than in 2014 by “the high single digits.” The decline was forecast at about 5 percent.Intel has been working on making a new future for itself by investing more in chips for data centers and Internet-connected products for industry — and some of those investments are paying off. Sales of chips for data centers rose 10 percent from a year earlier. In total, data center, Internet of Things and high-level memory chip sales were 40 percent of revenue and 70 percent of profits.Over all for the second quarter, Intel reported net income of $2.7 billion, or 55 cents a share. That was down $100 million from a year earlier, but was the same in per-share terms because Intel has bought back a lot of its stock. Net income was also lifted by a lower tax rate. Revenue fell 5 percent, to $13.2 billion. The results were above expectations of Wall Street analysts, who had forecast that Intel would make 50 cents a share on revenue of $13.04 billion, according to a survey of analysts by Thomson Reuters.“Second-quarter results demonstrate the transformation of our business,” Brian M. Krzanich, Intel’s chief executive, said in a statement. “We continue to be confident in our growth strategy and are focused on innovation and execution.”Stacy J. Smith, Intel’s chief financial officer, said in an interview that PCs remained an important business. Microsoft, for example, is releasing a new PC operating system, Windows 10, this month that may help spur sales.“The PC continues to be one of the key form factors people use to compute,” Mr. Smith said.Some analysts were skeptical of how much of a boost Intel could expect to see from Windows 10. “In the past we’d see a new operating system every three years or so, and people would buy a new PC,” said Bill Kreher, an analyst at Edward Jones. “Now a lot of things you do are based on subscriptions in the cloud, and you don’t need new hardware to get a subscription.”Mr. Smith and others have argued that Intel’s latest chips, which enable things like facial-recognition logons and gaming with touch screens, will still make hardware attractive. The company said it would have a third chip based on its current 14 nanometer wires, instead of the usual two, in 2016.That may get Intel a little more cash from some of its existing factories. Chips with a 10 nanometer wire, an expensive and difficult proposition that requires proportionally more capital from Intel, are expected in 2017.Another strategy to stir growth is to spend cash. Last year, Intel invested about $740 million in  Cloudera, which specializes in data analysis software commonly used in data centers. Intel discontinued its own projects in similar areas.Last month, Intel also announced a $16.7 billion deal to buy the chip company Altera, partly to expand the data center business.Advertisement