By J. D. BIERSDORFERJULY 15, 2015
Q. Recently I noticed an uninvited and unwelcome addition to my bookmark list in Firefox: View Pocket List. I do not use Pocket List and do not want to. I can’t seem to either remove it or demote it to the bottom of the list where it takes up less valuable real estate. Can you provide a fix for this intrusive creature?A. Mozilla Firefox version 38.0.5 and later includes Pocket, a utility that lets you quickly save content you find on the web for later. Through an online account you create, Pocket can sync the bookmarked pages to your other computers and devices. As you have noticed, a View Pocket List entry is also now visible in your Firefox bookmarks menu so you can find saved stories there, too.If you have no use for Pocket, you can disable it and remove it from your Firefox toolbar and bookmarks menu. In the Firefox toolbar or corner menu, look for the Pocket icon (which resembles a small coin purse or a pouch with a V-shaped flap).Once you find the icon, right-click it (or hold down the Control key and click) and choose Remove From Toolbar or Remove From Menu. Once you do, View Pocket List disappears from your Bookmarks menu. If you ever want it back, just click on the Firefox menu icon, select Customize and drag the Pocket icon back into the toolbar or menu.Cruising Windows 10 With ChromeQ. Will Windows 10 support the Google Chrome browser? I have read in various places that it won’t.A. When asked, a Google representative said, “Chrome is an equal opportunity browser and will work great on Windows 10.” Some users running the Windows 10 preview software have reported issues with running Chrome in the last few months, but Google’s browser has worked fine for others. The finished version of Microsoft’s new operating system arrives on July 29, so when you have upgraded your PC, make sure you get the latest version of Google Chrome to be up to date.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Microsoft’s own Internet Explorer is one browser that will be taking a back seat in Windows 10. Although it will still be available to use, Internet Explorer will be replaced as the default program by Microsoft Edge, the browser formerly code-named Project Spartan.TIP OF THE WEEK The MacBook laptop family with multitouch trackpads (typically those built in 2008 or later) respond to a variety of gestures you can use to navigate and control the action on screen — with just a few swipes and other finger moves. Multitouch gestures also work on Apple’s MagicTrackpad accessory for its desktop Macs.To see a demonstration of each gesture and what it does, open the System Preferences icon from the Mac’s Dock and click Trackpad. In the Trackpad preferences box, select the multitouch move you would like to learn. You can turn off gestures you do not use — or use accidentally — here as well.If you have the “Look Up” gesture enabled in recent versions of OS X, tapping the trackpad with three fingers over a selected word on the screen brings up a box with the dictionary definition, thesaurus suggestions and other information. In OS X 10.10.3 and later, you can do even more with the three-finger tap. When you have a webpage open in the Safari browser, use the three-finger tap on a link on the screen to open a quick preview window of that linked page. You can open the full page in a new tab by clicking the preview window, or you can click the Add to Reading List button in the preview window to save the page for later.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Unbookmarking Pocket List.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.