
App Smart By                     
 KIT EATON
 
JULY 15, 2015
Make the most of summer music festivals with apps that can identify songs and tell you when the bands will be playing next.Visitors to music festivals like Lollapalooza or Pitchfork often have three goals: enjoying great live music, having fun with friends and staying safe and secure. In a crowd of thousands, this can be difficult, but there are plenty of apps that can help.Planning which performers you would like to see at a festival can be a big help, and the Any.do app is a great way to do this. This is a to-do-list app, free for iOS and Android, that includes timed reminders and alerts to help you remember to go to a particular stage to see a particular artist.The app has a clean and simple interface that is pretty easy to learn, and it has sharing options so you can send your plans to any friends joining you at the festival. Any.do has a lot of menus and options, so it is worth familiarizing yourself with it before you try to use it in a busy crowd, but the complexity allows the app to be useful in places besides music festivals.Another helpful app is Songkick Concerts, which shows the acts appearing at festivals long before the event happens. The app, free on iOS, scans your music library to learn which performers you like. It then sends alerts if any of them will be playing soon or nearby.AdvertisementSongkick lets you see the full lineup of bands at festivals, and it has other information like venue maps. It also has an option to buy tickets. The app is great to look at and easy to navigate. Songkick is also available on Android, where it looks similar and works the same way, but it scans your Google Music, Last.fm and other accounts to learn your music tastes.AdvertisementDon’t forget about song lyrics — you don’t want to find yourself in the crowd humming along to a rock anthem when you don’t know the words. Musixmatch can help. The app connects to music played on your phone and displays synchronized lyrics so you can learn the words before you get to the festival.You can also search for lyrics, and the app can listen to the music being played around you and match the lyrics to the music it identifies. This feature may work when you are in a crowd listening to a live performance, but the results may be unreliable. On iOS, the app has an Apple Watch extension so you can see the lyrics on your wrist.Musixmatch is free on iOS and Android, but to remove in-app ads and have access to the full range of features, you have to pay $5 a year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you are at a music festival and hear some music you don’t know and can’t identify, consider trying Soundhound. When you turn the app on, it works a lot like its main rival, Shazam, comparing music to its database to come up with an identification. But unlike Shazam, Soundhound can identify music if you hum it or even, if you are lucky, if it is being performed live. The app is easy to use and feels a little magical when it works. It’s free on iOS and Android.Meeting up with friends can be tricky at a festival, so to avoid a long string of instant messages, try Apple’s built-in Find My Friends app, which can locate fellow Apple users through their phones’ GPS services. You can even set up temporary sharing so your personal location is shared only during a festival. The free Locate My Friends app on Android is similar, but if you use it, keep in mind that your location info will be shared with a third party that is not Google.Microsoft has an app that could help coordinate which performances you and your friends see at a festival: Tossup, free on iOS and Android. You set up a question like “Do you want to see Disclosure?” and your friends vote on it. You can even chat inside the app and set up calendar alerts. Tossup is available only in the United States, and because it is new, it may be a little buggy — some reviewers on iOS complain about problems logging in.Finally, it can be hard to find your tent in a huge festival campsite, or your car in the parking lots, so try the free Tent Finder app from Aaron Wardle on iOS or the free Festival Buddy app on Android.Tent Finder isn’t very elegant, but it seems to work well for marking the location of your tent or car, and it has an Apple Watch extension so you don’t even have to take out your phone to locate things. Festival Buddy is also pretty basic in design and has in-app ads, but it is worth trying out.These apps should help with your festival experience, but remember to check the festival’s official app — many such apps are high quality and have useful features specific to each location.AdvertisementThe popular bloglike publishing platform Medium has long had an iOS app, but it now has an Android app as well. The app lets you find and read interesting articles published on the platform and even submit some of your own. Medium is free.A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Before Heading to the Festival, Know the Lineup and the Lyrics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »