AdvertisementSupported byBy Conor DoughertyInvestors have spent the last year telling Google to stop opening its wallet so much. On Thursday, they got their wish.In the first earnings report for Ruth Porat, the chief financial officer Google lured from Morgan Stanley, Ms. Porat said the company was keeping a closer eye on costs. The numbers backed her up, with revenue and profits outpacing the expectations of Wall Street.The slower growth in costs, along with suggestions from Ms. Porat that Google will try to be more forthcoming with investors — and may be open to redistributing some of the company’s cash pile down the line — suggested a new era of cooperation from a company that has historically had an antagonistic relationship with Wall Street.“She confirmed that they are more open to focusing on expense controls, more open to providing new disclosures and more open to potentially returning cash,” said Ben Schachter, an analyst with Macquarie Securities. “Those are the three things people wanted, and she came through.”Ms. Porat has been on the job since May, so she had little if any impact on the company’s second-quarter results. Still, analysts like Mr. Schachter were impressed by her investor-friendly tone, and Google shares jumped nearly 11 percent in after-hours trading.Google remains a fast-growing company, and Ms. Porat said the goal remained to increase revenue. The company continues to hire and spend at a fast clip — just not quite as fast as in past years. And the company has not suggested any less desire for big and ambitious projects.In a conference call with investors, Ms. Porat used words like “prioritize” and “judiciously” to suggest that it will pursue those projects with an eye on the bottom line.“How we prioritize and focus on these opportunities remains paramount,” she said, “both for our employees who remain inspired by the opportunity to work on the most cutting-edge developments with maximum global impact and for our shareholders.”The company reported that revenue rose 11 percent to $17.7 billion from a year earlier, with net revenue — a figure that excludes payments to advertising partners — increasing to $14.35 billion. That was above the $14.28 billion projected by analysts, according to Bloomberg. Google said that absent currency fluctuations, overall revenue would have risen 18 percent from a year ago.“Our strong Q2 results reflect continued growth across the breadth of our products, most notably core search, where mobile stood out, as well as YouTube and programmatic advertising,” Ms. Porat said.From self-driving cars to high-tech threads that can be woven into computer clothes, Google, based in Mountain View, Calif., spends a lot of money on some unconventional ideas. The company has defended this as a sign of optimism, both in its core search advertising business — which requires huge sums for things like data centers — as well as future opportunities.That continued in the second quarter. Google spent $2.8 billion, or 16 percent of its revenue, on research and development, compared with 14 percent a year ago. But it was more cost-conscious than in the past.This started with Patrick Pichette, Ms. Porat’s predecessor, who had begun peppering the company’s earnings calls with the word “discipline” and highlighted its decision to re-evaluate Google Glass, the company’s much-ridiculed Internet-connected glasses, as an example of this attitude.On Thursday, Ms. Porat signaled that investors could expect more of the same. “We’re just beginning the 2016 budget process, and core to that is prioritization,” she said in a conference call with analysts.She also seemed to suggest that Google would try to be more open with investors about how the company’s business was changing. Google, like every technology company, is seeing a rapid evolution of its business as people spend more time with mobile phones. In many places, including the United States, Google searches on mobile devices now outnumber those on desktop and laptop computers.That has led to a long-run decline in “cost per click,” which is how much the company is paid, on average, each time someone clicks on an ad. The measure has fallen over the past few years, but on Thursday, Ms. Porat said the gap between desktop and mobile was closing, as mobile prices rise and desktop prices remain steady.Analysts are starving for specifics about what exactly is driving this and what it means about Google’s core search business and growing areas like YouTube. During the call, one analyst asked if more specific disclosures would be coming in the months and years ahead. Ms. Porat did not make any commitments, but said: “I am trying to create a framework that helps you understand where we’re going.” Google’s cash pile swelled to $70 billion in the second quarter. Investors have spent most of the past year asking Google to lay out a plan for if and how it might return some of that money to shareholders — such as by issuing a dividend or buying back stock — and that continued on Thursday.Ms. Porat was noncommittal but did not say no. No doubt the bulk of that money will be put toward addressing the company’s many challenges — including those from a host of new mobile search competitors including Apple, European regulators that have accused the company of abusive and monopolistic practices, and its expensive and long-running quest to create revolutionary new businesses in areas like self-driving cars.But for the moment, at least, the company’s relationship with Wall Street seems to be off the problem list.Advertisement