AdvertisementSupported byBy Dino GrandoniThe Federal Communications Commission on Thursday approved plans to prevent large businesses from gaining access to small-business discounts in a much-anticipated auction of airwaves expected early next year.The new rules are in part a response to actions taken last year by Dish Network, the large satellite television operator, in another auction of airwaves. In that auction, Dish teamed up with smaller entities. Those corporations received a $3.25 billion discount on the $13 billion worth of spectrum they bought.While the F.C.C. has not concluded whether Dish Network broke any auction rules, the moves by the company led to calls for changes in the rules.The rules passed on Thursday, the agency said, would be harder for companies to game. Under those rules, companies may receive a maximum discount of $150 million, and wireless carriers are prohibited from bidding through multiple companies.In addition, the commission said it would be aggressive in uncovering any cases of abuse.“What we’re doing is we’re updating our rules to reflect the reality of the 21st century,” Tom Wheeler, chairman of the F.C.C., said at the vote on Thursday.Next year, the F.C.C. will coordinate the sale of billions of dollars in spectrum, the airwaves through which radio and Wi-Fi signals are carried. In what Mr. Wheeler has called “a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity” for television broadcasters, the F.C.C. is asking local TV stations to put up the rights to their airwaves on an online auction block. Cell carriers will have a window of time to outbid each other to buy the limited resource.The F.C.C. says it hopes the auction will help Americans get better connections to the Internet with their smartphones and other mobile devices.When Dish Network’s actions became known this year, Ajit Pai, a Republican commissioner, called the earlier auction process a “mockery” and suggested there could be some bipartisan unity on changing the rules. But Mr. Pai and the other Republican commissioner ultimately voted against the proposal, arguing that the new rules made it too easy for small businesses to license spectrum to the large carriers, like AT&T and Verizon, with which they are supposed to be competing. All three Democrats on the commission, including Mr. Wheeler, voted for the rules.“We have the blessing of new loopholes through which a minimally competent attorney could drive a truck,” Mr. Pai said during the vote.Mr. Wheeler said the new rules preserved an opportunity for smaller companies. “I’m surprised and disappointed at my colleagues’ arguing to limit opportunity,” he said.Dish Network declined to comment on the F.C.C. vote.The commission had planned to vote on other rules surrounding the auction on Thursday. But late Wednesday, in a sign of how contentious some aspects of the auction have become, Mr. Wheeler decided to push those votes back until August.The delay came after Representatives Fred Upton and Greg Walden, two Republicans, asked for those votes to be delayed, saying the F.C.C. had not given them and other outside parties enough time to review data on the auction after it was released late last week. But Mr. Wheeler went ahead with the vote on the small-business discounts.Past reforms in the discount program have flopped as the F.C.C. struggled to strike a balance between making regulations easy on new entrants unschooled in the intricacies of the F.C.C. but still tough enough to prevent large wireless companies from exploiting them.In 2006, after AT&T received some discounts, the F.C.C. tightened the rules. But when small-business participation in the program plummeted, the commission rewrote the rules again.“There’s a long history here of the pendulum swinging back and forth,” said Harold Feld, senior vice president of Public Knowledge, a consumer advocacy group. “No program is going to be perfect.”Advertisement