By STEVE LOHR and MIKE ISAACJULY 16, 2015
EBay is sailing into the split of its two businesses — PayPal payments and its online marketplace — with a reassuring show of strength as its second-quarter financial performance surpassed Wall Street forecasts.With its PayPal business to be spun off at the end of this week, eBay also did some last-minute corporate cleanup Thursday morning. The company announced that it was selling its eBay Enterprise unit, which handles warehousing and logistics for third-party sellers, for $925 million to an investors consortium led by two private equity firms, Permira and Sterling Partners.Both eBay’s profits and revenue were better than expected, after taking into account the sale of its warehouse and logistics arm. Shares in eBay, which reported its results before the stock market opened, were up about 3 percent in midday trading.EBay’s net income in the second quarter fell sharply, to $83 million, but that included a charge of $786 million to account for its loss on the sale of eBay Enterprise. EBay bought that business, then called GSI Commerce, for $2.4 billion in 2011.AdvertisementBut eBay’s operating earnings from continuing operations rose 9 percent, to 76 cents a share. That was above the average estimate of Wall Street analysts of 72 cents a share.AdvertisementThe company’s revenue increased 7 percent from the year-earlier quarter to $4.38 billion. The reported revenue fell short of analysts’ average estimate of $4.49 billion. In the quarter, eBay pulled out the revenue from eBay Enterprise. If included, total revenue would have been $4.65 billion, above Wall Street forecasts.The split-up strategy is the byproduct of a drawn-out proxy fight with Carl C. Icahn, an activist investor, who advocated a PayPal spinoff. His pressure and logic prevailed, and the company declared in September that it planned to break itself up. John Donahoe, eBay’s chief executive, who at first fiercely resisted a split, said in a conference call on Thursday that separating PayPal from the online marketplace was “clearly the best path for each business.” Mr. Donahoe will depart after the spinoff.The split, expected to be completed on Friday, could benefit eBay’s marketplace business by letting it accept new forms of electronic payment, while also allowing PayPal more autonomy to work with other potential partners, such as marketplaces like Amazon or Alibaba.Dan Schulman, a former American Express executive, will lead PayPal, whose shares will be traded as a separate company on Monday. Devin Wenig, who has led eBay Marketplaces, will be the chief of that business. The presentations of the two executives on Thursday underlined what very different businesses they are.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.PayPal’s revenue grew to $2.26 billion, a 16 percent increase from the year-earlier quarter, and 19 percent excluding the currency effect of a strong dollar. Revenue for the eBay marketplace business declined 3 percent to $2.12 billion, though it gained 5 percent without the currency impact.Mr. Schulman’s comments were about the encouraging growth prospects of units like Braintree, Venmo and Xoom, which are briskly expanding in new markets as diverse as mobile payments for millennials and international remittance payments in developing nations.By contrast, Mr. Wenig discussed the steady progress in “revitalizing our core business,” referring to the marketplace.In a streamlining step, eBay has said it would cut 2,400 positions, or 7 percent of its global work force.Advertisement“PayPal is firing on all cylinders,” said Colin Sebastian, an analyst at Robert W. Baird & Company. “EBay is facing challenges and retrenching to its areas of strength. They are very different businesses, but in this quarter the trend was positive for both.”EBay’s online marketplace, analysts say, faces strong competition from an array of merchants led by Amazon and big retailers increasing their online presences, like Walmart, and in overseas markets from rivals including Alibaba and JD.com. EBay’s strength, they say, is not in trying to compete head-to-head in online retailing but as a marketplace for liquidations and unique products offered by smaller merchants, who number in the millions.And while PayPal is thriving, it faces rising competition from large companies like Apple, as well as payments start-ups including Stripe and Adyen.A version of this article appears in print on July 17, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: EBay Beats Forecasts in Advance of Spinoff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.