AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I know how to delete a Facebook comment using the web version, but how can I do the same thing on the Android app?A. Facebook’s mobile apps have less space for menus and icons than the desktop edition does. When you are using the Android app and want to delete a comment you posted (or that someone else posted to your own Timeline page in response to one of your posts), press and hold your finger down on the comment. When the menu appears, tap the Delete option.For those times when you just want to reword a previously made comment, press the text on screen for a second or two until the menu arrives and select Edit. Once you have fixed your typo or clarified your remarks, tap the Update button. The process for deleting and editing comments is similar on Facebook’s iPhone app.Seeking Control of the iOS Control CenterQ. Is it possible to change the icons on the Control Center screen in iOS 8? Some of the shortcuts, like Airplane Mode, are handy, but I never use the Do Not Disturb or Timer functions and would rather put more useful settings there.A. Apple introduced Control Center in 2013 with the release of iOS 7, but the slide-up menu of shortcut icons to popular functions has been decidedly static since its arrival. Developers have previously found settings buried in the code within beta versions of iOS, which let the Control Center screen be configured differently. The authorized final editions of the system Apple has released to the public, however, include only settings for allowing access to the feature from the iPhone’s lock screen, or within apps.But while Apple does not include tools in the Control Center settings that let users customize the selection of shortcuts, developers who create software for jail-broken iPhones have come up with ways to change  the icons. Jail-breaking, which is the intentional modification of the phone’s official system software to install alternative apps and gain more access to the device, is not illegal, but it can take some technical patience and fortitude to do properly. If that appeals to you, a quick web search on the topic brings plenty of advice on how to start.As one might expect, jail-breaking is strongly frowned upon by Apple, which notes that “unauthorized modifications” can cause numerous issues with iOS devices. A webpage on the company’s site also states “unauthorized modification of iOS is a violation of the iOS end-user software license agreement and because of this, Apple may deny service for an iPhone, iPad or iPod Touch that has installed any unauthorized software.”If that makes you nervous and dissuades you from tinkering with your phone, you can at least add your voice to the chorus of other users on Apple’s feedback page requesting iPhone features.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement