LONDON — In its continuing regulatory standoff with European policy makers, Uber, the ride-booking company, is not backing down.That was the message on Monday from Mark MacGann, Uber’s head of European policy, who stressed that the company would continue to take legal action against countries that tried to ban some of its services.“If governments take decisions that we believe are contrary to European law, then of course we will have to decide what to do next,” Mr. MacGann told reporters on Monday when asked about future legal action. “Regulation in some countries was written decades ago before we all carried smartphones in our pockets.”Mr. MacGann’s comments came days after ​a case about UberPop, the company’s low-cost ride-booking service, was referred to Europe’s highest court, the European Court of Justice​. The pending legal case could clear up ​much of the legal uncertainty surrounding Uber’s business in the region.The legal case, which the judges will not rule on for at least 18 months, could provide a pan-European ruling on whether UberPop is legal across the 28-member European Union — a decision that could potentially overrule several national and citywide bans of the service. It was referred to the European Court of Justice last week by a Spanish judge.Uber, which allows drivers to connect with potential passengers through a smartphone application, has been facing a number of regulatory hurdles across the European Union.In late June, French taxi drivers held violent protests in many cities against the rise of UberPop. The company later agreed to shut down the service temporarily.Other European cities and national governments, in the Netherlands, Germany and Spain, among other countries, have banned some of Uber’s offerings, saying they represent unfair competition for taxi drivers. Many global policy makers also have taken a negative view on Uber, which is now valued at more than $40 billion. Most recently, New York officials have proposed capping the number of cars that the likes of Uber can have on the road, in a bid to reduce traffic congestion.In addition to waiting for a decision from Europe’s top court, Uber has filed legal cases against France, Germany and Spain over bans on its low-cost service. It also has asked the European Commission, the executive arm of the European Union, to weigh in on whether national governments have the right to ban the company’s offerings.And Mr. MacGann told reporters on Monday that the company would consider further legal action against governments that tried to clamp down on Uber’s services.“There are outdated rules used across Europe to squash competition,” Mr. MacGann said. “Uber completely supports regulation. But rules need to be based on what’s good for users and drivers, not existing taxi companies.”A version of this article appears in print on 07/21/2015, on page B2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Uber Vows Legal Action If Countries Ban Services.