By VINDU GOELOCT. 27, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  Jack Dorsey, the co-founder and newly returned chief executive of Twitter, seems to be quite adept at scaring investors.On Tuesday, Twitter gave a dismal forecast for its fourth-quarter revenue and profits. Shares in Twitter, a social media company, plunged as much as 13 percent in after-hours trading as Mr. Dorsey and his lieutenants offered little explanation for the gloom in a conference call with investors. In a similar call three months ago, Mr. Dorsey’s pointed critique of Twitter’s product failings sent the stock down 11 percent.The new projections, delivered as the company exceeded analysts’ expectations for its third-quarter results, provided fresh evidence that Twitter is failing to win over advertisers, the source of most of its revenue, as it confronts stiffening competition from Facebook, Instagram and Google.“The company is finding real challenges gaining traction with advertisers,” said Mark Mahaney, an Internet analyst with RBC Capital Markets, citing the new forecasts and an advertiser survey his firm conducts twice a year.AdvertisementMr. Mahaney, who has a neutral rating on Twitter’s stock, said he was struck by the contrast between the upbeat tone of Twitter’s executives on the call and the company’s deteriorating outlook. “Everything sounds so good, yet you reduced your forecast pretty materially. Why?”AdvertisementMr. Dorsey didn’t answer that question, although Adam Bain, the company’s former ad chief and new chief operating officer, offered a clue: Ad prices plunged 39 percent in the third quarter, which he said was partly because of improved efficiency of video ads.Twitter’s intensified efforts to lure more newcomers to the service are also not yet delivering results. The company said it had 320 million users in the third quarter, up slightly from 316 million in the second quarter. Excluding people who subscribe to the service via text message, a group that Wall Street considers less valuable, the company had 307 million users, roughly flat with the previous quarter.Mr. Dorsey promised more “bold experiences” to turn that around, including easier ways to tap into conversations around topics such as black Americans’ experiences with the police, many of which have taken place under the hashtag #BlackLivesMatter.But, he added, “we’re not going to get into the product road map.”Twitter also reported revenue of $569 million for the quarter, up 58 percent from $361 million a year ago. Its net loss was $132 million, or 20 cents a share, compared to a loss of $175 million, or 29 cents a share, in the same quarter last year.Excluding common business expenses such as stock compensation, taxes and depreciation — a measure called adjusted Ebitda that the company prefers to highlight — Twitter reported a profit of $142 million compared with $68 million a year ago.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The actual numbers beat analysts’ estimates, which had been recently raised. Two weeks ago, when the company announced it was laying off 8 percent of its staff, it said revenue for the third quarter would come in at or above $560 million and adjusted Ebitda would be at or above $115 million.No one on Wall Street cared much about the company’s past, however.For the fourth quarter, usually the strongest thanks to holiday advertising, Twitter warned that revenue would be $695 million to $710 million, well below the $740 million that Wall Street had been expecting, according to S&P Capital IQ data. The company said adjusted Ebitda would be $155 million to $175 million, compared with the $198 million analysts had been projecting.Erna Alfred Liousas, a social media analyst with Forrester, a research firm, said it was too early to expect results from Mr. Dorsey, the company co-founder who was named permanent chief executive this month after three months as interim chief.Advertisement“During the short amount of time he’s been there, he’s been very decisive,” Ms. Liousas said, pointing in particular to the layoffs. She said the company had an opportunity to build communities around brands and topics, which no social platform has done well.Also this month, Twitter added a feature called Moments, in which it selects the top posts about popular topics, with the goal of engaging casual users. On Tuesday night, the company planned to run a television ad for Moments during the first game of the World Series.Mr. Dorsey emphasized Twitter’s strengths as a center of public conversation during live events. “Every event we’ve seen is always better with Twitter,” he said.One concern for investors is that Mr. Dorsey will need to focus more of his attention on Square, the digital payments company that he also heads. Square has filed for an initial public offering of stock, and Mr. Dorsey will soon begin a so-called road show, a series of meetings with potential investors to pitch the merits of Square shares.“I question the concept of a dual C.E.O.,” said James Gellert, chief executive of Rapid Ratings, which assesses the financial risk of companies and gives low ratings to both of Mr. Dorsey’s companies. “It seems to me that Twitter needs a great musician and so does Square.”A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Forecasts From Twitter and Flat User Growth Send Its Stock Diving.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.