
App Smart By                     
 KIT EATON
 
JULY 22, 2015
Summer is the time for grilling. Several new apps can help you cook your burgers to perfection.It’s summer, the perfect time for the sizzling sun to be joined by sizzling sounds from your grill. But since grilling is an art, and it’s easy to ruin a piece of meat on the flames, you may be seeking a little help from the right recipe apps to help cook up some mouthwatering feasts and avert a barbecue disaster.That might lead you to Grill-It!, a $1 recipe app available for iOS and Android phones. The app has a long list of food that you can cook on the grill, ranging from classic beef burgers to unusual seafood dishes.The recipes are sorted in categories like pork, burgers, seafood and vegetables. You can search for recipes and mark your favorites. New recipes can be sent to your phone automatically. Each recipe has color photos to inspire you to grilling greatness, and the instructions are written clearly.Grill-It! lacks extras like a built-in shopping list, but the app is likely to be on your phone when you’re shopping, so you can still figure out what to buy. The list of recipes is also limited. But the app’s menus are easy to use, and it is good to look at. While the Android app hasn’t been updated in several years, that doesn’t seem to affect how well it works.AdvertisementGrilling: A Bon Appétit Manual is one alternative to Grill-It!, though it’s available only for iOS devices. It has 100 recipes, along with demonstration videos and tips for good grilling. The recipes are perhaps more sophisticated than those in Grill-It!, with the kind of dishes you could find in a restaurant. The instructions are presented clearly, if a little formally, and the app uses lavish photos to illustrate each recipe. The app might strike some people as just a smart cookbook, but it is fun to use and free.AdvertisementFor budding barbecue chefs looking for expert tips, the Weber Grills app is also a good option. From the same company that sells grills worldwide, Weber’s app contains a varied selection of recipes, plus a long list of tips and tricks to help master setting up your grill and cooking on it. The tips include good knife habits, as well as hints on how to tell if your food is perfectly done.There are videos and shopping lists so you know exactly what to buy. The app is generally easy to use, if a little gaudy looking and laden with advertising for Weber’s many different grilling products. I didn’t encounter any issues using it, but some reviewers complain the app is sluggish and that the recipe-of-the-week feature isn’t working. The app is free on iOS and Android.If you’re a barbecue expert, the Pit Pal app, available on iOS and Android, is definitely worth trying. Think of Pit Pal as a kind of logbook; it’s an attempt to insert some structure into the art of cooking on a grill or in a smoker.The app lets you make detailed notes about your grill setup, which dishes you’re cooking, temperatures, cooking times and so on. You can even append photos to your notes so that next time you cook a dish, you can learn from your earlier successes (or mistakes).The app also connects to some third-party wireless grill temperature sensors, for an accurate indication of how fast your food is cooking in real time. Barbecue perfectionists may love this app and it is free, though for access to all the features, including temperature charts and graphs and unlimited logging, you pay $2 for an upgrade.Getting the cooking time right is critical to avoiding underdone steaks or food that’s turned to carbon. The Omaha Steaks Steak Time app is a great help here. The app has smart timers: You enter the type and thickness of meat you’re cooking, and the app recommends a cooking time and starts a timer for you. You can run multiple timers at once if you’re cooking several things, and it will even tell you when to flip the meat.Steak Time includes cooking tips and a reasonably big recipe archive — which is aimed at promoting and selling Omaha Steaks’ own products. If you don’t mind this, the app is visually friendly, useful and free on iOS. There’s also a free Android version, via Amazon, but it hasn’t been upgraded in some time and may be buggy on more modern Android devices.Quick CallThe hugely popular board game Splendor is now available as a mobile app. The game is about Renaissance-era jewel traders, and involves a lot of strategy — a little like Monopoly, but more intriguing. All the fun can be had for $7 on iOS and Android.A version of this article appears in print on July 23, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Grilling Advice for Barbecue Beginners and Expert Outdoor Chefs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »