For Will Shu, the idea behind his tech start-up grew out of frustration.When he moved moved to London for the first time, to work as an analyst for Morgan Stanley, Mr. Shu could not find restaurants in the city’s financial district to deliver food when he worked late nights.“I ended up having to go to Burger King because no one would deliver,” he said. “Where I worked, it was impossible to find anything good to eat.”After leaving the investment bank and finishing an M.B.A. at the Wharton School, Mr. Shu returned to the British capital and co-founded Deliveroo, an on-demand food delivery service, in early 2013. The timing caught the company on the wave of of tech companies that allow almost anything to be delivered with little more than a swipe of a smartphone screen.Now, the company is looking to be an even bigger player in the delivery market. On Monday, Deliveroo announced a new $70 million funding round led by Greenoaks Capital and Index Ventures, which takes its total fund-raising to almost $100 million.The move by Deliveroo and its backers is part of wider efforts by venture capitals and tech entrepreneurs to build on-demand services. That has helped to propel the likes of Uber, the ride-booking service, and Airbnb, the housing-rental site, to multibillion dollar valuations.While online food delivery companies like GrubHub and Just Eat, its European rival, have helped restaurants with existing delivery services to connect digitally with potential customers, Mr. Shu says there are thousands of restaurants, particularly in Europe, that are not set up for the online economy.To fill this void, Deliveroo provides a one-size-fits-all offering for nontech savvy restaurants, including food packaging, delivery drivers and other support so individuals can order the restaurants’ food through smartphones. The start-up charges customers a flat $4 delivery charge and takes an undisclosed percentage from restaurants’ additional sales. “If we can figure out all the logistics for restaurants, then we can offer people a better service,” said Mr. Shu, who still spends a couple of hours a week delivering food to customers despite have about 150 employees at the company. “For the first eight months, I was on my bike a lot.”With the new money, Deliveroo is planning to introduce its offering to other European cities, as well as in the Middle East and a small number of Asian countries. The start-up has just signed up its first restaurants in Paris and Berlin, though Mr. Shu, who grew up in New Haven, said he did not have plans to enter the United States in the short-term.“Our sweet spot is when there’s high population density, a degree of affluence and a lot of restaurants,” he said. “There are a lot of cities in Europe that have those characteristics.”