For many users, Google Plus accounts don’t get all that many visits. Now, Google seems to be indicating it, too, will be paying less attention to its social network. On Monday, Google said it would move features once integrated into Google Plus out of the social network and into other Google services. Photo features have already been moved to the newly introduced Google Photos. Location-sharing will go to Google Hangouts, the company’s chat app.Users will also no longer need a Google Plus account to comment on YouTube, long a point of contention among customers who felt as if they were being roped into using a social network they did not ask for.Altogether, the moves, announced in a blog post on Monday, are a moment of reckoning for Google Plus and those who created it.“While we got certain things right, we made a few choices that, in hindsight, we’ve needed to rethink,” Bradley Horowitz, who oversees Google Plus, wrote about the moves.He was even more contrite on his personal Google Plus page: “We want to formally retire the notion that a Google+ membership is required for anything at Google.”Driving home that point, Google said it would make it easier for users to delete Google Plus accounts, if they choose to.Mr. Horowitz was put in charge of Google Plus in March.Started in 2011 and promoted as Google’s answer to Facebook, Google Plus initially appeared popular on paper. The social network reached 300 million monthly active users in just two years, according to the company.But much of that growth, analysts say, came because users needed to create Google Plus accounts to use some of the company’s other services, like YouTube, annoying many longtime users of those services.“When you say that one service requires another, that’s not a tenable approach,” said Bradley Shimmin, a business analyst at Current Analysis.But Google’s decision to dismantle Google Plus may have less to do with appeasing users’ anger than with meeting the demand of mobile phone owners, who expect apps for each individual service.Rather than make an app or website that is a one-stop shop, tech companies instead are introducing stables of services. Twitter has Vine, a video-sharing app, and Periscope, a live-streaming app, separate from the main Twitter platform. Facebook not only broke out photos and messaging into separate apps, but also decided to acquire Instagram and WhatsApp, direct competitors to those services, and maintain them both as yet another set of options for smartphone owners.In that vein, Google reintroduced Google Photos, which had previously been folded into Google Plus, to great fanfare as a stand-alone service in May.Even though it has been dismantled, Google Plus is not dead and Google promised to continue adding new features. Despite often being portrayed as a ghost town, Google Plus still draws groups of hard-core users, often focused on forums dedicated to discussing other Google products, like Chromebook or Android.After Google’s announcement, those die-hard Google Plus users sounded a note of optimism.“Today’s news surrounding the upcoming changing to Google+ could be seen as cause for concern,” Derek Ross, an Android enthusiast with 1.2 million followers on Google Plus, said in an email. “But myself and many other users of the platform aren’t concerned for the future of Google+.”