For the first 13 years of the century, Americans embraced the Internet at a whirlwind pace. The percentage of Americans who use the Internet grew to 84 percent in 2013 from 52 percent at the turn of the century, according to data from the Pew Research Center. But since 2013, the percentage of American adults who go online has remained virtually unchanged, according a new Pew study released on Tuesday. The 15 percent of Americans who still do not use the Internet is essentially the same portion as in 2013.“A lot of the easy adopters have already been converted,” said Aaron Smith, associate director at the Pew Research Center.Those Americans who remain offline, Pew found, do so for a number of reasons: the cost of buying a computer and paying a broadband or cellphone bill, the perceived relevance of Internet content or even the physical ability to use devices. The elderly, for example, face the dual barriers of making less money and having difficulty reading computer text, typing on keyboards and manipulating touch screens. As a result, age predicts more than anything else whether someone uses the Internet. Thirty-nine percent of Americans 65 and older are still not online, according to Pew.But those Americans who are not connected to the Internet are also disproportionately black or Hispanic, in part because these groups tend to have lower income and education levels. Some Hispanics may also face the additional barrier of English-language proficiency.The cost of getting on the Internet was cited by 19 percent of those who did not use it. The people in that situation are caught in a sort of Catch-22. They cannot afford to get access to the Internet, yet access to services like job listings that would help them earn enough to afford Internet access are available largely online.“Access to technology really mirrors the current wealth gap we see in our country,” said Nicol Turner-Lee, chief researcher at the Multicultural Media, Telecom and Internet Council.Pew’s Internet adoption rate of 84 percent also includes a number of low-income Americans who are able to go online only with difficulty. They may not have Internet at home, instead getting it at a library or at work.The federal government often tries to spur Internet service providers and cellular carriers to increase broadband coverage, sometimes compelling them to do so when they seek approval for acquisitions and mergers.Just last week, when the Federal Communications Commission approved a merger between AT&T and DirecTV, the agency required the company to extend access to high-speed broadband Internet to 12.5 million new customer locations, including schools and libraries.Still, the Internet holdouts persist.“There hasn’t been a real effort to address the affordability barrier at the federal level,” said Michael Scurato, policy director of the National Hispanic Media Coalition.But he and others are optimistic about a new plan by the F.C.C. to expand its Lifeline program, which subsidizes phone service for low-income Americans, to help pay for broadband Internet access as well.“I think we do a service by reminding people that this thing we think is ubiquitous isn’t actually ubiquitous,” said Mr. Smith, the Pew researcher.A version of this article appears in print on 08/03/2015, on page B7 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Numbers Steady for Americans Not on the Internet.