Yahoo is quite late to the world of mobile messaging, but you’ve got to give the company some credit: The new chat service it finally debuted on Wednesday sure is different from the rest of them.The app, Livetext, combines traditional text messages with a silent video feed between the two people chatting. You read that right — video, but no sound.Yahoo says it wants Livetext to be used for quick sessions just like regular texting, but with the emotions conveyed by seeing a person’s face. Eliminating audio means you can use it anywhere — in a meeting, on a noisy street, during class, on a train.“It’s a new way to communicate: casual text on top of video,” Arjun Sethi, a senior director of product management at Yahoo and head of the Livetext project, said in an interview.As Facebook, Google, Tencent and WhatsApp introduced mobile chat apps in recent years and gained hundreds of millions of users, Yahoo floundered in its attempts to update its Yahoo Messenger service, a web service designed a generation ago. Last year, Yahoo essentially gave up and stopped updating Messenger’s mobile apps.Livetext is something different, based on technology developed by MessageMe, a start-up co-founded by Mr. Sethi that was acquired by Yahoo last fall. It combines elements of video chats with the disappearing nature of Snapchat messages.“The key thing for us was to make this as simple as possible,” said Adam Cahan, Yahoo’s senior vice president of video, design, and emerging products, in an interview.As Yahoo developed the product, engineers tested it at Ohio State University and the University of California at Santa Barbara, and also offered it to groups of high school students. In the last few weeks, the company began offering the app publicly in mobile app stores in Hong Kong, Taiwan and Ireland.The company was impressed with the results. “When somebody first tries it, there is a bit of a moment of ‘Aha! I didn’t expect that,'” Mr. Cahan said.Mr. Cahan said the choice to exclude sound, as odd as it appears, was deliberate. “I can barely ever use a video chat experience,” he said. “I feel like I need to make an appointment with someone.”Silent video, on the other hand, can be used in almost any situation where text chats are possible, with the added bonus of conveying a person’s emotions and a sense of place.Mr. Sethi said the company found that video also made chats more memorable by associating them with a person’s face.Video isn’t saved on the phone or by Yahoo. And unlike competing products such as Google Hangouts, Facebook Messenger and WhatsApp, the texts disappear once the chat session is ended.The app will be released in iOS and Android app stores on Thursday in the United States, Britain, Canada, Germany and France.Mr. Sethi acknowledged that users have many messaging apps to choose from. “Is this a new form of communication? Have we hit the opportunity well?” he said.The only way to find out is to put it out in the world and see what happens.A version of this article appears in print on 07/30/2015, on page B8 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Yahoo Introduces Mobile Chat App With a Silent Video Feed.