AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichWho is making the most noise about smartphone overuse? It seems that it might be smartphone companies themselves.A survey released this week by Motorola tried to illustrate that people around the world are obsessed with smartphones. A recent report from Ericsson also emphasized the amount of time certain users are spending on their phones.Even the company that popularized the smartphone is expressing concern for its customers. In an interview with Wired earlier this year, Kevin Lynch, the man responsible for developing the software for the Apple Watch, seemed concerned about our inability to detach:“We’re so connected, kind of ever-presently, with technology now,” Mr. Lynch said. “People are carrying their phones with them and looking at the screen so much.”We asked Brian X. Chen, The Times’s consumer technology expert and the author of a book about constant connectivity, “Always On,” to explain why smartphone companies are so interested in what their products are doing to us. He said that because consumer anxiety about overusing smartphones has lessened, companies feel more comfortable using that line of thinking as a way to market new products.Why are all these studies coming out about smartphone addiction? Do you think it’s something that people are worried about?I think Microsoft and Nokia tried to do this in 2010. They had all these ads come out that said the Windows phone is better than iPhone because it helps you get away from your phone more. We made this more streamlined, more efficient and easier to use, so therefore, you’re going to spend less time on your smartphone. Which, you know, just didn’t turn out to be true. It was just a marketing twist, and we’re seeing more of that now.But there are definitely people who are anxious about using their smartphones too much. Do you think those people are addicted? Are there legitimate worries about using our phones too much?It’s a case-by-case basis, but there are legitimate concerns for people and their everyday interactions. It’s generally rude to keep looking at your smartphone when you’re at dinner with your friends, for example. When you’re in a relationship, and you’re spending more time with your smartphone than you are with your partner, then you probably have a problem. So I think those are some of the concerns when it comes to our social relationships.Have you ever had anyone complain to you that you’re on your phone too much?I get more of the criticism for video games. But yes, there are technology issues that come up in my life. I’m addicted to email probably, working at The New York Times where our bosses are just emailing us all day. I kind of have to tell myself to get away from that on the weekend and set my own limitations and restrictions.How would you suggest people stay away from their phones?The way that I’ve set it up is I only get sound for emails when I get emails from my bosses, and I use the V.I.P. alerts on the iPhone. I pretty much ignore everything else, unless it’s friends. I turn on “Do Not Disturb” every day from midnight to 6 a.m. just so I’m not getting crazy email noises while we’re sleeping.An argument I make in the book is, simply, if it’s really becoming a problem, you can start setting restrictions around yourself. For example, at dinner turn on airplane mode on the iPhone. And stop looking at your phone; pay attention to your partner and your friends and so on. You can do these things!The MIT Technology Review had a report a couple of years ago that claimed that smartphones had spread with “unprecedented speed.” Do you think the speed of adoption has contributed to the anxiety?I kind of feel like the opposite: The fact that smartphone adoption is spreading so quickly is kind of proof that people are getting past that anxiety. Back when the smartphone was still becoming a mainstream thing, that’s when anxiety was at its peak. But there have been very few studies suggesting anything severely negative about using smartphones.There has always been fear of new technology. The classic example is that Aristotle warned that using the pen to write would make us stop memorizing things, and that certainly turned out not to be true. And then there’s the television. The television is funny in that we’ve all moved on, but that’s one piece of technology that we should actually be more concerned about because it involves a lot of sitting around. And sitting is really, really bad for you. Advertisement