SAN FRANCISCO — In 2012, a Brazilian software engineer named Bruno Gregory and a friend went for a bicycle ride in the hills of the East Bay, where Mr. Gregory was living. With a GoPro camera on one of their bikes recording the ride, a car mowed into the two cyclists, sending them hurtling to the pavement.The two suffered minor road rash, but Mr. Gregory gave the footage of the incident to the police, who were able to identify the driver from his license plate. (The incident was mentioned in a an article I wrote in 2012).  Even better, Mr. Gregory got an idea for a start-up out of the incident. On Wednesday, he plans to announce the start-up, Graava, which aims to use intelligent software and sensors to create a new twist on the action cameras like GoPro that are becoming increasingly popular. The small Graava camera, no bigger than a pack of Tic-Tacs, is designed to work with an online service that automatically edits any footage a user captures into good-looking videos, composed only of the most dramatic moments from a ski run, motorcycle ride or a rafting trip. The premise behind the company’s product is simple: GoPros and other action cameras capture stunning footage from life’s most exciting moments, but people still have to upload it to their computers and edit it to make into something interesting. Graava requires no connection to a computer. Drop the camera onto a wireless charging mat, and it automatically syncs the raw video to the cloud, where Graava cuts out the boring bits. “After the accident, I started thinking about the camera I had,” said Mr. Gregory, who spent more than 16 years doing software programming for banks and government agencies in Brazil. “Most of the time, I just leave the camera at home. I used it two times in a year, for vacation or skiing. The market really needs something better than this, something smarter than this.”He said the Graava camera has a G.P.S. chip and an accelerometer, sensors that detect location and acceleration force during any video recording. Graava’s software makes assumptions that moments when you’re speeding up sharply or slowing down are probably more exciting, and therefore worth keeping in the final cut. The location data the camera collects will even allow Graava to merge footage from multiple cameras — from friends on a cycling trip, say — into a single video, as long as users provide permission to do so.  Users will also be able to use voice commands to start and stop video recording, without having to fiddle with physical controls. The camera will be available for early buyers for $249 and ship early next year. It will begin taking orders for the camera on Wednesday. A version of this article appears in print on 08/10/2015, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Camera Edits Out the Boring Parts.