AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. How often does Windows 10 automatically run the File History program? Does it back up the whole PC?A. In the default setting, the File History program in Windows 10 backs up the contents of your user folder on the computer’s C: drive once an hour. If this timing does not suit you, you can change the frequency in the File History settings. To save space or time, you can also exclude specific content libraries or folders from the backup.To make adjustments, go to the Start menu to Settings, select Update & Security and then Backup. Select the More Options link under the name of your backup drive, and then choose See Advanced Settings. (If you are using a mouse and keyboard, another way to get there faster: Press the Windows and X keys to pop open a quick menu with a Control Panel shortcut, then click the File Recovery icon in the Control Panel window.)In the File History control panel, select Advanced Settings. Here, you can choose how often you would like the program to back up your files. Click the Save Changes button to return to the File History control panel screen. If you would like to prevent certain libraries or folders from being part of the backup, select the Exclude Folders link on the left side of the box. Click the Add button on the next screen to start excluding and save your changes when you are done.Adding Android to the Television SetQ. What’s the best way to get Android TV on my television?A. Android TV, Google’s package of streaming video content, apps and games for the big screen in your life, is primarily available through dedicated set-top boxes. Using Google’s Nexus Player, (which includes its own voice-activated remote) is one method to add the Android TV service to the entertainment menu on your current set, as long as your TV meets the Nexus Player’s system requirements. Google’s set-top box is now available around the web and in stores for well under its original $99 list price.If Android TV’s potential as a video game console interests you the most, consider getting a set-top box with a more robust processor designed for the speed and graphics of gaming. The Nvidia Shield (about $200 with a game controller) and the Razer Forge TV ($100 by itself or $150 for the box bundled with a controller) are two models to explore if you are serious about playing Android games on the television screen.When it comes time to upgrade the television set itself, you will probably be able to find a few models with Android TV already on the inside. Sony has added the software to some of its 2015 Bravia sets, and Philips has integrated it into some of its Smart TV line. Some new Aquos models from Sharp also include Android TV.Advertisement