Researchers say they have discovered something that teenagers already know: Young people use the Internet to maintain friendships made at school or work, but also to forge entirely new ones with peers they meet while browsing social networks like Instagram or playing a game like Call of Duty.In a survey released Thursday by the Pew Research Center, 57 percent of American teenagers age 13 to 17 say they have made a friend online. Nearly three in 10 of the teenagers surveyed said they had a network of more than five friends they had made through the Internet. The vast majority, 77 percent, of these relationships don’t culminate in an actual meeting, the Pew researchers said.For at least some parents, the survey’s could come as a revelation.“We found the Internet is really a critical part of how teens make and sustain friendship,” said Amanda Lenhart, associate director of research at Pew. “It helps us unpack some adult assumptions — that they’re wasting time with these devices.”But for teenagers, like Isabel Song, 18, of Colorado Springs, making friends online is just a part of growing up.“A lot of the times people look at online friendships skeptically,” Ms. Song said in an interview. “But I feel if we do it safely and do it right, they can mean the world to people.”When applying to universities during the last school year, Ms. Song relied on a group of friends she had made on Twitter for application tips and emotional support. Many in the group, she said, had gone through the college admissions process a year or two before. Only once she began touring colleges did she finally meet some of these friends in person.Teenage girls rely more than boys on social networks like Instagram and Facebook, famous for turning “friend” into a verb, to find like-minded peers online. There, they often congregate to discuss shared interests.Boys, in turn, are more likely than girls to make friendships through video games. One third of teenage boys said they had made a friend through Internet-connected video games, Pew found.“Communication in games really grew over the past 10 to 15 years,” said David Cole, founder of DFC Intelligence, a company that researches digital media. “It was games like World of Warcraft and Xbox Live, with products like Halo, that really drove it for teens.”But over all, boys are more likely than girls to seek out peers online, in part because some sites on the Internet, like Reddit, are often not welcoming to women, the researchers said.“In some of these more open spaces,” said Ms. Lenhart, the Pew researcher, “sometimes the conversation isn’t always hospitable to women and girls.”