AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Apple’s old iPhoto app had its own Trash area, which held the pictures I deleted from my library until I used the Empty iPhoto Trash command to remove them permanently from my hard drive. The newer Photos for OS X app does not have a Trash area, nor an Empty Trash command, and I don’t see photos I delete in the regular Mac Trash. Are these images instantly erased?A. The Photos app for OS X might not have its own labeled Trash area, but it does not immediately wipe the pictures you delete from your image library or your hard drive. Instead of a Trash folder, Photos dumps the pictures you discard into a Recently Deleted album. You can see the unwanted images in Photos by going to the File menu and selecting Show Recently Deleted.By default, the Recently Deleted album does not wait around for you to empty it. Photos that you remove from your picture library stay in the Recently Deleted album for about 30 days before they are automatically and permanently deleted from your Mac; you may get up to 40 days before deletion if you use Apple’s iCloud Photo Library to share images among your devices and computers.When you go into the Recently Deleted album, each photo is labeled with the number of days left until it is permanently wiped. If you change your mind and want to restore discarded images to your library, click to select the photos you want to save and then click the Recover button in the top-right corner of the Photos window. On the other hand, you can speed up the permanent erasure of the images in the Recently Deleted album by clicking the Delete All button in the Photos window, or by selecting specific pictures and clicking the Delete button.Q. How do you force-quit an app that often freezes on an Android Lollipop tablet?A. You can forcibly shut down a sluggish or misbehaving app (and all of its background services) on most Android Lollipop gadgets by opening the Settings icon on the main screen and then pressing Apps (or Application Manager) on the Settings screen. Choose the app from the list of installed programs and then tap the Force Stop button. Android may give you a standard warning about the app behaving badly if you force-stop it and give you a chance to cancel the action.If you need to quit the app because it is behaving erratically or you are troubleshooting the tablet, you have a few more options on the app’s own settings page. For instance, you can clear the app’s cache of temporary files or delete data the app has stored on your device. (Each app’s page of settings also displays the permissions it has to interact with your gadget’s hardware and software, in case you want to see how much access it has to other parts of the tablet.)As general troubleshooting steps, restarting your tablet and checking for updates to its installed apps might fix certain issues. To check for app updates manually, open the Play Store app on your home screen, tap the Menu icon in the top-left corner and select My Apps to see if any new versions are waiting.You can also look for any available Android system updates by opening the Settings icon, selecting About Tablet, then System Updates and Check For Update. If you have had enough of a particular app, you can remove it from the tablet by tapping the Uninstall button in the top-right corner of the app’s settings page.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement