Under everyone’s noses, the competitive video game scene has gotten huge, with more than 113 million fans globally by some estimates.Still, it hasn’t totally hit the mainstream in most parts of the world. The very name that competitive gaming goes by — e-sports — is enough to send die-hard sports fans into a fury.There are compelling reasons to believe that will change, the most obvious being that playing games professionally already seems normal to many young people, and it will probably be that way for successive generations, too. There’s also a strong case that e-sports, like every other kind of entertainment, will have to more fully embrace the mobile devices that account for so much of the world’s computing habits.Touch-based games, said Jens Hilgers, the founder and chairman of ESL, which operates large e-sports tournaments around the world, have “the potential for being a broader e-sport because there’s a larger audience that wants to play games there.”One of the first games to test that proposition is Vainglory, which came out late last year for iPhones and iPads and just recently for Android devices. Most mobile games are of the casual variety, like Candy Crush, and aren’t played as e-sports.Vainglory is aimed at the more hard-core gamers. It’s a variation on a genre known as multiplayer online battle arena games, the most prominent of which — League of Legends and Dota 2 — have found huge success as e-sports, attracting enormous online and in-person audiences to their tournaments. Vainglory pits two teams of three players against each other, each with the objective of destroying enemy gun turrets and, eventually, a crystal monument on the opposing team’s base.While Dota 2 and League of Legends are played on PCs, the device favored by most e-sports athletes because of the precision possible when using keyboards and mice, Vainglory is played by tapping on touch screens, a method disdained by many hard-core gamers.The game’s high production values, which resemble the slick look of similar games on PCs, have won over many people. There were 1.5 million active players during May before the Android version of the game was released.What’s more interesting is that Vainglory’s touch controls were supple enough that serious competitive players began forming teams to battle it out in ad hoc tournaments. Eventually, Super Evil Megacorp, the Silicon Valley start-up that created Vainglory, took notice. In July, it organized a tournament for the game in Korea, the country where e-sports have penetrated most deeply into the mainstream, attracting more than a million viewers over television and the Internet.“We all thought, myself included, it would be incredibly arrogant to go out and say you’re creating an e-sport,” said Kristian Segerstrale, chief operating officer of the company. “E-sports is an earned status.”This week, Super Evil Megacorp is stepping up its efforts to foster a competitive scene for Vainglory, taking a cue from other companies that have used e-sports as a way to energize the player community around their games. On Monday it plans to announce a partnership with OGN, a broadcaster in Korea that airs e-sports competitions, to form a fully developed competitive league for Vainglory.In August, teams from Korea, Europe, North America and China will compete for a total prize pool of $70,000, with their competitions airing on prime-time television in Korea and streamed over the Internet to the rest of the world. The company has formed a partnership with a big player in the PC game business in China, Giant Interactive, to officially bring Vainglory to that e-sports-hungry nation.And Super Evil Megacorp will announce that it has raised $26 million in a funding round led by Index Ventures, a venture capital firm that invested in another successful mobile games start-up, Supercell, which makes Clash of Clans. Yuri Milner and Jim Breyer, both investors in Facebook, and Korea Investment Partners, a venture capital firm in Korea, also invested in the company.Alex Novosad helped form a team, GankStars, that will be competing in the coming Vainglory tournament in Korea. Initially he was skeptical that a touch-based game could be a satisfying e-sport, but the responsiveness of the game’s controls were impressive, said Mr. Novosad, who now manages the team.“This game is just one of the first we think might be ushering in an era of serious games that can be played on devices we didn’t think were powerful enough,” said Mr. Novosad, a software engineer at Intel.Mr. Segerstrale argues that the market for e-sports on mobile devices can be several times that for PCs, largely because there are so many more mobile devices being sold. Last year, there were about 1.5 billion smartphones and tablets shipped globally, and a little over 300 million PCs, according to estimates from IDC, the technology research firm.David Cole, an analyst at DFC Intelligence, a game research firm, estimates that about 1.2 billion people worldwide play games on PCs, 250 million on consoles and 1.1 billion on mobile devices, though a lot of those people play on some combination of all three devices. Next year, Mr. Cole estimates, the number of mobile gamers will surpass those playing on PCs.Other developers of mobile games are seeking to tap into the growing e-sports audience, the most prominent of which is Blizzard, maker of a hit digital card game called Hearthstone. Players in tournaments typically play a version of the game for computers, though.Broadcasts of e-sports tournaments can sometimes seem slightly alien to casual viewers. Players in some tournaments sit in soundproof booths to prevent them from hearing enemy positions from e-sportscasters. Their faces are obscured from audiences by computer displays.At the Vainglory tournament in Korea in July, players sat in chairs at desks out in the open in a television studio. One player cradled an iPad on a pillow in her lap while playing. Others played the game on iPhones.“It’s very difficult for you to identify with a player sitting in a booth,” Mr. Segerstrale said. “Bringing players out of the booths, having them play on a device you also own, that helps.”A version of this article appears in print on 08/10/2015, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Edging E-Sports Into the Mainstream With Mobile Versions and Leagues .