AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike IsaacTwitter has had a tough year. It has been slow to attract more users and has been battered on the public markets.Now executives at the highest levels of Twitter are trying to show that despite it all, they still believe in the company.Jack Dorsey, co-founder and interim chief executive, bought more than 31,000 shares of Twitter stock on Monday, amounting to roughly $875,000.“Investing in Twitter’s future,” Mr. Dorsey wrote in a tweet on Monday that included a link to the Securities and Exchange Commission filing disclosing his purchase.For Mr. Dorsey, who owns nearly 22 million shares of Twitter stock, it was a small addition to his holdings. And it came at a relatively low price; shares of Twitter have fallen by nearly a third over the last year.The price of a Twitter share jumped 9 percent on the news Monday, to $29.50. The purchase is also a statement by Mr. Dorsey who, along with stepping in as the interim chief, has privately expressed considerable interest in becoming Twitter’s permanent leader, according to people familiar with his thinking who asked not to be identified because the conversations were private.The company has yet to name a permanent chief executive, and Mr. Dorsey has not said whether he would take the position were it offered to him. But any decision would come at a tricky time for Mr. Dorsey, whose other company, Square, is preparing an initial public offering.Twitter’s board has indicated that it wants its next chief executive to be at the company full time, putting pressure on Mr. Dorsey to decide between the tech companies he co-founded. That is, assuming he would be the board’s choice to run Twitter.“I think for another company, spending months on end to find the right C.E.O. is appropriate,” said Brian Blau, an Internet analyst with Gartner. “I’m not sure Twitter has that luxury, or that they should have even gone forward without a permanent C.E.O. already on board.”There also could be a shuffling of Twitter’s top ranks, according to people close to the company who requested anonymity because the board conversations were confidential. The shift would distribute power among Mr. Dorsey, Adam Bain, the company’s top advertising executive, and Evan Williams, a founder and board member of Twitter.“We see that as a triumvirate of power,” said Robert Peck, an analyst at SunTrust Robinson Humphrey. “It brings a greater emphasis on the product, which is Twitter’s main problem, while also giving more power to the revenue side of the house.”Mr. Dorsey has been joined by several other board members in making stock purchases over the past few days. Among them, Peter Currie bought about 9,200 shares, roughly $250,000 in stock on Monday; on Friday, Peter Fenton, a venture capitalist and also a board member, purchased about $200,000 in stock. Anthony Noto, Twitter’s chief financial officer, bought roughly the same amount last week.The purchases by insiders are a showing of public support during one of the most difficult times in Twitter’s nine years. The embattled company faces intense criticism and weakening faith from investors, analysts and many employees.Twitter had its debut on the New York Stock Exchange in November 2013 to an optimistic Wall Street; the company’s shares surged to about $50 a share for a while on their first day of trading, and within two months reached a high of over $70.But some Twitter loyalists have lost faith in the company’s ability to grow into a large enough presence to fight off competitors like Instagram, Snapchat and, of course, Facebook, the still-growing, 1.5 billion-user behemoth that Twitter is constantly compared to. At the same time, Twitter’s top ranks have been unsettled. Before the departure of Dick Costolo as chief executive on July 1, Twitter reassigned a series of product managers as well as its chief operating officer and chief financial officer, all within a year.Mr. Costolo has told some people that he will step down from Twitter’s board when a new chief executive is appointed, according to people familiar with his plans who asked that their names not be used because they were not authorized to speak to the press.Also on Monday, Twitter announced a multiyear partnership with the National Football League, in which Twitter will feature and sell advertising against in-game video clips on Twitter.Certainly, the recent stock purchases are relatively small given the net worth of the buyers. And last year, Twitter insiders like Mr. Costolo, Mr. Bain, Mr. Dorsey and other top officials collectively sold more than $50 million of Twitter stock.The most conspicuous seller is Mr. Williams. Since May, he has sold more than one million Twitter shares, according to filings with the S.E.C., though this represents only a small amount of the over 50 million shares he owns.That has caused some concern among analysts, but Mr. Williams said in an email that they were automatic sales planned some time ago. “The vast majority of all my net worth is still in Twitter stock, and I expect that to be true for a long time,” he said. “These stock sales in no way reflect my confidence in the future of the company, which is high.”Mr. Peck, the financial analyst, said: “We would like to see the founder of the company stop selling shares.”Advertisement