AdvertisementSupported byGadgetwiseBy Gregory SchmidtIt is almost time for teachers and students to head back to campus, and many of them will arrive with the newest technology in things like headphones and storage devices. Here are some notable gadgets that will enhance your back-to-school experience:Before you can get the latest tech, you have to get rid of your old devices, which still have value even if you’re not using them. Rather than posting them on eBay or Craigslist and waiting for a buyer, you can sell them directly to Gazelle.com. Tell Gazelle the electronic device you have, and it will make you an offer. Gazelle will pay for shipping, check the device and wipe the data clean.After processing, payment is sent within 24 hours, as a check, a PayPal deposit or an Amazon gift card, which includes a 5 percent bonus. The company says it has paid out more than $200 million to more than a million customers since it opened its doors in 2007.Sennheiser is known among audiophiles for headphones that provide high-fidelity listening, but some models can cost more than $1,000. For the budget-conscious student, Sennheiser offers Urbanite headphones, which feature great sound and a durable design at a much lower price.The headphones emphasize the bass without sacrificing the range, so you get clear sound. The on-ear design includes comfortable ear cups that minimize sound leakage, which makes them good for hitting the books in your dorm room without disturbing your roommate. A durable headband, stainless steel hinges and aluminum sliders mean the headphones will last long after graduation.The headphones come in five colors with names like Denim, Sand and Plum. They include a flat, detachable cable with a three-button microphone designed to work with different smartphones, including iOS and Android devices.Note-taking skills are crucial for school. With the Jot Script stylus from Adonit, you can ditch the pen and paper and take notes with an Apple tablet or smartphone. Once synchronized via Bluetooth, the Jot Script offers a smooth writing experience. With a 1.9-millimeter tip and a slim barrel, the stylus resembles a ballpoint pen in shape, weight and performance. Palm rejection technology, which works with newer Apple devices, allows you to rest your hand on the screen without producing stray marks.The stylus does not come with a cable for charging, just an odd-looking USB charger in which the stylus sits upright to charge. (Adonit says the stylus will last up to 20 hours on a full charge.) The stylus works with any app, but Adonit offers its preferred choices on its website. Topping the list is Penultimate from Evernote; a six-month subscription to Evernote Premium is included with the Jot Script.Navigation on a laptop can be tricky with a touch pad, and a tablet presents its own set of difficulties. But multitasking, scrolling and dragging and dropping can be much easier with the MX Anywhere wireless mouse from Logitech.The MX Anywhere is aptly named because of its compact size and ability to track on virtually any surface. Its shape is contoured for an easy grip, and it includes side buttons that can navigate web pages forward or back, an adaptive scroll wheel and a gesture button that can be programmed to reproduce Windows or Macintosh commands.The mouse can be synchronized to up to three devices via a Bluetooth connection. For older devices that do not support Bluetooth, Logitech supplies its Unifying dongle, which can be plugged into the device’s USB port. The mouse includes a rechargeable battery, and Logitech says a full charge can last up to two months.Dashing to class is not exactly a team sport, but it still burns calories. For students who want a better gauge of their daily physical activity, the Fitbit Charge HR can record steps taken, floors climbed and calories burned, as well as monitor heart rate and track sleep patterns.The Charge HR can synchronize with the Fitbit app on a mobile device, which provides a summary of activity, including the time spent in recommended heart rate zones. It can also alert users to incoming calls, and is compatible with more than 150 smartphones. But it will work without a mobile device as well. By pushing a button on the side of the tracker, users can toggle through activity data on the tracker’s screen.For a more comprehensive look, the data can be uploaded by computer to a personalized dashboard on Fitbit’s website. The Charge HR is available now in black and plum; models in blue and tangerine will be available in the coming weeks. It comes with a synchronizing dongle and a charging cable; Fitbit says it will last up to five days on a full charge. The Charge HR is a smart device for teachers, too, but it is not recommended for children.The Connect Wireless Stick, part of SanDisk’s line of wireless storage drives, was recently redesigned with a sleeker form and enhanced capacity of up to 128 gigabytes. No wires or Internet connections are needed to transfer files because the Connect Stick synchronizes via its own Wi-Fi network to the Connect app downloaded to an iOS, Android or Amazon mobile device.The new app is more intuitive and makes it easier to navigate and manage files. You can store your music, videos, photos and class presentations and get access to them all remotely from your mobile device or computer. (SanDisk says the Connect Stick has a range of 150 feet.) The drive allows multiple connections, which means you can share the files with friends. SanDisk says the drive takes two hours to charge fully and can last up to four hours when streaming video or several days on standby.Advertisement