AdvertisementSupported byBy J. D. BiersdorferStopping The Step CounterQ. My new iPhone 6 is tracking my steps. I never turned on this pedometer and don’t wish my movements to be recorded. Can I turn off this function?A. Motion tracking is typically turned on by default and counts your steps in the background, whether or not you use any of the iOS 8 Health apps. While its settings are not readily visible, you can disable this pedometer feature.In the latest version of the system (iOS 8.4), open the Settings icon on the iPhone’s Home screen. On the Settings screen, scroll down and tap Privacy. Look for Motion & Fitness down the list of Privacy controls and select it, and then tap the button next to Fitness Tracking to turn it off.Defending A Compromised PCQ. How can I help if someone I know is deceived by one of those Windows telephone-support scams where the person tries to gain control of the computer and its files?A. If someone you know has given passwords or personal information to a stranger on the phone — or ceded control of the computer to someone remotely — assume the worst. If possible, the victim should immediately go to a different computer or device and change all the passwords and PINs for online bank and credit card accounts, as well as the passwords for email and other online services.Financial institutions have improved in notifying customers of suspicious activity, but if the caller got a debit or credit card number, ask the bank or card issuer for a new one. Keep an eye on monthly statements for unauthorized charges. If the caller has the person’s Social Security number, there is a risk for identity theft and fraudulent tax returns; the Social Security Administration has links to resources on its website.Change the computer’s password and update its antivirus and security software, then scan the computer for malware. Microsoft’s site has advice, a free Online Safety Scanner and other tools at microsoft.com/security. If the computer supports the Remote Desktop feature, make sure it is disabled in the Windows System properties box. Computer repair services can also scan, clean and strengthen security on a PC.Once the PC has been scanned and any malware (like keystroke loggers) removed, change the computer’s password again, as well as the password for the home network and network router. Stay on guard against suspicious activity both online and off — there will always be other scammers out there.TIP OF THE WEEK Amazon sells pretty much everything now (including kitchen sinks), and even offers automatic subscriptions to goods you purchase regularly, or easy reordering of household products with its Wi-Fi-equipped Dash Buttons. If you are a frequent customer and want to better track how much money you are spending with Amazon, you can also download an order history report from the site.To do so, log into Amazon, click the Your Account button at the top right of the page, and in the Orders area of the next page, choose Download Order Reports. On the Order History Reports page, you can choose the type of report you want (like Items, Orders and Shipments, Refunds, and Returns) and the time period you want to see; quick links to download reports for the last 30 days, the last month, the last year or the year-to-date are available as well.Once you click the Request Report button, Amazon gathers the data and notifies you when you can download it. The file arrives in the Comma Separated Values (.csv) format, which can be opened as a spreadsheet with Microsoft Excel, Apple Numbers, Google Sheets or other compatible programs. J. D. BIERSDORFERPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. Advertisement