Even as AT&T has been busy expanding its wireless empire into other markets, like cars and home security, it remains at its heart a phone carrier. The company said Friday that it made some minor revisions to some of its most popular phone plans, offering more mobile data per buck.AT&T said customers subscribed to its most popular shared data plan, called Mobile Share Value, will now get 50 percent more data. Customers who were paying $100 a month for a shared bucket of 10 gigabytes of data will now get 15 gigabytes of data. The company added that the plan would include unlimited voice minutes and text messages to people in Canada and Mexico.In an interview, Glenn Lurie, the company’s chief of mobile, shared his thoughts about AT&T’s various phone plans in the face of myriad changes for the company, including the recently completed acquisition of DirecTV, which expands its presence in the TV market. An edited transcript follows.What has the DirecTV acquisition done for your business?It’s been a week. It’s a phenomenal opportunity for us. We’ve obviously been in the U-verse business and TV business before. Now, being the largest TV and video player in the world brings a whole bunch of benefits.DirecTV really makes us a different company. You’ve probably seen the original offer, the All in One Plan, where we bundle together four TVs and four smartphones for $200 a month. It’s game-changing when you have TV and wireless put together.Also on Monday we put out our switcher offer, offering $500 in credit for DirecTV customers who aren’t AT&T mobile customers yet and switch over to AT&T. That’s also game-changing. Those are very high-value customers that are part of our family through the DirecTV acquisition.We’re on different sides and have very different levels of negotiation with content players to bring those costs of content down. We’re also thinking about the future of technology, and our business is about mobility and video. You should be able to watch your content where and when you want.Randall Stephenson, our chairman, is very clear that we want to play big in that space. And with the acquisition of DirecTV, we now have by far the best wireless in the U.S., and we have the biggest and best TV business in U.S.I respect my three competitors, but they’re wireless-only players. Verizon has a small TV footprint, but they’re selling their wireline business. And if you look at cable players, they don’t have wireless. There’s no one in the U.S. with our assets, not even close. We plan on executing those together in a very, very simple customer experience so that the customer can have a beautiful bundle and single carrier experience.So you’ve got a lot of stuff going on. You offer mobile shared-data plans, which more than 80 percent of your subscribers use. You also offer a payment plan called Next. Why not just simplify everything into one easy-to-understand plan?They actually work together. Mobile Share Value is the rate structure that allows you to buy a bucket of data and add devices to it. You can add tablets, wearables, cars, all into the same bucket. AT&T Next is one of the ways that people can buy their devices.A really important point is our happiest customers are those who are on Mobile Share Value and buying our devices through Next. The reason that Next has been so popular is they love it. It’s a zero-down opportunity, where customers can obviously have a smaller payment upfront and decide when they want to upgrade.We obviously want to give our customers choice, and it’s really, really important that we do that.We’ve done that forever. The two combined have been a big part of our success. We’re off to a fantastic start. It’s all about our customers, listening to them and giving them options. It’s what they’re enjoying.It’s a fair point that people appreciate having options. But don’t too many options also create confusion?Not when you go from what we had before, which was a whole bunch of rate structures, down to Next. We simplified significantly, so no.If you look at our results and our churn, which are at all-time highs, we’ve done the exact opposite. We’ve simplified our rate structure. Ultimately our customers still want a set of options.Your latest addition to some phone plans is free calling to Mexico. Could you elaborate on your ambitions there?We invested about $4 billion in buying those two carriers, Iusacell and Nextel Mexico. We now have more spectrum in Mexico than any other carrier. We’ve said we’re going to invest an additional $3 billion there to build out an LTE network. Without question we’re going to go and compete in Mexico.It’s very, very important. The halo effect for the U.S. is terrific. As you’re well aware, it’s a very popular place to call. We’ve very quickly added free calling to Mexico and no-contract, plans as well as Cricket. It’s adjacent to the U.S. We feel very strongly there’s huge affinity to the U.S. One of the things we’ve said repeatedly was we’re not sure there needs to be borders in North America. We see a terrific opportunity there.