By J. D. BIERSDORFERAUG. 14, 2015
Q. How do you make a copyright symbol on an Android or iOS tablet?A. On a tablet running the Lollipop version of Android and the Google Keyboard software, you can find the copyright symbol (©) with two taps. When you are on the standard qwerty alphabet keyboard, tap the ?123 key in the lower-left corner.When you land on the keyboard layer that shows numbers and punctuation, tap the ~ [ < key on the lower-left side to switch to the symbols keyboard. The copyright symbol is in the first row above the space bar, along with the Registered (®) and Trademark (™) symbols. When you have inserted the character you need, tap the ABC key to go back to the regular alphabet keyboard.Those trying to find the same symbols on an iOS 8 device have to work a little harder. If you have not already installed the Emoji keyboard on your tablet or phone, do so by tapping open the Settings icon on the home screen. On the Settings screen, choose General and then Keyboard.On the next screen, tap Keyboards, then Add New Keyboard and select Emoji. In addition to a palette of symbols, the Emoji keyboard also brings dozens of colorful little pictographs you can use to accent your messages. After you add the Emoji keyboard, switch to it from the standard iOS keyboard by tapping the smiley-face key next to the space bar.AdvertisementOnce you are on the Emoji keyboard, tap the Objects & Symbols icon on the lower-right side of the screen and swipe several screens to the left to get to the copyright symbol. Tap it to add the character to your document or message. Tap the ABC key in the lower-left corner to return to the regular keyboard.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last year, Apple added the ability to use third-party keyboard apps in iOS 8. You can find alternative keyboards from other developers in the Google Play or iOS App Store if you want an input app with more style or features.AdvertisementQ. A recent column on how to see what types of files are taking up hard-drive space on the computer covered Windows 8.1 and Mac OS X, but how can you do this on Windows 7?A. While Windows 7 gives you a quick way to see the amount of free space you have left on the PC, this approach does not break out the different file types (like photos, videos and audio tracks) filling up your drive. However, one way to get the full breakdown is to use a program that analyzes disk space.In addition to listing the file types, many disk-usage programs can also display the computer’s data as a graphic, usually in the form of a “treemap” or pie chart. WinDirStat, TreeSize Free and Space Sniffer are among the free options. After the program scans your system, it presents its findings and you can quickly see just how much space your giant audio collection or photo library is taking up on the computer.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.