Pivotal Software announced on Tuesday that it had a new leader and that bookings for its cloud computing software is now a $100 million-a-year business, double the size of a year ago.Paul Maritz, 60, is handing over the chief executive post to Rob Mee, 52, an executive vice president who heads Pivotal Labs, the unit that helps corporate customers with software development projects. Mr. Maritz will become executive chairman of Pivotal Software, a two-year-old web services company. He said he would remain active but not in day-to-day management.When asked, Mr. Maritz said that the decision to step away as chief executive was his alone, and was made easier because the company had found its footing and was showing healthy growth. A top executive at Microsoft in the 1990s, Mr. Maritz left there a wealthy man. He is an active philanthropist in his native Zimbabwe and elsewhere.Pivotal, founded in 2013, was spun out from EMC with assets from another EMC subsidiary, VMware, which also holds a stake in Pivotal.Pivotal is a bet that there is a sizable business to be made in helping corporations develop cloud and data-analysis applications, using open-source, cloud-based software. Other major technology companies, including IBM and Infor, are placing similar bets. Amazon Web Services is the early leader in cloud-based software as a service for corporationsThe technology and business model embraced by Pivotal and others represent a challenge to standard enterprise software and hardware suppliers, like EMC.“Our view was that all platform technology in the future will be open-source, and that it will be cloud software sold by subscription as opposed to conventional licensed software,” Mr. Maritz said in an interview.Last month, EMC reported a decline in quarterly profit and announced cost-cutting steps, as demand for its storage hardware and software eroded.Mr. Mee was a founder of Pivotal Labs in 1989. The company, based in San Francisco, focused on rapid, Internet-style software development, known as agile programming. It has done software development work for Internet companies including Google and Twitter.EMC bought Pivotal Labs in 2012, and it became the foundation around which Pivotal Software was built.Pivotal Labs is now the development services arm of Pivotal Software, which has two other businesses. Those are its open-source cloud application software — the unit reporting the fast subscription booking rate — and its software for managing and analyzing large amounts of data.In an interview, Mr. Mee said Pivotal’s overarching business was to help corporations make the transition to become modern digital businesses. “Whether you’re in the auto, insurance, energy, retail or any other industry, you have to be a software company to compete,” he said. “Excellence in software is becoming a core competence, and that’s really daunting for most companies.”Its roster of clients includes Allstate, Philips, Humana, Comcast, Verizon, Kroger, Lockheed Martin and General Electric, which is also an investor in Pivotal.At Pivotal, the goal is to not just help corporate clients with specific development projects, Mr. Mee said, but to “show them the way,” with consulting, advice and training.