Peach, a growing lunch delivery service that operates in Seattle and San Diego, has secured $8 million from Madrona Venture Group and Vulcan Capital.The investment will allow Peach, which says it has delivered more than 400,000 lunches since it started in June 2014, to expand its operations to Boston and Washington. “We’re looking to grab as much market share as possible,” said Nishant Singh, the company’s founder and chief executive.Peach uses a somewhat different model than PostMates and GrubHub, which charge users a fee for delivering food from the restaurants they serve. Instead, Peach tacks a percentage onto what a restaurant would charge for a sandwich or salad. “Say a restaurant prices a sandwich at $9.50,” Mr. Singh said. “We add 20 percent to the price, and that’s what the restaurant pays us.”Peach negotiates the terms with each restaurant. Most of the restaurants do their own delivery, although Peach does arrange third-party delivery if a restaurant wants it.Restaurants across the country are experimenting with new, third-party delivery services driven by apps. Starbucks has a partnership with PostMates, while Chipotle is trying out different services.Restaurants decide what selections they will offer through Peach in a given week, and Peach creates a weekly menu that it delivers to users via text message. Users can order all their lunches for a week, or they can order on the morning of the day they wish to have lunch at their desks.A sample menu on the company’s website, for instance, offers a carne adovada pasty from Twisted Pasty in Seattle as Wednesday’s selection. The pasty will cost $9.72, plus a $1 Peach fee and tax.“They’ve given us some phenomenal exposure,” said Ryan Santwire, the owner of Paseo Caribbean Food, a popular lunch spot in Seattle and the restaurant with th second-highest number of reviews on Yelp in America. “We’re now able to reach an audience sitting behind a desk that may be unable, because of distance or time constraints, to get out and try us.”Another delivery service, SpoonRocket, shut down in Seattle after just four months. It promised to deliver Paseo’s sandwiches free, delivering individual orders to several locations using vehicles specially equipped to keep foods warm.Instead, Peach accumulates orders from workers at the same corporate location, say, a company’s campus in Seattle. Participating restaurants can then potentially send dozens of sandwiches to a single business rather than delivering a sandwich here and a sandwich there.“The individual delivery method, that’s harder on everyone in the chain,” Mr. Santwire said. “Peach has such a great model because it reaches out to multiple employees in a corporate office, so the orders are sizable and that makes the logistics simpler.”Paseo does so much additional volume through Peach that it has had to limit the amount of meals it promises through the service — which, of course, makes its sandwiches more attractive.