By THE NEW YORK TIMESAUG. 18, 2015
The recent New York Times article about Amazon inspired an unprecedented online conversation about workplace stress. Here are a few of the thousands of comments posted across the web.Amazon recently surpassed Walmart as the most valuable retailer in the country. It is ceaselessly inventive, unafraid to try something and fail. Its ambitious goal: sell everything to everyone everywhere. It is also figuring out how to extract the most from its employees, whose dedication and obsession is the real engine behind the company’s success.A recent article in The New York Times —“Inside Amazon: Wrestling Big Ideas in a Bruising Workplace” — offered a glimpse into what could be described as a workplace that is both bruising and thrilling. It gave accounts of workers who suffered from cancer, miscarriages and other personal crises who said they had been evaluated unfairly or edged out rather than given time to recover in Amazon’s intense and fast-paced workplace.The reaction to the story was voluminous and spirited. On websites like Reddit and Hacker News, tech workers, Amazon employees and friends and relatives offered thoughtful and detailed reflections of their experiences at the company. Jeff Bezos, its chief executive, also weighed in.Many of the more than 4,000 comments posted to nytimes.com recounted what life was like at Amazon.Dan Kreft’s was among them. He joined the company in 1999 after a short career in basketball, first at Northwestern University and then around the world after college. An old pair of his size 21 shoes, he wrote in a follow-up email to The Times, became one of the prizes handed out to recipients of the company’s Just Do It award — a recognition of an employee taking the initiative to do something above and beyond the call of duty. He said he left last month, after putting in 15 years, 10 months and 11 days at the company.“Amazon is a great place to learn from fantastically skilled and intelligent people. It’s a terrific place to work on systems on a scale that most companies can’t even fathom. It’s a thrilling place to work if you thrive on pressure and love being a part of something huge and powerful.It’s a great place to work if you don’t have any interests outside of work and if you’re a corporate-ladder-climber type. But corporate culture doesn’t really promote treating its employees like human beings who have feelings and a life outside of work. At Amazon, you’re just a login...a face on a badge...“head count”...a row in a database in a giant air-conditioned room filled with servers, just waiting to have your bit flipped. So go ahead, Work Hard, Have Fun, Make History...but defenestrate any silly notions that you matter as a person.I wish Jeff Bezos and Company continued success, but I wonder how much more successful they could be if they would only show the same kind of obsessive care about their employees as they do about their customers.” — DanAdvertisementAnother Amazon employee put it a bit more succinctly — if not more dramatically:“As someone who worked at Amazon headquarters in Seattle for over 5 years I can tell you that it is an obscenely stressful place to work. I wouldn’t wish a job at Amazon on my worst enemy. Everyone I knew was on drugs for depression, drank too much and had severe sleeping problems — forget about having any life outside of Amazon, 75-plus hour work weeks are the norm. It’s absolutely brutal. I didn’t even realize how disgustingly abusive it was until I left.” — Frmr Amzn“I still struggle with the Amhole nature within,” a Seattle technology recruiter who worked there for four years wrote, referring the pejorative Seattle nickname for employees, “resisting the desire to verbally castrate my current colleagues who are not up to my vision of competence.”AdvertisementDozens of current and former employees, as well as loved ones, wrote in to talk about how difficult it was to maintain a work/life balance. Many pointed out that the two year-mark was often the cut off for how long they could last there. As one Amazon customer put it:“We are terribly naive to think that the instant gratification services we demand — kitty litter in an hour or less, groceries and other services — do not have an impact to the employees hired to support our immediate whims.” — misterbohThe depiction of life at Amazon left many commenters wondering whether they should continue shopping with the company. Not everyone, however, was so quick to lambaste it and its practices.“America needs more companies like Amazon that demand more from employees and rewards them accordingly. Our nation’s Silicon Valley culture isn’t perfect and can burn people out, but is also the reason we have Apple, Microsoft, and Google keeping us competitive.” — SeattleGuyA recent hire noted that for him, the grueling environment feels like it’s worth it in terms of career development — an attitude he believes is shared among other young engineers in the tech industry. He expects to be pushed, he said.“While it may seem appalling to many readers, all you need to see the light is a switch in mindset. If you think of work as working for somebody else, you will be appalled at the work conditions at any high performing company. But if you understand that what you do, no matter who you do it for, is at the end of the day for yourself, all this starts to make sense.“The skills I develop while working will be mine to keep for life. I’m not here to put in the hours for a paycheck. I’m here being paid to learn.” — JumboSome current Amazon employees said their experiences matched the most upbeat ones described in the original article.A European employee wrote that he found the company unusually supportive.”The pace is fast but it brings a sentiment of accomplishment and satisfaction to the people working here. I have never seen anybody sick or in pain not being treated in the most humane way possible and I cannot imagine anybody at Amazon condoning the behaviors you have described. These were bad managers that do not deserve to work for us. Working for Amazon has made me raise my standards and I’m grateful for it.” — Bernard KAnother Amazon employee echoed that experience. He pointed to the climate inside the company as a place that fosters projects that can have a huge impact on millions of people.“I’ve never seen someone cry at their desk. I’ve taken a family leave with no negative repercussions. I’ve given (and as a manager, received) tons of anonymous feedback, most of it positive or constructive, which would be normal to submit at almost any company with a collaborative workforce.” — JoshJosh didn’t deny feeling stressed or overworked or being pushed at times for deadlines that struck him as unreasonable. He did, however, suggest that working there might be “unsustainable.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.