
OCT. 30, 2015

Related Article
Analysts and officials in the American military community are increasingly examining a recent trend among United States technology companies of forming new partnerships with Chinese firms that have ties to the Chinese military. Critics are concerned that the growing number of such deals could inadvertently improve the fundamental technology capabilities of the Chinese military – or worse, harm United States national security. Below is a list of some of the recent partnerships formed between American tech firms and military-connected Chinese companies. This government-run company that is closely connected to Tsinghua University has received billions of dollars in state money to become a new national champion for microchips. One of its subsidiaries, Tsinghua Tongfang, supplies military communications control equipment and electronic countermeasures and satellite navigation equipment to the People’s Liberation Army, according to a report from the Defense Group Inc., a security firm. At one time, the son of Hu Jintao, the former Chinese president, was Tsinghua’s representative to the Chinese Communist Party.Intel: In September 2014, Intel agreed to invest $1.5 billion for a 20 percent stake in a holding company run by the Tsinghua subsidiary Tsinghua Unigroup. Intel said it would work with two companies acquired by Tsinghua Unigroup to develop new chip technology for mobile phones. Hewlett-Packard: In May, HP sold a 51 percent stake in its China-based server, storage and networking business, H3C Technologies, for $2.3 billion to the Tsinghua Holdings subsidiary Unisplendour. Western Digital: In September, Unisplendour agreed to pay $3.78 billion for a 15 percent stake in the American hard-disk-drive maker Western Digital. Dell: In June, Dell signed a strategic partnership with the subsidiary Tsinghua Tongfang to develop advanced computing technologies supporting cloud computing, big data and smart cities. IBM: Tsinghua University is a member of IBM’s Open Power program to license advanced IBM technology. One of China’s leading makers of servers and networking equipment, Inspur has benefited from government policies aimed at weaning the country off foreign technology. The Chinese military uses Inspur computers, mobile mapping systems and communications systems according to the Defense Group Inc. report. Inspur also sells to the China Air-to-Air Missile Research Academy and the China Academy of Engineering Physics. IBM: Inspur is a partner in IBM’s Open Power program, which gives the company access to the technology supporting parts of its high-end server technology. Cisco: In September, Cisco formed a $100 million joint venture with Inspur to develop advanced information technology infrastructure, data centers and networking equipment. Intel: Inspur sells servers that use Intel chip technology to Chinese clients, many of which have government connections. A crucial state-run company, the China Electronics Technology Group Corporation (C.E.T.C.) is composed of many former military labs that have been the crucial developers of the technology supporting China’s military. The company’s labs designed the electronics on China’s first nuclear bomb, guided missile and satellite. Today, some labs are focused on the military, with others on commercial operations. Microsoft: In September, Microsoft announced a partnership with C.E.T.C. to provide specialized configuration, deployment and maintenance of a localized Windows 10 to support government institutions and critical infrastructure in China. IBM: In December 2013, IBM signed a strategic partnership with a C.E.T.C. joint venture with the Shanghai Municipal Government, which focuses on developing new software products and solutions. Teamsun does things as diverse as setting up networks for large companies and government organizations and protecting those networks from online attacks. It also sells satellite communications equipment and software. The company counts the Second Artillery Equipment Academy and the Chinese People’s Armed Police Force as customers and is registered as a military supplier, according to the Defense Group Inc. report. IBM: Through cooperation with the Beijing city government in November 2014, Teamsun has acquired or is in the process of getting intellectual property rights to advanced IBM server, software and database technology. Unisplendour, a hardware producer and vendor, has agreed to pay $3.78 billion to the American maker of hard disk drives.AdvertisementUnisplendour, a hardware producer and vendor, has agreed to pay $3.78 billion to the American maker of hard disk drives.