The SXSW Interactive conference faced a growing outcry after it canceled two discussion panels intended to tackle online harassment and related issues plaguing the games community. Now it plans to hold a full day of panel discussions on the topic of online harassment. On Friday, Hugh Forrest, director of the conference that takes place in March in Austin, Tex., apologized in a blog post for canceling the two panels earlier this week after the conference received threats of violence. The decision returned GamerGate, an online movement that has been associated with online intimidation of feminist critics of games, to the spotlight. “By canceling two sessions we sent an unintended message that SXSW not only tolerates online harassment but condones it, and for that we are truly sorry,” Mr. Forrest wrote. After conversations with law enforcement authorities and security experts, the conference decided to hold an online harassment summit during the conference on March 12. The summit will include members of the two panels that were previously canceled. He said the conference was working with members of both panels to determine the “most productive focus for their appearances.”Additionally, Mr. Forrest said 20 other speakers have confirmed their participation in the event, including Wendy Davis, a women’s rights advocate and former state senator from Texas; Katherine Clark, a Democratic congresswoman from Massachusetts; and Monika Bickert, head of product policy at Facebook.“It is clear that online harassment is a problem that requires more than two panel discussions to address,” Mr. Forrest wrote. Brianna Wu, a game developer who is a frequent target of online harassers, is among the people who will participate in the summit, though she said on Twitter that she was still troubled by the conference’s original actions.   I’m not going to tell you this erases the terrible path @sxsw took getting here. But, I am a pragmatist, and I’d prefer to move forward.— Brianna Wu (@Spacekatgal) October 30, 2015