PALO ALTO, Calif. — Ashley Madison is the hacking that doesn’t want to go away.On Wednesday, Brian Krebs, the well-known security blogger posited a new theory about who may have hacked the site, which helps arrange extramarital affairs. Mr. Krebs zeroed in on a Twitter user named Thadeus Zu (@deuszu), who posted a link to Ashley Madison’s stolen, proprietary source code before the information was made public this month.Mr. Krebs’s work dovetails with a colorful detail from police reports. The Toronto police have said that Avid Life Media employees first learned their systems had been breached on July 12 when they arrived at work to find a menacing message on their computer screens accompanied by the rock band AC/DC’s song “Thunderstruck.”Mr. Krebs said he downloaded five years’ worth of tweets from Thadeus Zu. In the tweets, he found boasts about many simple web attacks, including the defacement of several websites, and, buried within, references to AC/DC’s “Thunderstruck” tune.In one case, Thadeus Zu tweeted to KPN-CERT, a Dutch hacking response team, that he had breached their site. “Next time, it will be Thunderstruck. #ACDC,” he tweeted. A day earlier, after breaching an Australian Parliament site, he taunted Australian lawmakers with more AC/DC-related tweets.The kicker, Mr. Krebs believes, was a series of tweets Thadeus Zu posted on July 19, some 12 hours before a group calling itself the Impact Team sent Mr. Krebs and other news sites word of the hacking.  In the tweet, Thadeus Zu wrote that he was about to “get the show started.” Looking closely at a screenshot included with the post, Mr. Krebs noticed a web browser tab where AC/DC’s “Thunderstruck” can be shown playing.Mr. Krebs also noted that on Aug. 17, a full 24 hours before news outlets started reporting on details of the information stolen from Ashley Madison, Thadeus Zu wrote on Twitter, “Times up” with a link to where the stolen Ashley Madison data could be found.Fallout from the Ashley Madison breach continues to spread.In Canada, police said two suicides might have been linked to the breach. And on Monday, Avid Life Media, the company that owns AshleyMadison.com, put up a bounty of 500,000 Canadian dollars for anyone who could point the company to the real identities of the Impact Team. ALM set up a Twitter account, @AMCaseTPS, and hashtag #AMCaseTPS, to solicit the public’s help in finding those responsible.And some unexpected names have popped up in leaked member lists since the hacking became public, including 10,000 government officials; Josh Duggar, the troubled reality star now headed to rehab; Sam Radar, the Christian family values “vlogger”; and, apparently, many fake female profiles.Until now, leads to who may have been behind the attack have been few. None of the usual suspects — members of Anonymous, the hacking collective, or any other vocal “hacktivists” — have taken credit. Many hackers say they suspect that the breach was the work of an embittered employee. Noel Biderman, ALM’s chief executive, conceded that the attack was not the work of an employee but someone who appeared to have “touched our technical services.”Mr. Krebs said that he pored over Thadeus Zu’s twitter feed and Facebook posts, but noted that the Internet user was careful to use stock images of male models for his profile photos. He additionally refrained from replying to people directly on Twitter to mask his social network, and appears to be masking his real location by using a Hawaiian time zone, even though other clues suggest he may be based in Australia.Whatever his real identity, Mr. Krebs says, Thadeus Zu may be the closest lead to date. “Thadeus Zu — whoever and wherever he is in real life — may not have been directly involved in the Ashley Madison hack,” Mr. Krebs wrote. “But one thing is clear: If Zu wasn’t involved in the hack, he almost certainly knows who was.”The Internet user behind the Thadeus Zu account responded to an inquiry on Twitter on Wednesday about Mr. Krebs’ post. “I would love to get raided so I can sue some folks,” he wrote, followed by an expletive. On Twitter, he seemed to challenge others to tie him to the attack. “No one’s got anything on us, man,” he tweeted. “No evidence and no proof.“ A version of this article appears in print on 08/31/2015, on page B5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Ashley Madison Clues Emerge.