For years, Chris Lehane has known how to wage political war inside the Beltway. More recently, he’s been focused on fighting political battles from inside of Silicon Valley.Now, Mr. Lehane is going tech full-time. On Thursday, Airbnb said it has appointed Mr. Lehane as head of global policy and public affairs, a role in which the online room-rental company said he is expected to make Airbnb’s voice “heard loud and clear by policymakers.”Mr. Lehane has the credentials to have that voice heard. He has had a long political career, including more than six years in former President Bill Clinton’s White House grappling with the many scandals the administration confronted. He was also the spokesman for former Vice President Al Gore in his 2000 campaign for the presidency. And he is a pugnacious political adversary, known for thoroughly researching his opponents, who advocates going into so-called “warrior mode” to defend his clients and compatriots, according to a New York Times profile from 2014. In an interview, Mr. Lehane said that Airbnb’s mission — to help people rent their extra rooms out for additional income — aligns well with his personal belief in expanding income opportunities for the middle class. “I am committed to playing to win when it comes to standing up and fighting for the rights of everyday people to share their homes,” he said.In a statement to The New York Times, Mr. Gore characterized Mr. Lehane as “smart, strategic, loyal and tough,” among other attributes. Mr. Lehane is the latest in a string of high-profile political operatives to join the ranks of West Coast technology companies, which have long sought deeper connections and in-roads into Washington. In February, Amazon hired Jay Carney, former press secretary to President Barack Obama, as its senior vice president for global corporate affairs. Lisa Jackson, former Environmental Protection Agency chief under Mr. Obama, now works for Apple. And last August Uber picked David Plouffe, a top advisor to Mr. Obama, to be its senior vice president of policy and strategy.Mr. Lehane is no stranger to technology policy. He has worked with Airbnb for nearly a year as an outside consultant, and steps into the role previously held by David Hantman, a former chief of staff to Senator Chuck Schumer, the New York Democrat. Through his private consulting practice, Fabiani and Lehane, Mr. Lehane has also done work for Lyft, the ride-hailing start-up. While Mr. Lehane will lead the team of policy experts assembled by his predecessor, he said he expected his team to grow as the company scales. Airbnb has close to doubled its work force in the past year, and now employs more than 2,000 people globally. It also offers its service in more than 34,000 cities across 190 countries, each of which has different regional policymakers and regulations that require local expertise to navigate. The company, based in San Francisco, is valued at around $24 billion,  and in its most popular markets has tilted toward taking a cooperative approach with local politicians. While it has faced clampdowns in some American cities like New York, it has by and large run into fewer regulatory hurdles than Uber.A version of this article appears in print on 08/28/2015, on page B2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Airbnb Names Ex-Aide to Bill Clinton as Policy Chief .