By J. D. BIERSDORFERAUG. 28, 2015
Q. I thought Macs were supposed to be protected from malware, but I’ve gotten those fake tech support pop-ups and ads in Safari. I have to force the browser to quit to get away from them. Could my Mac be infected?A. Recent versions of Mac OS X include built-in malware protection like file quarantine and plug-in blocking, and the system has incorporated a number of other safety features. Still, these defenses may not be enough to keep the Mac clear of evolving threats. While Windows users have traditionally been the primary target of malicious software, times have changed. Mac users should not assume their machines are impervious to spyware, viruses and other intrusive code — hacked web pages and malware programs written to specifically attack OS X are out there.If you are seeing a lot of intrusive ads and fraudulent system alert messages when you browse the web, your Mac may have picked up a piece of unwanted software in your travels. Apple’s site has a guide to dealing with pop-ups and adware that hamper its Safari browser.Third-party security programs can also help protect your system, and the Mac App Store has a number of antivirus apps for OS X. If your main concern is adware and malware, free tools like Malwarebytes Anti-Malware for Mac and Bitdefender Virus Scanner for Mac can catch a number of invasive programs.AdvertisementChanging Case in Microsoft WordQ. I occasionally hit the Caps Lock key by mistake and type away for minutes without noticing in Word 2010. Is there an easy way convert this all-caps section into standard upper- and lowercase characters without retyping?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. Most versions of Microsoft Word for Windows and Mac OS X include a Change Case command that flips the selected text into one of several styles. You can convert a chunk of text typed in all uppercase letters to sentence case, which capitalizes the first word of a sentence and lowercases the rest. (You may have to go back to capitalize proper nouns, though.) The Change Case command can also switch a selected block of lowercase letters to uppercase or capitalize each word in a highlighted section.AdvertisementTo use the Change Case command in Word 2010 for Windows, select the text you want to convert. Then click the Change Case button on the Ribbon’s Home tab; the button’s icon looks like an uppercase and lowercase letter A side by side.You can also get to the Change Case command with a Windows keyboard shortcut. When you have selected the text you want to convert, press the Shift and F3 keys to cycle through all the case options, and stop on the one you want.The Change Case command works the same way in Word 2013 and Word 2016 for Windows, but may vary within earlier versions of Microsoft Word. In some versions of Word for Mac OS X, the Change Case command can be found under the Format menu; to use the keyboard shortcut, press Option-Command-C, which will cycle through the case styles.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.