T-Mobile USA, one of the few phone carriers to still offer an unlimited data plan, has run into a classic Homer Simpson problem: The company says it will get rid of abusers of its all-you-can-eat data privileges, similar to when Homer was thrown out of a restaurant for eating too much seafood at an all-you-can-eat buffet.John J. Legere, T-Mobile’s chief executive, took to Twitter on Monday to announce that the company would eliminate people who abuse its unlimited data plans.He specifically referred to those who used their cellphones for tethering, which is the ability to share a smartphone’s Internet connection with another device like a computer. The practice gobbles up large amounts of data — as much as two terabytes, more data than any reasonable person could consume with a smartphone over a month.“They are ‘hacking’ the system to swipe high speed tethered data,” Mr. Legere wrote. “These aren’t naïve amateurs; they are clever hackers who are willfully stealing for their own selfish gain.”I wondered about the characterization of abusers as thieves and asked Mr. Legere about it on Twitter. My question stemmed from the word “unlimited,” since other carriers in the past have added caveats and restrictions to their unlimited data plans, and most carriers have struggled to deliver on the concept.AT&T, for one, discontinued unlimited data plans in 2010 but let customers with pre-existing unlimited data plans to be grandfathered in. In 2012, it slammed the brakes on unlimited data plans when it announced that users would have their speeds slowed after they surpassed five gigabytes of data.T-Mobile’s situation is not the same as AT&T’s. T-Mobile says on its phone plans that its unlimited data is meant for smartphones, and only a certain amount of that data can be used for tethering. Considering that most carriers charge extra for tethering in the first place, T-Mobile’s inclusion of some data for tethering is a big plus.That said, T-Mobile also practices what is called network deprioritization. In areas where networks are congested, T-Mobile will look for the highest data consumers — those who have surpassed 21 gigabytes of data — and give priority in providing higher speeds to those who have consumed less data. Even if that situation is uncommon, it is a limitation on an unlimited data plan nonetheless.Furthermore, the implication that some heavy data consumers are abusing unlimited data raises a question: Where do you draw the line and say someone is using too much data?Mr. Legere responded to that query in a tweet, saying T-Mobile would contact so-called abusers directly and provide them with options. A version of this article appears in print on 09/07/2015, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: T-Mobile to Bar Planu2019s Abusers.