

      By BRIAN X. CHEN

SEPT. 2, 2015

Shopping for a phone plan can be a mind-numbing task because there are so many costs to consider: the price of the device, the activation fees (when applicable), the data allotment and the cost per phone line. A comparison of a set of plans offered by AT&T, Verizon Wireless, Sprint and T-Mobile USA shows that Sprint and T-Mobile plans are the cheapest, and T-Mobile offers some of the coolest perks. But no matter what you pay, a phone plan is no good if you can't reliably get on a network, and Verizon Wireless and AT&T have broader nationwide network coverage compared with the other two. When network coverage was considered, an analysis by Alekstra, a research firm that analyzes wireless bills, found that AT&T's contract-free "Next" plans currently offer the best value for individuals and families. All plans include unlimited text messages and minutes. Assumptions were calculated using Apple's iPhone 6 with 64GB, which costs $750.$2,565 Best for? A person who regularly uses e-mail, uploads photos, streams music and downloads apps. What are some perks? Unused mobile data rolls over to the next month. What is the commitment? $75 a month for service including line access, $31.25 a month for device payments over two years, $15 activation fee. $6,900 Best for? A family of four that regularly uses e-mail, uploads photos, streams music and downloads apps. What are some perks? Unused mobile data rolls over to the next month. What is the commitment? $160 a month for service, $125 a month for device payments over two years and $60 in activation fees. $2,670 Best for? A person who regularly uses e-mail, uploads photos, streams music and downloads apps. What are some perks? All phones come unlocked for using with carriers overseas. What is the commitment? $80 a month for service including line access, $31.24 a month for device payments over two years. $6,839 Best for? A family of four that regularly uses e-mail, uploads photos, streams music and downloads apps. What are some perks? All phones come unlocked for using with carriers overseas. What is the commitment? $160 a month for service including line access and $125 a month for device payments $1,965 Best for? A person who regularly uses e-mail, uploads photos, streams music and travels abroad. What are some perks? Free international texting and data, unlimited music streaming for services like Pandora and Spotify, unused data can be stashed for up to a year. What is the commitment? $100 down payment for phone, $50 a month for service including line access, $27 a month to pay off the phone, and $15 for a SIM card. $5,940  Best for? A family of four that does a lot of music streaming, photo sharing, downloading apps and traveling abroad.  What are some perks? Free international texting and data, unlimited music streaming for services like Pandora and Spotify, unused data can be stashed for up to a year. What is the commitment? $400 upfront commitment for phones, $120 a month for service including line access, $108 a month to pay off the phones, and $60 for SIM cards. $2,190 Best for? A person who does lots of music streaming, video streaming, email and gaming. What are some perks? Free unlimited calls and text messages when traveling in Mexico, Canada and Latin America. One gigabyte of free mobile data in those regions, too. What is the commitment? $60 a month for service including line access, $31.25 a month for device payments over two years. $5,400 Best for? A family of four that does a light amount of emailing, music streaming and photo sharing. What are some perks? Free unlimited calls and text messages when traveling in Mexico, Canada and Latin America. One gigabyte of free mobile data in those regions, too. What is the commitment? $100 a month for service including line access and $125 a month for devices over two years. Calculations were based on the latest pricing, including some plans that are being offered for a limited time, and total prices are rounded to the nearest dollar.Advertisement