Updated, 5:16 p.m. | If you have ever browsed the web on a mobile phone, you have probably encountered what technology people call an “app install interstitial” – those pop-up banners that ask: “Would you like to install the mobile app?” The messages are tiny and take about a second to push off your screen, but inside that moment is a brewing fight over Google, the web and whether the search giant is trying to flex control over the mobile Internet by discouraging people from using mobile apps. On Tuesday, in a blog post, Google said that starting in November it would begin penalizing sites that show these “please install our app” ads — at least in cases where they obscure what’s on the page — by deeming them less mobile friendly. That designation will lower their ranking on Google’s mobile search engine. Google didn’t list the offenders, but it includes a broad spectrum of popular services like Yelp, Pinterest and LinkedIn. The ads “hide a significant amount of content and prompts the user to install an app,” Daniel Bathgate, a software engineer at Google Search, wrote in the blog post. “Our analysis shows that it is not a good search experience and can be frustrating for users because they are expecting to see the content of the web page.” There is no doubt that a lot of users find these ads annoying. But where Google describes a policy change that will make life more pleasant for users, others see an attempt to defend the web — where Google makes much of its money — from the armies of apps that mobile users favor. “Google saw its users fleeing mobile search via an exit door that led to apps,” said Luther Lowe, vice president for public policy at Yelp, the local search engine and persistent Google critic. “To make sure they can continue to extend their search monopoly onto mobile, Google is essentially telling app developers, ‘We’re losing too many of our users to your apps, so your new users will have to go through a doggy door.’” People use Google to navigate the vast and open  web, and Google makes tens of billions of dollars guiding them. But when they go straight to the app, they cut Google and its ad business out of the equation, a fact that Steve Jobs of Apple noted as far back as 2010. For companies like Yelp, these app prompts are a way to build a more loyal group of users. “The rewards for getting a new app user are huge, as these users end up being much more engaged,” wrote Jeremy Stoppelman, Yelp’s founder and chief executive, in a recent post on Search Engine Land, a site that closely follows Google’s search policies. Mr. Stoppelman wrote that post last week. In it, he pointed to a recent Google study of those “install my app” pop-ups and predicted that Google would soon hit companies like his with a search-ranking penalty. He sharply criticized the study as “foreshadowing a search ranking penalty designed to slow users’ natural migration away from web search towards apps,” and noted that Google itself uses the interstitial approach to promote many of its own apps like Gmail and Google Docs. “So if Google uses these app pitches, and many industry leading companies successfully do, too, then why would Google want to discourage their use — or perhaps even outlaw them (via an explicit ranking penalty in search)?” he wrote. LinkedIn criticized the same study in a post on Tuesday. Google is not discouraging app install prompts altogether – just those that obscure the content on the page after the user clicks on a search result. As an alternative, Mr. Bathgate suggested a less intrusive form of promotion such as a banner advertisement that would allow the users to see whatever is on the web page but also gives them the option to install the app if they like. In an emailed statement, a Google spokesman said the company has “been working hard over the past few years to make it easier for our users to discover and download apps,” and pointed to several programs, like adding apps to Google’s search results, as evidence. Still, some observers criticized Google’s decision because the policy change doesn’t penalize all pop-up ads — just the ones that ask you to install a mobile app. One of them was Mike Dudas, a former Googler and co-founder of Button, a New York company that is trying to build a system that would weave apps together and pay them for referrals. “The problem is Google seems to be applying a universal rule based on the format of the interstitial and it seems somewhat self-serving in terms of how they’ve implemented it,” Mr. Dudas said. “It just makes you question what the true underlying motives are because it’s fundamentally clear people are opting when they can not to spend time on the mobile web. This seems like a really strong move in deterring people from installing apps.” 