STOCKHOLM — The signs are still not looking good for the maker of Angry Birds.The woes became clear again last week when Rovio, the Finnish company that helped usher in the rise of mobile games with the Angry Birds franchise, said it would cut up to 260 jobs, or nearly 40 percent of its work force. Rovio’s profit in 2014 fell roughly 70 percent compared with the year before, to just $11 million, according to regulatory filings.Nevertheless, at a tech conference here on Wednesday, one of the company’s top executives tried to strike an upbeat tone — saying the Angry Birds brand remained strong despite the financial troubles.“We’re happy with our progress, but there’s room to streamline,” Peter Vesterbacka, Rovio’s chief marketing officer, said in an interview. “We’re in a hits business, but we remain confident.”That confidence is being severely tested as the global online gaming business becomes increasingly cutthroat.In the last couple of years, games from rivals like Supercell of Finland and King Digital of Sweden have outpaced Rovio by offering so-called freemium games.  These allow people to download the online game free, and then charge users for additional services like extra lives or premium levels. The freemium business model has been particularly successful in Asian countries like South Korea, where people have become accustomed to paying for additional gaming services.Rovio has now shifted to freemium games. Its latest offering, Angry Birds 2, has been downloaded more than 50 million times worldwide in its first month — a big number, but still behind other top games. And it may be too little, too late. While about 150 million people still play one of Rovio’s games on a regular basis, the company has lost roughly 100 million monthly users from its highs. “Freemium is really tough,” Daniel Kaplan, business developer at Mojang, the maker of Minecraft that Microsoft acquired last year for $2.5 billion, said on Wednesday. “It’s not hard to make games, but it’s hard to get attention.”To differentiate itself from rivals, Rovio has pitched itself as more than just a gaming company. Since it began in 2009, the company has signed multiple licensing deals to spread the Angry Birds brand around the world and branched out into education and theme parks, and it will release a movie next year.As part of its restructuring, Rovio is expected to cut back on some of those activities, though its gaming and licensing businesses remain central to its overall strategy.“It’s not very different from what Disney does,” said Mr. Vesterbacka of Rovio. “Angry Birds isn’t a game, a movie or a theme park. It’s about the brand.”How successful Angry Birds can be in the long term, though, will depend on Rovio’s ability to turn itself around, just as larger rivals like King Digital and Supercell spend more and more to publicize their online games to smartphone users.Mr. Vesterbacka said Rovio planned to release a number of new games tied to its Angry Birds movie next year, and hinted the company may announce new brands later in 2015.“When Rovio first came out, you could still be a small company and be successful,” Niklas Zennstrom, a co-founder of Skype and investor in Rovio, said on Wednesday. “Now, you have to spend a lot on market. With games, it’s very hard to get it right.”A version of this article appears in print on 09/07/2015, on page B4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Angry Birds Being Tested.