
Tech Fix By                     
 BRIAN X. CHEN
 
SEPT. 2, 2015
THE American wireless industry is increasingly redefining the word “simple” in the same way that the food industry rendered the word “natural” absurd.Consider that when you pick up “natural” pancake syrup from the grocery store, chances are that one of the listed ingredients will be “natural flavoring” — an oxymoron.Similarly, when you shop for a wireless phone plan today, chances are that the carrier’s marketing contains the word “simple.” But when you browse the numerous options and fees, you’ll find they are anything but. Instead, we may be hitting peak complexity with phone plans.“Never before has the pricing been so complicated with all the carriers,” said Toni Toikka, whose research firm Alekstra analyzes wireless bills and who recently created a giant spreadsheet of phone plans. “This is the first time in carrier history that the carriers have been able to build that kind of a maze that even I get really confused.”AdvertisementSo we worked to boil down which plans are worth paying attention to, especially as consumers may be shopping for new phones and carrier plans after Apple unveils new iPhones on Sept. 9. The main takeaway: In terms of price and network quality, AT&T has the best deals right now for both individual subscribers and families.To see how we arrived at that conclusion, it’s worth understanding how once relatively straightforward phone plans became complicated ones with all manner of fees and choices.The big change in wireless plans began with the departure from the two-year contract, which was a standard plan several years ago. Under the contract, people paid a one-time subsidized price for a cellphone upfront, and then a monthly fee for a wireless plan, including minutes, text messages and data. After two years, you would be eligible to buy a new phone at a subsidized rate and you would continue to pay the same monthly wireless fee, whether you upgraded to a new phone or not.
                We worked to boil down which plans are worth paying attention to, especially as consumers may be shopping for new phones and carrier plans after Apple unveils new iPhones on Sept. 9            In 2013, T-Mobile said it would abandon the two-year contract to make phone plans cheaper and more transparent, while eliminating annoying charges like termination fees. T-Mobile instead chose to break out the full cost of a phone from the cost of the data plan. AT&T, Verizon Wireless and Sprint soon followed suit.“We’re finally seeing companies move away from these one-way, unfair, nontransparent contracts,” Mike Sievert, the chief operating officer of T-Mobile, said in an interview.AdvertisementThe new plans are called contract-free or “equipment installment plans,” which typically have four main costs: the price of the data plan, the cost of the device spread over monthly installments, the activation fee for each phone and the monthly cost for each phone line (also called the network-access fee).Prices vary by carrier, and over time, the fees can shift. Once you finish paying off the cost of the phone, for example, that fee is removed from your bill and you pay a lower monthly rate for your phone bill. In some cases, you can choose to upgrade to a new device when you’ve paid off the phone.For a flavor of the complexity of these plans, look at Verizon’s three-gigabyte contract-free plan. It costs $45 a month for the data. Each smartphone added to the plan is $20 a month. There is an equipment payment plan to pay off the smartphone over two years — the iPhone 6 costs $650, or $27 a month spread over two years. Altogether, you pay at least $92 a month. After paying off the device, you would subtract the $27 equipment charge from your monthly bill.One aspect of contract-free plans that consumers should be aware of: Some can actually cost more than a two-year contract plan.Take an individual AT&T customer who has an iPhone 6 with five gigabytes of data on a two-year contract. Over the two years, the customer would pay about $2,405 total ($200 upfront for the iPhone, $50 a month for the data plan, a $45 activation fee and $40 a month for the network access fee).For someone who chooses the five-gigabyte plan on AT&T’s Next 18 installment plan, which spreads phone payments over two years, the customer would pay $2,465 over two years ($27.09 a month for the iPhone, a $15 activation fee, $25 a month for the network access fee and $50 a month for the data plan).The difference in price comes from the monthly rates and activation fees. The monthly rate for the installment plan is higher than the monthly rate for the two-year contract, whereas the activation fee is higher on the two-year contract than the contract-free plan.Some consumers also don’t hang on to their device long enough to enjoy the monthly price drop that happens when they pay off their device fee in a contract-free plan, which typically happens two years into owning a device. That’s because they then immediately upgrade to another device instead of taking advantage of the data plan’s price decline.Advertisement“Do you know anyone who keeps their handsets for three years?” Mr. Toikka asked, adding that it makes little sense for consumers to pay off their phones in less than two years, since it costs nothing extra to spread the payments out.Then there are times when the contract-free plans are better deals than the two-year contract. Take a family of four, each with an iPhone 6, on a 15-gigabyte data plan and on a two-year contract with AT&T, who would pay $7,240 over two years. On a contract-free plan like AT&T’s Next 18, they would pay $6,501 over two years.All of this is hardly intuitive. Glenn Lurie, AT&T Mobility’s chief executive, suggested that the plans’ designs were driven by the desire to give consumers options. “We obviously want to give our customers choice, and it’s really, really important that we do that.”But when I asked whether consumers might be confused, he said, “We simplified significantly, so no.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After comparing phone plans, Mr. Toikka determined that AT&T’s current plans offer the best value for individuals and families — though there are caveats. T-Mobile and Sprint offer the lowest prices. But Mr. Toikka recommended AT&T or Verizon because of their broader network coverage and because they offer similar pricing to each other. Where AT&T wins is with a benefit called rollover data, which lets unused data from one month be rolled over into the next month, giving consumers more value over time.Press officers for Verizon, Sprint and T-Mobile cited their own data points. Verizon says third-party metrics had shown its network was faster and more reliable than AT&T’s, while Sprint said of its network that “improvements are real and happening.” T-Mobile says its network coverage has grown and its plans offer more data, among other benefits.Among AT&T’s plans, Mr. Toikka recommends that a family of four pick AT&T’s Next 18 contract-free plan with 15 gigabytes of data. For individuals, he suggests AT&T’s Next 18 contract-free plan with five gigabytes of data. (AT&T’s two-year contract with five gigabytes for an individual is barely cheaper, so it’s worth paying a little extra to stay off contract, he said.)He picked those based on pricing, the average amount of data used by a consumer (roughly three gigabytes a month) and the average smartphone upgrade cycle of two years. In other words, those plans should have enough data for most people and also allow for device upgrades every two years.AdvertisementThere are caveats. For one, carriers change their prices frequently, and many of the prices are limited-time offers.There is also no one-size-fits-all phone plan, because it depends on the quality of each carrier’s network in your area, how much data you consume and the number of lines on the plan.So consumers should study their phone bills to calculate the average amount of data they used over the last year. They should look up each carrier’s coverage maps online to see if the network has strong coverage where they live or work. Then they should work out the math and the cost over two years.“Selecting a cellphone plan is the most complicated financial transaction that a consumer will ever make,” Mr. Toikka said.The Tech Fix writer, Brian X. Chen, can be reached via email at bri-an.chen@nytimes.com or on Twitter at @bxchen.A version of this article appears in print on September 3, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Making Sense of Cellphone Plans.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »