By J. D. BIERSDORFERSEPT. 4, 2015
Q. Windows 10 will not recognize my USB printer, even though it worked fine with Windows 7. What should I do?A. Upgrading to a new operating system can lead to additional time spent getting your peripherals and PC playing nicely together again, but start by checking the Windows Compatibility Center to make sure your printer model is supposed to work with Windows 10 in the first place. If your model is deemed compatible, move on to further tinkering, like unplugging and reconnecting the printer’s USB cable to see if the system recognizes the hardware.If the two devices are still not communicating with each other, try removing the printer’s software and drivers from the system. Download the latest driver from the support area of your manufacturer’s website and install the new files. Your printer’s manufacturer may also have its own guide to getting its hardware to work with Microsoft’s new operating system.Most of the major printer hardware companies, including Brother, Canon, Dell, Epson and Hewlett-Packard have put up web pages with tips and advice for Windows 10 users. Microsoft’s site also has a “Fix printer problems” page with a troubleshooter program you can use to guide you through diagnostic steps.AdvertisementInternet Speed for Apple TV Streaming Q. On an Apple TV box, how fast an Internet connection do you need to stream high-definition movies without the picture stalling out?AdvertisementA. Apple currently recommends a minimum broadband download speed of 8 megabits per second for the smooth streaming of high-definition video in the 1080p resolution. Slower speeds or unstable network connections can cause the buffering and stuttering interruptions that make streaming video unpleasant to watch.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For streaming video in the 720p resolution, a broadband speed of 6 megabits per second (or faster) is recommended. Apple’s guidelines for watching video in standard definition — sometimes referred to as 480p resolution — advise a minimum speed of 2.5 megabits per second.If you are paying for a broadband package, it should provide adequate speeds for high-definition streaming, but you may have to do some poking around. You can test your home network’s general connection speed on the computer at sites like MegaPath Speakeasy Speed Test, Ookla Speedtest or BandwidthPlace . If your network comes up slow, contact your service provider.If your network speed meets the guidelines for streaming video, check the Apple TV’s network connection and signal strength: From the device’s main screen, select Settings, then General and About to see signal-strength information. If the signal is weak, move the network router closer to the TV, or away from furniture and other obstacles that may be interfering with the network signal. Rebooting the router and the Apple TV box may also help, as well as installing any available updates for the Apple TV’s system software. The official support page for the product may have further advice.Apple has not significantly updated its Apple TV hardware in several years. Those pondering the purchase of the device may want to wait until the company’s Sept. 9 product event to see if a fresh model may be coming.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.