For months, Uber has made clear that China is vital to the company’s future growth. Now it is putting its money where its mouth is. Uber plans to introduce in more than 100 cities in China over the course of the next year, Travis Kalanick, the company’s chief executive, said at an event in Beijing on Tuesday. To further that goal, Uber has raised another $1.2 billion in venture capital from Chinese investors, Mr. Kalanick said, the latest in a rolling round of financing. Uber previously said it had earmarked at least $1 billion in a previous fund-raising to grow throughout Asia, and it will use the additional financing to continue in the same vein. It is also the most recent of more than $7 billion in venture capital the company has raised to date, with Uber being valued at around $51 billion.At the rate Uber is spending money to establish its operations, it will need the money. The company is heavily subsidizing rides for customers in Chinese cities, while paying out huge bonuses and other cash incentives to recruit more drivers for the service. Those enormous sums of money are required to take on Didi Kuaidi, the company made up of China’s two largest taxi-hailing services that dominate the on-demand ride market in the country. Didi Kuaidi is itself in the midst of raising $3 billion in venture funding for growth, as well as to combat Uber’s early, yet successful, entry into the country. Didi Kuaidi didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment.At the Beijing event on Tuesday, which was held by Baidu, the Chinese Internet giant and an Uber investor, Mr. Kalanick said Uber has already made excellent progress in the nine months since it entered the country. “When we started this year, we were about one percent market share. Today, nine months later, we’re looking at about 30 to 35 percent market share”, Mr. Kalanick said, though he did not specify whether that included the taxi-hailing market dominated by Didi Kuaidi. The remarks were first reported by Reuters.Paul Mozur contributed reporting from Hong Kong.