When Microsoft revealed in 2012 that it was going to make its own computer for the first time in the company’s history, the grumbling by executives across the PC industry began immediately. Publicly they played down the notion that Microsoft’s computer, the Surface tablet, posed any threat, but privately most of them were aghast that one of their most important partners, the creator of Windows, was going to be competing for sales in the hardware business. “They were livid with Microsoft when they came out with Surface,” said Patrick Moorhead, an analyst with Moor Insights & Strategy, a technology research and advisory firm. Dell, the world’s third-largest PC seller by unit volume, is not grumbling. On Tuesday, the company announced that its sales force will begin selling Microsoft’s Surface Pro 3 tablet and related services to large corporate customers. The deal is a win for Microsoft, which is making a bigger play to sell Surface to businesses. After slow initial sales, Surface has started selling well for Microsoft, mostly through retail stores. Another major PC maker, Hewlett-Packard, also plans to sell Surface to businesses, Microsoft said Tuesday.  Two other firms, Accenture and Avanade, will also develop apps for Surface and other Windows 10 devices and offer related services.The benefits to Dell in this unusual deal are harder to wrap your mind around. Dell, a major manufacturer of computers, including its own tablet devices that compete with Surface, is going to be selling another company’s tablets to businesses. It’s a bit like Niketown agreeing to sell Adidas sneakers. “This is unique,” Kirk Schell, vice president of Dell Commercial Client Solutions, said in an interview. “We don’t do this with anybody.” “My initial reaction was shock and surprise, and I’ve been around the PC industry for almost 25 years,” said Mr. Moorhead. “I would not have guessed this if I had a thousand guesses.”Mr. Schell said that Dell’s corporate customers had been interested in buying Surface, so it was helpful to offer the product as part of its broader portfolio of devices. That way clients can buy from the company. Dell also has the potential to profit from Surface by selling support and other services for the devices, he said. “This fits nicely into Dell’s overall commercial ecosystem,” Mr. Schell said. “You can think of us as an end-to-end I.T. solutions provider. If people want to buy Surface Pro, it makes perfect sense.” Still, chances are some Dell customers might also be interested in Lenovo, Hewlett-Packard and Apple devices, but Dell doesn’t use its sales force to offer those products. Then again, Dell does not have a strictly competitive relationship with Microsoft. The company has been one of the top makers of Windows PCs for decades, and the relationship between its executives is tight. In a joint interview several years ago with Michael Dell, the chief executive and founder of Dell, and Steve Ballmer, then the chief executive of Microsoft, Mr. Ballmer said Mr. Dell was the first person he showed Surface to outside of Microsoft. Mr. Dell said Mr. Ballmer told him that Microsoft was using Surface to help Windows 8, a new version of the software, succeed, which would help Dell as well. “We’re just fine with all that,” Mr. Dell said. There are a lot of ways that Microsoft has provided assistance to its PC industry partners, which could be a factor in the Surface deal with Dell. Mr. Moorhead said it was possible that  Microsoft agreed to help Dell by underwriting marketing campaigns for Dell products or by licensing intellectual property. He also saw the deal as a sign of how Dell, which went private two years ago, is willing now to do things it might not have done as a publicly traded company. Picking up more corporate resellers of Surface could help the company make the product a real business. In its last fiscal year, which ended June 30, Microsoft said it had about $3.6 billion in Surface sales, of which about $1 billion was to businesses. (For contrast, Apple’s iPad sales were $4.5 billion in its most recent quarter.)    Brian Hall, the general manager of Surface at Microsoft, said business sales of Surface had been held back because big customers wanted to be able to buy new systems quickly from resale partners anywhere in the world they have offices. “It’s the big thing keeping hundred-unit sales from turning into thousand-unit sales,” said Mr. Hall. A version of this article appears in print on 09/14/2015, on page B7 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Dell Agrees to Sell Microsoftu2019s Tablet.