SAN JOSE, Calif. — A year ago, Meg Whitman announced she was cutting Hewlett-Packard in two. On Tuesday, she detailed job cuts expected at the company.About 10 percent of the jobs at the current HP, or perhaps 30,000 of its 300,000 employees, will be eliminated, company officials said.“We’re looking forward to operating as two industry-leading companies,” said Ms. Whitman, HP’s chief executive, speaking at a meeting of financial analysts. “You’ll see us doing more pruning of businesses that don’t fit.”Ms. Whitman became the head of HP in 2011. As part of a restructuring announced in 2012, 54,000 jobs have been cut at the company. The new cuts are on top of that.In November, Ms. Whitman will become the chief executive of HP Enterprise, or HPE, which will sell things like computer servers, data storage, software and services to business. The other company, called HP Inc., will focus on printers and personal computers. Ms. Whitman has said the division will enable both businesses to react faster to changing markets.The big job cuts will come from HP Enterprise, in particular jobs at call centers and other service centers in developed countries. HP plans to automate many of the jobs, and build out positions in countries like India and Costa Rica. The services business had been largely dependent on just a few customers, and in 2014 it lost important accounts.Cathie Lesjak, HP’s chief financial officer, said HP Inc., which will have about 50,000 employees, will reduce its headcount by 1,200 employees in 2016, and a total of 3,300 employees by the end of 2018.Longer term, HP Enterprise is also retraining its sales force, aiming to increase the amount of technology consulting and cross-selling work the company does. This is typically the kind of work done by companies like IBM, while the old HP made lower margin, but high-volume sales of individual products.There will most likely be high demand for such big technology deals, as companies move to new styles of business enabled by the growth in mobile devices and cloud computing. It is uncertain, however, whether HPE can win the confidence of lots of customers.While Ms. Whitman said HP was switching “from turnaround mode to growth mode,” some analysts were skeptical about her projection that HPE would have a compound annual growth rate of 4.4 percent over the next three years. “Half your portfolio is not going to grow for the next three years,” said Toni Sacconaghi, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Company, “is it really realistic that HP can grow?”It can “if enterprise services can stop shrinking,” Ms. Whitman says. Despite the torrid growth at smaller tech companies in hot areas, she said HPE was aiming for “G.D.P.-like growth rates,” and hoping to raise profit margins with efficient management. Ms. Whitman will also be chairman of HP Inc. Dion Weisler, who currently runs the printing and PC business at HP, will be chief executive. HP shares rose 7 cents to $27.11 on Tuesday. The stock fell during after-hours trading.A version of this article appears in print on 09/16/2015, on page B2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Hewlett-Packard Will Reduce Its Work Force by 10 Percent.