Salesforce.com was one of the early giants of the cloud-computing revolution. Now it wants to be at the center of two of the next big things — big data and so-called computational intelligence everywhere.Marc Benioff, the co-founder and chief executive of Salesforce, is expected to make its “Internet of Things Cloud” a centerpiece of the company’s customer conference in San Francisco this week. Mr. Benioff, who has been skilled at predicting and positioning his company on major tech trends, sometimes with mixed success, hopes he can give nontechnical companies automated customer service and recommendations, the kind of activities done by computing-intensive companies like Amazon. If successful, Salesforce’s Internet of Things could vastly increase the amount of personalization we now see in many products and services. It could also justify the company’s highflying stock price, by making it much more attractive to its own customers.The Internet of Things is a term for online data from machines about their behavior. This service would combine data from devices like sensors and smartphones with customer information already inside Salesforce, like personal profiles and previous transactions. In one example from Salesforce, an insurance company would get data from a car’s bumpers and airbag indicating a collision, and could then send to its customer’s phone messages about current coverage, nearby tow trucks and service centers.Much remains to be seen, however. These kind of interactions are currently only the province of big, engineering-intensive companies, and involve less complexity. General Electric, for example, combines data from jet engines and the activity of ground crews to efficiently schedule maintenance. Google’s advertising sales engine depends on a range of different signals about Internet and customer behavior.Salesforce hopes to bring that capability to thousands of companies, which work with millions of customers. Nothing like that has been done before, let alone in a way that people skilled only in basic spreadsheets could manage. That means Salesforce has to build a powerful sorting and computing technology, and a series of customizable templates that can be easily used in a lot of different businesses. No major company has successfully done that.So far Salesforce has only tested the product with a couple of outside industrial companies, according to the engineer responsible for the product’s creation. “We’re going to learn a ton from our customers about how this works,” said Adam Bosworth, the engineer in charge of the IoT Cloud. He added, “there will be a time in five years or less when, if you miss a flight and you’re not rerouted to a new flight, and your contacts informed about the changes, you won’t fly that airline again.” Mr. Bosworth, who has worked on the project for the past 18 months, is well known in the tech world. He was an early developer of spreadsheets, the most basic type of data analysis, at Microsoft, then led development of XML, a computer language important in the development of the World Wide Web. At Google he worked on projects including Google Health, a failed effort to put people’s health records online.Mr. Bosworth said he had come out of retirement to do this project, choosing Salesforce because it sells to lots of nontech companies, which keep big amounts of data on their own customers. The IoT Cloud is one of several efforts by Salesforce to get its products, which were originally designed to help sales and marketing people better manage customer information, into the business of automating insight.Last year, the company introduced a product called Wave, which was supposed to deliver quick analysis of sales behavior. So far Salesforce has been guarded about the product’s success.Also on Tuesday, the company is announcing a product called IQ, which parses all of a company’s contacts with a customer in order to keep salespeople and others up to date about the status of sales, meetings and the like. For example, if someone sends an email suggesting several possible dates for a meeting, IQ monitors people’s calendars, and removes possible times as they get filled. Salesforce is selling versions for both small and large businesses.Companies developing products using Salesforce data, something the San Francisco firm encourages as a way to make itself more useful, are also getting deeper into analysis.For instance, a company called Wise.io, which specializes in predictive applications for customer service, will announce on Tuesday that it has built a sophisticated data tool for routing customer needs to the right service agent.  This can save on administrative costs, and also give high-value customers priority treatment. 