The on-demand economy just got another $1 billion company.BlaBlaCar, the French ride-hailing start-up, announced on Wednesday that it had raised $200 million, primarily from United States investors, which valued the company at $1.6 billion.The funding comes as the Paris-based company, which was founded in 2006 and aims to connect people who want to split the cost of long-distance journeys, has expanded beyond its European roots into a growing number of emerging markets like Turkey, India and Russia.With roughly 20 million users spread across three continents, BlaBlaCar is hoping to follow in the footsteps of other on-demand services like Uber, the ride-booking company, and Airbnb, the vacation rental website, to expand its international operations. With more than $300 million raised, the company also is one of Europe’s best-funded start-ups as concerns are growing  that the technology industry — both in Europe and in Silicon Valley — is becoming overheated. Investors are clamoring to back the latest fledgling companies, turning many into so-called unicorns — companies valued at $1 billion or more.“If we can fill empty car seats when people are driving, then we can change transportation globally,” said Nicolas Brusson, a co-founder of BlaBlaCar, whose name is based on how chatty people are when sharing journeys. If passengers do not want to talk during the trip, they can mark in their profiles that they are only “Bla,” to indicate that they are not looking for much conversation. Or they can go a full “BlaBlaBla” when they are happy to chatter throughout the trip. “There are few services that bring people together for hours at a time like we do,” Mr. Brusson added. “We’ve been surprised about how quickly people have taken to the service in emerging markets.”BlaBlaCar has so far mostly skirted controversy, unlike companies like Uber, which has faced protests from many regulators and taxi associations. That is because BlaBlaCar does not allow drivers to profit from the ride-sharing service. People can only split the cost of long-distance travel, say between Paris and Marseilles or Moscow and St. Petersburg. The French start-up says the average ride in Europe costs roughly $25 per person, significantly less than the region’s costly high-speed trains.And in a sign that other on-demand start-ups are increasingly focusing on global expansion, two of Uber’s biggest international rivals — Lyft and Didi Kuaidi of China — announced a partnership on Wednesday that will allow Lyft users to order Didi’s rides in China and customers of the Chinese start-up to use Lyft’s service in the United States.While BlaBlaCar’s short-term plans are primarily focused on emerging markets, particularly in Latin America and Asia, Mr. Brusson said the start-up could eventually turn its attention to North America. Regions like the Northeast in the United States — where people travel frequently between cities like Boston and New York — may provide an opportunity for the French start-up to offer cheaper long-distance travel options compared to Amtrak or traditional airlines.“With the funding we have, it makes sense to try North America at some point,” he said. “It’s not the easiest market to tackle, but no one is doing what we’re doing in the U.S.”