AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Do you have to have one of Amazon’s Fire tablets to use its Amazon app store, or do I have other shopping options besides Google Play?A. Amazon’s Appstore comes preinstalled on its Fire hardware, but you can shop for apps on regular Android tablets and phones if you install a bit of stand-alone software from Amazon. (Earlier versions of Amazon’s regular shopping app included the ability to directly download apps to an Android device, but that has changed.)The company originally created its Amazon Appstore app for Android shoppers, but it recently released the Amazon Underground app to provide access to all of its digital goods, paid and free. Amazon Underground, which opened last month, is a collection of purely free apps, videos and other content available on the site. Because its stand-alone shopping apps are not available in the Google Play store, Amazon has provided its own instructions for installing the software.To stop malware from invading your phone or tablet, Android may be set to block app installations from unknown sources. Amazon is a known source, but you can check your tablet by going to the Settings area to Applications and look if the unknown sources option is enabled; on some versions of Android, this setting may be under Security instead. (In general, though, it is not a good idea to download apps from third-party sources unless they are from established companies.)After you have confirmed that your device can get software from outside the Google Play store, download the Amazon Underground app. To install the app after it has finished downloading, swipe down from the top of the screen to open your notifications, select the AmazonApps file and tap the Install button. Once the installation is complete, you can open the app and shop using your Amazon account.Q. I like Reading mode on the new Microsoft browser for Windows 10, but is there a way to make the type bigger?A. Microsoft Edge, the new default browser included with Windows 10, includes a clutter-free Reading View for webpages that can be adjusted in a couple of ways. You have four type sizes to choose from: Small, Medium, Large and Extra Large. You can also select from several screen background styles with varying degrees of contrast to make it easier on your eyes.To change the Reading View’s default settings, open the three-dot More Actions menu in the top-right corner of the browser and select Settings from the menu. In the Reading area, choose the background and font size that suit you. You should see the difference when you switch from a standard webpage to Reading View by clicking the book icon in the Edge toolbar, or using the Control-Shift-R keyboard shortcut.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement