A little over a year ago, a start-up in San Francisco called Artemis Networks announced a new technology that it said could enable much faster Internet access speeds over wireless networks, which often slow dramatically when too many people use their smartphones in busy locations.The only thing Artemis needed was big companies from the wireless industry to buy into the idea of using its technology. But it has been challenging for a small start-up to get those deals.Now Artemis, founded by the entrepreneur Steve Perlman, who created Web TV and other companies, finally has a big wireless industry partner willing to give its technology a look. On Monday, Nokia Networks, the Finnish networking equipment provider, said it planned to begin testing Artemis’s technology, called pCell, starting next year with wireless carriers. The tests will be an attempt to prove that the technology works as advertised.Traditional cellular networks rely on antennas carefully placed around cities. They cannot be positioned too closely or they interfere with their wireless signals.According to Mr. Perlman, wireless networks that use pCell antennas do not need to worry about interference from nearby antennas. Instead, data centers connected to the antennas perform instantaneous calculations that create a coherent wireless signal for every user of a smartphone or another device within range.Those users gain access to the full capacity of the wireless spectrum of a pCell network, instead of seeing their Internet speeds degrade sharply, especially in crowded areas like a stadium or a train station.Because pCell antennas are compatible with existing smartphones that run on standard 4G LTE networks, users of Android smartphones and iPhones won’t have to do anything to receive the benefits of the technology, Artemis promises. “Their phone is going to work like it has a cable modem connection even if you’re in a high-density crowd,” said Mr. Perlman.Mr. Perlman has demonstrated that pCell works in a laboratory setting. In a phone interview, Hossein Moiin, executive vice president and chief technology officer of Nokia Networks, said he had seen the demonstration in the lab and now wanted to see it in action in an ordinary setting outside.“To get to the bottom of how real it is, we have to take further steps, which means we have to deploy it in a real setting outside the lab,” said Mr. Moiin. “Once we do that, we’ll know the answer.”Mr. Moiin said Nokia plans to test pCell at a stadium with a global carrier outside the United States by March. “I’m going into this venture with open eyes,” he said. “It might fail, but it’s definitely worth trying.”