By J. D. BIERSDORFERSEPT. 22, 2015
Q. Where are the controls for spell check and automatic correction in the Twitter app for Android?A. Like many other text-oriented programs, Twitter’s apps make use of the spell-checking and auto-correction tools built into the operating system on your mobile device. If you want to make adjustments or turn the auto-correction feature on or off, go to the device’s Settings area.If you are using the Twitter app on a device running the current Android Lollipop system, open the Settings icon and tap Language & Input. On the Language & Input screen, you can select and adjust the settings for the Spell Checker. Tap Google Keyboard (or whichever keyboard you are using) and choose Text Correction to change your auto-correction and correction-suggestion preferences.Keep in mind that if you adjust the settings here, those changes affect other apps using the spelling and correction tools on your Android device.Q. If you already have a cable subscription (and have to keep it), what is the point of getting an Apple TV?A. You do not need to have a cable subscription to use an Apple TV, but having one expands your use of the set-top box. For example, the free user name and password you get from your cable provider can be used to watch archived shows on a TV network’s app — programs you may not normally have access to unless you were also paying for on-demand services. You could also connect the Apple TV to a different television set (one without a cable box), but still use your account credentials to view, for example, the WatchESPN app and stream live sports to the connected television.The recently announced fourth generation of the Apple TV brings games, apps and other content beyond cable programming to the screen as well. While the Apple TV is not a dedicated game console, you can get a third-party game controller to use with the box if you want to play more complicated video games on it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even without a cable subscription, Apple TV includes apps for Netflix, Hulu, HBO Now and other streaming services. The current and future Apple TV models offer channels that do not require a cable account, like YouTube, Vimeo and PBS. You can also stream your own music and photos to the TV if you use compatible services like iTunes and Flickr, or mirror the screens of iOS devices and certain Apple computers.While you can make use of the Apple TV with or without a cable subscription, you do need a broadband Internet connection. You also need a high-definition television set with an available HDMI port and an HDMI cable to link the little black box to the big screen.TIP OF THE WEEK Just as with Windows 8, you can create a USB recovery drive in Windows 10 to use when troubleshooting future problems that may arise with the PC. You just need a little bit of time and (at least) a 16-gigabyte flash drive that you can fully erase and dedicate to the cause.Once you have the USB drive, go to the taskbar and enter “Create a recovery drive.” Type any admin passwords requested, select “Back up system files to the recovery drive” and click the Next button. Once you connect the USB drive and click through the screens to start the process, Windows 10 copies system files and settings to the flash drive. When the recovery drive is finished, the system may also give you the option to delete the preconfigured recovery partition on the computer to free up more hard drive space for other things.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@ nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually. A version of this article appears in print on September 24, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Spell-Checking Your Tweet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.