By J. D. BIERSDORFERSEPT. 25, 2015
Q. The Edge browser uses Bing for search. I found the settings box to change it, but it won’t let me type in the address of my preferred search engine. What gives?A. Microsoft Edge, the new default browser for Windows 10, does automatically go to the company’s own Bing site when you type in a query, but you are not locked out of switching to another search engine. The Edge settings may look as if you can just enter the address of a different site to add it, but you actually have to browse to your preferred search engine and have it open in Edge first.Once you have your search engine’s site on your screen, go to the upper-right corner of the Edge toolbar and click the three-dot More Actions menu. Select Settings and then choose View Advanced Settings. Now, click the “Add New” button in the “Search the address bar with” area. Click on the site listed (which should be the one open in Edge at the moment) and choose Add As Default.When you first browse to your preferred site, Microsoft Edge may display a button on the page that you can click to see a step-by-step guide to changing your default search engine. Microsoft says certain Windows 10 apps and features (like the Cortana virtual assistant) work best with Bing, though, so switching to a new default search engine may affect your Windows 10 experience.AdvertisementQ. Why do I see the Dropbox badge icon when I’m using documents on my work PC, but not the same files I open at home on my Mac?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. The “Dropbox badge,” a collaboration tool for people working on Microsoft Word, Excel and PowerPoint files stored in Dropbox folders, is compatible only with certain versions of Microsoft Office. If your Mac at home is running OS X 10.7 (Lion) or earlier and has Microsoft Office 2008 or older, you do not see the Dropbox badge on the side of your Office files; the icon may appear on Office 2008 files used with more recent versions of Mac OS X, however.AdvertisementYou also need to have the Dropbox desktop app installed on the Mac. If your Mac and Microsoft Office software meet the Dropbox badge system requirements, make sure that you are still working on the documents within the Dropbox folder on the Mac, and that your Internet connection is consistent.For those unfamiliar with the Dropbox badge, it is a small icon that clings to the on-screen edge of a Microsoft Office document, spreadsheet or presentation stored in a Dropbox folder that you and your collaborators share. When you click the badge icon, a menu appears with a list of helpful actions like sharing a link to the file, commenting on a shared document or viewing the file’s history of changes that you and other people have made to it.Along with Microsoft Office 2011 for Mac OS X 10.8 and later, the Dropbox badge works on computers running Windows 7 and later, and using Microsoft Office 2007, 2010 or 2013. While it is meant to be useful, you can also turn it off in your Dropbox settings if you do not need it.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to QandA@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.