Twitter users around the world were jolted to learn Tuesday morning that stars had been replaced with hearts, and “favorites” with “likes.”You can say a lot with a heart. Introducing a new way to show how you feel on Twitter: https://t.co/WKBEmORXNW https://t.co/G4ZGe0rDTP— Twitter (@twitter) 3 Nov 15“We hope you like what you see,” said Akarshan Kumar, product manager at Twitter, in a chipper blog post. “We want to make Twitter easier and more rewarding to use, and we know that at times the star could be confusing, especially to newcomers. You might like a lot of things, but not everything can be your favorite.”The heart is “a universal symbol that resonates across languages, cultures and time zones,” Mr. Kumar said, “enabling you to convey a range of emotions and easily connect with people. And in our tests, we found that people loved it.”As with anything new on social media platforms, many users rushed to complain and make jokes, using Twitter itself, as they had the last time changes were made to the “favorites” function.By noon, there had been at least 192,000 tweets about the change, making “likes” a trending topic. Users who objected to the term cited its association with Facebook, Twitter’s rival. Many other platforms, including Instagram and Apple Music, also use hearts instead of stars.What are these drippy “hearts” replacing “likes”? I have to think harder about committing to such ardent fealty now… #TwitterLuddite— kentucker (@kentucker) 3 Nov 15I work at @twitter but even I can’t believe how we replaced a completely value-neutral term like “favorite” with something so loaded.— Peter Seibel (@peterseibel) 3 Nov 15“People like Facebook.”
“This is Twitter. It’s different.”
“No, we must be like Facebook.”
“With Likes?”
“No, that’s stupid. Hearts.”
“…”— Andrew Katz (@katz) 3 Nov 15Alternative symbols to Twitter Hearts:
1. A stiff handshake
2. The word “fine”
3. A pint
4. A nice biscuit
5. “6/10″
#Likes— VeryBritishProblems (@SoVeryBritish) 3 Nov 15Twitter hearts likes.— Ahmed Al Omran (@ahmed) 3 Nov 15Mr. Kumar was unrepentant.Incredibly excited to announce what my team and I have been working on the past few weeks! Hope you like it ❤️ https://t.co/yw99KQttuq— Aki (@akik) 3 Nov 15A version of this article appears in print on 11/04/2015, on page B2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Twitter Retires u2018Favoriteu2019 Stars in Favor of u2018Likesu2019 and Hearts.