AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. How long do laptop batteries last? How do you know when it’s time to replace a lithium-ion battery?A. Lithium-ion batteries have a limited life span and eventually wear out after a number of charge cycles, as opposed to wearing out over a particular number of months or years. Some companies, including Apple, measure a cycle as using all of a battery’s power, but not necessarily from a single charge.As an example, Apple describes using 75 percent of the battery’s charge one day and then recharging it to 100 percent. If you use 25 percent of the battery the next day, the use for those two days makes up one cycle because you consumed 100 percent of the battery’s charge in that time.The number of charge cycles you get depends on the battery. But several laptop manufacturers estimate that you should get 300 to 500 charge cycles before the battery begins to fail; some may even promise 1,000 cycles. If you are a heavy user and recharge your laptop frequently, you may see the battery’s performance begin to degrade after a year or two.Most laptop makers include diagnostic tools to check the health and status of the battery. If you do not see a battery-checker program on your computer, visit the technical-support area of the manufacturer’s website for information.On the PC side, ASUS, Dell, HP, Lenovo and Sony are among many companies that offer information and tools for checking the condition of your laptop battery. Third-party apps can also help provide information about your battery. If you are comfortable using typed command-line instructions, Windows has a Powercfg tool that you can use to generate a battery report; sites like Laptop, How-To Geek and The Windows Club offer illustrated guides for doing so.For MacBook laptops, Apple’s support site devotes several pages to information on lithium-ion batteries and how to care for them (as well as how to recycle batteries when they are fully kaput). The “Determining battery cycle count for Mac notebooks” page explains how to find out how many battery cycles the MacBook has used so far. The “About Mac notebook batteries” section is also full of information on battery care and troubleshooting. For immediate information about your battery’s status, hold down the Option key on the Mac’s keyboard while clicking the battery icon in the menu bar to see one of four conditions listed: Normal, Replace Soon, Replace Now or Service Battery.When the time comes to replace your battery, check with the manufacturer about ordering the right power cell if your laptop uses a removable battery pack. If you have a laptop or an ultrabook with the battery sealed inside, find an authorized service provider for your model to crack open the case and make the swap — unless you are feeling daring enough to find the parts and attempt the repair yourself with the help of sites like iFixit or YouTube videos.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement