
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
SEPT. 30, 2016
European regulators may be starting to regard antitrust in the tech industry in the light of the famous line about pornography: They can’t define it, but they know it when they see it.As Mark Scott and Nick Wingfield report, the European Union is concerned about Microsoft’s plan to acquire LinkedIn, the online careers site. The prime concern is that Microsoft will hinder access to LinkedIn’s data.Salesforce, a leading opponent of the deal, is also suggesting to regulators, and anyone who follows the Twitter posts of Salesforce’s chief executive, Marc Benioff, that Microsoft will create proprietary bundles of its services and LinkedIn data.There are arguments to support this view, but in fairness, the feared business does not really exist yet. And if it did, what would it be worth?That situation underlines how quickly the world is moving to a form of economics that rests on owning the richest possible data resources.AdvertisementData in all forms seems valuable right now, because rich and varied data is at the core of machine learning and artificial intelligence, the basis for analyzing and predicting almost any action that can be digitally measured. Without A.I., now-hot fields like robotics and virtual reality would be pallid, perhaps even nonexistent. It is expected to change product design and manufacturing and how people think about work, which is where the LinkedIn data comes in.AdvertisementThese are the early days of what stands to be a transformation that will take decades, but the data assets are already being battled over. Without them, people can’t build products.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That’s why Salesforce, which lost out to Microsoft in the $26.2 billion purchase of LinkedIn in June, is upset about possibly losing access to all that job-hunting data. It is just building up its A.I. business, and it needs to worry about this. (It’s worth considering whether, if Salesforce had won LinkedIn, Microsoft would be complaining to the E.U.)Essentially, the Europeans propose judging anticompetitiveness on the basis of something with imputed value, the uses of which aren’t fully understood yet.On the one hand, that is a deeply subjective approach. On the other hand, it may also be prescient.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »