
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
OCT. 4, 2016
Q. Can you return a Kindle e-book? If so, how?A. Amazon’s return policy gives you seven days from the time you buy a Kindle book to return it for a refund. You can get a refund for an e-book for many reasons, including an accidental purchase made by a child or another family member using the Amazon account.For a refund, log in to your Amazon account and go to the Manage Your Content and Devices page at https://www.amazon.com/mycd. In the Your Content list, find the name of the Kindle book you want to return and choose the three-dot Actions button next to the title.Choose Return for Refund from the list. In the window that pops up, choose a reason for the return and click the Return for Refund button to confirm your decision. Once you officially request your money back, you no longer have access to the book in your Kindle library.If you want to return a book that was a gift, you can exchange it for an Amazon gift card. To do that, open the Amazon email notifying you of the gift, click the link to redeem the book and enter the claim code, but choose “Learn how this works or exchange for gift credit” instead of the option to accept the book. As long as you do not redeem the gift, there is no time limit for exchanging it for credit.While you can get a refund for e-books within the seven-day window, Amazon does not generally allow returns for downloadable games, software or Android apps. Unless noted, you also cannot get refunds for downloaded content from the Amazon Digital Music service or the Amazon Video store.Amazon Kindle Fire tablets and other devices that use the Amazon App Store include parental controls in the settings to restrict in-app purchases and video viewing by eager offspring.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: How to Return a Virtual Purchase.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »