AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Why does the Twitter app want to use the microphone on my Android phone?A. Twitter’s Android app has a whole list of things it would like permission to use on your phone. The app would like permission to record audio so that any videos you make with the built-in video camera tool will include sound. If you choose to record a short clip to accompany a tweet, you can record and edit up to two minutes and 20 seconds of video; iPhone users can record video with the Twitter app, too, or stop Twitter from using the Camera app in the Privacy area of the iOS settings.If you have already installed the Twitter app on your Android phone and want to refresh your memory about the permissions it requested, open the Settings icon, select Apps and locate the Twitter app in the list to see the information. You can also open the Google Play store icon, tap the menu icon in the corner and find the Twitter app in the list to get its permissions. (You can check up on the permissions for any of your installed apps with these methods.)The permissions list for the Android Twitter app varies with the version and the hardware you are using, but you may see that the program has access to your phone’s contact list to suggest friends to follow on the service. The app also needs permission to modify or delete data on the phone’s USB storage card so it can store profile avatars and other data for faster display.Other permissions requested include full network access so the service can connect whether you are using your mobile carrier’s data network or have locked into a Wi-Fi signal. Like many other apps, Twitter also asks to see your phone’s location information so you can opt to share your location in your tweets — and so Twitter can customize the advertisements you see in your feed.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement