
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
OCT. 10, 2016
Q. When using Gmail on the web, is there a way to occasionally make a new message a free-floating window that I can move around the screen, instead of having it anchored down at the bottom of the inbox?A. When you create a new message in the Gmail browser window, hold down the Shift key when you click the Compose button. A separate message window that you can freely move should pop up in the center of your screen. If you decide later you want to reconnect the new message into the corner of the Gmail window, click the downward-pointing arrow on the right side of the floating window.Other Gmail keyboard shortcuts can save time and increase your efficiency — once you remember to use them. If they are not enabled already, you can turn on the keyboard shortcuts function in your account settings.To turn on the shortcuts, click the gear-shaped icon in the top-right corner of the Gmail window and choose Settings from the menu. On the General tab, scroll down to the Keyboard Shortcuts section, choose Keyboard Shortcuts On and click the Save Changes button.Google has dozens of Gmail shortcuts for the keyboard-oriented. For example, you can quickly report spam from the keyboard: Just press the exclamation mark on an open message to summon the Report Spam & Subscribe box. There is a list of all the Gmail shortcuts on Google’s site.If you are looking for more Gmail shortcuts, Google’s support site offers its own page, Tips & Tricks for regular users, along with a set of  suggestions for those who want to get the most out of the corporate version of Gmail.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Gmail Message in Movable Window.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »