AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. What should I do if I have a Samsung Galaxy Note 7 phone?A. Samsung’s Galaxy Note 7 smartphone is the only model involved in Samsung’s battery-fire situation, and the company says it has stopped selling it and discontinued production. The Galaxy S7 and Galaxy S7 Edge models and older members in the Galaxy S line are not affected.Samsung and the Consumer Product Safety Commission formally recalled the Galaxy Note 7 for an overheating battery defect in September, and an exchange program was put into place for customers to get replacement versions. However, after multiple reports of battery fires in the replacement Galaxy Note 7 devices, Samsung announced Oct. 11 that it was stopping all sales and production of the model. The company says it is investigating the battery situation.If you have a Galaxy Note 7 (either the original or replacement version), Samsung advises that you power down the device immediately. You should also contact the wireless carrier or retail store where you bought it for details about getting a full refund, or exchanging it for a Galaxy S7 or Galaxy S7 Edge model.On Oct. 13, Samsung updated its exchange policy, saying it would offer a $100 bill credit from “select retail or carrier outlets” for those exchanging their Note 7 for another Samsung smartphone. Those who previously exchanged phones for a $25 credit are eligible for an additional $75. And Note 7 owners wanting a refund, or an exchange for another brand, can get a $25 credit.Those who bought a Galaxy Note 7 from Samsung’s website (or who want more information about the recall) should call the company at 1-844-365-6197 or visit www.samsung.com/us/note7recall.Many major wireless carriers have stopped selling the model. AT&T, T-Mobile and Verizon Wireless are among those who have already posted specific information regarding Galaxy Note 7 refunds and exchanges. The electronics retailer Best Buy has also added a page of information for its Galaxy Note 7 customers curious about how to get a refund or exchange. Some retailers may allow you to exchange the Galaxy Note 7 for a phone from a different manufacturer, but check with your place of purchase.Since the Galaxy Note 7’s release in August, Samsung has received more than 92 reports of batteries overheating in the United States, including 26 reports of burns and 55 reports of property damage, according to the Consumer Product Safety Commission. A manufacturing defect in the particular lithium-ion battery used by that model was believed to be the cause of the combustibility, but Samsung has so far been unable to pinpoint the problem.Both the Federal Aviation Administration and the safety commission  had issued warnings advising Galaxy Note 7 owners not to use, charge or pack their phones in checked baggage, but on Oct. 14, the F.A.A. went further, banning the phone from planes altogether. The safety commission’s site has its own information about Samsung’s recall and a form to report incidents with the device.Advertisement