
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
OCT. 17, 2016
This article is part of a series aimed at helping you navigate life’s opportunities and challenges. What else should we write about? Contact us: smarterliving@nytimes.com.Q. How do I check out library e-books to use on my Kindle?A. E-books are available for borrowing from about 11,000 libraries around the country, so confirm that your local library lends them and offers the Kindle format. You can find this out from the library’s own website or at OverDrive.com, a digital service that works with libraries to lend digital content to the public.If your library lends Kindle books, you just need a valid library card and PIN code from the institution itself. You also need an Amazon account, a Wi-Fi connection and a Kindle e-reader, Kindle Fire tablet, Kindle mobile reading app or the Kindle Cloud Reader.Next, go to the e-books section of your library’s website. For New Yorkers, the New York Public Library’s e-book collection can be found at http://ebooks.nypl.org, where audiobooks, videos and e-books in other formats can also be borrowed; the N.Y.P.L has its own reading app for Android and iOS, too.AdvertisementBrowse until you find an interesting book and click it to open its details page for more information. On the details page, you can download a sample, borrow it or put it on hold in case the title is already checked out.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When you select the Borrow option, follow the screens for your library’s sign-in process and for your Amazon account — and you eventually wind up with the downloaded e-book on your Kindle. Lending periods are often 21 days but may vary, and you can usually renew or return a digital book through your Amazon account’s Manage Your Content and Devices page or your library account.Advertisement(Related: The definitive guide to to cord-cutting in 2016, based on your habits)If you want to read on the cheap, many e-bookstores offer a selection of free e-books. Most of these classic books are older titles in the public domain. You can also find most of the same public-domain books — along with audio and video files — to download free on the vast Internet Archive site.Want more? You might also like:• Tips for expanding your smartphone’s battery life• Free tools to keep those creepy online ads from watching you• 3 airfare hacks for the committed penny-pincherPersonal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Library Books on the Kindle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »