
Bits By                     
 QUENTIN HARDY
 
OCT. 21, 2016
Quick: What did you pay last month for your cable, phone, internet, mobile apps or online automobile subscription services? If you flew, what did you pay for that premium boarding, premium seating, premium Wi-Fi/pillow/suitcase status?If you can answer all of those questions with anything like accuracy, stop reading — you have a firm grip on all the extra costs that are now added to so many purchases.If not, congratulations! You are well on your way to understanding Microsoft’s new business model.As Nick Wingfield reports, the software giant posted impressive results on Thursday, mostly related to cloud computing-based products and services. Investors liked what they saw enough to send the stock above its all-time high, recorded in 1999, in after-hours trading.Here, as elsewhere, things were not exactly what they seemed, in good ways and bad. Adjusting for inflation, Microsoft shares, about $60.60 apiece in after-hours trading Thursday, will have to rise above $85.09 to be worth more than they were at the peak of the internet bubble.AdvertisementIn addition, it’s still hard to say exactly what to make of cloud-computing revenue at Microsoft: Is a customer really paying for access to the kind of advanced hardware and software that is in Microsoft’s cloud, called Azure?AdvertisementOr is the business buying standard Microsoft software applications, like Office, which are now sold in jazzed-up versions that are sold via Azure, as a subscription? To some, that kind of revenue matters less, since people buy Office anyway — it’s not like Microsoft really did anything new to get this money, the argument runs.Microsoft’s chief executive, Satya Nadella, speaking after the earnings came out, talked about all the ways he is adding new functions, like artificial intelligence, to those mundane services.A.I. can put the most important emails at the top of the heap, or manage calendar obligations. In other areas, like sales software, cloud-based applications can find the best prospects or help schedule sales calls.Mr. Nadella noted that companies that buy one Azure service frequently take another. As they add them, they also add data, and with more frequent use enable the associated A.I. to do more things, and better (A.I. is basically statistical projection, and with more and varied data, it can do more things.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That means Microsoft can probably start doing any number of clever things, either free or for unseen charges — extra data storage, more networking or other A.I. services.Pretty soon a piece of software Microsoft sold one time, with some fairly straightforward servicing contracts, will look a lot like those cable bills and airline charges. Only instead of happening in sales to individual consumers, it will happen in a big, widely dispersed corporation.Is that hoodwinking customers? Not really. Companies may actually see more value for their dollars, if the A.I. can make work processes more efficient. And, after all, with some other A.I. it may be possible to audit all these charges.As businesses go, however, it may even be something to admire.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »