By CECILIA KANGOCT. 25, 2016
WASHINGTON — When President Obama picked Tom Wheeler, a former cable and wireless lobbyist, to head the Federal Communications Commission in 2013, AT&T celebrated the pick as “inspired” and the cable industry said it was “exceptional.”But after days on the job, Mr. Wheeler quashed the idea that he would look favorably on his past employers. In a meeting at the F.C.C. with the heads of telecommunications, cable and technology lobbying groups, he held up a newspaper article quoting industry executives publicly calling for weaker oversight from the regulatory agency.“This is a rough way to begin a relationship,” Mr. Wheeler said, according to one lobbyist at the gathering, which was confirmed by the F.C.C. It turned out that the chairman had big regulations in mind for those industries instead.Now, as Mr. Wheeler enters his last few months as head of the F.C.C. during the Obama administration — the next president is expected to name a new chairman — he has turned early supporters into foes and invited an expensive lobbying battle that may stymie a last-ditch pursuit of regulations that starts on Thursday, including voting on a proposal for broadband privacy protections.AdvertisementMr. Wheeler’s last act as chairman could be overseeing the review of AT&T’s $85 billion bid for Time Warner, a mega-media deal that has already elicited protests from some politicians and consumer advocacy groups. AT&T and Time Warner will most likely try to avoid an F.C.C. review by selling off the small number of broadcast television assets owned by Time Warner.
            If AT&T;’s purchase of Time Warner is completed, the combined company would generate $175 billion a year, based on 2015’s revenue. Wall Street is not hugely enamored with the deal, however. After an initial jump, Time Warner’s stock price has declined, as has AT&T;’s.        2015REVENUETIME WARNER$6 bil.HBOTOTAL: $28.1 bil.TURNER $11Includes TNT, TBSand CNN24th:$86.74WARNER BROS.$13TV, movies andvideo games$4INTERNATIONALStock pricein OctoberCONSUMERMOBILITY$35AT&T;Includes wirelessservicesTOTAL: $146.8 bil.Stock pricein October24th:$36.86ENTERTAINMENTGROUP$35Includes pay TV andhigh-speed internetservices.BUSINESSSOLUTIONSIncludes wireless,voice and dataservices as well asequipment tobusinesses.$71OCT. 24, 2016
Yet some say that even if Mr. Wheeler does not directly review the deal, his regulations have created new restrictions for AT&T and other broadband companies at a time when they are trying to find new growth beyond their internet businesses.In only three years at the helm of the F.C.C., Mr. Wheeler has redrawn the regulatory landscape for internet companies and telecom businesses by making the federal government a stronger watchdog. He declared broadband an essential communications platform as important as the phone — and that put internet service providers like AT&T under rigorous government oversight for the first time.AdvertisementThe reclassification of broadband as something akin to a utility came as part of the February 2015 passage of net neutrality rules, which ensure that web users will get to any legal web content without paying extra tolls to internet service providers. Mr. Wheeler also opposed Comcast’s merger with Time Warner Cable to protect streaming video competitors and created subsidies for low-income homes to get broadband.Now nearly all of these moves have created more challenges for cable and telecom companies such as AT&T. Many of those companies say Mr. Wheeler’s regulations have favored tech companies like Netflix and Google over them.At AT&T, James W. Cicconi, the recently retired head of lobbying, once called Mr. Wheeler an “inspired” choice. But in an interview last month on C-Span, Mr. Cicconi said AT&T was investing more in Mexico right now because “it is, frankly, a better regulatory environment” than in the United States.Even some tech companies that have benefited from the new regulations said Mr. Wheeler had injected the government too deeply into the free market.The F.C.C. has “overreached,” Barry Diller, chairman of the internet holding company IAC/InterActiveCorp, said at a conference this month. Mr. Diller supported the net neutrality rules passed last year but said that Mr. Wheeler had been “anti-cable” and that reclassification of broadband was a “crazy overreach.”Mr. Wheeler, 70, said consumers needed greater government protection as the nation makes a transition to smartphones and streaming services from landline phones and television. His job, he has said, is to encourage nascent technologies and protect them from powerful incumbents that may want to block their success.“Institutions such as the F.C.C. are the point where the diverse interests of consumers and business converge in an effort to decide how society will deal with those changes,” he said in a statement.Mr. Wheeler declined to comment on AT&T’s proposed purchase of Time Warner. AT&T declined to comment on the F.C.C., and Time Warner didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment.Aides and friends said Mr. Wheeler’s actions in tightening the regulatory landscape around cable and telecom firms were not surprising. He has always fought incumbent communications providers, they said: first against broadcasters as the head of the National Cable and Telecommunications Association from 1979 to 1984; and then against telephone companies as the head of CTIA-The Wireless Association from 1992 to 2004.AdvertisementBy the time he was a venture capitalist in the mid-2000s, cable and wireless were the powerful incumbents, and he saw their grip on access to the internet as a threat to the web.At the F.C.C., Mr. Wheeler became even more strong-handed. He was publicly criticized by the late-night television host John Oliver, and protesters sat in the driveway at his home, after he released weaker early versions of net neutrality rules. The F.C.C. was flooded with millions of comments protesting the rules.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.President Obama, who in late 2014 posted a video message in favor of treating broadband more like a utility, was crucial to the change. Mr. Obama weighed in again early this year to support rules on set-top boxes that would require cable and satellite companies to share programming with third-party device makers and free consumers from cable box rentals.Mr. Wheeler’s friendship with the president began when Mr. Obama was a junior senator in 2006 and called him to learn more about tech and telecom issues. Mr. Wheeler and his wife moved temporarily to Iowa in 2007 to campaign for Mr. Obama, and the couple became fund-raisers, collecting $700,000 for the candidate. The relationship led Mr. Wheeler into government.Now some lawmakers say Mr. Obama’s comments on F.C.C. issues are examples of coordination between the White House and an independent agency. Republican leaders in Congress have called for investigations, threatened to take away F.C.C. funding and urged laws to limit the agency’s abilities.“For the president to tout the achievements of the F.C.C. is a new dynamic in politics,” said Richard Bennett, the head of the policy website High Tech Forum.The F.C.C. said that the White House did not drive the decision to pursue broadband reclassification or set-top box reforms and that Mr. Obama’s support in both cases came months after the agency had agreed to draft rules.“Chairman Wheeler welcomed the president’s point of view, as he welcomed the nearly four million Americans who made their views known during the proceeding” for broadband reclassification, the F.C.C. said in a statement.The most effusive supporters of Mr. Wheeler are now the most bitter.Michael Powell, president of the National Cable and Telecommunications Association, who at one point called Mr. Wheeler an “exceptional” choice as F.C.C. chairman, said in a speech in May that the cable and telecom industry had faced a “relentless regulatory assault.” Mr. Powell, whose group was recently renamed N.C.T.A.-The Internet & Television Association, declined to comment further.AdvertisementYet while Mr. Wheeler has lost early supporters, he has won some former critics.“This is a guy I fought in the 1980s and 1990s who was Mr. Deregulator,” said Jeffrey Chester, executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy, an advocacy group instrumental in child online privacy rules. “Talk about a conversion.”A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: One Last Growl for F.C.C.’s Sharp-Toothed Watchdog.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.