
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
OCT. 25, 2016
Q. Is it possible to block posts with profanity in the comments section for my Instagram feed?A. Thanks to an update announced last month, you can now prevent comments that contain profanity, slurs or other objectionable language from appearing on your Instagram posts. If someone (or some bot) adds a comment containing a keyword you have decided to block, the post will be automatically hidden from your feed, even though it may still be included in the comment count under the photo.To set up comment filters for your feed, open the Instagram app on your Android or iOS device and tap the icon for your profile page. On an Android gadget, select the menu icon (which looks like three vertical dots); on an iOS device, tap the gear-shaped icon. On the Options screen for either platform, select Comments.On the Comments screen, tap the button next to Hide Inappropriate Comments to automatically block a standard collection of common words many people find offensive. This list currently contains only profanity and other inappropriate words in English.You can also use the Custom Keywords area to add words or phrases you’d like to filter out. You can also block numbers and specific emojis from comments. Use a comma to separate the items on your list of custom keyword and characters to filter out. (At this time, Instagram does not support custom keywords in languages that do not use spaces between written words, like Chinese and Japanese.)Note that when you do turn on comment filtering, the past, present and future comments on your posts will be affected. Comments that were blocked from view will reappear if you return to your settings later and turn off the filtering. If you find that people are wiggling around your filters, you can also delete or report abusive comments to Instagram.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Blocking Slurs on Instagram.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »