AdvertisementSupported byApp SmartBy Kit EatonYOU don’t need to strap a fancy Fitbit or Apple Watch around your wrist to get fit. All you need is your phone and the right apps to track exercise sessions, get motivated or take tips on what exercises to do to achieve your health goals.The neatest one-size-fits-all sports app at the moment is Endomondo. This free iOS and Android app can log location data and can time runs, walks, bike rides and more. At its core, this app is a smart location-aware stopwatch and pedometer.Endomondo has a straightforward onscreen display that shows elapsed time, distance covered and calories burned. With one swipe, you can look at a GPS-based map to see where you have already been and plan where you may go next.Endomondo also logs sessions so you can see how your performance has varied over time, showing distance and energy burned on an easy-to-read graph. The easy-to-use app accomplishes all of this with a clean-looking interface and minimalist controls.The app also incorporates social networking for chatting with friends and challenging them to exercise with you. You can set up a weekly exercise commitment inside the app, and it will prompt you through the week to keep you on track. If you are a runner, the app has a built-in coaching system to encourage you to improve.Endomondo’s timing and tracking features can be switched into different modes depending on what sport you are doing. For example, fencing can be high intensity, but it isn’t about covering distance on a track — so in fencing mode, GPS tracking is turned off, and instead the app helps time how long you have been in action and how much energy you have consumed.The C25K app has a different goal. It is intended for people who prefer to sit on a sofa instead of going for a jog. The idea is that with the app’s help and about eight weeks of effort, you will be able to run five kilometers.C25K is easy to use, as you would hope for a beginner app. Its display shows session timing and distance covered, and a prominent clock shows how much time remains in a daily session.The app’s most important element is the day-by-day coaching system. The screen shows what you are supposed to be doing. For example, the first day begins with a five-minute walk followed by a cycle of jogging and brisk walking. There are audio cues to help remember what to do, but you can also listen to music apps.I like C25K for its simplicity and modest, but achievable, goals. I also like its social chatting section, where users can talk to one another for motivation or to get running tips. Best of all, C25K is free for iOS and Android.A full exercise regime can eat up a lot of time, but it’s always possible to find a handful of free minutes during even the busiest days. That’s where Johnson and Johnson’s Official 7 Minute Workout app is great. Clear voice guidance and simple graphics guide you through exercises like jumping jacks and squats that you can do almost anywhere and in just a few minutes.The interface is attractive and easy to understand, and the app’s tone of voice is gently upbeat and positive. It’s free on iOS and Android.Sometimes we need the right music to get us moving, and RockMyRun (free on iOS and Android) is great for that. Aimed at runners and those who like to work out, the app starts by asking what music genre you want to listen to — things as varied as electronic dance music, dubstep and oldies are offered. Then you choose how you want to feel — “good” and “nostalgic” are options — and what type of activity you are taking part in.The app builds a playlist and starts playing a sequence of tracks. You can change the speed of the tracks by dialing up a different beats-per-minute rate, or let the app use your phone’s sensors to measure your pace and match the music to your exercise rate. It’s easy to use and can add an edge to your workout.The popular “Lip Sync Battle” TV show now has an app that places you in the video, miming the lyrics to your favorite songs. It has a slick interface and a social networking and social competition angle and is great fun to liven up a party. It’s free on iOS.Stash is an interesting new URL bookmarking app for keeping track of web articles you like but prefer to read later. Rather than merely presenting a list of your bookmarked websites, Stash analyzes them and tries to categorize them automatically so you can find them more easily. It’s a bit experimental, so performance may vary, but it’s free for iOS and Android.Advertisement