By NICK WINGFIELDOCT. 27, 2016
SEATTLE — For the last several quarters, Amazon delighted investors by delivering something unusual for the company: a bumper crop of profits.But Amazon profits were in shorter supply in its most recent quarter than Wall Street analysts had pined for, and could vanish entirely over the holidays as the company pours money into building warehouses and making original movie and television productions.So after months of exuberance that pushed Amazon’s shares to new highs, investors took a break, sending the company’s stock down more than 5 percent after it reported its latest financial results.Amazon had warned investors not to get too comfortable with its record run of profits, promising last quarter that big increases on warehouse spending would come in the second half of the year so it can handle what it expects to be a crush of holiday orders. It is also cranking out more original video productions like “The Man in the High Castle” and “Transparent,” to turn its Prime membership service into an attractive alternative to Netflix.AdvertisementAnalysts took those warnings with a Himalayan-size heap of salt. They had heard such talk from the company before about increasing investments, only to see Amazon later deliver bigger-than-expected profits. Surely, Amazon was just sandbagging again.Advertisement“They said something similar about last quarter and crushed it,” said Michael Pachter, an analyst at Wedbush Securities. “I think people expected they would do that again.”Instead, Amazon reported a profit of $252 million, or 52 cents a share, for the third quarter, well below the 78 cents a share average estimate of analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters.That figure still represented more than three times the $79 million profit it reported in the same period last year, and Amazon’s corresponding operating income of $575 million was at the high end of the range that the company had previously forecast.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Revenue grew 29 percent to $32.7 billion, slightly above what analysts forecast at $32.69 billion.Many of the pistons of Amazon’s growth seemed to be firing during the quarter, especially Amazon Web Services, the cloud-computing business that has emerged as its biggest source of profits — despite being only 10 percent of its total revenue. Sales from A.W.S. grew 55 percent to $3.23 billion, while operating income more than doubled to $861 million.Amazon’s biggest quarter is now coming up — the end-of-year season when shoppers go wild for presents and have increasingly turned to the e-commerce giant to buy them.But Amazon’s forecast for the quarter was worrisome to some analysts. The company told them to expect as much as $1.25 billion in operating income for the fourth quarter and as little as nothing, a remarkably wide range. Amazon projected that revenue would increase in a range of 17 to 27 percent over a year ago.“I think the big concern here is Amazon moving into another big, deep investment cycle,” said Neil Doshi, an analyst at Mizuho Securities.Asked about the gap between Amazon’s results in the third quarter and expectations, Brian Olsavsky, the chief financial officer of Amazon, said, in effect, we told you so.In a conference call, he said Amazon opened 18 fulfillment centers during the quarter, triple the normal rate. It will double its spending on video content production and marketing during the second half of the year compared with the same period last year.Advertisement“It was built into the guidance,” Mr. Olsavsky said.A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Amazon Projects $1.25 Billion Operating Income, or None.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.