By MIKE ISAACOCT. 27, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — For months, the question facing Twitter has been what its fate will be.The company that popularized the 140-character message has been the subject of takeover discussions that soured as suitors like Salesforce.com turned tail.Some thought a partial intervention from private equity would help buy Twitter time to turn itself around. The company has also considered layoffs and divestitures of certain businesses in an attempt to refocus and reinvigorate its growth.When Twitter reported its third-quarter results on Thursday, an answer started to emerge: The company has to go it alone — and do it by slimming down and stemming losses so that it can ultimately make money.Twitter said it planned to cut 350 jobs, or roughly 9 percent of its global work force, as it tries to revamp the company and become profitable. The earnings also showed budding signs of progress, as user growth and revenue rose more than Wall Street had anticipated.AdvertisementAt the same time, Twitter is beginning to pare back businesses it no longer views as central. The company said it would discontinue the mobile app Vine, the application for sharing six-second videos that Twitter acquired and introduced in 2013. While Vine gained early traction with young users, the app did not reliably make money.Advertisement“We see a significant opportunity to increase growth as we continue to improve the core service,” Jack Dorsey, the chief executive of Twitter, said in a statement. “We have a clear plan, and we’re making the necessary changes to ensure Twitter is positioned for long-term growth.”In a conference call with analysts on Thursday, Mr. Dorsey also swept aside any questions about the takeover discussions around the company. His focus, he said, was bringing Twitter to profitability as soon as next year.In total, Twitter posted revenue of $616 million for the third quarter, up 8 percent from a year ago and above Wall Street estimates of $605 million. Twitter continued to lose money, though its net loss narrowed to $103 million, or 15 cents a share, better than Wall Street’s estimates of 19 cents a share.Twitter’s users increased 3 percent from a year ago, to 317 million, and over the latest quarter, it added four million more users, which was slightly more than analysts had expected.The results were relatively positive compared with Twitter’s history of uneven quarterly earnings over the last three years. Since the company went public three years ago, it has been haunted by its inability to attract new users, especially when compared with Facebook, the social networking giant that hosts more than 1.7 billion regular visitors each month.Twitter’s small increase in user growth shows an accelerating curve. Growth of average daily active users, for instance, has increased over the last three consecutive quarters to 7 percent in the most recent quarter. The company said the improvement was a result of product changes in signing up people, its user interface, notifications and customers’ tweets.Shares of Twitter, which have been sliding for months, rose less than 1 percent to end the day at $17.40.AdvertisementTwitter has undergone a string of executive departures and a revolving door of company leadership. Mr. Dorsey, a Twitter founder, returned last year to lead the company, but critics are concerned that he is not moving fast enough. Twitter has added 10 million users since his return, and the product has not changed as significantly as some hoped.Instead, Mr. Dorsey has taken a more methodical approach — one that has received mixed reactions internally — and opted to make small changes to how tweets are composed and consumed. In previous interviews, Mr. Dorsey has said many of these tweaks are long overdue and accretive to overall user growth.Other changes, like staff revamping and job cuts, may ease pressure from investors over time. This round of layoffs — the second since Mr. Dorsey’s return — will focus on slimming down the sales and marketing teams across the organization.Robert Peck, an analyst with SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, expects that such companywide layoffs could save the company more than $50 million to $100 million annually.In a companywide address at Twitter’s headquarters in San Francisco on Thursday, Mr. Dorsey spoke soberly to the thousands of workers in attendance about the company’s future and renewed efforts to focus on core parts of Twitter’s business, according to three employees who attended. Much of the meeting was spent trying to boost morale and lay out a vision of Twitter remaining an independent company going, while also fielding questions from employees.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Much of Twitter’s turnaround strategy is now based on attracting new users with live video content, including “Thursday Night Football” games broadcast on Twitter in a deal with the National Football League. Such deals highlight Twitter’s ability to provide news and commentary to millions of people in real time.“Our live strategy is showing great progress,” Anthony Noto, Twitter’s chief financial officer, said in a statement. “We’ve received very positive feedback from partners, advertisers and people using the service, and we’re pleased with the strong audience and engagement results.”Mr. Noto has largely commandeered the live video push and negotiated relationships with partners like the N.F.L., where he once worked as chief financial officer.Those efforts, while still nascent, have shown signs of progress. Twitter’s N.F.L. viewership has steadily increased each week, according to the social media company, even as viewership on traditional television channels has fallen.Twitter also said it had experienced strong demand from marketers that wish to buy advertising during live broadcasts, which also include deals with the N.B.A. and Bloomberg, along with BuzzFeed and CBS News for election coverage.A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Going It Alone, Twitter Plans to Cut Its Staff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.