AdvertisementSupported byBitsBy Quentin HardyEurope has a big headache: the current state of American technology companies. And it may take a long time to go away.As Mark Scott reports, Google will respond this week to charges brought by the European Commission that the tech giant hobbles competitors and squelches consumer choice in cases involving its Android mobile operating system, its online searches and some advertising products.In addition, Salesforce is pressing the commission to look into Microsoft’s purchase of LinkedIn, which it says will hinder Salesforce’s access to LinkedIn’s data about people, job skills and companies. Facebook has faced issues about how its data on Europeans is transferred to the United States. And the European Union has told Ireland it isn’t collecting enough taxes from Apple.With all these complaints, only Apple seems ensnared in a traditional argument with regulators. The others, because they are intrinsically tied to new kinds of business, require creative thinking about the meaning and importance of data, privacy, competition and the like.No European company has a comprehensive leading position in the new tech world, which combines cloud computing, mobility, data and artificial intelligence. But that’s probably not why the regulators are preoccupied with Americans.It’s the nature of big online businesses to seek as much data as possible, and often engage with consumers in such a way that the users share a lot about themselves in the name of fun (Facebook) and professional advantage (LinkedIn).Creating effective methods for searching for information, for using smartphones or for building applications seems to enable companies to acquire dominance more rapidly than ever. Some of that may be because of noncompetitive behavior, but it is also because of the strong network effects that benefit these companies. It’s cheap and easy to distribute software online, and if people love your product, they will share and publicize it for you.The continued strength of Amazon Web Services is a case in point. A.W.S. was an early leader in cloud computing, and it now hosts services like Twilio, used to build cloud-based communications, Stripe, a payments service, and Braintree, used in mobile commerce.Software developers using these applications may choose among other cloud providers, but having so many popular tools in A.W.S. gives it an edge; it is also known and trusted.It’s a strong model. And it quite possibly provides years of work for European regulators, until they can integrate the new businesses that technology creates into old customs and laws.Advertisement