AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinMichael D. Hammond, co-founder of Gateway, a computer manufacturer that was started in an Iowa farmhouse and became known for shipping products in boxes with a spotted cow design, died on Thursday at his home in Sioux City, Iowa. He was 53.Korey Robinson, the director of Meyer Brothers Funeral Homes in Sioux City, confirmed the death. A spokeswoman for the Woodbury County medical examiner said the office had not yet released results of an autopsy.Mr. Hammond and Ted Waitt, another Iowa native, were in their early 20s when they started Gateway in 1985, initially working out of Mr. Waitt’s family farm just outside Sioux City. The two met the year before at a University of Iowa football game, according to The Sioux City Journal.The company, originally called Gateway 2000, sold computer parts before developing a line of personal computers and selling them directly to consumers, its shipping cartons recognizable by their black-and-white spotted design resembling the hide of a Holstein cow.Achieving a reputation as a high-quality provider of low-cost equipment, Gateway grew quickly into a Fortune 500 company, employing more than 10,000 people globally and emerging as a rival to Dell in the direct-to-consumer computer market. Gateway eventually moved its headquarters to North Sioux City, S.D.It also began opening retail stores to augment its direct-to-consumer strategy. In early 2000, the company had 242 retail shops, called Gateway Country Stores, across the United States; in 2002, the company reported about $4.2 billion in net sales.But facing increasing pressure from Dell and the resurgence of Apple in the personal computer market, Gateway’s business stalled. Maintaining its own retail outlets proved costly, and profits fell. The company began shuttering stores and laying off employees and announced in 2004 it would close its remaining 188 shops. Net sales dipped to $3.98 billion in 2006.In 2007, Gateway, which by then had moved its corporate office again, to Southern California, was sold to Acer, a Taiwanese company, for $710 million.Mr. Hammond, the lesser known of the two Gateway founders, helped manage the company’s operations in Iowa and South Dakota. He was seen as the technical expert, and Mr. Waitt was considered the marketing specialist.Jim Wharton, a former mayor of Sioux City, who worked with Mr. Hammond for about nine years at Gateway’s offices in South Dakota, recalled him as a “nuts and bolts guy” who did not care about executive office niceties. “You rarely saw him with a tie on,” Mr. Wharton said.Michael David Hammond was born on Nov. 28, 1961, in Des Moines to Merlin Hammond and the former Annette Frazier. Mr. Hammond, who did not graduate from college, worked as a diesel mechanic before going to work as a salesman for a Des Moines computer shop.After leaving Gateway he founded Dakota Muscle, a company in North Sioux City that restored and repaired classic cars.His wife, the former Lisa Hunt, whom he married in 2011, died of cancer in June. Mr. Hammond is survived by a son, Michael; a daughter, Jessica; a brother, Mark; a sister; and four grandchildren.Advertisement