AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I have an iPhone running iOS 10. How can I copy my photos to a pocket flash drive before deleting them to free up space on the phone?A. Although the iPhone does not have a standard USB port to connect a flash drive, you can transfer photos from the iOS 10 Camera Roll with special hardware that plugs into the Lightning port on the bottom of the phone. The portable photo-saving solution is handy, especially if you do not back your photos up to a computer or cloud service.The Leef iBridge 3 Mobile Memory and the Picture Keeper Connect are two such USB devices designed for direct photo backup from an iPhone. Although their physical design differs, each has a Lightning connector, a standard USB plug and software for transferring photos.The Leef iBridge 3 and the Picture Keeper Connect come in a range of capacities. Prices for the iBridge 3 start around $50 for 16 gigabytes of storage. A 16-gigabyte Picture Keeper Connect is about $120, but it includes a cable for also using the drive with Android devices that support the USB On-the-Go standard; Leef makes a separate line of drives for Android gadgets. (Most modern Android hardware uses a micro-USB connector instead of Apple’s proprietary Lightning plug, and other portable storage options include the SanDisk Ultra Dual USB Drive or inexpensive USB OTG cables that connect compatible Android hardware to standard USB drives.)Cheaper alternatives for off-loading your photos include using one of the many cloud backup services, or transferring the photos to your computer. For the latter approach, plug the iPhone into a Mac or Windows PC with the same USB cable you use for charging. The operating system should give you the option to transfer the pictures to the computer’s photo library, just as you would import pictures from a regular camera. Apple’s site has a guide at https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT201302.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement