
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 3, 2016
Q. MacBooks and iMacs have built-in microphones, but how do you use Siri on a Mac Mini?A. Siri, the virtual assistant that arrived on the iPhone 4s in 2011 and now comes with the new macOS Sierra operating system, must hear your commands to work. Apple suggests that for microphoneless Mac models (like the boxy Mac Mini and the cylindrical Mac Pro), you should connect an external microphone to the jack on the back.You can use the earbuds-and-microphone headset that Apple ships with its iPhones, or buy a set separately for $29. Webcams and USB-based microphones can also work to communicate with Siri. If you plug in the microphone and get no response when you test it, click the System Preferences icon in the desktop dock and select the Sound icon. In the Sound preferences box, click the Input tab and select the name of your microphone.Once you get the microphone working, you can summon Siri by either clicking the round Siri icon in the desktop dock (or in the Mac’s menu bar). When Siri responds, ask your question or say your command.You can also hold down the Command key and Space bar on the keyboard to make Siri ask how to help you. Clicking the microphone icon in a search result area brings up Siri for more questions.As with Siri on iOS devices, you can ask the software to find specific files on your drive, play songs in your music library, start FaceTime calls with people, announce the current weather conditions, search the web and update your calendar — among other things. Several sites around the web, including OS X Daily and Hey-Siri.io, have lists of Siri commands that work on the Mac.You can also just pose the question to the program itself. Simply summon Siri and ask, “What can you do for me?”Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »