AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I have a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet on my PC and I want to make the lines of information alternate between gray and white for better legibility. How do I do that?A. The exact steps for applying a gray shade or color to every other row in an Excel spreadsheet vary slightly with the version of the program you have, and the type of computer you are using. In many recent versions of Microsoft Excel for Windows, one approach is to use the program’s conditional formatting rules with a formula that figures out which rows are even or odd numbered so it can put the tint in the right place.Start by selecting the cells in the spreadsheet you want to format. If you do not select a specific group of cells, you can highlight the batch by clicking the Select All button in the upper-left corner of the sheet — where Row 1 and Column A meet.When you have selected the cells, click the Home tab in the Excel ribbon, go to the Styles area and click the arrow next to Conditional Formatting. Choose New Rule, and in the New Formatting Rule box that pops up, select “Use a formula to determine which cells to format.”Next, move down to the “Format values where this formula is true” section of the box. Without quotation marks, enter the formula “=MOD(ROW(),2)=0” and click the Format button below. When the Format Cells box pops up, click the Fill tab and then choose the color (or shade of gray) you want to use for your spreadsheet’s alternate rows. Click the O.K. button in that box and then click it again to close the New Formatting Rule box. Your worksheet’s alternate rows should now be your chosen tint.Using a standard Excel table style is another way to color alternate rows in a particular range of cells. The Microsoft Office support site has illustrated instructions for using Excel table styles this way, and detailed guides for adding the shading with either technique in Excel 2007, Excel 2010 and other versions. (Mac users can find similar support documents for Excel 2011 and Excel 2016.)Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement