
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
NOV. 7, 2016
Q. I have some photos I copied from my phone to my Windows 10 PC for cropping and editing on a bigger screen. Is there a way to remove the GPS coordinates in the picture files before I post them online?A. When you take a photo, the phone’s camera can record all kinds of technical details about the image, which are stored in the file’s EXIF (Exchangeable Image File Format) data. Along with any location information embedded by a phone or camera, the EXIF data can include a wealth of facts about the image, including the date and time it was taken, the camera’s settings and the model of camera used.To erase the location information from the picture, you just need to delete it from the photo’s EXIF data — which is not difficult to do in Windows. To get started, right-click on one of the picture files you want to scrub and choose Properties from the contextual menu.When the Properties box opens, select the Details tab. At the bottom of the box, click the link for “Remove Properties and Personal Information.” In the Remove Properties box that appears, you can choose to create a copy of the photo that wipes as much information as possible from the file. You can also opt instead to use the original file and delete data selectively.If you stick with the original file, go down the list of properties in the box and select the information you want to remove from the file. Click the O.K. button when you are finished.Repeat the process for each photo you want to edit. If you have a large number of pictures to change, third-party EXIF-editing programs may help speed things up. BatchPurifier for Windows is one such app. Mac users can find similar software, like Exif Remover and other data-stripping tools available around the web.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on November 10, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Erase GPS Data From Photos.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »