AdvertisementSupported byThe Art of CollectingBy Nina SiegalAMSTERDAM — “Where is ‘The Scream’?”Employees at the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam say this is one of the most frequent questions by visitors to the museum, the world’s largest collection of art by the post-Impressionist painter.Vincent van Gogh did not paint “The Scream,” of course; that was his Norwegian contemporary, Edvard Munch. But the fact that so many people confuse the two intrigued curators in the artists’ home countries, who already felt there was a strong artistic and historical connection that they wanted to explore.The result of that exploration is “Munch:Van Gogh,” which opened Sept. 25 at the Van Gogh Museum and runs until Jan. 17. The show was curated and produced with the Munch Museum in Oslo, where it ran under the title “Van Gogh + Munch” from May 9 to Sept. 6.The Oslo show attracted more than 170,000 visitors, said Magne Bruteig, the museum’s senior curator and curator of the Oslo exhibition. The museum typically attracts about 125,000 visitors a year, he added.The two shows contain much of the same material: about 80 paintings and 30 works on paper. About half the works came from either the Van Gogh Museum or the Oslo museum. The remainder was borrowed from institutions such as the Musée d’Orsay in Paris, the Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza in Madrid, the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston and the Minneapolis Institute of Art.Bringing together two popular artists in a single exhibition has become something of a formula in the museum world for lifting ticket sales. The Munch:Van Gogh curators conducted extensive research over six years to justify the linkage. They found that van Gogh may never have been aware of the Norwegian artist, but that Munch was a great admirer of van Gogh’s work and often tried to emulate his approach.Seen together, the works show that the artists took similar paths to developing their technical approaches to painting, and also indicate strong thematic affinities. It is also clear that each artist found his own distinct style.“We think that there’s a kinship,” said Maite van Dijk, the curator of the Amsterdam exhibition. “We wanted to discuss in some detail the parallels but also the differences, because of course there is also a lot of difference.”Research initially focused on trying to discover whether the two, who were born 10 years apart — van Gogh in 1853 in Zundert, the Netherlands, and Munch in 1863 in Loten, Norway — ever met.They started their art careers in 1880, when van Gogh was 27 and Munch was 17. They both visited Antwerp in 1885 and both spent time in Paris, at the time the center of the European art world, in the late 1880s. Both developed their craft in France, where they sought inspiration from many of the same painters, including Claude Monet, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec and Paul Gauguin.Yet the curators could not identify a moment of actual contact between them. “It’s very frustrating,” Ms. van Dijk said, “because there were several near misses.”“We were fantasizing about a possible meeting in May 1890, because they were both in Paris at that time, and they both probably went to the same exhibition,” Mr. Bruteig said by telephone from Oslo. “But they probably didn’t meet. Munch admired van Gogh very much and he would have mentioned it in his letters if he had met him.”Van Gogh died in 1890 in Auvers-sur-Oise, northwest of Paris, and was probably never aware of Munch’s work, because Munch did not organize any exhibits that van Gogh might have seen. The curators believe that Munch saw at least a few of van Gogh’s paintings at exhibitions in the 1880s; and as van Gogh’s fame grew after his death, there were many other opportunities for Munch to see his art. Ms. van Dijk identified at least 100 works that Munch probably saw in exhibitions he was known to have attended, as noted in his diaries and correspondence.Eventually, the curators had to let go of the biographical details of the artists’ lives and “rethink the meaning and importance of their artworks and what they themselves wanted to achieve with their art,” Ms. van Dijk said.While both artists began their careers with naturalistic and social-realist paintings, “neither was prepared to follow in this tradition uncritically,” she said.In some cases the exhibition explores the relationship between the artists’ work by hanging similar paintings side by side — but not always. “We’re a little afraid it will become a competition — whose ‘Starry Night’ is more beautiful?” Ms. van Dijk said. “You can see some comparisons between their artistic approaches and themes, but sometimes they’re so obvious you can’t ignore them.”Both artists, for example, created renditions of an evening sky: van Gogh in “Starry Night over the Rhone” (1888) and Munch in “Starry Night” (1922-24), which are exhibited together. They also both painted images of their houses — van Gogh’s “Yellow House (The Street)” in 1888 in Arles and Munch’s “Red Virginia Creeper” (1898-1900).“The Scream” is included as well. Munch created four versions; the one on view here is the first version, from 1893. It is presented alongside van Gogh’s “The Bridge at Trinquetaille” from 1888, a street scene including a small portrait that could be interpreted as a girl screaming on a bridge. Its composition is similar to that of the Munch work, with the line of the bridge cutting a diagonal down the right side of the image.Despite the striking resemblance, Ms. van Dijk says it is unlikely that Munch ever saw this painting of van Gogh’s. Coincidental or not, it is significant, the curators said, that the image that connects the two artists most directly is a bridge.“They both found that they needed to create a very different pictorial language,” Mr. Bruteig said. “They wanted this direct bridge between themselves and the spectator, which they discovered that Impressionism couldn’t provide.”Advertisement