Season 1, Episode 3: “Eight Slim Grins”What? Jane finally gets some face time with the mysterious bearded guy from her memory, and he’s killed before she even learns his name? NBC’s “Blindspot” seems determined to defy expectations, which bodes well for the future.It appeared from the first two episodes as if the show’s routine was going to be: Decipher one of Jane’s tattoos, stop some horrendous crime, glimpse bearded guy for a few tantalizing moments, end of hour. But in Monday’s episode, the bearded man surprised Jane in her safe house in the opening moments, then was shot dead by a long-range assassin. Did anyone see that coming? Not me.Then it was off to a jewelry heist, where one of the thieves, when apprehended, was found to have a tattoo that matched one of Jane’s. Mayfair, the F.B.I. assistant director coordinating the Jane investigation, seemed suspiciously indifferent to the news that her name turned up in a file related to the heist. By the end of the episode we had learned why: Mayfair has been hiding a broader knowledge of Jane’s situation that involves some kind of secret project named Daylight. This may be bad news for Jane — as the episode ended, Mayfair was being ordered to terminate her — but good news for viewers, in that it means we’re likely to see more of the always appealing Marianne Jean-Baptiste, who plays the assistant director.The other startling development in the episode, of course, was the revelation that Jane is indeed the playmate who disappeared when Kurt Weller was a child. That possibility, introduced the previous week, seemed too convenient to be true, and the smart money was on there being no connection.But in this episode a DNA test confirmed that Jane is the child, whose name was and presumably still is Taylor. So, do we have to start calling her Taylor now? In any case, it weirdly makes this series even more intriguing. By taking the seemingly easy route — linking the memory-wiped Jane/Taylor to the childhood of Weller, the investigating F.B.I. agent — the writers have again defied expectations, turning what seemed like a red herring into the main attraction. They must have big plans for this improbable connection.A final thought: Thankfully, this may be the last time we see the “wait in the car” idiocy. Weller had made a habit out of bringing Jane along to crime scenes, only to order her to wait in the car while he and the other agents did the dangerous work (which inevitably left Jane vulnerable to dangers herself). He did it again in this episode. Jane has been annoyed by this treatment, and so have viewers. But by the episode’s end Jane was authorized for weapons training. Looks as if she won’t be a mere drag-along anymore.Your thoughts on this eventful hour?