AdvertisementSupported byBy Graham BowleyWASHINGTON — The Renwick Gallery, housed in an ornate, 156-year-old confection here that was the first American building constructed as a public art museum, begins a new chapter in its history on Friday.After being shuttered for two years, the Renwick, the part of the Smithsonian American Art Museum that is dedicated to craft and design, will open its doors to showcase the effects of a $30 million renovation and its updated mission.“It’s not enough to update the building,” said Elizabeth Broun, the Renwick’s director. “We have to rethink.”The Renwick hopes to chart a new course for craftsmanship in a digital age and to showcase the preoccupations of skilled 21st-century artisans.Now, where there used to be exhibitions of furniture and ceramics, there is instead the opening exhibition, “Wonder,” which features a room patterned with dead insects, a kind of maze crafted from rubber tires, and eerie mounds created from one million glued-together plastic index cards, among other installations.In the past, the museum might have shown the work of highly skilled artists toiling in isolation to create some exquisite object, Ms. Broun said.“That is no longer the working concept for us,” she said. “Instead we want artists even if they use computers in their design process.”The museum wanted art that “looks out,” she said. “It is not a precious object in a studio. It engages the world in a broader way.”Located on Pennsylvania Avenue near the White House, the redbrick building was designed by James Renwick Jr., the architect who built the Smithsonian Castle in Washington and St. Patrick’s Cathedral in New York, and who drew inspiration for the museum from the Louvre in Paris.It was created to give the public a chance to view the collection of William W. Corcoran, a banker, who wanted the young American nation to boast art comparable to Europe’s.It became an Army depot during the Civil War and later a courthouse. It was saved from demolition in the 1960s with help from Jacqueline Kennedy.In 1972, it became the home for the Smithsonian’s contemporary craft and decorative art program, and the just-completed renovations are the first in more than 40 years.Now the faux-Victorian velvet drapes and heavy wall colors have been removed, the floors are sanded, and hidden ceilings and original windows are restored.The work, by the firm Westlake Reed Leskosky, includes other upgrades like LED lighting.The museum drew 160,000 visitors a year before the renovations. Ms. Broun hopes it will attract double that number after the reopening.The renovations were paid for half by the federal government and half by private donors. Before the work, the museum had no named spaces, but now 11 public areas and galleries carry the names of donors, including the Bettie Rubenstein Grand Salon, after a gift by her son, the businessman and philanthropist David M. Rubenstein.“Wonder” includes nine installations in galleries and spaces around the museum.One work by Jennifer Angus, a Wisconsin-based artist, appears like patterned wallpaper on a deep pink wash. But on double-take, the wash is cochineal, and the patterns of circles and skulls are dead insects, nearly 5,000 in all. The skulls, said Ms. Angus, who was working on the installation in the gallery this week, are a symbol of man’s mortality.“Our mortality is closely linked to the environment,” she said. “The fact of the matter is we can’t live without insects.”Nicholas R. Bell, the Renwick’s curator in charge, admits the show blurs the definition of craft and decorative arts. Still, he says, it stays true to the Renwick’s values — a focus on labor, process and materials, with an eye always on the contemporary.“It needed to be people who made stuff,” he said, and works where part of the fascination is not just the concept, or the visual beauty, but the sometimes startling mechanics of how it came to be.“When you look at this work,” he said, “you are going to consider the process and the making of it.”Many of the artists alighted on themes related to the environment.Maya Lin, who designed the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, mapped Chesapeake Bay, using scattered fiberglass marbles that flow across the floor and climb the walls in one room.“They are all somehow about nature, the natural world,” Ms. Broun said. “It tells you what the artists are thinking about. It’s very different things from going into a studio and seeing an exquisite vase.”In another room, John Grade, a Seattle-based artist, hung a full-scale model of a 150-year-old hemlock tree created from half a million bits of reclaimed cedar wood and put together with the help of volunteers.The sculptor Patrick Dougherty wove together willow branches to create a room crowded with what could be hobbit houses.Signs declare, “Photography is encouraged.”“I am thinking of this show as selfie-heaven,” Mr. Bell said.“Wonder” opens Friday at the Renwick Gallery in Washington and closes in two phases, May 8 and July 10; 202-633-7970, renwick.americanart.si.edu.Advertisement