
Antiques By                     
EVE M. KAHN

NOV. 12, 2015
Five years ago, New York City officials learned that a slightly moldy trove of 128 construction plans for local parks was slated for sale through Christie’s. The city requested that the sale be called off, and since then those 19th-century drawings have been repaired and returned to the government. The city is now planning to put them on display.The retrieved drawings, which measure up to four feet long, were mostly produced between the 1850s and 1890s and represent park designs by stars like Frederick Law Olmsted, Calvert Vaux and Jacob Wrey Mould.The pages, a few of which are stamped “Take Care of This Drawing and Return to Department of Public Parks,” give instructions for artisans who were creating infrastructure and features like lampposts, tiled archways, music pavilions, animal enclosures, refreshment stands and fountains. The images also depict planned attractions that were never realized, including a Paleozoic Museum in Central Park.Jonathan Kuhn, the director of art and antiquities for the city’s parks department, said the works demonstrate the civic-mindedness of early generations of open-space planners. “An extraordinary level of care went into the details,” he said.AdvertisementSometime in the 1950s, the pages ended up in a trash pile in Manhattan. A passer-by, Charles Buckley, a recent Yale graduate interested in history and architecture, rescued them from scattering in the wind and stored them for decades. He went on to work as a building restorer and antiques dealer.Mr. Buckley’s son, Samuel, who took them to Christie’s without realizing that they were government property, said that his father understood the collection “had an importance and should be kept together.”AdvertisementKen Cobb, the assistant commissioner of the city’s Department of Records and Information Services, said that plans for an exhibition, publication and Municipal Archives online posting are being finalized.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page C30 of the New York edition with the headline: Historic Park Plans Saved.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »