
Antiques By                     
EVE M. KAHN

NOV. 12, 2015
The Flagler Museum in Palm Beach, Fla., is lining its domed music room with newly restored seating that had long been shedding bits of gilding and threads from its tapestry upholstery. Meanwhile, the once-prominent original supplier of the furniture, Pottier & Stymus, is re-emerging from obscurity.The oil and railroad magnate Henry Flagler and his third wife, Mary Lily Flagler, bought roomfuls of Pottier & Stymus furnishings around 1902, as Mr. Flagler’s longtime favorite architecture firm, Carrère & Hastings, was completing construction of the couple’s showplace Beaux-Arts house. The building, known as Whitehall, was meant to be a wedding present for Mrs. Flagler, who was nearly 40 years her husband’s junior. (Days before their wedding he had divorced his second wife, Ida Alice, who had been deemed “incurably insane” and institutionalized.)Pottier & Stymus, based in Midtown Manhattan, decorated Whitehall in various European styles. The music room is still stocked with Louis XV-style banquettes, armchairs and sofas as well as chandeliers with thousands of dangling Baccarat crystals and an organ with 1,249 pipes. The furniture’s mahogany and beech frames are sculpted with leaves, flowers, scrollwork and spiderweb motifs, and the tapestry upholstery depicts courtiers frolicking in pastoral landscapes.Although their style is Louis XV, the gilded seats were actually made in the 19th century. F. Carey Howlett, a furniture conservator in Virginia who has restored the music room pieces, said that the vintage of the antiques was not a priority for the Flaglers. “It was a look that they were after,” he said.AdvertisementOver their decade in residence, the Flaglers entertained lavishly. They kept an organist on staff and brought in renowned singers like Nellie Melba and Enrico Caruso; chairs would fill the 90-foot-long music room. Mr. Flagler died in 1913 after falling down stairs. Four years later, his wife died under mysterious circumstances (opiates and toxic substances were later found in her system), having bequeathed millions of dollars to her second husband, Robert W. Bingham.Whitehall was then turned into a hotel, and the guests and the South Florida climate gradually took a toll on the furniture.AdvertisementMr. Howlett’s team spent a year, on and off, working on the music room’s dozen pieces of seating. They replicated missing feet on the chairs, and they dabbed glues, consolidants and flecks of 22-karat gold on the deteriorated gilding. They stabilized and repaired disintegrating upholstery with netting, tinted paper and fabric that was painted to look like tapestry. Mr. Howlett will lecture about the project at the Flagler Museum on Dec. 15.Tracy Kamerer, the museum’s chief curator, said, “The furniture kind of carries you along, glittering, and now glittering more than before.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the next few months, other objects supplied by Pottier & Stymus and their circle will be displayed.On Dec. 15, an exhibition opening at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, “Artistic Furniture of the Gilded Age,” will include Pottier & Stymus pieces as well as a newly installed dressing room fabricated by the company’s former employee George A. Schastey. The room, inlaid with mother-of-pearl, was made for Arabella Worsham, the mistress and later the wife of the railroad magnate Collis Huntington. She sold the house, on West 54th Street in Manhattan, to John D. Rockefeller, a friend of Henry Flagler, and it was eventually demolished; pieces of its Schastey interior have ended up at various institutions, including the Met, the Brooklyn Museum and the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts.The Met show will also include furniture by Herter Brothers, another Pottier & Stymus competitor. A restored parlor that Herter Brothers supplied for the financier James J. Goodwin’s home in Hartford will soon go on view at the Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art in Hartford. (A date has not been set.) In January, the Atheneum will exhibit a Herter chair from the parlor at the Winter Antiques Show in New York.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page C30 of the New York edition with the headline: Flagler Museum’s Gilded Seating, Restored, Evokes a Sumptuous (and Torrid) Gilded Age.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »