
Friday File By                     
 MARY JO MURPHY
 
NOV. 12, 2015
There’s no artist like a dead artist.A tiny advertisement in The New York Times in January 1923 by the New Gallery Inc. on Madison Avenue announced that the “Hundred Dollar Holiday Sale will be continued.”The gallery was showing contemporary art with “important examples” by Cézanne, Gauguin, van Gogh, Matisse and Modigliani, among others.Who knows whether a Modigliani was among the works offered for $100, but even that would have been something for Modigliani. He had died a pauper three years earlier and his dealer and friend, the Polish poet Leopold Zborowski, had “sold Modigliani’s canvases for what they would bring and his own trunk and clothing to get enough to pay their fare back to Paris” from the South of France, where they had repaired in vain to try to restore the artist to health, an article in The Times in 1929 reported.A Modigliani nude, it is by now well known, sold on Monday at auction in New York for north of $170 million.AdvertisementBut the artist’s stock had begun its climb in the decade right after his death. The 1929 article was tied to a solo show of his works at a New York gallery and the publication of a book about him.Advertisement“Despite the voluminous mention of Modigliani since his death and the entrance of his work into numerous important collections here as well as in Europe, most of us have gained but a fragmentary impression of him, and these coincident opportunities are welcome,” the article said. Its writer, the art critic Elisabeth Luther Cary of The Times, sought to rectify that, helping introduce him to Americans:“Modigliani was an Italian of Italy and not a line of all the beautiful lines he has drawn has denied his nationality. Once a portrait by Ingres, seen in reproduction, startled this commentator by insisting upon resembling a Modigliani. The explanation lay in the fact that the sitter was a lovely Roman with an oval face and sensitive languid hands. Modigliani would have made the oval face more pointedly oval, the long nose longer, the slim neck more slender, the small mouth much smaller and thus would have made it all Modigliani and drained every trace of French from its character.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An article published in The Times several months earlier, by James J. Sweeney, an Irish poet, appeared under the headline “Distortion Defended: Why Modigliani, One of Its High Priests, Chose His Grotesque Noses and Necks.”The article began with an editor’s note:“The subject is a highly controversial one. Some will argue that artists wishing to engage in what may perhaps be termed pure distortionate esthetic have no business to adopt as their vehicle the human form — or, for that matter, familiar, everyday form of any sort — but should deal only with the abstract, though it might then be concluded that abstract distortion is impossible. Well, it is all very deep and devious.”Mr. Sweeney then proceeded to write very favorably about Modigliani, commenting on a recent show in London where “the public once again paid its traditionally belated homage to genius. For more than a month the King Street rooms were thronged: students, connoisseurs and the curious; while canvases that scarcely won their creator a starvation dole during his lifetime were now spoken of reverently in five figures. Six, eight and twelve thousand dollars were asked; what is more, these sums were paid by the well-observed wealthy.”Oh, those reverent five figures.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page C36 of the New York edition with the headline: The Rise of Modigliani’s Profile, and the Asking Prices for His Works.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »