AdvertisementSupported byInside ArtBy Robin Pogrebin and Brett SokolFried eggs sliding down the walls, spreading in the corners, sprawling across the floor. No, you haven’t walked into some restaurant kitchen run amok or a twisted rendition of Dr. Seuss. This is “Livestrong,” an installation by Christopher Chiappa, his third solo show at Kate Werble Gallery on Vandam Street, which opens Saturday.“How does one start making this many eggs is the question,” Mr. Chiappa said. “I get obsessed with different objects and symbols. So obviously a fried egg is a potent object and symbol for me.”Mr. Chiappa made the fried eggs — 7,000 to be exact — over about a year. Individually, they represent the craftsmanship of an artist working in plaster. In the aggregate, they amount to an exhibition both whimsical and ominous; silly and sober — precisely the complicated metaphor Mr. Chiappa was aiming for.If you just have the egg, it’s this one thing — optimistic, positive, forward-moving,” Mr. Chiappa said. “It’s like a feeling of future.”“The fried egg is the opposite,” he continued. “It’s the idea that this sort of perfect object — this object of all potential — has been sacrificed.”Ms. Werble described the show — which runs through Jan. 9 — as an “infestation”: cheerful on the surface, with “something spreading underneath.”“It’s dead,” she added. “It’s a fried egg. If you want to get into it, it’s the end of life.”Mr. Chiappa, 44, who lives and works in Long Island City, Queens, said he tends to gravitate toward extremes in an effort to explore how an excess of something beautiful can become oppressive.“I kind of take anything and turn it into a nightmare,” he said. “I grew up Catholic, and I think I need somehow for the art to be painful — like real pain, not like hand-on-the-forehead, woe-is-me pain. I feel like artists have this real need to feel terrible.”In opening his first permanent gallery next month — in St. Moritz — Vito Schnabel is leading with his friends — namely the Swiss artist Urs Fischer, who has not had a solo show in Switzerland since 2008.“It’s nice to bring him home in some way,” Mr. Schnabel, the New York independent curator and contemporary art dealer, said over breakfast the other day.Mr. Fischer’s show, which is to open Dec. 29, pays tribute to the space itself, which formerly belonged to the Swiss dealer Bruno Bischofberger. In addition to new paintings and sculptures, the exhibition will feature a site-specific work made of wax pigments, wicks and steel depicting a life-size Mr. Bischofberger seated with his wife, Yoyo.As the wicks burn down over the course of the show, the wax figures will slowly dissolve and melt into an ornate oak chair.Mr. Bischofberger is also a mentor of Mr. Schnabel’s; the two have presented three exhibitions together, and Mr. Bischofberger suggested he take over the gallery. “It was not something I was planning on,” Mr. Schnabel said.The Vito Schnabel Gallery plans to present four to five shows a year, as well as public art projects, the first of which will be Sterling Ruby’s piece made up of four functioning wood-burning stoves in a walled-in garden at the Kulm Hotel across from the gallery.“I want to bring these to the mountains of Switzerland and install them in the snow,” Mr. Schnabel said.The stoves — each 14 to 17 feet tall — continue the Ruby series currently on view at the Musée de la Chasse et de la Nature in Paris and reflect the gallery’s intention to extend its programming throughout St. Moritz.“It’s a beautiful landscape in the middle of the Engadine,” Mr. Schnabel said. “Outdoor space has always been something that interests me.”An unorthodox look at the commercial side of Frank Stella’s 50-year career arrives on Dec. 11 at the Lower East Side gallery Alden Projects, featuring an array of rarely seen 1960s exhibition invitations and gallery posters.Timed to complement the Whitney’s Stella retrospective, the work in “Frank Stella: Early Traces” was personally designed by Mr. Stella to promote his seminal shows at the Leo Castelli and Ferus galleries, and it’s a fun reminder that an artist’s intimate engagement with the market — even back when the art market was still small — doesn’t have to be staid and publicist-driven. The results at Alden Projects offer insight into how he perceived his own art and how he in turn wanted the contemporary art world — then still in its infancy — to perceive him.An elaborately die-cut invitation to a 1962 Castelli show unfolds into one of Mr. Stella’s mesmerizing geometric creations, with the text repeating in an equally hypnotic fashion, thereby placing one of his then-radical “shaped canvases” directly into the mailboxes of skeptics and fans alike.But subtlety wasn’t always part of Mr. Stella’s agenda. The director of Alden Projects, Todd Alden, points to a 1963 invitation to a Ferus Gallery show: In a poster-size photo, Mr. Stella has perfectly framed himself within a warehouse doorway and below circular vents and a proscenium-like archway. With his limbs splayed symmetrically, he evokes da Vinci’s “Vitruvian Man.”“There’s a personal dimension that you don’t see when you look at, for example, his ‘Black Paintings,’” Mr. Alden said of the image. “It sings out.”Early on, Mr. Stella spoke of wanting to fuse Renaissance-era aesthetics with modern abstractionism. His intense facial expression practically dares critics to question whether, at 26, he was up to that task. “There aren’t many other artists who considered the apparatus of publicity with such poignance,” Mr. Alden added. “Yet the attention he paid to his posters wasn’t well documented, because it’s ephemera, which is considered marginal — the stepchild of the art world. But if you want to really get to know an artist, to see what they’re most passionate about, look at their ephemera.” BRETT SOKOLAdvertisement