By STEPHEN HOLDENNOV. 12, 2015
The songs of Cy Coleman are not given to navel-gazing introspection. Their characters are too busy elbowing their way through the show business jungle. Rolling with the punches and coming up bruised but exuberant.On Wednesday evening at Feinstein’s/54 Below, Randy Graff, Cady Huffman and Judy Kaye, three alumnae of Coleman musicals whose careers got a crucial boost from him, gathered to perform an affectionate tribute, “Our Guy, Cy: The Songs of Cy Coleman,” directed by Will Nunziata.The revue is a concise, well-organized showcase of mostly familiar material whose streetwise sophistication matches the sensibilities of these veteran troupers. Ms. Huffman’s performance of “Hey, Look Me Over,” from the 1960 show “Wildcat,” accompanying herself on ukulele, illustrated Coleman’s connection to vaudeville and burlesque, but with a heavy infusion of jazz.Coleman, who died 11 years ago, loved women. Three of his most important lyrical collaborators were Carolyn Leigh, Dorothy Fields and Betty Comden (with Adolph Green). If you imagined that his fondness for the opposite sex led to a surfeit of dreamy ballads by ingénues, it was quite the opposite. Coleman, even more than his hard-shell peers Kander and Ebb, was allergic to traditional pop sentimentality, and so were his collaborators, especially Ms. Leigh.The show, larded with personal backstage lore, gave each woman a moment to reminisce about the breakthrough moment in her professional relationship with Coleman. For Ms. Kaye, whose voice has several dimensions, including operatic parody, it was the day she abruptly took over the lead role from Madeline Kahn in “On the Twentieth Century” and became an overnight star. Ms. Graff recalled how her audition song, “Nobody Does It Like Me” (from “Seesaw”), became a lucky charm when Coleman asked her to sing it while she was trying out for “City of Angels.” It was right there at her fingertips. For Ms. Huffman, it was the brassy production number “Will-A-Mania,” from “The Will Rogers Follies,” for which she wore a cowboy hat and boots on Wednesday.Today more than ever, Coleman’s tough, sexy show tunes are in sync with these challenging times.“Our Guy, Cy: The Songs of Cy Coleman” continues through Friday at Feinstein’s 54/Below, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 54below.com, 646-476-3551.A version of this review appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Songs That Shaped Their Careers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.