AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Holland CotterHas there ever been a more beautiful autumn than the one now on the wane in New York City, with our parks still looking like cloth-of-gold, and flocks of southbound geese calling over our rivers? We know there were just such seasons in centuries past in Japan. Artists tell us so. In a 16th-century hanging scroll, the painter Shikibu Terutada depicts fall leaves and flowers as last-chance blasts of color. In the 18th century, Maruyama Okyo fills an all-but-empty folding screen with the image of a single goose descending to withered reeds.You’ll find both paintings in “Celebrating the Arts of Japan: The Mary Griggs Burke Collection” at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, a lavish rollout of 160 objects that went to the Met from the Mary and Jackson Burke Foundation last spring. Filling the museum’s Japanese galleries, the gifts are presented in two rotations, the second beginning in February. The quality of the work? Japan thinks highly enough of it to have made the Burke holdings the first Japanese collection from abroad ever to show at the Tokyo National Museum.The Burkes (Jackson died in 1975, Mary in 2012) loved Japanese art, all of it, and the collection is close to compendious in terms of media — from wood-carved Buddhas to bamboo baskets — and dates. Among the earliest pieces is a sixth-century clay head of a female haniwa, or burial figure, with bright slashes of rouge on her cheeks. At the other end of the spectrum are 19th-century paintings of urban beauties who had a comparably theatrical flair for cosmetics.Organized by John T. Carpenter, Monika Bincsik and Aaron M. Rio, all from the museum’s Asian art department, the exhibition proceeds more or less chronologically. The big Buddhist altar that starts things off is, apart from the figures of two small cloud-borne spirits, the only non-Burke ensemble — it’s a permanent installation — though Burke material is all around it, including two of the collection’s most valuable sculptures.One is an early-13th-century seated figure of Fudo Myoo, a Buddhist protector deity whose raised sword and thundercloud scowl are meant to chase evil away. The sculpture is almost identical to one by Kaikei, the Donatello of Japanese art, and is probably from his workshop. A second Burke object, however, this one of the much-loved bodhisattva Jizo, is by Kaikei himself. The attribution was confirmed in the 1970s when, during shipping, the sculpture split open and the master’s ink-brushed signature was discovered in its hollowed-out head.Shinto, Japan’s indigenous religion, is also very present in this early part of the show. Two 10th-century Shinto deities look as stolid and foursquare as the cypress blocks from which they were carved: They seem to hug the ground, as if rooted. In a sense, they are, coming as they do from a religion that saw natural forms and phenomena — earth, mountains, trees, weather — as the embodiments of spiritual forces.Zen Buddhism, imported from China (where it was called Chan) and tinged with Daoism, was similarly nature-revering. So it’s no surprise that Buddhist and Shinto divinities rub shoulders in devotional painting, and that the material world is a central subject of Japanese art, as often as not in images devoid of figures of gods and men. If the Buddha is the dominant presence of the show’s first half, nature is the big personality in much of the rest.In a thematic section devoted to Zen ink painting, we suddenly have, along with devotional icons and illustrated parables, pictures of birds and seasonal flowers, landscapes, fruit-and-vegetable still lifes. In a wispy 15th-century hanging scroll by the little-documented artist Bokurin Guan, we see a cicada clinging, as if half-frozen, to a grapevine as autumn frosts set in.All such pictures were, of course, at some level metaphorical, infused with moral impulses and with art-historical references. And an overarching theme of the paintings in the Burke collection is time, an element that different cultures approach in very different ways. Western classical and medieval Christian art seem bent on arresting time, freezing it at a perceived moment of physical perfection or spiritual resolution. Japanese art, by contrast, repeatedly marks time’s passage, records the trace — even clocks the movement — of change from season to season, moment to moment, mood to mood.This is true of monumental landscapes, like the one on the collection’s early-17th-century folding screens called “Willows and Bridge.” The bridge arches like a great diagonal bar of bullion across all six panels, yet it, and everything else, is composed of thousands of chips of gold leaf and strokes of paint. Up close, the grand panorama resembles a trembling fabric of loose molecules. And in Ito Jakuchu’s 1755 painting “White Plum Blossoms and Moon,” molecular goes cosmic. The flowering tree is a galactic explosion, anticipating the eruptive art of visionary naturalists like Samuel Palmer and Charles Burchfield.Nor is the theme of mutability in time confined to painting. It’s there in the half-abstract forms of ocean waves etched on the surface of a stoneware jar, and in lacquer-brushed bellflowers and grasses that cover an incense stand turned tea table. Change is implicit in language. It’s the subject of poems, like this one, written on a 15th-century calligraphic scroll:Wild grasses spread out far across the plains. Each year they wither, only to flourish again.And it’s built into the act of writing itself, into the art of calligraphy, long valued as much for its inspired departures from formal orthodoxy as for its adherence to it. And, finally, seasonal shifts in taste are the very essence of fashion, which is a focus of the show’s concluding section, “Ukiyo-e Painting and Ideals of Feminine Beauty.” The main setting here is 17th- and 18th-century urban Japan, specifically the city of Edo, present-day Tokyo, with its parks and palaces and its equivalents of New York’s singles bars and shop-till-you-drop street life. It’s a secular world, thoroughly present-minded, yet with versions of earlier thinking and even rituals still intact.You get a hint of this in a large six-panel screen called “Women Contemplating Fans,” probably painted in the 17th-century by an artist whose name is now lost. The format is much like “Willows and Bridge,” but with people added: a crowd of stylishly robed and coifed women who are tossing fans into an almost-black river below. The fans, we can see, are beautifully decorated, with hand-painted flowers and poems, or views of Mount Fuji, or scenes from “The Tale of Genji.” But they’re summer accessories, superfluous now that autumn has come. Besides, they’re last year’s models. So they drop down, and drift away.Or most do. A few women hesitate. Maybe for personal reasons, they’ll keep their old fans, because they’re pretty, or remind them of happy times, or carry images to meditate on. There’s one such fan in the show, preserved as a hanging scroll. It was painted by the Edo artist Yosa Buson (1716-1783) with a scene from Matsuo Basho’s “The Narrow Road to the Deep North,” a diaristic account of a writer’s arduous trek to far northern Japan and back.Published in 1694, the book was a hit, and Buson both quotes and illustrates a passage from it on his fan. In it, Basho describes coming across a village monk who lived a secluded and unchanging life in a gated yard under a chestnut tree. It was the life Basho yearned for, but felt he had to earn, first by his journey, and then by writing it down. For him, the writing-it-down part worked; it completed the quest, gave him peace. It let him stop.Art is a record of change: leaves on water, a cry in the air. Can it be more? Basho said yes. So, it seems, do artists, collectors and museumgoers who seek it out. What’s the “more”? A paradox, the one that makes Basho’s season-by-season, step-by-step book both the story of ceaseless movement and, to quote the Japanese scholar Nobuyuki Yuasa, a monument “set up against the flow of time.”“Celebrating the Arts of Japan: The Mary Griggs Burke Collection” remains at the Metropolitan Museum of Art through July 31; 212-535-7710. The second rotation begins in early February.Advertisement