By ZACHARY WOOLFENOV. 12, 2015
The amusing Twitter account named Kim Kierkegaardashian mashes up the anguished writings of Soren Kierkegaard with the daffy public statements of Kim Kardashian: “When the child must be weaned, the mother too is not without sorrow, but you and your toddler can still wear matching outfits.”The joke is in the knowing collision of antique and contemporary, high and low culture, as it is in “You Us We All,” a winking yet earnest and eventually tiresome new piece of music theater that had its American premiere on Wednesday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. A modern version of a Baroque court masque, the work brings together period instruments with references to Britney Spears and infinity pools. For some it will recall the band Vampire Weekend, which used sprightly harpsichord in a song about a Manhattan crosstown bus.In the 17th century, masques deployed theatrical spectacle — dazzling clothes, sets and dances — to celebrate monarchical power, with a series of tableaus in lieu of a standard plot and with the royal family represented as abstract virtues like Beauty and Justice. Extravagantly written, chicly designed and murkily directed by Andrew Ondrejcak, with music by Shara Worden, “You Us We All” hews to this basic structure, fielding Love, Virtue, Hope, Time and Death, all peeling off their elaborate costumes as the mood turns from gently triumphant to gently despairing in elliptical numbers.Death (the countertenor Bernhard Landauer) confesses his romantic feelings to Love (the baritone Martin Gerke). Virtue (Helga Davis, her vocal lines here too high for comfort) tries to egg Hope (Ms. Worden) out of her depression by recommending a strip club. Time (the gruffly charismatic performance artist Carlos Soto) drinks a lot.AdvertisementThe flat scenery of the Baroque era has been cleverly transformed into a proscenium-filling screen at the back of the stage, onto which Mr. Ondrejcak’s computer desktop — full of shifting, overlapping images that inspired the production — is projected. Played by the ensemble Baroque Orchestration X, the score by Ms. Worden — classically trained, she is best known for her indie-rock band, My Brightest Diamond — smartly uses period instruments both for their slippery mellowness and their etched pungency.There’s both flowing arpeggios and droning underneath Time’s climactic surreal monologue, summing up eons of Earth’s history. The melody is sweetly ornamented, with bright rivulets of harpsichord, as Hope narrates the plangent letters, full of existential angst, she writes to pop divas like Whitney Houston and Mariah Carey.AdvertisementBut though Ms. Worden’s voice is the production’s glory — translucent and melancholy, it evokes Nico’s — that angst comes off as superficial: sincere but merely cute. (“Dear Beyoncé, sometimes I feel aloneith.”) The work’s stakes feel low, and its final consolation — “Are we not us each all split from one single chromosome, and spend our lives trying to puttith pieces back together?” — Hallmark-thin. The political agenda of the court masque has been recast for an era in which the only politics is emotional: What’s being celebrated here is not a king’s power but the adolescent urge to legitimate our feelings.“You Us We All” runs through Saturday at BAM Harvey Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Brooklyn; 718-636-4100, bam­.org.A version of this review appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Masque Like No Other, With Virtues and Vice.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.