AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasRace and music are potent tools for Kyle Abraham, a Pittsburgh-born choreographer and dancer who grew up enmeshed in hip-hop culture. In his newest work, “Absent Matter,” Mr. Abraham takes inspiration from jazz and hip-hop to focus on racial injustice. It’s a timely — and, for a dance, a huge — subject. Yet despite his status as a 2013 MacArthur Fellow, Mr. Abraham is not fully formed enough as a choreographer to tackle it.On Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater, what became increasingly apparent was twofold: His works are less dances than sketches, and his movement — however silky with sleek transfers of weight, and arms that stretch as gratifyingly long as the legs — lacks specificity. In the case of “The Gettin’” (2014) and “Absent Matter,” one dance bleeds into the other, from the black-and-white projections documenting demonstrations and discrimination policies to the nearly identical endings: a dancer posed with her back to the audience as a curtain falls.In each instance, that parting image borders on sentimental, and you wonder: Why did Mr. Abraham repeat himself so quickly? It’s disheartening to watch a program of what seems like first drafts, and it’s all the more frustrating because there is promise here: Abraham.In.Motion is an attractive company of dancers who perform with spontaneity and sincerity.Three works are to live jazz, and that’s a treat, especially the way Mr. Abraham has arranged his musicians in the theater. At the start — in “Prelude,” a solo for Mr. Abraham that leads into “The Quiet Dance,” from 2011 — Kris Bowers performs piano pieces at the left of the stage. In “Absent Matter,” composed and arranged by Mr. Bowers and Otis Brown III, the musicians are placed on the opposite side, and in “The Gettin’,” set to Robert Glasper’s interpretation of the 1960 jazz album “We Insist! Max Roach’s Freedom Now Suite,” the band, including Mr. Brown in a scrupulous and soaring drum solo, frames the back of the stage.In “Absent Matter,” which takes inspiration from the Black Lives Matter movement, Mr. Abraham also layers jazz with hip-hop samples. Throughout the work, which concludes with Kendrick Lamar’s “Alright” — which has become a positive song of protest — stagehands remove black sheets of vinyl to reveal, ultimately, a white stage.Naima Ramos Chapman’s video design keeps images of protests fresh in the mind as the dancers hint at how resignation can turn into resistance. At times, they are tense and still and at others radiating momentum as their arms swing loosely forward and overhead — later increasing in speed like sharp blades. Yet while the trenchant combination of jazz and hip-hop has a modern, living pulse, the dance languishes in a place of unfulfilled impulses: No matter how intelligently or passionately these dancers move, they have nowhere to go.Abraham.In.Motion continues through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, Manhattan; 212-242-0800, joyce­.org.Advertisement