By ALEC M. PRIESTERNOV. 14, 2015
Today’s lineup — crime; travel through time, space, dimensions and tundra; home repair; ’70s teenagers; Steve Jobs; and James Taylor — pairs well with popcorn.What’s Streaming NowSTEVE JOBS: THE LOST INTERVIEW Catch this acclaimed documentary before it falls off Netflix on Nov. 22. A 70-minute conversation with Steve Jobs, filmed in 1995, two years before his return to Apple. (Netflix)DAZED AND CONFUSED (1993) Aerosmith’s particularly apt “Sweet Emotion” introduces Richard Linklater’s coming-of-age story set on the last day of high school in a Texas town in 1976. The energetic movie features an ensemble cast including Matthew McConaughey, Parker Posey, Ben Affleck, Adam Goldberg and Milla Jovovich. They fool around school and town in the buildup to a party at the moon tower and to the rest of their lives. (iTunes) (Image: Rory Cochrane and Mr. McConaughey)What’s On TVCOPS 8 p.m. Eastern time, on Spike The police will never run out of material to be filmed. In a new episode, “The Young and the Reckless,” multiple warrants seem only to make one man more reluctant to be arrested, a teenager must get a job as a form of penance, and a driver tries a last-minute cover-up.AdvertisementASK THIS OLD HOUSE 8:30 p.m. on PBS “This Old House” viewers get some questions answered. A trendy sink is deemed a mistake and replaced with something more sensible. A driveway is outfitted with a light.AdvertisementDOCTOR WHO 9 p.m. on BBC America Horror abounds as the Doctor and Clara go to Le Verrier Space Station. The episode is styled as found footage from the wrecked station.ASH VS. EVIL DEAD 9 p.m. on Starz The pesky Necronomicon has brought the evil and dead to Earth again. Ash and his ValueStop co-workers Pablo and Kelly continue to battle deadites, and a mysterious woman discovers Kelly’s parents’ farm. Bruce Campbell shines as Ash. “And his act — boyish but world-weary, arrogant but self-deprecating, a permanent twinkle in his eye — is central to nearly every moment; there would hardly be a show without him,” Mike Hale wrote in The New York Times. (Image: Mr. Campbell and Dana DeLorenzo)DR. DEE: ALASKA VET 8 p.m. on Animal Planet Dr. Dee leads a marathon of spaying and neutering at a laundromat in a remote Alaskan village. On a cattle ranch, a calf refuses to be born, and Dr. Dee gives it what for.SPOTLESS 10 p.m. on Esquire TV The premiere episode of this series from France’s Canal+ network. Set in London, a man’s crime-scene cleaning business is dirtied when his estranged brother reappears, entangling them both in mob dealings while they confront their shared past.AUSTIN CITY LIMITS 11:10 p.m. on PBS James Taylor performs his classics, alongside songs from “Before This World,” his first record of new material in 13 years. (Image: Mr. Taylor)A version of this schedule appears in print on November 14, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Watch Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.