AdvertisementSupported byBy Martha SchwendenerThe Salon Art + Design bills itself as a fair that combines art and design, echoing how people actually live — that is, with both art and furniture, rather than in sterile white cubes or furniture showrooms. It also sets out to reflect how architects and interior designers are behaving today, mixing historical periods and styles to achieve a casual, if studied, eclecticism. With that in mind, the fair runs the gamut from works that have made the rounds of museum shows to more experimental or even frivolous objects (which doesn’t mean cheap ones). Following are highlights from some of the 55 galleries in the show.Kraemer Gallery The Paris-based Kraemer, known for its 17th- and 18th-century furniture, is showing a pair of Louis XVI armchairs, stamped on their undersides by Jean-Baptiste Delaunay, that have been transformed by upholstery by Pierre Frey, a contemporary designer. The juxtaposition of 18th-century gilded and molded arms and legs with fabric marked by bold slashes of color is a good entree to the historical and stylistic mixing throughout the show.Seomi International A different kind of eclecticism reigns at Seomi, which is showcasing the work of the Korean ceramic artist Lee Hun Chung and the Portuguese artist Joana Vasconcelos, among others. Mr. Chung fires his bulky, minimalist ceramics with fast-burning pine in his own kiln near Seoul, while Ms. Vasconcelos outfits found ceramic pieces with crocheted covers that change not only their appearances but also their “masculine” or “feminine” ethos.Galerie Zlotowski Geometric abstraction in painting and prints appears all over the fair. A standout work, in a slightly different medium, is a 1915 wool tapestry designed by Jean Arp, which was shown at the Cabaret Voltaire, the Dadaist haunt in Zurich, in 1916. Titled “Diagonal Composition,” the work has also been known by the less modern title “Crucifixion.”Bernard Goldberg A strikingly American version of Modernism, Paul Cadmus’s painting “Venus and Adonis” (1936) riffs on a Rubens canvas from the 1630s depicting the same subject. Exhibited in several museums, this is a relatively tame piece by Cadmus, whose work was removed from the Corcoran Gallery in Washington in the 1930s at the request of the United States Navy because of its salacious depiction of sailors. (Cadmus was one of the first publicly gay artists.)Mazzoleni The surge of interest in masters of Italian Modernism is reflected at Mazzoleni, which is showing works by Alberto Burri, Lucio Fontana and Michelangelo Pistoletto. A diminutive 1966 red plastic work by Burri, made by taking a blowtorch to plastic, is like a miniature version of what is on view in the Burri show at the Guggenheim Museum. Several canvases with Fontana’s signature slashes are joined by a recent Pistoletto mirror work that includes a flat image of a man on a telephone.Carpenters Workshop A softer approach is taken by the young Dutchman Sebastian Brajkovic, who combines industrial design with an element of fashion in his lovely, chaise-like chair. The fabric covering the piece was embroidered by the couture house Lesage and includes colorful, sinuous lines recalling Art Nouveau. It’s a nice respite in a fair that leans, on the whole, toward the chunky Modernism of Art Deco or geometric abstraction.Moderne An organic and natural modern approach to furniture is on view at Moderne Gallery of Philadelphia, which is showing a sofa designed in 1968 by Wharton Esherick, a leading midcentury craftsman. Made of cherry and walnut, the biomorphic shape recalls sculptures by Alberto Giacometti, Barbara Hepworth and Henry Moore, and functions as both sculpture and sofa. When the wood along the back of the sofa expands because of temperature and humidity, it reveals red paint, creating a kind of striped effect.Friedman Benda Nature is corralled in a more humorous way by the Brazilian designers and brothers Humberto and Fernando Campana in their “Bolotas” (2015) chairs at Friedman Benda, near the entrance to the fair. “Bolotas” means “acorns” in Portuguese, and the chairs, covered with chestnut-colored sheep’s wool, do simulate the look of acorns, as well as of unshaven sheep, shag carpeting or bean bags. They are, nonetheless, shockingly comfortable.David Gill Arguably the goofiest object at Salon is the “Jungle V.I.P.” chandelier from 2014, designed by Barnaby Barford. Made with crystal, brass, sculpted foam and wire, the fixture hangs at a tilt, thanks to a black crystal monkey dangling from its rim. In another context, it might read like a sculpture by Maurizio Cattelan or any number of young artists given to sight gags. Like many of the objects in this show, however, the chandelier is a strong statement against taking art or design too seriously, and for mixing materials, histories, traditions and sensibilities as irreverently as possible.The Salon Art + Design continues through Monday at the Park Avenue Armory, at 67th Street, Manhattan; thesalony­.com.Advertisement