By GIA KOURLASNOV. 13, 2015
Sylvie Guillem is a trailblazer, notably in the decisive way she has commandeered her ballet career, but she’s only human. After dancing for nearly four decades, she’s calling it quits. In the charming program note for her farewell performance, “Life in Progress,” Ms. Guillem writes that she gave a friend the final say, or a “license to kill,” if she remained onstage longer than she should. “Frankly,” she writes, “I’d like to spare him this task.”If only the actual program, which opened on Thursday at City Center, delivered an inkling of that intimacy and charm. With four works, including new dances by Akram Khan and Russell Maliphant, it poses a formidable task to muster much emotion for Ms. Guillem. Despite moments that reveal her tensile strength and effortless extension — at 50, she can still graze her nose with her toe — she could be anyone.In Mr. Khan’s “Technê,” Ms. Guillem takes brisk steps in a crouched position as she circles the perimeter of a spotlight, in the center of which is a silvery wire tree. Her fingers reach forward to form tents on the floor, lending her slithering shape the look of a praying mantis. As Ms. Guillem, more of a creature than a woman, continues to mark her territory, rising into the air in quick turns, the more paltry this dance becomes.Mr. Maliphant’s “Here & After” is pallid from the start. In this duet, Ms. Guillem and Emanuela Montanari start out slowly as they pose in sculptural shapes. But even after Mr. Maliphant speeds up the action in the second half, and the dancers twine their arms playfully or grab hands for a frisky spin, this work amounts to little more than a dance version of girls’ night out. Ms. Guillem unwisely takes a break during the program’s only piece of note, William Forsythe’s “Duo2015,” a robust reworking of his 1996 “Duo,” performed by his company members Brigel Gjoka and Riley Watts.The missing link is Ms. Guillem; in 1987 Mr. Forsythe featured her in his influential “In the Middle, Somewhat Elevated.” She would have been wise — and brave — to dance something of his today. Instead, she bids farewell with minor fare, Mats Ek’s “Bye,” in which, looking like a dowdy lunch lady, she lives out her dreams, first appearing on screen in black and white, and then in the flesh. Ms. Guillem leaves the way she arrived — on film — offering little sense of closure. But there you have it: for better or for worse, she likes to do things her way.“Sylvie Guillem — Life in Progress” continues through Saturday at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan; 212-581-1212, nycitycenter­.org.A version of this review appears in print on November 14, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Outspoken Performer Makes a Quiet Farewell.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.