AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KozinnAndy White, a studio drummer with a thriving career in London in the 1960s whose best-known work was on the Beatles’ first single, “Love Me Do,” died on Monday at his home in Caldwell, N.J. He was 85.His wife, Thea White, said that the cause was a stroke.As a studio drummer, Mr. White was renowned for his stylistic flexibility. An adept jazz player, he became a favorite of producers who recorded pop music as well, even though he was more than 10 years older than many of the rock musicians he worked with.His performances were generally uncredited, and he did little to call attention to them. He provided the beat behind Billy Fury’s highly regarded 1960 album, “The Sound of Fury,” as well as Lulu’s raucous 1964 cover of the Isley Brothers’ “Shout,” the 1965 Tom Jones hit “It’s Not Unusual” and Herman’s Hermits’ “I’m Henry VIII, I Am,” also released in 1965.But it was three hours’ work, on Sept. 11, 1962, that made Mr. White a household name among aficionados of British pop.The Beatles, then a fledgling Liverpool group just signed to Parlophone, a subsidiary of EMI, were about to have their third recording session. At the first, the group’s producer, George Martin, complained that their original drummer, Pete Best, was too unsteady for recording work.The Beatles replaced Mr. Best with Ringo Starr, with whom they recorded a version of “Love Me Do” at their second session. When Mr. Martin still had doubts, his assistant, Ron Richards, engaged Mr. White for the next session, a week later.With Mr. White, the Beatles recorded a second version of “Love Me Do,” with Mr. Starr playing tambourine alongside Mr. White on drums, as well as “P.S. I Love You,” with Mr. White on drums and Mr. Starr playing maracas.Mr. White also played drums on an early version of the Beatles’ “Please Please Me,” which was unreleased until it was included on “The Beatles Anthology 1” in 1995. As it turned out, Mr. Starr’s version of “Love Me Do” was released as the group’s first single in England, with Mr. White’s “P.S. I Love You” as the B-side. But Mr. White’s version appeared on the band’s debut album, “Please Please Me,” and on the American version of the single and other American releases.Mr. White was paid 5 pounds 15 shillings for the job, what Mr. White had said was the equivalent of about $15 then (about $120 today), and Mr. Starr was restored to his job at the next session.Andrew McLuckie White was born in Glasgow on July 27, 1930, and began studying the drums at 12. His first big job after he moved to London was with the Vic Lewis Band, a popular touring ensemble, with which he made his first visit to the United States, in the late 1950s.He married Lyn Cornell, a singer in the Vernons Girls, a Liverpool group, in 1962. That marriage ended in divorce. Mr. White met Thea Zitzner, an actress, in 1973, when he was performing in a band backing Marlene Dietrich. They moved to New Jersey in 1983, shortly after they married. She is his only immediate survivor.His final job, his wife said, was as a drum coach for John Magaro, who played a drummer in “Not Fade Away,” David Chase’s 2012 film about a young rock musician in the 1960s.Mr. White’s last recording session was a cover version of “P.S. I Love You.” When the Smithereens recorded the song for their 2008 tribute album, “B-Sides the Beatles,” the group’s drummer, Dennis Diken, had the idea of inviting Mr. White to reprise his performance. For the sake of historical verisimilitude, Mr. White played drums and the voluntarily displaced Mr. Diken played maracas.Advertisement