AdvertisementSupported byBy David AllenDavid Geffen Hall is nearly empty. An usher roams the aisles. A technician adjusts microphones. A New York Philharmonic woodwind player fiddles with his reeds. Near the stage door sits a piano technician, his work on a Steinway being tested.Daniil Trifonov is warming up.On Wednesday evening, the sensational Mr. Trifonov, 24, drew roars of approval as he began a fall residency in New York. He is the star attraction of the Philharmonic’s Rachmaninoff festival, and one of the few possible excuses for three solid weeks of that composer’s all-too-evergreen music. Last season, this slightly built Russian pianist-composer played that great Russian pianist-composer’s First Concerto with the Philharmonic. Now he is appearing in the other three, as well as the Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini.Practically alone in the hall, he plodded slowly through scales, sounding like a child at practice. His hair flopped over the thick black glasses he usually wears. Suddenly, the flourishing motto of the Rhapsody erupted, faster than anyone would sensibly take it in performance. Mr. Trifonov began to improvise, almost imperceptibly merging the themes of the Rhapsody and the Second Concerto, the other work on his first, sold-out program.Upstairs in the soloist’s quarters, he worked on his touch, lingering on single notes, then gradually growing more intense. Leaving his everyday calm demeanor behind, he became the whirl of animation his audiences see onstage. With an hour to go until the performance, he seemed nerveless, his eyes closed, listening hard.“Nervousness comes only when there is a lack of focus,” he had said a few days earlier after a visit to Rachmaninoff’s old home at 505 West End Avenue, on the Upper West Side. “Once the mind is centered on the music, once there is nothing that can influence the process, that state is ideal. There might be some nervousness before the performance, but once you are onstage, nothing else exists.”In conversation, Mr. Trifonov is intellectually alert, but quiet, often awkward. Tired after a flight from Japan, he looked at the table as he chatted and played air piano as he thought. But when he was showing off his encyclopedic knowledge of Rachmaninoff’s works, his face brightened into an eager smile.He gives the impression of being a genuine musician, able to analyze Rachmaninoff’s piano works, as well as his symphonies and songs. And he spoke of the “very special experience” of beginning to tape the concertos with Yannick Nézet-Séguin and the Philadelphia Orchestra, the band Rachmaninoff himself recorded with. Deutsche Grammophon recently released a sublime recording of Mr. Trifonov playing the Rhapsody, and plans are afoot to complete the set.For all his precocious expertise, though, Rachmaninoff is new to Mr. Trifonov. “When I was studying in Moscow,” he recalled, “the majority of works on which my teacher wanted to concentrate were Classical: Beethoven, Mozart, Bach, Schumann. In Russian music, it was Scriabin, Tchaikovsky, Medtner, but not Rachmaninoff.”Rachmaninoff was assumed to be too stern a physical challenge. He possessed famously large hands, Mr. Trifonov said: “But at the same time, the writing demands the right use of weight, not only in the fingers, the wrists, the elbows, but also the shoulders — basically the whole upper body. If not handled properly, it might even cause an injury.” Not until after his victory in the Tchaikovsky Competition, in Moscow in 2011, did he play a note of his countryman’s music.By then, Mr. Trifonov had paid a different kind of homage. “I started as a composer when I was 5,” he recalled of his childhood in Nizhny Novgorod. “That’s what brought me to the piano. Composing came first. The piano was a tool that I could use to express what I built.”During Mr. Trifonov’s first year at the Cleveland Institute of Music, 2009-10, he wrote a suite of five dreamy vignettes with a suggestive name: “Rachmaniana.” While he was still forbidden to take part, he watched his teacher, Sergei Babayan, give classes on Rachmaninoff. “After the lessons, I would find some practice room,” he said. “And I would go to the piano, under the impression of what I had just heard.”It is composing, as much as performing, that makes Mr. Trifonov an echo of Rachmaninoff. When Rachmaninoff fled the revolution and moved permanently to the United States in 1918, playing his own compositions added to the fame he had since his first tour in 1909. In 25 years of appearing in America, he had 44 dates with the New York Philharmonic, including under Gustav Mahler’s baton in 1910. Mostly he demonstrated his own concertos, along with dashings of Liszt, Tchaikovsky and Beethoven.Composing at a different moment for classical music, Mr. Trifonov has neither the outlets nor desire to perform his creations quite so much. Even so, he has played his Piano Concerto — a blend of Scriabin, Prokofiev and Medtner that seems to raise their already fearsome pianistic demands to a higher power — with the Cleveland Institute of Music Orchestra and  the Pittsburgh Symphony.“For now, I think it’s a little bit too early to play only my work,” he said, but added that he would play his concerto a number of times over the next few years. And a double concerto — for violin, piano and chamber orchestra — awaits orchestration. Despite his tour schedule, he still manages to write.Meanwhile, Mr. Trifonov’s youthful courage in repertoire shows no sign of abating. The Brahms concertos are next. He wants to play more solo Bach and is eager to take on Ligeti and Messiaen. He dreams of playing Scriabin’s “Poem of Ecstasy,” lamenting the lack of a one-piano transcription of that lurid orchestral orgy. (Would he write one himself? “That’s a good idea. But no.”) And in recital programs, he will continue to take risks, like his remarkably ambitious Carnegie Hall program last season, which included Beethoven’s final sonata and Liszt transcriptions, as well as all of his “Transcendental Études.”“That kind of repertoire prepares you as a musician,” he said. The only question is: for what?Advertisement