By VIVIEN SCHWEITZERNOV. 13, 2015
Most of the opera singers who appear at Carnegie Hall follow the traditional route of singing alongside a pianist. The mezzo-soprano Isabel Leonard chose a more unusual partner for her concert on Thursday evening at Zankel Hall, performing mostly Spanish music with the guitarist Sharon Isbin.This seemed very much an equal collaboration, even down to the women’s striking outfits, both designed by Austin Scarlett: a fitted red dress with bustles for Ms. Leonard, a plum-colored dress with black chiffon overlay for Ms. Isbin.Each spoke to the audience, and Ms. Isbin played several solos, sometimes with such intimacy that at times you almost had to lean in to hear her, as during Granados’s “Andaluza.” She rendered Albéniz’s “Asturias” and Tárrega’s “Recuerdos de la Alhambra” with soulful depth, opting, even in their more fiery moments, for subtlety over bravura.Ms. Leonard sounded confident in this repertory, with works like Falla’s “Siete canciones populares españolas” demonstrating the scope of her sultry mezzo, from its plummy lower notes to silvery higher range. She imbued each of the selections on the program with dramatic flair and contrast, opening with three of Federico García Lorca’s “Canciones españolas antiguas.” She took on the air of a storyteller in other songs by Lorca, like “Los mozos de Monléon.” In “Las morillas de Jaén,” she lingered seductively on the name “Marién.” She sang with blazing power in “La Tarara” and with intimacy in selections from Montsalvatge’s “Canciónes negras.”The lineup also featured the premiere of Richard Danielpour’s appealing “… Of Love and Longing,” set to three texts by Rumi. Evocative and melodic, his songs complemented the Spanish works: The passionate, declamatory “This Night of Love” contrasted with the gentle lilt of “Your Beauty.” An encore, Agustín Lara’s “Granada,” concluded the evening on a vibrant note.A version of this review appears in print on November 14, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Pealing Notes and Plucking Strings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.