By BRIAN SEIBERTNOV. 13, 2015
It is best to attend “Clytigation: State of Exception,” by the unclassifiable performance artist Michelle Ellsworth, with a healthy appetite. I’m not talking about your stomach, though during the show at the Chocolate Factory in Queens, where the work had its New York debut on Wednesday, someone cooks enough pancakes for everyone. The extraordinary plenitude on offer is mental. This is high entertainment with no empty calories.In part, it’s an installation, with buttons to push and knobs to turn. There are exhibits controlled by coin, typewriter and stationary bicycle that generate choreography. (You can get a taste at choreographygenerator.org.) Open one box, and you find a phone connecting you to an operator who’s standing by to answer your questions. Open another, and you uncover a switch: Flip it, and you hear laughter that curdles into the sound of agony.I won’t describe everything, since much of the fun comes from discovery, but there wouldn’t be enough space in a short review anyway. “Clytigation” overflows with ideas, but it’s put together with such skill and care (programming by Satchel Spencer and Michael Theodore, video and sound by Max Bernstein) that the overload is a delight.The central action takes place in a box. Its interior is blue, so while the dancer Jadd Tank is inside it, video of him projected onto an adjoining box can — through blue-screen or chroma-key technology — insert his image into any scene: a temple in Greece, an old video game, recent music videos, famous works of art and choreography.The effect is very funny. And it’s made more so by Mr. Tank’s earnest struggle to follow the instructions given by the voice of Ms. Ellsworth, who, through holes in the box, sends him various absurd props and articles of female clothing to wear. The instructions, she explains, are meant to demonstrate protocols for eluding state surveillance. That’s a subject she knows about, she explains further, because she is Clytemnestra: Having murdered her husband, King Agamemnon, she has been branded a terrorist.Ms. Ellsworth is an excellent comedian, impersonating a slightly scatterbrained TED talk lecturer. Hiding in famous art is an amusing idea; hiding in her comedy is a sharp political sense and, better, an undercurrent of deep sadness. She suggests the terrible loneliness of someone like Edward Snowden (one of the countless figures and topics alluded to in the piece) and the grief fueling the rage and violence in Greek tragedy. Her wonderfully original work pushes all kinds of buttons.“Clytigation: State of Exception” continues through Saturday at the Chocolate Factory, 5-49 49th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens; 718-482-7069, chocolatefactorytheater.org.A version of this review appears in print on November 14, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: An Eclectic Array on Display, Along With a Helping of Pancakes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.