AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleNoah Solloway forgot to pick up the Thanksgiving turkey in Sunday night’s episode of “The Affair” — distracted by a play date with Jonathan Franzen and possibly by the charms of his abrasive but sexy book publicist, Eden.And yet there was a prize turkey present for the holiday dinner at the Solloway-Bailey residence. It was Noah himself, who, after showing up late and forgetting the bird (1) lied about hearing the heartbeat of his and Alison’s baby (2) lied about the dead-Alison ending of his now published book, saying that his editor Harry made him do it (3) probably lied when he told Alison that he wanted the baby, given that the news of her pregnancy was what led him to change the ending of his book.This all happened in the episode’s first half, which was an Alison chapter. The lies continued in the second half, which was Cole’s. The angsty Cole, presumably missing Alison on the holiday, told his new girlfriend Luisa that he was going to join his estranged family for dinner, then told his brother Scotty that he was joining Luisa’s family in Queens. What he really did was to go into Montauk, buy Noah’s book and start reading it, underlining as he went.Cole is the show’s repository of nobility, however, so — in a development that seemed to stretch the limits of time and traffic — he ended up attending both dinners. He surprised his own family by showing up and then, in a notably unfestive move, reading them passages from Noah’s book that he thought slandered their ancestors. (Turned out he was wrong — his grandfather really was a baby killer!) Then when Whitney, the world’s most unwanted guest, made her latest hegira and showed up in Montauk in search of Scotty, noble Cole drove her back to Brooklyn. This still left him time to buy a bottle of wine and get to Queens in time for Luisa’s dinner. Maybe his cab has wings.While we’re considering temporal matters, let’s think for a moment about the Noah-Alison timeline. Feel free to correct me if I’m wrong. It’s Thanksgiving. Alison is no more than four or five months pregnant, since she’s due in April. This makes sense, because it appeared to be summer when she told Noah she was pregnant in last week’s episode. This means Noah finished his book (with the new kill-Alison ending) earlier in the summer, perhaps late in the spring. (The Yankees were already playing.) So his hardcover literary novel has made it into print in, what, six months? The publishing industry hasn’t moved that fast since Dickens was pushing his deadlines on “Oliver Twist.”Alison, in her chapter, was once again portrayed as the hapless outsider — ignored and insulted at a literary party where Noah was feted, failing to recognize a “Page Six” reporter who used her quotations in an unflattering item about Noah, clueless about dealing with the doorman at the luxury building where she and Noah now live. It was the usual strategy of belittling Alison while putting down the pretentious and ephemeral book world — Alison found solidarity with a waitress, who explained that she hadn’t read Noah’s book because “I have two jobs and a kid at home, so there’s no time to read.” To complete the portrait of Alison as sap vs. Noah as pathological liar, we learned that the new digs were being financed, in part, by the proceeds from the sale of Alison’s Montauk house.In other developments:• Max, despite making out with a drunken Jane in clear view of Alison and her mother, was surprisingly gallant at dinner, repeatedly sticking up for Alison as Eden and Noah took turns putting her down.• Alison had lies of her own. First she admitted that she had read all of Noah’s book after all, and confronted him about his decision to kill off the character based on her. Later, and more seriously, we learned that in the future story line she was possibly lying to Gottlief when she said that she left Cole’s wedding before Scotty and that she and Scotty were on good terms.• Oscar Hodges delivered a piece of videotape to Gottlief that showed Scotty and Alison appearing to argue at the Lobster Roll. The tape didn’t have sound, but Oscar claimed to have heard part of the exchange — Scotty telling Alison, “That’s our baby.” (This makes Scotty the baby’s third possible father, after Noah and Cole.) But what was he talking about? He might have meant the restaurant itself. He might have meant that it was a Lockhart baby, as in Cole Lockhart.• We learned that Cole’s traumas include not just the death of his and Alison’s young son, but the suicide of his father on Cole’s 10th birthday.• The Montauk contingent is united in parental sacrifice: Athena revealed that she was responsible for the family home passing to Alison, while Cherry Lockhart maintained that everything she had done with her family’s finances was meant to protect her sons.Best dialogue of the episode This exchange between Luisa and Cole. “I said, ‘I love you,’ and you lost your erection.” “Do you want muffins?”Advertisement