
Homeland By                     
JUDITH WARNER

NOV. 15, 2015
Season 5, Episode 7 Recap: “Oriole”This recap contains spoilers for Sunday’s episode of “Homeland.”How many of you thought twice before tuning into Homeland this evening?I approached it with some dread.The episode, fortunately enough, was devoid of suicide belts, R.P.G.s, or the all-too-familiar rat-a-tat of assault rifles. It afforded us the bitter pleasure of watching Peter Quinn defeat jihadists’ plans to wreak terror among Berlin civilians by redirecting them to Syria, where they’ll “die like dogs in the desert,” as the barely recovered, soon-to-be-embedded agent puts it to a delighted Dar Adal.But it also served up an unwelcome reminder of the porousness of post-Schengen, open-border Europe. Carrie drives from Berlin to Amsterdam and back and penetrates the Iraqi émigré community without attracting notice — though with predictably disastrous results for the happily relocated, taxi-driving Iraqi M.B.A. student who facilitates her journey. Russian agents move to and fro, and commit murder just as freely. Quinn’s team of would-be jihadists prepares to drive to Syria, encouraged by the ease with which they can cook up a cover story about construction work awaiting them in Turkey. And Carrie, Laura, and Otto Düring continue to argue over the proper limits of virtual frontiers and transparency.Advertisement“An open society,” snarls Laura, quick to take advantage of Carrie’s need for high-level tech support to make another grab at the stolen C.I.A. documents.“Have you already forgotten how many people have [expletive] died because of this?” Carrie snaps back.AdvertisementEnough said.On first view, it was hard to see this episode as anything other than a soap opera refraction of the real-life horror in Paris on Friday. Upon reflection, though, if we can step back and take the show on its own terms, there’s a lot to dig into.Notably: the finely wrought sexual tension between Allison (“Allie, Alichka”) and her Russian handler, who holds her by the waist and seems to lean in for a kiss while deploying his curiously idiomatic English in such flexible ways that he can pull Allison out of a panic attack like a skilled cognitive therapist. (“O.K., what’s the worst that can happen?”)Then, moments later, he revs her up with some career-coaching dirty talk: “Come on, don’t protest too much … Both of us know you love it.” The erotically charged back and forth, thick with James Bond-esque innuendo (“No one does it better than you”), career counseling (“My bosses actually believe you will be director one day”) and therapeutic hand-holding (“You’re projecting your anxieties, O.K.?”) is so effective that soon Allison’s got her evil little smile on again and is ready to get back in the game. (And what a game it will be! I can hardly wait to see the Carrie-Allison encounter next week.)Ivan knows full well that Ice Queen Allison is a hot mess; she may think she’s keeping her panic attacks private, but he’s clearly savvy to what lies behind the head-rubbing, nostril-pinching and self-regulatory deep breathing. Even his bizarrely inaccurate assessment — “That’s where you live, the double game. Without it you’d be a beached fish, dying of too much oxygen” — makes its own twisted sense, when you think of Allison hyperventilating, getting too much oxygen, not too little, as would a real goldfish out of water.They’re really two sides of the same coin, Allison and Carrie, the former kept afloat by the thrill of “the double game,” the latter fueled for flight, in marked contrast to her “earthbound” former boyfriend, Jonas.“You’re either born with wings or not,” says Otto, visibly sorry-but-not-too-sorry to hear of Carrie and Jonas’s breakup.AdvertisementIt’s a great line from a decidedly not-so-great man. Which leads me to my question of the week: What, really, is Düring’s game? He seemed to be coming on strong with the long seductive looks, faux-self-revelatory confessions — “But I’m not. I’m not,” he replies to Carrie’s semi-flirtatious, “You seem pretty virtuous to me” — and lordly manor furnished with what looks like the entire contents of the Pottery Barn catalog.But now he’s turned on Carrie, it seems. She’s “unbalanced,” he tells the earnest Jonas. “We won’t be renewing her contract. Of course don’t let that influence your personal relationship with her. That’s your business.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Has Düring truly turned on Carrie because she won’t sell out the C.I.A.? Is he attempting a middle school frenemy-type bait and switch on Jonas, the better to get Carrie all for himself? Why did he and Laura exchange such a meaningful look when Carrie and Gabehcuod discussed her trip to Amsterdam?All theories are welcome.And, before we go: This matter of Saul and the Israelis. This is such a bizarre and yet uncharacteristically pedestrian development — “all too stupid and theatrical for words,” to quote Dar Adal, in another context this evening — that I still suspect it may turn out to be merely a “play.”There are troubling details: Why did the men guarding Saul throw up their hands when the Israeli commandos burst into the elevator? Why was his ostensible capture so seamless? Would a man like Saul really “defect?”All questions of internal logic and character motivation aside, it seems unlikely to me that the show would trade so grossly in stereotypes about American Jews’ potentially traitorous divided loyalties. Or is this exactly what Homeland’s creators want us to think?Judith Warner, a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine, is the author, most recently, of “We’ve Got Issues: Children and Parents in the Age of Medication.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »