AdvertisementSupported byThe Walking DeadBy Jeremy EgnerWe saw a new romance blossom and a cherished one torn asunder on Sunday as “The Walking Dead” finally wrapped up the great walker drive of 2015, cutting the herd loose to … what? Cool their rotting heels on the highway? Ease on down the road? It wasn’t totally clear but there wasn’t time to ponder it. Because no sooner had Daryl, Sasha and Abraham left the zombies to their own devices than they were being shot at by unknown enemies. In a flash — and in classic “Walking Dead” fashion — the splinter group was splintered again, and then spent the rest of the hour trying to get back together.The new love that bloomed was between Abraham and Sasha, kindred loose cannons who see in each other the problems they need to fix within themselves. (Such a dynamic might not be the healthiest emotional cement but its bond can be strong.) They spent Sunday nesting in an office that included a pet walker in a terrarium. By episode’s end, after a reckless wrestle with an impaled zombie brought Abraham cigars, a rocket launcher and some clarity, he seemed ready to embrace the future and throw over Rosita in favor of Sasha, who seemed into it. A man can tell.The big breakup happened between Daryl and his faithful crossbow, the most enduring relationship in the show with the possible exception of Rick and Carl. It was a tough week for Daryl, who was shot at, skinned up, knocked out, tied up and shot at again, all before being robbed of his precious at gunpoint.He began the show by laying down his bike on the pavement amid gunfire before recovering enough to flee and lay it down again in the forest. Soon he was shedding his leather jacket and giving away tickets to the gun show, no doubt fulfilling some biceps screen-time clause in Norman Reedus’s contract. (Jokes, Norman. They’re just jokes.)Before long Daryl was knocked out and captured by the couple who would eventually steal his bow and who mistook him for a member of some other unpleasant sounding group in the vicinity. The couple (I didn’t catch their names) was fleeing said group and had a delicate diabetic named Tina in tow, along with Tina’s contraband insulin. Their grievances lacked specificity but the gist was their old group had offered security in exchange for an escalating series of indignities. “People will trade anything for safety,” the man said, reflecting a theme we’ve watched unfold in the increasingly Ricktatorial confines of Alexandria.This other group is more of a Wadeocracy. When the group came for its insulin, a man named Wade, who we heard but never actually saw in full, sounded like he was in charge. He might just be middle management, however — “The Walking Dead” is apparently finally ready to bring on a villain named Negan, one of the baddest bad guys in the comic books, whose arrival has been hotly anticipated by fans for awhile. Reports last week claimed the show has cast Jeffrey Dean Morgan as Negan, who will debut at the end of this season. (Here’s a Negan primer if you don’t mind potential spoilers.)It was unclear to me, someone who hasn’t read the comics, whether Team Wade, Negan and the Wolves are affiliated or enemies or what. (Those who have read them please refrain from posting spoilers, though we all know the show diverges from the books.) The ambush at the beginning of the episode seemed like it could have been intended for someone else — perhaps the woods of Northern Virginia are more crowded than we thought. Perhaps after years of zombies and mostly isolated human threats, we’re entering an era of warring post-apocalyptic city-states, something Andrew Lincoln has alluded to in interviews. (Abraham’s military misadventures and uniform modeling on Sunday could have been foreshadowing this.)For awhile it looked like Daryl the recruiter was going to draft his captors onto his side, returning to help them escape Wade and friends. Tina didn’t make it, ultimately, but seems lucky to have lasted as long as she did, based on her diabetes and general lack of survival skills. All it took was one walker to open its eyes for Tina to first throw herself atop a pair of them and then roll over to offer a better biting angle on her neck. The other woman took it pretty hard but I just sort of shrugged — I’d only known Tina for like 11 minutes.After Tina was in the ground, Daryl gave the others his Alexandria pitch. “I’m from a place where people are still like they were more or less, for better or worse,” he said. It didn’t work. Soon the scrawny couple was taking his bike and bow, though one suspects that the separation between Daryl and his signature weapon will be temporary. The robbers don’t seem long for this world, something Daryl himself suggested as they rode off on his bike.“We’re sorry,” the woman said.“You’re gonna be,” he responded.All that was left was for Daryl to commandeer a fuel truck and go pick up Abraham and Sasha, and for the series to give us its standard episode-closing cliffhanger. “Help!” someone warbled over the walkie talkie. Any guesses who it was?• So it seems like Rosita’s about to be back on the market, right? (I assume this was the “stuff” Sasha told Abraham he had “to take care of.”) That could explain the subtle tender moment she and Spencer shared last week at the lookout post. Circumstantial Instagram evidence supports this theory. (Via the account of Christian Serratos, the actress who plays Rosita.)• I enjoyed Abraham and Sasha reminiscing about the cocktail party at Deanna’s place last season. “You had the time of your life,” he said, referring to Sasha’s freakout. Those kinds of callbacks are minor things but they make the show’s world feel more lived-in and real.• So Abraham spends the episode spoiling to kill a walker and then, when he has one on a pole waiting for him, opts to grapple with it instead? I get that it was a symbolic interlude but it didn’t make much narrative sense — wouldn’t it be easier to remove a rocket launcher from a zombie that wasn’t fighting you? Then again, the universe gave him the weapon anyway, so what do I know?Advertisement