
The Leftovers By                     
JEN CHANEY

NOV. 15, 2015
Kevin Garvey is not dead. Virgil probably isn’t either, not permanently.These assessments may seem off-base given what happens at the end of this week’s episode of “The Leftovers.” To recap: In an effort to erase his Patti Levin hallucinations, Kevin drinks a glass of poison, so he can temporarily die and cleanse himself. Virgil, who had promised to revive Kevin with an epinephrine shot, doesn’t administer the shot. Kevin convulses, then croaks. Virgil shoots himself in the head. Then Michael, Virgil’s grandson, drags Kevin’s lifeless body out of his grandfather’s trailer.These events seemingly leave little room for debate. Both men seem really, most sincerely dead. But this is “The Leftovers,” and based on what this strange, dark yet revelatory hour of the HBO drama tells us, Kevin will come back from this. Most likely, Virgil will, too.Damon Lindelof and Patrick Somerville, who co-wrote this episode, pack an awful lot of information into the two encounters between Kevin and Virgil, who we now know is the abusive father of John Murphy. (Clues to that abusiveness: Virgil refers to his “foul machinery below the waist” and also says he “hurt John a long time ago,” while Patti later flat-out calls Virgil a pedophile.) But which information implies the two will resurrect?The fact that Virgil has resurrected before. As Virgil tells it, after he was shot by John, he returned from death cleansed of sin. Which explains what John meant in “Axis Mundi” when he said of his attempted murder charge, “I didn’t try hard enough.” It also explains why John is such an anti-believer; he can’t abide the idea that God would save the man who caused him such pain. (Knowing that John may have been the victim of abuse also sheds some light on why John previously got so irked when Matt refused to admit he raped Mary.)AdvertisementAs previously noted, Virgil’s name evokes “The Divine Comedy.” In that epic poem, Virgil is Dante’s spiritual guide through hell and purgatory, a journey that eventually leads Dante to Earthly Paradise, a.k.a. the Garden (Jardin?) of Eden. Virgil says more than once in this episode that he needs to be Kevin’s “guide” to the other side and back.AdvertisementThe fact that Kevin has returned from the brink before, too. Turns out on the night Evie disappeared, Kevin visited Virgil, then tried to “cross over,” which that cinder block anchored to Kevin’s ankle when he awoke post-earthquake. The fact that he didn’t die “means you’ve got somebody looking out for you, or you’ve got yourself a most powerful adversary,” Virgil says, using the phrase that gives this episode its title. So who is Kevin’s ally or adversary? Patti seems too obvious. Perhaps it’s his true other half, someone who both looks out for and works against him: Kevin Garvey Sr.All this evidence suggests that Kevin (and presumably Virgil) will become the equivalent of the bird in Erika’s shoe box. My guess is that Chief Garvey will be dead for three days, then re-emerge, which means poor Jill will be stuck at home with Laurie, whose path has finally led to Miracle.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“A Most Powerful Adversary,” while a perfectly good episode of “The Leftovers,” feels like a slight comedown after the perfectly pitched ones that preceded it. Perhaps that’s because it forces us to spend so much time with Kevin, who, let’s be honest, can be a major drag. That’s no knock on Justin Theroux, who keeps Kevin’s sweaty, addled haze grounded in recognizable reality. Maybe it’s because he’s so thoroughly defined by his mania this season, but Kevin just feels more one-dimensional than he has before.As a prism through which to understand the broader themes in “The Leftovers,” though — themes such as logic versus faith — Kevin remains key. During his hotel room conversation with Laurie, she tells him he’s psychotic, like his father, and that what he really needs to make Patti evaporate is a trip to a mental hospital and some meds. “Can I tell you about belief, Kevin?” Laurie says in a monologue that feels like a “Leftovers” mission statement. “When the mind is in emotional distress, it will grasp at any construct that makes it feel better. After the 14th, the whole world needed to feel better. We were all in emotional distress. So that made us susceptible to false belief.” Eventually, she concludes: “There is no Patti, Kevin. There is only you.”At first, Kevin seems to agree, asking for her help in a way that suggests he plans to head straight for the psych ward. But once Nora says she’ll come back if Kevin can eradicate his Patti flashes, he’s on his way toward Virgil and divine intervention. (It’s interesting how Kevin’s relationship roles are reversed this week. Nora leaves him, instead of the other way around, and Kevin finally gets to ditch Laurie, so he can seek spiritual clarity.)Like the Tommy huggers Laurie describes, Kevin would sooner embrace magic than deal with feelings of fear, abandonment and guilt. Be like his dad, talking to mirages in a mental institution? Nope, not going to happen. Not over Kevin’s dead body.Leftover ‘Leftovers’ Notes• Remember when that first pie showed up on the Murphys’ doorstep and Erika jokingly asked John, “Do you think someone’s trying to poison you?” Knowing that pie came from Virgil gives that question double meaning now, doesn’t it? (For “Pushing Daisies”-related reasons, it also seems perfect that Virgil is a “pie man” who can seemingly help resurrect the dead.)• A few weeks ago, Patti rickrolled us. This week, she’s trolling us, first with that comment about the wishing cup from Cairo, then by noting that the idea that Virgil, a “magical black man,” can solve all of Kevin’s problems is “borderline racist.” I’m beginning to think Patti is not just Kevin’s demon, but also the devil that sits on Lindelof’s shoulder, pre-anticipating the audience’s tendency to overanalyze and/or criticize his work. Man — can’t wait until Patti tells us what she thought of the “Lost” finale.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »