By this time next year, a new Smithsonian museum dedicated to telling the history of black Americans will be  welcoming visitors on the National Mall. This week that long-awaited institution, the National Museum of African-American History and Culture, kicks off a countdown to its opening with three days of free festivities. For the marquee event, the facade of the new building will be turned into a five-story-tall, one-block-long 3-D screen, displaying images from moments in black history for the city’s drivers, pedestrians and tourists. From Monday through Wednesday evening, from 5:30 to 9, a seven-minute-long video project organized by Stanley Nelson and co-produced by Marcia Smith, his wife, will be shown on a loop. (Mr. Nelson’s latest film, the documentary “Black Panthers: Vanguard of the Revolution,” had its premiere at Sundance and opened in theaters in September to largely favorable reviews.)The theme of this project, set up in conjunction with Quixotic Entertainment, a high-tech performance art firm in Kansas City, Mo., is “Commemorate and Celebrate Freedom,” and will feature photos from the Civil War as well as images related to the abolition of slavery and the passage of the Voting Rights Act. Mr. Nelson and Ms. Smith culled the photos from various archives, with about half coming from the Smithsonian’s collection. They said they wanted the display, situated among the other memorials commemorating the nation’s history, to show that the issues facing black Americans have been an intrinsic part of America’s story as well. “We’re not defined by hardship, but nor do we want to treat these moments as if they came out of nowhere,” Ms. Smith said. “They came out of a lot of people making a lot of sacrifices and struggling for them for a long time.”She added: “It’s about power and potential. Being a link in the chain.”Monday’s celebration will include performances by the Grammy Award-winning singer BeBe Winans; poetry readings; readings of works by historic figures like Frederick Douglass and Ella Baker; and remarks from legislators. The video — showing images of abolitionists like Sojourner Truth, black military members from the Civil War and the early civil rights movement — will be displayed on the south and west sides of the building, facing Madison Drive and the Washington Monument. The north and east sides will have special lighting and static images, which were also curated by Mr. Nelson and Ms. Smith. Construction of the $540 million museum, designed by the team of Freelon Adjaye Bond/SmithGroup, began in 2012. Its director, Lonnie G. Bunch III, said the museum is planning exhibitions that will help show not only the history of blacks in America, but also how those events help inform the issues cropping up on colleges and in towns across the country today.  “It’s important to realize that this museum is as much about today and tomorrow as it is about yesterday,” he said. “We want to use those stories to be able to contextualize, and to use those tools to understand racial violence isn’t new. Protest is the highest form of patriotism. The goal here is to make sure that we collect things that are going on.”