The feel-good comedy “Love the Coopers” seemed to arrive just in time for moviegoers weary of word events, while the ripped-from-the-headlines drama “The 33,” about the 2010 Chilean mining tragedy, may have been a little too real.Arriving in 2,603 theaters, “Love the Coopers” took in roughly $8.4 million, exceeding prerelease analyst expectations, according to Rentrak, which compiles ticketing data. It placed third, the best of several new wide-release movies. CBS Films spent less than $18 million to make that ensemble comedy.James Bond and Charlie Brown, as expected, repeated as the top two cinematic attractions. The Bond film “Spectre” was No. 1, collecting about $35.4 million, for a two-week domestic total of $130.7 million. Sony Pictures said that “Spectre” broke box office records over the weekend in China, where it arrived to $48 million in ticket sales. To compare, the previous Bond movie, “Skyfall,” took in $59 million over its entire Chinese run. “The Peanuts Movie” (2oth Century Fox) was again second in North America, collecting about $24.2 million, for a two-week total of $82.5 million.Art house ticket buyers appeared to reject Angelina Jolie Pitt’s poorly reviewed “By the Sea” as a vanity project.“The 33,” which cost Alcon Entertainment about $25 million to make, took in about $5.8 million, far below the total predicted by prerelease tracking surveys. While exit polls indicated that audiences enjoyed it, “The 33” faced hefty competition from other dramas and may have been too dark for a world unsettled by terrorist attacks in Paris.“My All American,” about a Texas football star and his battle with cancer, was spurned by the faith-based audience it pursued. Independently financed for about $20 million, it collected an estimated $1.4 million.Ms. Jolie Pitt and Brad Pitt, her husband, were in a similar boat. “By the Sea,” directed and written by Ms. Jolie Pitt and starring herself and Mr. Pitt, generated $95,444 from 10 locations, a dismal result, especially given their star power. It cost Universal Pictures at least $10 million to make. Continuing to perform well at the specialty box office were “Brooklyn,” a period romance from Fox Searchlight, and the newspaper drama “Spotlight.”A version of this article appears in print on 11/21/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Tanglewood Highlights.