AdvertisementSupported bySnapshotBy Steven McElroyOne grandfather played ukulele at family gatherings while she was growing up in Jackson, Tenn., and the other was a Hank Williams fan, so perhaps it’s unsurprising that Lauren Pritchard was evolving as a singer-songwriter before she was 10.Ms. Pritchard started playing the piano at 9 and was soon writing songs. “It’s not like they were the most profound things in the world, but I was writing them,” she said. Barely out of high school, she was cast as Ilse in the original Broadway production of “Spring Awakening.” Then came an album, “Wasted in Jackson,” in 2011.At 27, she remains busy — she is on tour promoting her recent EP, “Comeback Queen” (she’ll play at Terminal 5 in Manhattan on Nov. 18). And her well-received musical “Songbird” is at 59E59 Theaters in New York through Dec. 6. The show, a reimagining of Chekhov’s “The Seagull” set in Nashville, has a book by Michael Kimmel (“The Last Goodbye”).Ms. Pritchard chatted recently by phone from Jacksonville Beach, Fla., before a concert. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.Q. How did “Songbird” come about?A. Michael Kimmel and I met three years ago, and he had an idea of trying to reinterpret “The Seagull.” He knew that I was born and raised in Tennessee, and I’ve been in the singer-songwriter world forever, so he was like, “Do you want to go on this journey with me?”The show is your first musical and your first stab at writing country songs?I had never focused on country music, and it was a lot easier than I thought. Being raised where I was, there was music around me and like an osmosis kind of thing. I grew up in Jackson — it’s between Memphis and Nashville — and the amount of music that happens in that little triangle is pretty astonishing.The song “Wasted in Jackson” is not a sweet homage; it’s about someone who wants out. Do you still visit?I moved back around Valentine’s Day of this year. But I wrote that song at 20 about my feelings when I was 15, when I needed to leave. Dude, everyone felt that way at 15 years old.Before “Songbird,” were you familiar with Chekhov and “The Seagull?”I had seen “The Seagull” a few times. It’s one of those great stories where it’s relatable on all levels, no matter the time or space. There are so many things in the play about heartbreak and love and loss and need and lack of change, where these people just kind of never get out of their cycle. They’re just always talking but never doing, and everyone can relate to that.Can you identify with the frustrated singer-songwriter characters?I would go so far as to say there’s probably a little piece in each of those people, each of those characters, that I can relate to in some way.You released “Wasted in Jackson” as Lauren Pritchard, but now you perform as LOLO. Why?When I put out that album as Lauren Pritchard, I really wanted to put it out as LOLO, but the label I was with at the time wouldn’t let me because I had recently been in “Spring Awakening,” and they had marketing ulterior motives, which was really annoying. For me it’s like Lauren Pritchard does all this writing and co-writing and creating, and then LOLO screams at people onstage for her personal agenda.Do you intend to always balance both careers?My whole life, I was always dancing, I was always singing, I was always writing, I was always performing, I was always — I stage managed at the theater. I was interested in it all, and I never knew any limitation. It’s weird when you get into the industry, and they’re like “Well, no you can only do one thing,” and I’m like “Well that sucks, I want to do all of it!”Advertisement