AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe CoscarelliOn his first full-length album, “Riot Boi,” the New York rapper Le1f is playful, painfully clever, aloof, outraged and deadly serious, often in the span of a few lines. “Rats and roaches running all over the hood in the daytime,” he begins on Track 1, “but I still don’t see none of that in their raps, their rhymes or their headlines.” Topical issues covered across the 12 songs include homophobia, misogyny, transgender rights and Black Lives Matter. “You just wanna ignore it all, don’t you?” Le1f scoffs. “Basic.”Yet the performer, born Khalif Diouf, resists tokenism, citing the news media’s overreliance on “super-reductive buzzwords.” “How do you feel about being called a gay rapper?” he rattled off as a mock interview question one recent afternoon in the courtyard of a Manhattan hotel. “I don’t mind talking about gay things at all,” he continued. “I don’t mind talking about queerness. But I do mind not talking about my music.”Le1f, 26, is trained in ballet and modern dance, self-taught in the production of clanging electronic beats and ever improving as a dexterous M.C. On “Riot Boi” (Terrible Records), which follows a run of experimental mixtapes and viral videos, he channels a high-low mix of fashion, sex and politics. There are realistic boasts — “I’m at the deli gettin’ $7 sandwiches/My room’s a mess ’cause designers keep on giving me gifts” — and the raised expectations that come with education and self-confidence. “If you don’t get intersections, then get out of my section,” he warns. Less brash in person and quick to laugh, Le1f detailed the practice and research it took to create the album, which he had been imagining since adolescence. These are excerpts from the conversation.Growing up in New York, what were you listening to?A. I was pretty much only listening to Aaliyah, Missy Elliott, Timbaland and their collaborations. That was my favorite style. Kelis and Star Trak productions were major for me. And then pretty much Z100 [WHTZ, 100.3 FM] and Kylie Minogue. My mother listened to a lot of amazing stuff, and I stole all her CDs. My mom was trained in opera singing. There was a lot of Phyllis Hyman, Patti LaBelle. I let her keep those CDs, but I took the Sade for sure.Who were your blueprints when you first moved from dance and producing to rapping?Amanda Blank’s verse on the Spank Rock song “Bump.” When that verse happened, the only other fast rapper I’d heard was Twista. Her clarity and sassiness were just really inspiring to me. I figured if I could rap that verse, I could rap any other flow. It was such an articulation and trick-of-the-tongue situation. That became my focus, which is why I was always rapping super fast.Did you make a concerted effort to get better at melody for this album? Was it self-taught?Oh my God, I wish it wasn’t. I’m not a good singer, still. I do the best I can on this record, and I’m still trying to find even more things I can do with my voice. I’m the only person in my family who can’t sing. Everyone was raised in the church or in Carnegie Hall. I was the one put in ballet class. I just really want to push myself to be that consummate performer. I want to be able to make anything that I feel and hear in my head — more tools, more colors of paint.Why did you decide to bring more political and social issues to the front on “Riot Boi”?This is the album that I wanted to make since I was 16. I was a hell-of angsty teenager. I literally had an accumulating list of topics that I wanted to discuss on my mythical first record — Islamophobia, transphobia, kleptomania, weed. Very real things from my experience as a New Yorker. I didn’t feel like I was educated enough to talk about all the actual political issues — that’s why it took me two years to write. I felt like I wasn’t smart enough. But you just make a decision, especially in this day and age when information is so accessible, whether it be on the Internet or through people you can actually speak to. So I just had to really dig deep into the information about struggles that maybe I don’t have.Who are your models for incorporating that into your music?M.I.A. and Dev Hynes. I love how Dev has come through so many different styles, and I really appreciate his soft, aggressive blackness. You definitely hear his message so clear, and it seems relentless, but he also doesn’t give any of the angry-black-man tropes that make it easy for people to write it off in the way they do Kanye West. In the same right, I love how militant M.I.A. is. Being a small-framed, gorgeous brown woman and being actually so stern and well educated to the point where you would say she’s being rude — whereas if it was a man, maybe you wouldn’t — I really respect that.How would you describe the story that you’re telling on this album?You’re feeling cute about yourself, and so you go with your girls to the bar. There’s some guy hitting on you, but he’s kind of a chauvinistic racist — the average night out in New York. So you’re just over it and you try to leave, but cabs don’t stop for you. And then you’re just sad in your room, smoking weed. But you feel way more confident, because you didn’t have sex with that racist guy. [Laughs.] It’s like: “Oh, you think you’re good enough for me? Let me tell you my struggle, and then I’m gonna go home.”Advertisement