Season 2, Episode 1Somebody dies, sometime, somewhere on a dark and lonely road. That’s pretty much what we know about the mystery that both has and hasn’t happened yet in “The Affair,” which started its second season on Sunday night. So we won’t worry too much about it in these recaps, since we’d probably just get it wrong anyway, but we encourage any and all speculation in the comments. All correct guesses will be noted if and when Sarah Treem and her staff of writers spell it out for us.As we all know, the series presents its story — adultery and intrigue, shuttling between Brooklyn and Montauk — in a he-said, she-said fashion, jumping between the perspectives of the Brooklyn writer Noah Solloway (Dominic West) and his lover Alison (Ruth Wilson), a Montauk waitress. And it proceeds along at least two timelines, before and after the roadside death for which Noah, in a future timeline, has been arrested.For Season 2 the show shifts to he-said, she-said times two, with the addition of the perspectives of Helen (Maura Tierney), Noah’s wife (ex-wife in the future), and Cole (Joshua Jackson), Alison’s husband (future status unknown). It also adds a major new location, a house along the Hudson in Cold Spring, N.Y., to which Noah has retreated in the present time line while he revises his second novel and goes through divorce mediation with Helen.The premiere begins with Noah dreaming about driving down a dark road, with a ghostly — and seemingly female — figure walking ahead of him. That was confusing on two counts, first because we’ve been led to believe that the victim in the future hit-and-run is a man (Scott Lockhart, Alison’s brother-in-law), and second because Noah woke up into the present, staring at an empty screen in the idyllic house found for him by his publisher-editor, Harry. Apparently Noah’s somewhat meager roster of talents includes seeing the future.We’re seeing the situation from Noah’s point of view and it’s not pretty. Harry doesn’t like what Noah’s done with the ending of the novel, changing it from a murder to, in Noah’s words, “two people sitting down with an unimaginable secret between them.” (More prescience? Or do I just really misunderstand the timeline?)Next is a stop in Brooklyn, where Noah has made an appointment to pick up his stuff from the house where he used to live with Helen and their four children. Waiting for him is Helen’s frightening mother, Margaret (Kathleen Chalfant), there to make sure he doesn’t take more than a few suitcases. Angry (even in his own telling), he storms back into the house and gathers dishes, books and artwork. He discovers that his older son has been hiding in his room the whole time, and learns that their planned trip to a baseball game is off because Margaret has scheduled an appointment for the boy with a therapist. Out on the sidewalk, he runs into his younger son, who’s happy to see him until Noah, seeing himself in the role of the truth-telling realist, informs him that yes, his parents are getting divorced. The boy promptly slugs Noah, bloodying his nose, and runs into the house.Next up in Noah’s day of sorrows: divorce mediation, with a mediator (cleverly played, in two very different performances, by Jeremy Shamos) who in this accounting is a chirping buffoon. “You have chosen to be divorced in a humane way,” he says, citing his three years of law school and calling the process “easy peasy.” This was easily the best scene in the episode, because the wonderful Ms. Tierney, who enlivens the show every time she appears, got to play Helen from Noah’s perspective, shifting seamlessly from child-like to condescending to shrewish. It was also clear that she was still, in Noah’s eyes, desirable, despite all the bad water under the bridge. Moving quickly through the question of their assets — she keeps the house (it’s hers anyway), he keeps the profits from his book — they arrived at the question of custody, and how Noah, with no home of his own in the city, would be able to host the children if given equal time. Helen’s real agenda came out as they left the session, when she told Noah “I don’t want her near my kids.” Let’s jump ahead here to the same scene, repeated later from Helen’s point of view. The mediator was now curt, matter of fact and inclined to identify with Noah. Noah, who saw himself wearing a suit, was now in a leather jacket and casual shirt. Helen, whom Noah saw in a nondescript pant suit, was now in the sexy outfit she’d worn out the night before. (More about that later.) Helen was now solicitous about Noah’s custody issues, offering to help him pay for a place in the city, but her Noah was an angry, loose cannon, yelling that he was done taking money from her parents. Crucially, when Helen asked whether he was living with Alison, this Noah denied it. In Noah’s telling, when asked the same question, he simply refused to answer.Jumping back to Noah’s memory, we see that in Helen’s account, he was a liar. When he gets back to the Cold Spring house that night, Alison is waiting for him, cooking dinner like a domestic angel, professing her happiness, dancing with him on the dock. (When she protests that’s there’s no music, Noah, a corny romantic in his own P.O.V., points to the sky, where the birds are singing.) Noah’s bad day ends on crescendo of contentment as he takes his Williams College canvas chair out to the end of the dock and pops open a beer, but then the camera swings to the right and there’s an immense storm cloud hanging over the Hudson. You can’t believe the show would stoop to something so obvious, but hey — with the unreliable-narrator setup they can basically get away with anything. It’s Noah who’s imagining that foreboding cloud, not the actual writers.Part two begins with a title saying “Part Two” but no name. It’s a bit of bait and switch — we see a room-service tray and clothes on the floor, the edible and wearable detritus of a hotel rendezvous, and we’re conditioned from Season 1 to think of this as an Alison scene. But then the camera moves over to the bed and we see Noah’s best friend, Max (Josh Stamberg), in bed with Helen. Not until then does the name “Helen” flash onscreen. This is a Helen we haven’t seen before — naked, for one thing, and engaging in loud sex. But it’s really the same Helen. She’s not making any of the noise, and she clearly can’t believe where she’s found herself after an evening of drinking. Max, in her eyes, is a silly braggart, telling a room-service attendant “I just bought this hotel” and rubbing himself suggestively with her foot.Later we see Helen (meaning Helen sees herself) crying in the shower, and on her way to the mediation she stops in Washington Square Park to vape some marijuana — throughout the episode we see her anesthetizing herself with weed and wine. After the meeting with Noah, she picks up her youngest daughter at dance class, where she overhears a catty mom gossiping about her and Noah’s problems. At home, her younger son is sobbing after his conversation with Noah and her older daughter is in a screaming match with Margaret over a college application essay. (She wants to write about the Season 1 incident when Cole pulled a gun.) In a cracked reflection of Noah’s escape back to Cold Spring, Helen finds some solace at the end of her horrible day. Showing up at a benefit Margaret has forced her to attend, she finds Max there, obviously invited by Margaret. He’s still overbearing and embarrassing in her eyes, but at least he’s there, and he slips her a marijuana lozenge, which is more than Noah’s doing these days. When he brings her home and kisses her on her stoop, she’s not happy but she doesn’t look unhappy, either. However, Brooklyn is getting that same storm that was moving in along the Hudson, and we last see Helen listening to the thunder and rain. That little bit of tidy symbolism has to be blamed on the show’s writers, I’m afraid.We’ve left out the future story line, which served as a postscript to both Noah’s and Helen’s stories. Noah saw himself in a holding cell with Detective Jeffries (Victor Williams), who pretended to be sympathetic and encouraged Noah to cop a plea — “They can’t even prove you actually killed him,” the detective said, specifying that the victim is a “him” but not giving a name. (This presumably was happening immediately after Noah’s arrest in the Season 1 finale — he was wearing the same shirt.) Helen’s telling picked up immediately afterward, when she arrived at the jail with a high-powered lawyer (Richard Schiff) who called her his associate. She was no longer Noah’s wife, but she was, much to Noah’s surprise, paying for the lawyer, something he said he couldn’t afford (even though he was arrested in what looked like an expensive apartment he was sharing with Alison). Let us know what you thought of the season premiere of “The Affair,” and Helen’s debut as a narrator.