By ZACHARY WOOLFENOV. 11, 2015
DETROIT — The composer Tod Machover sat on the floor in a circle of third graders one recent morning at the brightly colored, mural-filled Detroit Achievement Academy. He spoke with them about their city and asked for their help with his new piece, “Symphony in D,” which the Detroit Symphony Orchestra will play for the first time on Friday, Nov. 20.“What do you think Detroit is going to look like when you’re in high school?” a teacher asked the students, guiding them in a brainstorming exercise.“You mean if things don’t change?” one replied.A boy in a black sweatshirt raised his hand. “I think it would look torn down,” he said. “And we have to fix it up.”Detroit’s difficulties — it emerged from the largest municipal bankruptcy in American history less than a year ago — are by this point well known. So are those of the venerable Detroit Symphony, which has experienced the same financial pressures as many arts institutions and was forced to cancel its 2010-11 season because of a bruising musicians’ strike.AdvertisementBut the ensemble is slowly finding its way again. After posting a $5.3 million deficit, on a budget of $30.4 million, for the fiscal year 2010, just before the strike, it has broken even for the past three years. Struggling to fill the 2,000 seats in Orchestra Hall, its acoustically distinguished home downtown, it has tried to make a virtue of necessity, refocusing its energies on the communities where many of its patrons live. This means fewer concerts at the hall and more in smaller spaces — churches, high schools and community centers — in the suburbs.AdvertisementThe orchestra live-streams many of its programs online, at no charge, and recently began offering a service called DSO Replay, giving access to dozens of archived concerts to those who donate $50 or more per year. (The Berlin Philharmonic also does this, beautifully, but Detroit is the only major ensemble in this country to do so.) Leonard Slatkin, its music director since 2008, has made the orchestra a national leader in programming new and modern American music; premieres this season include substantial works by artists young and old, male and female, white and Latino.The last contract negotiation with the musicians was completed months ahead of schedule and by all accounts cordially. But the ensemble is still a recovering organization in a recovering metropolis. So “Symphony in D,” an explosion of energy, found sounds, live-music snippets and reminiscences featuring spoken and played interpolations from a range of Detroit artists, holds out the promise of healing, not just for its city, but also for the orchestra performing it at Orchestra Hall.“There’s an opportunity and an energy and quite a lot of hazard about what this will all become,” Mr. Machover said, reflecting on Detroit’s future. “And having a project that is a kind of forum for people to be able to express themselves and to meet each other is wonderful. It can’t possibly be the ultimate story of Detroit, but it will allow people to rally around a narrative of their city.”Mr. Machover, a professor of music and media at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, occupies an unusual niche in the classical world. Best known for technologically advanced compositions like “Death and the Powers,” a 2010 opera featuring a chorus of robots, he has lately been at work on what he calls “city symphonies.” Built around clips of everyday sounds — some recorded by him, some submitted by residents — these resolutely optimistic pieces offer a representation, or at least an intriguing impression, of the places they are made in and for.An official from the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation was impressed by Mr. Machover’s “Festival City,” performed at the Edinburgh International Festival in Scotland in 2013, and sought to bring him to Detroit for his first city symphony in the United States. In the Detroit Symphony, which under Mr. Slatkin had become an eager performer of American music, there was a natural partner, and the foundation provided the orchestra a $315,000 grant to support the work’s creation.Mr. Machover’s process of accumulating recorded sound elements has been labor-intensive but straightforward in places like Edinburgh; Toronto; Perth, Australia; and Lucerne, Switzerland, where he created “A Symphony for Lucerne” as the composer in residence at this summer’s Lucerne Festival. “Toronto is a great city, and Lucerne is a great city,” he said. “But they’re not cities on the precipice of great change.”Detroit, on the other hand, plainly is, and demanded a different, more complex approach. As Mr. Machover made visits here over the past year, he felt he had to include not just disembodied sounds — a car engine revving, the crowd roaring at a Detroit Tigers game — but also actual people, some of them recent transplants but many who had been here for decades amid the city’s slide into depopulation and financial ruin. It gradually became clear that the work needed to function as something like a collective ritual, with live performers in the mix, playing alongside the orchestra, as well as prerecorded excerpts.Advertisement“Having those people there will say something about the spirit of Detroit that the music can’t say itself,” he said. “I’ve never done anything quite like this. It’s one thing to collect sound samples, but to have all these people onstage is very different.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So the unflappably genial Mr. Machover has become as much a herder as a composer. On a visit in October, less than a month before the premiere, he drove from neighborhood to neighborhood, patiently explaining to the participants the roles that they’d be playing in the 30-minute work.The Detroit Achievement Academy students had created music using Hyperscore, the sound-visualization software developed by Mr. Machover’s group at M.I.T. The residents of American House, an assisted-living development, spoke about the sounds of a Detroit now lost to history, from Henry Ford’s first engine to the implosion of the old Hudson’s department store downtown when it was demolished in 1998. Mr. Machover negotiated about rehearsal time with the choir at St. Joseph Chaldean Catholic Church, and elicited electronic squeals and creaks from students in a basement computer lab at YouthVille, an after-school center. All will have their moment onstage during the performance.“Symphony in D” is a formidable undertaking, but it fits in naturally with the Detroit Symphony’s orientation toward the new, led by Mr. Slatkin and the orchestra’s general manager and artistic administrator, Erik Rönmark, who is also a saxophonist with the ensemble New Music Detroit. The orchestra’s 2015-16 season punches far above its weight, with premieres of substantial works by Mohammed Fairouz, Aaron Jay Kernis, Sarah Kirkland Snider, Gabriela Lena Frank and Mr. Slatkin himself (“Kinah,” to commemorate what would have been his father’s 100th birthday).Those are in addition to older works by the often-overlooked modern American masters Jacob Druckman, William Bolcom, Walter Piston and William Schuman. The 1996 Trumpet Concerto by the “Star Wars” composer John Williams is in the mix, and during Mr. Machover’s visit the orchestra played with cheerful clarity in the American premiere of Nico Muhly’s swirling Viola Concerto.It’s an approach to new music with an ambition and density generally associated with wealthier titans of the field like the Los Angeles and New York Philharmonics. While no orchestra these days can afford to abandon crowd-pleasing standards, Detroit and Mr. Slatkin handle the combination better than almost any.“He’s been here long enough and earned the right, if you will, and the trust to create the right balance,” said Anne Parsons, the orchestra’s president and chief executive.It helps that Mr. Slatkin’s taste is broadly accessible; though they can be thorny, the works he programs tend to grab listeners emotionally, and he offers helpful introductions from the podium. “I’m thinking of an audience hearing the piece for the first time,” he said over breakfast. “Are they going to be able to absorb the content of the work?”Shannon Orme, a clarinetist, put it another way. “We’re doing more pieces that at least half of the audience might connect with,” she said with a laugh.AdvertisementFew pieces are as primed for connection with their audience as “Symphony in D.” “It starts crazy,” Mr. Machover explained to the third graders. “Then it calms down, and it’s a good time to tell stories.” That isn’t a half-bad description of the structure of the work, which begins with jittery, muscular activity and the sounds of factories and cars — the stuff of the earlier city symphonies.But in the fourth movement, the orchestra grows quiet as the young students, the older Detroiters, the spoken-word artist Marsha Music, and the writer Tonya Matthews, who moved to Detroit in 2013 to become president and chief executive of the Michigan Science Center, take the stage to share memories, dreams and poems. The fifth movement raises the volume again, starting with a techno-funk rhythm from the duo Adult and bringing in a teenage electric-bass virtuoso, an African drummer, an indie-rock guitarist and others, all improvising together in a raucous finale.“It’s minor, but it keeps trying to go to major,” Mr. Machover explained to the St. Joseph choir members about the key of the melodic kernel in that bursting final movement.One of them smiled and said, “That’s just like Detroit.”A picture last Sunday with an article about the Detroit Symphony Orchestra was published in error. It showed the Detroit Opera House —not Orchestra Hall, which is the Detroit Symphony Orchestra’s home.A version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2015, on Page AR16 of the New York edition with the headline: Sounds of an Orchestra’s City.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.