
Fargo By                     
SCOTT TOBIAS

NOV. 16, 2015
The turf war between the Gerhardts and the Kansas City syndicate — incidentally, the Kansas City Syndicate sounds like another prog-rock band — continued to escalate in “Rhinoceros,” an action-packed hour that seems of a piece with last week’s episode, which found the show shifting to backstretch payoff mode. It even begins on the Blumquist’s porch, reversing the angle of last week’s final shot of Luverne policemen coming for Ed.The Fargoverse has officially descended into chaos, with no more mysteries over what happened at the Waffle Hut, no more negotiations between rival mobsters and everyone mostly clear about who’s done what and what needs to be done. To quote Mike Milligan quoting Lewis Carroll’s “Jabberwocky,” “the vorpal blade went snicker-snack” tonight.Two parallel scenes linger. There’s Hank on the Blumquists’ front porch, standing firm against Dodd, Hanzee and an overwhelming army of Gerhardt goons. Then there’s his son-in-law Lou, stepping out in front of the Luverne police station, standing firm against Bear and another overwhelming army of Gerhardt goons. “Fargo” has its share of moral ambiguity, but this is pure white hat-black hat stuff, with two incorruptible lawmen refusing to surrender or make any compromises that might spare their lives. And Lou knows it, too. He’s seen the movie before. “This kind of thing didn’t work in Westerns,” he warns Bear. “And it’s not gonna work now.”The specific Western he probably had in mind was the Howard Hawks classic “Rio Bravo,” starring John Wayne as a small-town sheriff who recruits a motley bunch of fighters to repel an outlaw’s siege to bust his brother out of jail. Three years before the Solversons squared off against the Gerhardts, John Carpenter updated “Rio Bravo” as the urban thriller “Assault on Precinct 13,” which more closely approximates the image of Lou, the staff and the inmates bunkering down in the dark, ready to fend off the invasion. “Fargo” doesn’t follow through on the showdown, thanks to Lou’s clever plan to have Karl intervene as Charlie’s self-appointed defense attorney, but the situation is the same. The Solversons are forever John Wayne in “Rio Bravo,” forced to use their courage and wits to defend their way of life from the scoundrels who threaten to destroy it.AdvertisementThe movie “Fargo” ends with Marge shaking her head over the evil that men do, wondering how such senseless carnage could happen over “a little bit of money.” But “Fargo” the TV show has moved more toward representations of good and evil in the abstract, which accounts for why it paid homage to Westerns on Monday. Though no one in Season 2 is a black hole of Billy Bob Thornton’s caliber in Season 1 — his Lorne Malvo more closely resembles the Anton Chigurh of the Coens’ “No Country For Old Men” — there’s a similar opacity to characters like Mike Milligan and the Kitchen brothers, who are utterly lacking in empathy. They may be cartoon bad guys, representing the corporate chill of a gangland Walmart, but the dynamic between them and the Solversons is one of stark contrasts. They do not belong in the wintry idyll of the Upper Midwest. And it’s up to Hank and Lou to expel them.AdvertisementAs much as “Rhinoceros” devotes itself to the battle of wills between incomprehensible evil and stalwart decency, it finds room to clarify the domestic enigma that is Peggy Blumquist. When Hank finally, at long last, gets Peggy to accept (if not openly confess) certain facts they both know to be true, her motives start to clear up a little. The immense stacks of health and beauty magazines, the Lifespring seminar she still insists on attending, the eagerness to leave a house that’s “like a museum of the past”: These are all examples of Peggy’s trying to wriggle out from her prescribed roles as wife and future mother and see if she can stake out some territory for herself. Hitting Rye Gerhardt with her car was the first push of a door that is closing on her dreams, a negation she’s so desperate to prevent, it makes her seem and occasionally act like a crazy person. (“A little touched,” as Hank puts it.) Ed’s being in jail bothers Peggy; Peggy’s being trapped in Luverne indefinitely bothers her more.On a lighter note, the show finally makes integral use of Nick Offerman’s Karl Weathers, a Korean War vet turned boozy advocate for the common man. (That phrase, “the common man,” nods in the direction of another Coen brothers movie, “Barton Fink,” whose hero professed a similar desire to give voice to the voiceless.) Karl’s mistrust of big government (and taste for brown liquor) brings him in line with Offerman’s beloved Ron Swanson character on “Parks and Recreation,” and his status as Luverne’s only defense attorney gives him ample opportunities to fight against it. Representing Ed and Charlie on the same night cleaves poor Karl in two: He’s comfortable defending Ed, the poor “wretch,” from the tyranny of law enforcement, but defending Charlie brings him into the fold. He’s no longer on the sidelines at Veterans Hall, pontificating over drinks to anybody who will listen. He has to join the fight.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.• There’s a difference between stylized dialogue and words that no character should say under any circumstance. We get two of the latter in rapid succession from Betsy. First: “It feels like the top might spin off the globe these days and take you along with it.” Then, after Lou makes reference to Vietnam: “Coulda saved a lot of lives if wives and mothers from both sides came and dragged their men home by the ear.”• I’d like to dig into the style of the second season more in future recaps, but tonight finally made sensible work of split-screen by showing the Gerhardts negotiating for Charlie in front of the police station alongside stealthier efforts to get Ed around the side and back.• Dodd trying to chasten the much larger Bear by belting him in front of the other men (“strap or buckle?”) speaks to a confused sibling dynamic. As Otto’s self-appointed successor, Dodd feels obligated to bring Bear in line, but Bear’s submitting to the beating is fascinating. They’re grown men and brothers, but they have to uphold the hierarchy and masculine codes of the Gerhardt crime family.• It would be something if “Kiss my grits” were the last words Dodd ever heard.• Floyd suspects Simone is double-dealing, but makes a smart appeal to her granddaughter’s desire for feminine empowerment: “We all got a role to play. You need to take my example, be a leader. This is our time. No such thing as men’s work and women’s work anymore ...”• The closing credits song, a ’70s-rock cover of “I Am a Man of Constant Sorrow,” gives the hat tip to the Coens’ “O Brother, Where Art Thou.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »