The archive of The New York Review of Books has been sold to the New York Public Library, which praised the material in an announcement as providing “unique evidence of intellectual life in the United States in the second half of the 20th century.”The archive, which totals some 3,000 linear feet of material, includes extensive correspondence between the editors Robert Silvers and Barbara Epstein, who founded the magazine in 1963, and a roster of contributors including Susan Sontag, Oliver Sacks, Robert Lowell, Mary McCarthy and Noam Chomsky. The library did not disclose the cost of the purchase, which it said would be covered by a private donation.Some of the material sheds light on the political coverage that became the magazine’s calling card in the Vietnam War era, like correspondence between Mr. Chomsky and Mr. Silvers assessing the accuracy of sources reporting the rise of the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia. In a telegram, Mr. Lowell offered a prose poem about Lt. William Calley, the United States Army officer who was found guilty of massacring Vietnamese civilians in My Lai, declaring: “I can’t tag this to a review comma but it seems meant for The New York Review of Books period.”Other documents give a window into the magazine’s painstaking style of disputation. In a nine-page letter from 1979 headed “not for publication,” Henry Kissinger took issue with a review by the political scientist Stanley Hoffmann of his book “White House Years.” After Mr. Kissinger sent a shorter note suggesting that silence equaled agreement, Mr. Silvers responded with a 20-page note.Connoisseurs of schadenfreude may enjoy poring over unpublished material that was rejected by the magazine, including submissions from luminaries like Joseph Brodsky, Nadine Gordimer and Norman Mailer.And then there were the writers who turned down the editors.When asked to contribute something about the suicide of Primo Levi, Saul Bellow demurred, writing: “While I’m not exactly King Lear, I’ve had more than the normal share of family trouble in the past months … I can’t find it in me just now to write on so distressing a subject … Things have been singularly nasty lately.”Mr. Silvers, who has been the magazine’s sole editor since Ms. Epstein’s death in 2006, is a trustee of the library. Funds for the purchase were provided by Roger Alcaly, a hedge fund manager and economist who has written for the magazine, and his wife, Helen Bodian, a photographer.A version of this article appears in print on 11/18/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: New York Review Archive Goes to Public Library.