AdvertisementSupported byJane the VirginBy Pilot ViruetOne of the most interesting elements of “Jane the Virgin” is the pacing. It’s always been pretty quick — after all, it is mimicking the style of a telenovela — but in a way that never confuses viewers or feels rushed. “Chapter Twenty-Eight” uses this rapid-fire approach to its advantage by fast-forwarding through entire months without dropping any important story points. The episode begins the day after the events of last week, immediately reassuring us that baby Mateo is O.K. before jumping into this week’s big plots. Jane is officially starting her life with Michael — and starting graduate school — while getting closer to Rafael, even as the two disagree on finances. Petra has her hands full with Milos’s surprise grenades, Michael is on a strange road trip with Nadine, and Rogelio is trying to figure out what his future will be after his television show ends.Rogelio, once again, has the most straightforward comedic story line. He pitches a telenovela version of “Mad Men” to network executives who reluctantly agree because they know he’s just going to burn through his budget. It’s a hilarious idea (Don Juan Draper!) and a show that I would absolutely watch but, as expected, it doesn’t quite go as planned — by the end of the hour, he receives a cease-and-desist order from Matthew Weiner. It’s a cute story (I’m not sure if this plot will run through several episodes, though it’d be interesting to see where the writers go with it) and a perfect use of Rogelio. He’s a great, funny and charming character but sometimes it’s necessary for the show to put him in the background in order to focus on other characters.Take Petra, someone that I have always been a little iffy on. She’s grown on me this season as she shows the more vulnerable sides of her personality. Overwhelmed by Milos’s giant stash of grenades and her difficult pregnancy (terrible morning sickness) and the discovery that she’s having twin girls (meaning Rafael will soon have three children but, as the narrator points out, no sex), Petra actually invokes sympathy this week. And not just from the audience — Jane even agrees to put in a good word to help get Magda out of prison so Petra won’t have to face all of this on her own. For a while, things seem to be going well for Petra (even with the return of accidental-hostage Ivan). Because of this episode’s especially fast pace, we get to skip through a lot of filler and just focus on the important bits: Petra and Magda working together to get Milos sent to prison; Magda losing one hand and one eye in a grenade accident; and Magda eventually standing over Ivan’s body as he bleeds out.That brings us to Jane. She has always been concerned about how she’ll be able to navigate the tricky balance between being a mother and being a graduate student. It’s tough and things start out rocky when she shows up to class late and then is locked out of the classroom by her professor (Adam Rodriguez, one of two “Ugly Betty” alumni in the episode) after she steps out to take a call from Mateo’s pediatrician. Even with Jane’s trademark pluck and optimism, she begins to get down on herself as her grades drop, she misses Mommy and Me classes, and ultimately realizes that she’s the reason Mateo needs to wear a helmet for a few months to combat getting a “flat head” from laying on his back too much while she does homework. She’s heartbroken, which means we’re all heartbroken.It helps that Rafael is around to pick up the slack by attending the classes and doctor’s appointments that Jane is missing. I love this side of Rafael — how can anyone be #TeamMichael after this episode? — who is willing to drive up to Jane’s writers retreat to give her the charger for the breast pump she left behind. He truly loves her, even as she keeps shutting him down. But he won’t admit defeat just yet; even after a brief relationship with another woman, Rafael can’t get over Jane. He wants to be with her on both her good and bad days — and her sick days are terrible days — even though she’s still unsure. There’s a sweet Thanksgiving scene that shows how well this family can work together, and how great things could be for Jane (as a mother, a daughter, a girlfriend, a student, a writer, etc.) but, as always, things never last. The requisite cliffhanger (aside from Magda’s) involves her new graduate school friend who is using their friendship to take notes on her Solano stories for his own agenda. It looks like Jane’s about to learn that, despite her best intentions, she can’t trust everyone.Advertisement