Andrew Lloyd Webber and Alice Walker don’t have all that much in common, but Broadway seems to be smiling on both of them this fall.Mr. Lloyd Webber’s comeback musical, “School of Rock,” had a strong start on Broadway last week, grossing $928,596 in its first eight preview performances. And “The Color Purple,” a stripped-down revival of a musical based on Alice Walker’s Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, began at a similarly strong pace, grossing $690,820 in its first six previews.Although the musicals are quite different in tone and subject matter, they both benefit from strong titles, and each show was previously a popular movie. “The Color Purple” also has a movie star in its cast: Jennifer Hudson, who won an Academy Award for “Dreamgirls.”“School of Rock,” with music by Mr. Lloyd Webber, lyrics by Glenn Slater and book by Julian Fellowes, tells the story of a failing rock musician who lies his way into a job as a substitute teacher and winds up teaching his pupils about music and life. It is scheduled to open Dec. 6, featuring Alex Brightman in the role made famous by Jack Black.“The Color Purple,” with music and lyrics by Brenda Russell, Allee Willis and Stephen Bray and a book by Marsha Norman, is about the life of a young black woman in rural Georgia who endures abuse and loss as she struggles to understand love and faith. It is scheduled to open Dec. 10, starring Cynthia Erivo in the role that won LaChanze a Tony Award in the original Broadway production.Also noteworthy during the week that ended Nov. 15, according to box office numbers released by the Broadway League: “China Doll,” a new David Mamet play starring Al Pacino, continues to perform extremely well in previews. The show — which has delayed its opening to make time for rewrites — grossed $1,202,149 in just seven performances last week. The season’s latest musical hit, “On Your Feet!,” about the lives of Gloria and Emilio Estefan, brought in $1,279,611 in eight performances, its second straight week above the million-dollar mark. And despite so-so reviews, the musical “Allegiance” also saw a nice bump at the box office. The top-grossing shows last week were “Wicked,” “The Lion King” and “Hamilton.” The lowest-grossing shows were “Dames at Sea,” “Hand to God” and “Fool for Love.”A version of this article appears in print on 11/18/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: u2018School of Rocku2019 and u2018Color Purpleu2019 Rock Box Office.