The New Jersey Symphony Orchestra’s next music director will be familiar to some concertgoers in the region: the orchestra announced Monday that the role would be filled by Xian Zhang, a rising Chinese-American star who was an associate conductor at the New York Philharmonic for several years before concentrating her recent career in Europe.“This actually feels quite like a homecoming,” Ms. Zhang, 42, said in a telephone interview last week from Cardiff, Wales, where she had led a concert during a day off from Puccini’s “La Bohème,” which she is conducting in London at the English National Opera.Ms. Zhang — whose full name is pronounced she-YEN jhong — has been the music director of the Orchestra Sinfonica di Milano Giuseppe Verdi since 2009, and has been a guest conductor with a number of prestigious orchestras around the world, including the London Symphony Orchestra and the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra in Amsterdam. In New Jersey she will succeed Jacques Lacombe, who plans to step down in June after a six-year tenure with the orchestra and who will become the principal conductor of the Bonn Opera in Germany this spring. Ms. Zhang will begin her four-year contract as music director in September, but will be heard there before that: in April she will lead the orchestra, which she has conducted before, in Tchaikovsky’s Fourth Symphony and Barber’s Violin Concerto.“I’ve conducted the orchestra several times, and really enjoyed it, really enjoyed the connection with the musicians,” she said. “It feels right. I think everything fits musically, and also in terms of where my career goes, it feels like the right thing at the right moment.”Ms. Zhang was born in Dandong, China, near the North Korean border, to musical parents, and began studying the piano when she was 3. Her father, an instrument maker, built her a piano, since they were hard to come by at the end of the Cultural Revolution. “He built the shell of the piano,’’ she recalled. “He brought some hammers, the keys and hammers, and he assembled everything and painted it red, quite bright red.”As a music student she began studying conducting and, at the age of 20, made her professional debut conducting Mozart’s “The Marriage of Figaro” at the Central Opera House in Beijing. She moved to the United States in 1998, and got her big break in 2002, when she shared first prize in the inaugural Maazel/Vilar Conductors’ Competition at Carnegie Hall.That success led Lorin Maazel to bring her to the New York Philharmonic, where she conducted Young People’s Concerts, concerts in the parks and several subscription programs.  Anthony Tommasini wrote in The New York Times in 2006 that her “technique appears to be flawless.” When she brought the Verdi orchestra to the BBC Proms in 2013, The Guardian called her “an exciting, heart-on-sleeve Verdian.”Ms. Zhang said that she would continue to lead the Verdi orchestra next season, saying that it was “in crisis” after its government funding was seriously cut back. But she said that she planned to spend only six weeks with that orchestra, down from 12. And she said that she wanted to get a better feel for New Jersey’s musicians and audiences before making any pronouncements about what kind of programming she envisioned.  “It’s like testing the water,” she said.