“Sometimes Cinderella is 37 years old, has a scraggly beard and sounds like a cross between George Jones and Otis Redding.”That was Billboard magazine’s take on Chris Stapleton, the country singer who shot to the top of the album chart last week after appearing on the Country Music Association Awards broadcast, where he took three top prizes and sang a duet with Justin Timberlake — all several months after his album “Traveller” (Mercury Nashville) first arrived with modest sales and then fell off the chart altogether.This week, “Traveller” holds the No. 1 spot for a second time, with 97,000 sales and 8.7 million streams, according to Nielsen. Much of that success, no doubt, is carryover from the C.M.A.’s — Nielsen’s accounting period for last week’s chart ended just one day after the awards. But Mr. Stapleton also benefited from a relatively light release calendar, right before major new releases from Justin Bieber, One Direction and Adele.Another country album, Eric Church’s “Mr. Misunderstood” (EMI Nashville), is in second place this week, and the new LP from the British pop singer Ellie Goulding, “Delirium” (Cherrytree/Interscope), opens at No. 3. The veteran country star Tim McGraw starts in fifth place with his latest, “Damn Country Music” (Big Machine), and the Beatles’ hits collection “1” (Apple Corps/Universal) — which has been rereleased in various new versions, including DVD and Blu-ray, with a wealth of restored videos – is No. 6. The Weeknd’s “Beauty Behind the Madness” (XO/Republic) is No. 4.Also this week, Eagles of Death Metal, the American rock band that was playing at the Bataclan in Paris during the terror attacks on Friday, cracked the British singles chart with a cover of Duran Duran’s ballad “Save a Prayer.” After an online campaign to push the song to No. 1 it entered the chart at No. 96 and could climb for next week’s list, according to the Official U.K. Charts Company.A version of this article appears in print on 11/17/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Stapleton, or u2018Cinderella,u2019 Tops Album Chart Again.