The cancellation of a college production of Lloyd Suh’s play “Jesus in India” over the casting of white actors as Indian characters has prompted a war of words over diversity in theater, with Mr. Suh arguing that the production could send a “dehumanizing” message to minority students and the school countering that the student actors on its rural, predominantly white campus were being “punished for their race.”The controversy broke out last week when The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reported that Mr. Suh had withdrawn permissions for the production at Clarion University, a state institution in western Pennsylvania with a student body of about 5,400. It landed amid heightened national conversation about racial exclusion on college campuses, as well as ongoing debate in the theater world about how to promote greater diversity onstage.In a statement posted online on Friday, Mr. Suh defended his decision, saying that going forward with white actors cast as South Asians would have subverted both the artistic intentions behind the play (which had an Off-Off-Broadway run in New York in 2013) and the broader cause of increasing visibility for minority theater artists.“As a writer of color in a field where representation and visibility are ongoing struggles, I feel a responsibility to provide opportunities for artists of color to be seen,” Mr. Suh said in the statement, which was posted on the blog of the artists’ rights advocate Howard Sherman.“The practice of using white actors to portray nonwhite characters has deep roots in ugly racist traditions,” Mr. Suh continued. “It sends a message, intended or not, that is exclusionary at best, dehumanizing at worst.”In an essay in the Chronicle of Higher Education, Marilouise Michel, the play’s director and a professor of theater, blasted back, describing the heartbreak of the student actors and defending the right of directors to cast performers “regardless of race, ethnicity and even gender.”A statement issued by the university put it more bluntly, saying that the actors were being “punished for their race.”“We have no further desire to engage with Mr. Suh, the playwright, as he made his position on race to our theater students crystal clear,” Karen Whitney, the university’s president, said in the statement. “I personally prefer to invest my energy into explaining to the student actors, stage crew and production team members why the hundreds of hours they committed to bringing ‘Jesus in India’ to our stage and community has been denied since they are the wrong skin color.”In his statement, Mr. Suh said he had only become aware of the casting of the Clarion production in late October, when he got a message from the school requesting a conversation with the student actors via Skype. He then found a publicity photo online showing two white actors playing Indian characters, and on Nov. 2 contacted the school through his agent to object. (A third Indian character is played by a mixed-race actor with no South Asian roots.)Mr. Suh, who is Korean-American, sent Ms. Michel an email on Nov. 9 demanding that the roles be recast. The school declined, saying it did not have enough time to do so before performances began on Nov. 18 and citing its limited pool of potential South Asian actors. (Only about 1 percent of the student body is Asian or Pacific Islander.)Mr. Suh, whom Ms. Michel said had declined the school’s offer to include a note in the program explaining his objections to the casting, then revoked permission, calling the use of white actors “an absolutely unacceptable distortion of the play.”Ms. Michel, who is white, acknowledged that the issue of casting had previously come up. When the production was first discussed last spring, she said, Mr. Suh had asked via a representative if the production would honor the general ethnicity of the characters in the play, which depicts Jesus as a foul-mouthed stoner wandering through India, jamming on his guitar and talking Buddhism with his new buddies.Ms. Michel told him the show had not yet been cast, and later forgot about the query, which she said was not raised again by him or his representatives or mentioned in the contract the school was sent. She said that she had tried to arrange conversations with Mr. Suh to discuss various aspects of the production, but was told he was too busy. (Mr. Suh, through a representative, declined to comment further.)“Had I been able to have a conversation with him, I would’ve quickly understood his views and we could’ve either come to a consensus or I would not have done this play,” Ms. Michel said. “It was certainly never my intention to change the essence of the play.”Robert Levy, the head of the visual and performing arts department, said the department followed a general policy of “open and nontraditional casting,” assigning parts along racial and ethnic lines only where the show dealt specifically with issues of race and ethnicity, as in recent student productions of “Big River” and “Ma Rainey’s Black Bottom.”With “Jesus in India,” both Mr. Levy and Ms. Michel said, they did not think it was essential to the play’s themes to cast South Asians as the Indian characters.“Although it’s Jesus, there’s a lot of weed and punk rock, a mixture of periods,” Mr. Levy said. “It’s primarily about finding yourself. We thought it was something that would speak to our students, performers and audience.”In her article, Ms. Michel noted that Mr. Suh, in an interview several years earlier, had called the play “universal” and “about humanity.”But in his statement, Mr. Suh, whose new play, “Charles Francis Chan Jr.’s Exotic Oriental Murder Mystery” is currently running at Walker Space in Manhattan, objected to the notion that this meant the Indian characters could be played by white actors.“Universal does not and should not mean white, or the privilege of ignoring race,” he said. “I wish it were not so difficult to accept that an actor of color, playing a character of color, could convey something universal.”Mr. Suh said he understood the students’ anger and confusion over the late cancellation, calling them “victims” of “this mess.” Ms. Michel agreed, but lamented that the cancellation would also deprive Clarion students of exposure to ideas and cultures that might be new to them.“We are a small state school in western Pennsylvania, and trying to bring cultural diversity here is challenging,” she said. “I still believe what we did with this play was beautiful. It’s very unfortunate people won’t be get to see it.”