By KATHRYN SHATTUCKOCT. 5, 2015
8 P.M. (Encore) A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT (1992) Fly fishing surged in popularity after Robert Redford’s visually stunning tale about a minister’s sons coming of age in Montana between Prohibition and the Depression — and finding expression for their emotions knee-deep in a rushing river. Craig Sheffer plays the introspective Norman Maclean, on whose 1976 autobiographical story this film is based; Brad Pitt is Paul, his wilder, more magnetic brother. “Between the novella’s well-known first sentence (‘In our family, there was no clear line between religion and fly-fishing’) and its elegiac last line (‘I am haunted by waters’), ‘A River Runs Through It’ circled gracefully among the landmarks of Mr. Maclean’s early years without violating the distant perfection of those memories,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times. It is easy to recognize Mr. Redford’s “reverent film version of this beautifully spare novella as a labor of love,” she added. “The same thoughts embraced by Mr. Maclean — of family and history, of the unbridgeable distances between men, of a wild natural landscape as a pathway to spiritual grace — are ably reflected on the screen.”8:30 A.M. (CUNY) CONVERSATIONS IN THE DIGITAL AGE WITH JIM ZIRIN Linda Fairstein, the novelist and former sex-crimes prosecutor, discusses her book “Devil’s Bridge” and the nation’s evolving standards of rape. In “Carnegie Council Global Ethics Forum,” at 10, Mona Eltahawy, author of “Headscarves and Hymens,” explains why she thinks the Middle East needs a sexual revolution.8 P.M. (CBS) THE BIG BANG THEORY The guys surprise Leonard (Johnny Galecki) with a bachelor party in Mexico, while the gals force Penny (Kaley Cuoco) to tell her father (Keith Carradine) she eloped. In “Life in Pieces,” at 8:30, Matt (Thomas Sadoski) teaches Colleen (Angelique Cabral) how to connect with his family after inviting her to brunch.8 P.M. (Smithsonian) THE WEAPON HUNTER Paul Shull, a band manager turned swordsman turned history nut, seeks a World War II-era Sherman M10 tank to fix and fire.Advertisement10 P.M. (NBC) BLINDSPOT This week’s clue — that Navy SEAL tattoo — links Jane (Jaimie Alexander) to a thief who pulls off the perfect jewel heist. Almost. Then the mysterious man (Johnny Whitworth) from her first memory shows up with a warning.Advertisement10 P.M. (ABC) CASTLE Castle (Nathan Fillion) goes undercover as a professor after a fraternity murder and discovers dark secrets in a university’s hallowed halls.11 P.M. (IFC) CASINO (1995) Sharon Stone plays Ginger McKenna, a hustler on a nose-dive in 1970s Las Vegas in this three-hour Martin Scorsese film. Robert De Niro and Joe Pesci, in a version of their “Goodfellas” routine, play Ace, a casino supervisor and Ginger’s husband, and Nicky, his vicious best friend. Nicholas Pileggi wrote the book from which Mr. Scorsese spins a web rife with cheating, mob bosses, greased palms, wiretaps and lip readers. “The material unearthed by Mr. Pileggi also features truths much stranger than fiction, wildly histrionic showdowns, intricate mob trivia and people whose Faustian conniving and obsessive fury fit perfectly into the Scorsese canon,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times. “Mr. Scorsese has been here and done this already in ‘Goodfellas,’ but not with his new film’s blistering bitterness or its peacock extravagance.”What’s Streaming NowGILMORE GIRLS Oct. 5, 2000, heralded the debut of Amy Sherman-Palladino’s banter-rich series starring Lauren Graham as Lorelai Gilmore, a teenage runaway turned stubbornly independent single mother and innkeeper in her Connecticut hometown, and Alexis Bledel as her Ivy League-bound daughter, Rory, who dreams of becoming a foreign correspondent. Celebrate its 15th anniversary by rewatching all seven seasons. (netflix.com)DOC MARTIN Martin Clunes’s dyspeptic village physician returns for a seventh season, which begins as his disenchanted wife, Louisa (Caroline Catz), takes their son to visit her mother in Spain, prompting Martin to seek therapy to win her back. (acorn.tv)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 5, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.