By ALEC M. PRIESTERNOV. 16, 2015
For those curious about Raf Simons’s departure from Dior, Netflix has added a documentary about his time there. And that rare thing — a Thanksgiving movie — should ease you into the week ahead of the holiday. What’s Streaming NowDIOR AND I (2015) This documentary follows the Belgian fashion designer Raf Simons in his role as Christian Dior’s artistic director and the creation of his first haute-couture collection. Mr. Simons announced last month that he would leave Dior, and the film depicts a segment of his time there. (Netflix) (Image: Mr. Simons)PLANES, TRAINS & AUTOMOBILES (1987) You can give thanks for John Hughes’s comedy of travel errors, which stars Steve Martin as an uptight businessman and John Candy as his slovenly bumbler of a travel companion. They’re each just trying to get home from New York to Chicago for Thanksgiving. But, wouldn’t you know it, their transit travails somehow make the holiday more meaningful. (iTunes)CRISTELA Arriving on Netflix today is the comedian Cristela Alonzo’s ABC series, canceled last spring, about pursuing a law career while navigating the idiosyncrasies of her Mexican-American family. (Image: Ms. Alonzo)AdvertisementWhat’s on TVGOTHAM 8 p.m. E.S.T. on Fox In the course of the usual cleanup of Gotham City with Barnes, Commissioner Gordon encounters Eduardo Flamingo (Raul Castillo), an infamous Gotham hit man. Nygma and Penguin tangle, and Bruce ramps up efforts to identify his parents’ killer.AdvertisementCRAZY EX-GIRLFRIEND 8 p.m. on the CW Rebecca spends Thanksgiving with Josh and his family. Greg tries to balance his dreams with the responsibility of taking care of his father.MONDAY NIGHT FOOTBALL 8:30 p.m. on ESPN The undefeated Cincinnati Bengals face off at home against the struggling Houston Texans.MINORITY REPORT 9 p.m. on Fox Dash and Vega are met with wariness when they follow a vision to a local community.FARGO 10 p.m. on FX In keeping with the Fargo tradition of turning salt-of-the-earth tools into lethal weapons, this episode finds Dodd armed with a cattle prod. (Image: Patrick Wilson as Lou)BARBARA WALTERS PRESENTS AMERICAN SCANDALS 10 p.m. on Investigation Discovery Barbara Walters revisits notorious events that she has covered through high-profile interviews. Tonight’s subject is Jean Harris (1923-2012), whose arrest and conviction in the 1980 murder of her lover Herman Tarnower, a.k.a. the Scarsdale Diet doctor, riveted the nation. The program includes new footage from Ms. Walters’s conversations with Mrs. Harris and a new interview with Mrs. Harris’s son Jim.GIGI DOES IT 10:30 p.m. on IFC. Gigi and Ricky go speed-dating.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 16, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Watch Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.