By ALASTAIR MACAULAYNOV. 15, 2015
When a friend heard I was going to a production at the Japan Society, he guessed I would see one of the traditional Japanese genres — Noh, Kabuki, Bunraku — and said at once, “Interesting.” My visit on Friday, however, was for Shuji Onodera’s “Spectator,” which, certainly interesting, was new in Tokyo in 2013.Its mental climate is akin to the modern surrealism of Haruki Murakami’s fiction; and the staging demonstrates a theatrical imagination parallel to that shown in the Complicite theater company’s 2003 staging of his “The Elephant Vanishes.” Mr. Murakami’s work, though greatly successful in Japan and elsewhere, has been called un-Japanese in Japan. But it, however, and this “Spectator” surely reflect a changed Japan.This dance theater production of “Spectator” (one hour long) includes live video, toy furniture, real furniture and seven performers in odd disproportion. We see, on the right side of the stage, a projection in which one tiny human head is juxtaposed with a larger one and how both can be dwarfed by a piece of fruit. On the stage’s left side we see how this is done, as a video camera tracks items and performers in a single view of different depths.Then we see, on one side, how pieces of dollhouse-scale furniture are moved and suddenly tipped by a human hand, while — seconds later elsewhere — the same arrangement of life-size chairs is re-enacted, this time with people on the chairs. When one life-size chair is tipped sideways, a person falls with it; and the other people look at him as if he has died.AdvertisementBecause we’ve seen a hand tip the doll-size chair, we can’t help feeling the hand that tips the life-size chair may be the unseen hand of God, or Fate, or Big Brother — even though the hand we see belongs to another dancer. Often, events are fitted to music. We’re aware of choreography, and the timing makes us feel the choreographer is another unseen great controller in the sky.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Not all of “Spectator” uses video, but all of it is layered, sometimes with comic confusion. A dancer starts to address us in English, while her verbatim script is projected on a wall; soon she switches to Japanese, so that most of us are grateful for the English translation. But when she starts to tell a story while other dancers enact it, the action diverts into a different story. The disparity between narration and movement becomes funny, baffling, suspenseful. And when solutions or explanations arrive, they add poignancy.The performance manner always contains a layer of artifice. One person in a group keels over and dies. It takes two seconds before the others react, but they do so in unison. There are repetitions, echoes; deaths and actions recur and recur. The patterns add up; we start to feel them as a psychological process, as if a mind is obsessively going over and over the same thing. It was uncanny to be watching this on Friday, with news of the Paris massacres still coming in.AdvertisementThe production’s surface tone is cool, dry, unemotional, objective and sometimes funny. The events depicted and the connections among them are mysterious and painful.A version of this review appears in print on November 16, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Reflecting a Changing Japan, With an Aura of Modern Surrealism   .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.