AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate ChinenRy Cooder began the first encore at Zankel Hall on Saturday night with a shadowy, droning solo on electric bouzouki, in no hurry to settle on a tempo. After a few moments, Ricky Skaggs joined him on mandolin, and their searching interplay coalesced into a slow processional. Only as Mr. Cooder started singing, with a light husk in his baritone, did the shape of a song become clear.It was “You Must Unload,” originally recorded by Blind Alfred Reed in 1927, during the Bristol Sessions, a watershed moment for country music. Mr. Cooder, whose history with Reed’s music runs long and deep, recast the tune as a folk-gospel trudge, in the spirit of Bob Dylan with the Band. The lyrics, which sternly inveigh against material urges, also got a playful tweak, but Mr. Cooder didn’t tinker with its message of a straight and narrow path to heaven.Mr. Cooder, the guitarist, producer and bridge-building guru of American roots music, and Mr. Skaggs, a shining paragon of bluegrass and country traditionalism, were performing under the banner of a supergroup, Cooder-White-Skaggs. The middle name in that triumvirate belongs to the Whites, a family group of longstanding renown in country music — principally Sharon White, a soulful singer and guitarist who has been married to Mr. Skaggs for more than 30 years.Cooder-White-Skaggs came about after Rosanne Cash asked Mr. Cooder to perform a concert of Southern roots music as part of her Carnegie Hall Perspectives series. He sought out Mr. Skaggs and the Whites, and their alliance led to a series of bookings this year. But Saturday’s sold-out Perspectives concert was the main event, conveying a sense of rare, joyous occasion.If Mr. Cooder was its wild card, the person most likely to make a single-chorus solo feel expansive and wind-borne, Mr. Skaggs was the resident ace, firmly grounded at every turn. To the extent that there was a tension in this dynamic, it was productive and subtle. Their common language of casual virtuosity — on fiddle, mandolin, banjo and guitar — found traction in a repertory suitable for the Grand Ole Opry.“About the only thing newer than 1965 in this show,” Mr. Skaggs said, “is our bass player and our drummer.” The bassist is Mark Fain, a Nashville stalwart; the drummer is Joachim Cooder, Ry’s son. (They played superbly, with buoyant ease.) Buck White, 84, the family patriarch, brought a seasoned touch to his piano playing, which rang with delicate authority, courtly but rarely ornate.The set list was oldfangled but lively: There were heartbroken plaints by Hank Snow and Hank Williams, and country-gospel standards like Jumpin’ Bill Carlisle’s “Gone Home,” in lilting waltz time. Mr. Skaggs and Ms. White sang a jaunty version of “No Doubt About It,” from their first full album together, “Hearts Like Ours” (Skaggs Family), released last year. Ms. Cash sang one tune, a bittersweet, resonant “I Still Miss Someone,” by her father, Johnny Cash.At times, the group pared down to a four-piece gospel vocal choir, with Mr. Skaggs singing clarion lead, Sharon and Cheryl White blending in deep sisterly harmony, and Mr. Cooder harrumphing a bass part. They did this for the exquisite second encore, “Reunion in Heaven,” by Flatt and Scruggs. As heavenward songs go, it was focused less on the straight and narrow than on the sweet reward — a reunion with loved ones whose earthly time had come and gone.Cooder-White-Skaggs appears on Monday in Burlington, Vt.; on Tuesday in Boston; and on Wednesday in Portland, Me. For more dates and information, rickyskaggs­.com.Advertisement