AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimWASHINGTON — Eight years ago, the composer Philip Glass unveiled a new opera, “Appomattox,” at the San Francisco Opera. Set to a libretto by Christopher Hampton, it centered on the gentlemanly negotiations between Generals Grant and Lee at a rural Virginia home that effectively brought the Civil War to a close in 1865. But the appearance of a chorus of civil rights protesters signaled that the opera’s true subject was race relations in America.On Saturday, Washington National Opera presented “Appomattox” in what it also called a world premiere. For this year’s 150th anniversary of the end of the Civil War and the 50th anniversary of the Voting Rights Act, Mr. Glass and Mr. Hampton condensed the events of 1865 and wrote a new second act that dramatizes President Lyndon B. Johnson’s passage of that seminal piece of legislation in 1965 against the backdrop of protests. A chilling epilogue, set in a Mississippi jail in 2011, shows the unrepentant murderer of three rights activists spewing hatred and boasting of his crime.The book on racial injustice, Mr. Glass reminds us, is far from closed. The Voting Rights Act has become the subject of recent revision. With the rewrite of “Appomattox,” Mr. Glass said in a recent public discussion in New York, he and Mr. Hampton often felt “as if history was chasing us.”But for an opera to be relevant it needs to do more than document political events. It should offer a point of view on them. And ideally, the music should add depth to that point. Otherwise, why opera?This “Appomattox,” in a respectful staging by Tazewell Thompson with clean, efficient sets by Donald Eastman, is a frustratingly uneven work that presents well-known historical facts on a conveyor belt of forgettable music. The first act especially is mired in earnestness with the characters of President Abraham Lincoln, Grant and Lee engaged in a stilted diplomatic dance. We get to see Frederick Douglass approach Lincoln on the subject of black suffrage, and Mary Todd Lincoln press him about women’s right to vote. But Lincoln’s vague replies are allowed to trail off unchallenged.The score to this first act features some of the most nondescript music Mr. Glass has written, with a soft, string-heavy orchestration laced here and there with percussion. The language is made up of Mr. Glass’s trademark undulating arpeggios and cloudy modulations but never builds up to the transcendent poetry of his music for the Gandhi opera “Satyagraha.”An arrangement of the Civil War song “Tenting on the Old Campground” opens the opera on a note of guileless vulnerability that is unrelated to the ensuing three hours of generic music. When the black journalist T. Morris Chester, sung resplendently by Frederick Ballentine, delivers an anguished report on the post-Civil War massacre of black soldiers, the orchestra sounds mildly detached.“My heart is too full to say more,” Lee, sung with great warmth by David Pittsinger, tells his troops after he has told them of the surrender. Most opera composers would jump into action at a line like this, letting the orchestra surge with all the character’s half-understood fears, memories and longings. Is Lee relieved? Humiliated? Scared? What has he lost? And should we care? Mr. Glass only offers a squiggly line of undulating strings to fill in the blank.The period of Reconstruction is an even bigger blank. Instead, Act II fast-forwards to 1965. The characters of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. (the sonorous bass Soloman Howard, who sang Douglass in Act I) and President Johnson (the baritone Tom Fox, doubling as Lincoln) bring forth some of the freshest writing from Mr. Hampton, who goes to town with Johnson’s penchant for invigoratingly salty language.This new act is altogether brighter and more confident — entertaining, even, despite the acts of racist violence invoked in upsetting detail. A few rousing and idiomatic orations by Dr. King (written by Mr. Hampton) provide Mr. Glass with the kind of musical dramaturgy lacking in the older material. The reverend’s rising rhetorical cadence and call-and-response with his congregation is a natural fit for opera and Mr. Glass’s music in these scenes is the most successful.The Washington National Opera Chorus was excellent. The same could not always be said of the orchestra, which sounded tense and exposed under the direction of Dante Santiago Anzolini. Among the large and generally fine cast, two female voices stood out: Melody Moore’s plush and vibrant soprano as Julia Grant and Viola Liuzzo, and Chrystal E. Williams, poised and precise, as Elizabeth Keckley and Coretta Scott King.Each act features a character voicing a premonition, which is pored over and analyzed with great anxiety. “Dreams never mean exactly what they seem,” Liuzzo says, “but they mean something.” The same sort of vagueness plagues “Appomattox.” The opera can’t quite decide whether it is about people, or ideas or movements. How much does history hinge on character, how much on providence? The peace signed at Appomattox Court House in 1865 means something, of that Mr. Glass and Mr. Hampton are sure. Figuring out just what may need another round of revision.“Appomattox” continues through Sunday at the Kennedy Center, Washington; 202-467-4600, kennedy-center .org. Running time: 3 hours.Advertisement