AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichLovely as it was, it had an air of unreality. To have canceled the concert or significantly altered the program on Friday night — a delicious mix of the sublime and the ridiculous, featuring the Swedish mezzo-soprano Anne Sofie von Otter — would have achieved nothing.But, at the Frick Collection, shouldn’t there have been some small acknowledgment of the unspeakable tragedy unfolding at that moment in Paris? The more so since the other two performers have close connections to that city: the lutenist Thomas Dunford, having been born and active there, and the keyboardist Jonathan Cohen, being an associate conductor of one of its musical glories, Les Arts Florissants.Instead, listeners were immediately transported to early England, starting with Purcell and Dryden — “Music for a while/ Shall all your cares beguile” — gorgeously sung. Some cares were indeed eased by the music of John Dowland and Robert Johnson, with Mr. Dunford playing archlute and Mr. Cohen, harpsichord and positive organ.The program took a number of turns (to Italy and, yes, to France), some of them weird. In the Neapolitan composer Francesco Provenzale’s daft little cantata “Squarciato Appena Havea” (“Scarcely Had Shining Dawn”), a lament of Queen Margeritha of Sweden for her dead husband, Gustav, Provenzale renders the supposedly dolorous outbursts of the various figures as raucous Neapolitan street songs.Ms. von Otter rescaled the heights with a setting of Robert Burns’s “My Heart’s in the Highlands” by Arvo Pärt, beautifully chanting the long, hypnotic phrases, each set to a single pitch. She wound down with attractive versions of popular songs touched by early music, from Björk, Kate Bush, Sting and Bruce Springsteen. And as a parting gesture, Ms. von Otter sang Monteverdi’s “Sí Dolce è’l Tormento” (“So Sweet Is the Torment”).Among the purely instrumental numbers, Mr. Dunford took a star turn in Dowland’s “Lachrimae” (“Flow, My Tears”), the moment undoubtedly most appropriate to the evening’s unspoken circumstances.Advertisement