By JAMES R. OESTREICHNOV. 15, 2015
When John Scott, the revered organist and choirmaster at St. Thomas Church Fifth Avenue, programmed Mozart’s Requiem to open the church’s concert season on Thursday evening, he could hardly have anticipated that the performance would be dedicated to his memory. But in August, having returned from the first leg of a triumphant European recital tour, Mr. Scott, a vigorous 59, died of a heart attack.In the event, his friend Andrew Nethsingha, the director of music at St. John’s College, Cambridge, in England, conducted the concert, which also included Haydn’s “Missa in Angustiis” (“Mass in Times of Distress”), better known as the “Nelson” Mass. Mr. Scott studied at St. John’s College in the 1970s, and Mr. Nethsingha will bring the Choir of St. John’s College to St. Thomas in April.This must have been a difficult assignment for all concerned, not least the youngsters in the St. Thomas Choir of Men and Boys who knew and worked under Mr. Scott. The choir was admirably prepared by Stephen Buzard, the church’s acting director of music, and Benjamin Sheen, the acting organist, who also played positive organ.Still — understandably, in these circumstances — the choir seemed to lack some of the crispness so typical of Scott performances in the Mozart. It brightened up a bit in the Haydn.AdvertisementThe choir was joined by a variable cast of vocal soloists — Katharine Dain, soprano; Brenda Patterson, mezzo-soprano; Dann Coakwell, tenor; and Charles Perry Sprawls, bass — and the endlessly versatile Orchestra of St. Luke’s.AdvertisementMr. Coakwell’s work was genuinely distinguished in both works. Ms. Dain showed good agility in the Haydn if not always ideal tonal luster. Ms. Patterson sang her modest parts appealingly but did not always project well into the church. Mr. Sprawls also failed to project and encountered vocal problems in the Mozart, but finally achieved some power in the Haydn.Mr. Nethsingha’s tempos were animated, and the orchestra played beautifully throughout. The work of the trumpets, trombones and timpani was especially notable in Haydn’s little militaristic outbursts, which were probably what somehow led the work to become associated, long after its 1798 completion, with the anti-Napoleonic exploits of Lord Nelson.The St. Thomas Choir of Men and Boys will perform Handel’s “Messiah” on Dec. 8 and 10, St. Thomas Church, Fifth Avenue at 53rd Street; 212-664-9360, saintthomaschurch­.org.A version of this review appears in print on November 16, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Works of Lamentation  Invoke a Lost Leader.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.