By JON PARELESNOV. 17, 2015
If Grimes is selling out, more musicians should do it her way.Grimes is Claire Boucher, the Canadian songwriter who released her fourth album, “Art Angels,” on Nov. 6 and played a packed Terminal 5 on Monday night. She performed with dancers, puffs of smoke, lasers and a breathlessly gleeful stage presence; there was even a fan blowing back her two-toned hair.The album cover for “Art Angels,” drawn (like the rest of her graphics) by Ms. Boucher herself, shows a pointy-eared creature with thorns in her neck, a third eye, and next to her, in a comic-book-like burst of yellow, “1000,00000 $.” It’s a pre-emptive strike against accusations of selling out.Grimes is braced for indie-rock moralizing: the increasingly risible notion that once an artist reaches a loyal cult audience of a certain size, any further outreach would only dilute and simplify what the cultists had been discerning enough to appreciate.After all, Grimes, 27, emerged not long ago out of an arty left field. She is an entirely do-it-yourself songwriter, singer, producer and visual artist with a piping high voice, a fondness for electronic loops and pop-tinged melodies and lyrics that welcome multiple interpretations. Her previous albums were lo-fi and more or less meditative, though each one moved closer to the dance floor.“Visions,” in 2012, made her an indie sensation, with gleaming synth-pop songs harboring darker introspection; “Oblivion,” its peppy single, dealt with the aftermath of a sexual assault. Grimes also generated a Matterhorn of subtext and commentary: far-ranging interviews, a hyperactive social media presence, and videos and fashion shoots in which she took on countless archetypes. She was a warrior, a schoolgirl, a sci-fi alien, a goddess, a makeup-smeared mess. For those who weren’t just dancing to the songs, Grimes was challenging all sorts of assumptions about power, gender, media and pop itself.AdvertisementBut for all the attention it drew, “Visions” reached only No. 98 on the Billboard album chart. Not pop enough. Grimes was no indie snob; she knew her Lady Gaga, her Katy Perry, her K-pop. But they all draw on the expertise of collaborators: producers, songwriters, video directors, stylists. Grimes, astonishingly, enlisted none of them for “Art Angels”: no Max Martin or Dr. Luke for her. She learned to do everything herself, from producing the huge virtual beats that power Top 10 pop to playing violin for her own string parts. And, she has said, she discarded an entire album that didn’t satisfy her.Advertisement“Art Angels” demands to play in the big leagues. Far from diluting her music, Grimes has ramped up its catchiness, its madcap invention and its contentious ideas. The album mines pop past and present — No Doubt, Madonna, Tom Tom Club, Rihanna — and then decisively one-ups it. On previous albums, Grimes was often content to toy with a few loops and beats throughout a song, while, on “Art Angels,” hooks, beats, backup choirs and assorted noises keep arriving out of nowhere, each an elaborate new treat. Grimes has vastly upgraded her rhythms; songs on “Visions” sound stiff compared with the quick-changing beat of “Pin” — variously rhythm guitar, stop-start drums, vocal syllables, handclaps and video game boops — or with the New Wave gallop of “Kill v. Maim,” which in some spots sounds as if it were propelled by stereo gunfire.Grimes’s version of pop doesn’t require dumbed-down lyrics, either; on “California,” she sings, “I get carried away/commodifying all the pain.” Her guests on the album are female rappers and singers: Aristophanes, from Taiwan, rapping in Mandarin with a cataclysmic view of female sexuality in “Scream,” and Janelle Monáe, joining Grimes on “Venus Fly” to mock the objectification of women: “Why you looking at me?” It’s the kind of catchy little chant a high school girl might arm herself with to fend off harassment.The show at Terminal 5 was a smiley, silly pop spectacle, with Grimes as a trouper. She was fighting the flu, and she had a brace on her right leg — recovering from a sprain, but dancing her way from her keyboard platform to center stage as if it weren’t there. She’s making music now that might lead listeners to all the subtext and commentary but doesn’t require it. As it needs to be in the world of radio pop, the sound is enough. Grimes can scale up.A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: A D.I.Y. Sensation Ramps Up Her Sound.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.