LONDON — An academic and journalist at the University of Melbourne has unearthed a book-length love letter from the feminist author Germaine Greer to the novelist Martin Amis.The professor, Margaret Simons, found the letter, a 30,000-word one, written in a notebook in an archive of Ms. Greer’s works that the author, who was born in Melbourne, sold to the university in 2013.Ms. Greer began writing the letter in 1976, when she was 37 and Mr. Amis was 26. Their affair was widely known, though neither author has acknowledged it publicly, according to The Guardian.“People tend to see Greer as somehow altered today,” Ms. Simons said Tuesday in an email, adding that the letter showed that her current persona is consistent with her older one. “She has always been witty, abrasive, vulnerable, radical, tactless, original and brave, as she is in this letter,” she said. “The letter is also a beautiful piece of writing, of worth for that alone.”One passage in the letter, quoted in The Guardian, reflects on Mr. Amis’s eyes: “You slide them away from most things and look at people through your thick eyelids, under your hair, your eyebrows and your lashes. You look at mouths more than eyes. Is it because you hate to look up? It is very shy and graceful and tantalising, as well you know.”Toward the end of the notebook, Ms. Greer critiques Mr. Amis’s second novel, “Dead Babies,” a riff on the works of Agatha Christie: “It is not the unpleasantness of your vision that excites reproof but the vulnerability of the author, for once casually revealed. As for me, it makes me helpless with desire for you.”Ms. Simons said that Ms. Greer seemed eager to send the letter when she started it. Mr. Amis apparently encouraged her to write it when she traveled, but Ms. Greer appears to have changed her mind after reading “Dead Babies.”By the end of the letter, Ms. Simons said, “she is unsure that it is actually him she is writing to, or whether she is writing to the man she wants him to be or thinks he might become.”“He has become, in a sense, her imaginary friend,” Ms. Simons added.In a phone interview, Simon During, a professor of literature at the University of Queensland who has not read the letter in full, said it would be an important contribution to Greer scholarship.Mr. During described the letter as “a Saul Bellow, Herzogian outpouring of the soul which she never posted.”“She was arguably at the height of her powers at that point; she was at the cutting edge of the culture,” he said.“What Martin Amis stood for was something very, very different than what Germaine Greer stood for,” Mr. During said, contrasting Mr. Amis’s macho persona  with Ms. Greer’s feminism.Ms. Simons will publish an essay about her research in the Australian literary journal Meanjin next month.An agent for Ms. Greer said that she had a blanket policy of not speaking to newspapers. Mr. Amis’s agency did not immediately respond to emailed requests for comment.