By ALASTAIR MACAULAYNOV. 17, 2015
Twyla Tharp This year is the 50th anniversary of Twyla Tharp’s start as a professional choreographer. Several of her classics date back to the 1970s. Since the death of Martha Graham, she has been the most famous living American choreographer. This fall she has been touring a double bill of “Preludes and Fugues” (Bach) and “Yowzie” (jazz) – neatly demonstrating her stylistic diversity. This at last reaches the David H. Koch Theater at Lincoln Center this week, opening Tuesday.Thomas Adès dancesOne theory — one I like — is that we will enter a new dance era only when we have convincingly new dance music that leaves the 20th century behind and finds its match in good choreography. Enterprisingly, Sadler’s Wells Theater in London last year presented a quadruple bill of choreography to music by the important British composer Thomas Adès (born 1971). This weekend “Thomas Adès: Concentric Paths — Movements in Music”  reaches New York City Center; each of the four dances is by a different choreographer.Mr. Adès, a most compelling conductor and pianist, leads the Orchestra of St Luke’s and plays piano with the Calder Quartet at all three performances. The program takes its name from his 2005 Violin Concerto, whose subtitle is “Concentric Paths.” That’s the score for a work already known in New York, a local commission — Wayne McGregor’s “Outlier” (2010), made for City Ballet. The others are Karole Armitage’s “Life Story” (a 1999 creation, its title is that of the 1993 Adès score); Alexander Whitley’s “The Grit in the Oyster” (to Mr. Adès’s 2001 piano quintet); and Crystal Pite’s “Polaris” (taking its name from the 2010 music).The Whitley and Pite works are both receiving their American premieres. It is Ms. Pite’s piece, for 64 dancers, that knocked out British critics. This Canadian choreographer is still too little known in New York; I look forward to the next stage of discovery.AdvertisementJean ButlerIn 1994-95, Michael Flatley and Jean Butler were the two stars of the hugely successful Irish step dance production Riverdance. Their careers have moved in opposed directions, but both are now dancing in New York. Last week Mr. Flatley opened his farewell on Broadway, “Lord of the Dance: Dangerous Games,” at the Lyric Theater; this week Ms. Butler, who has moved into areas of experimental modern dance, opens “this is an irish dance” at Danspace at St Marks; it’s a co-creation with the Belfast-based cellist Neil Martin.AdvertisementYvonne Rainer Like Ms. Tharp, the choreographer and filmmaker Yvonne Rainer emerged in the 1960s; her “NO” manifesto is forever quoted as an important text for postmodern dance, and her “Trio A” has long been the piece that most defined dance postmodernism. She’s still active: Her latest work, “The Concept of Dust, or How Do You Look When There’s Nothing To Move?,” a wittier piece than I anticipated from this serious artist, had its East Coast premiere at the Museum of Modern Art in June. This week the film “Feelings Are Facts: The Life of Yvonne Rainer,” directed by Jack Walsh, will receive its New York premiere as part of DOC NYC on Wednesday evening.Paco PeñaFew flamenco artists are equal to the veteran guitarist Paco Peña; he often surrounds himself with flamenco dancers. His new show, “Flamencura,” opens at the Town Hall on Friday. His colleagues on this occasion will be the guitarists Francisco Arriaga and Rafael Montilla, the dancers Angel Muñoz (whom I remember being a rare exemplar in Mr. Peña’s 2011 visit) and Yolanda Osuna Linares, the singers Inmaculada Rivero and Bernardo Miranda Luna, and the percussionist Ignacio Lopez. Elkins and KeigwinOn Saturday and Sunday, dancers of the Paul Taylor Dance Company perform at the Guggenheim Museum, as part of its Works & Process season, performing choreography both by Mr. Taylor and two other choreographers. If that sentence seems simple, it isn’t. Many people in the dance world are reasonably confused about both the current nomenclature of Mr. Taylor’s dance troupe and its deeper identity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This matters. For decades until 2015, the Taylor enterprise has had a big New York season each spring – almost always dancing work exclusively by Mr. Taylor, under the name Paul Taylor Dance Company. No other one-choreographer troupe was as popular across America. After the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, no modern-dance troupe has a stronger presence in New York; and, like Ailey, the Taylor dancers also tour nationally and internationally.This spring, however, the Taylor season was called Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance and also contained two other modern-dance companies performing works by their own choreographers (one older and dead, one younger and alive). Only during that season, however, did a few of us begin to understand that the Taylor dancers are still called Paul Taylor Dance Company.It is the Paul Taylor Dance Company that continues to tour America and abroad. Only in New York – where the company has its home – and only in the spring seasons at the Koch can you see Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance.And these distinctions arise because Mr. Taylor, 85 and still choreographing two pieces a year, is preparing his company for a post-Taylor world. The 2016 Koch season also brings two other premieres, by the choreographers Doug Elkins and Larry Keigwin; it is they who appear with the Taylor dancers this weekend, showing their new works-in-process. They also converse with the Taylor scholar Suzanne Carbonneau. The insight into the next stage of Taylor operations may be valuable.Gabriel Missé and Guillermina QuirogaThe great tango dancer Gabriel Missé first electrified New York in 2008. I had never heard of him and can never forget how his thunderbolt footwork and taut, legato phrasing helped to transform a largely bland tango evening at Symphony Space; I’m not the only observer who has thought him tango’s Baryshnikov.Like many tango stars, he’s half a nomad, visiting multiple cities, and half a denizen of his native Buenos Aires. He has appeared at City Center’s Fall for Dance season (twice) and (a number of times) at the Vail Festival. But tango, for all its intense drama, is not seen best in theaters. It’s an art of salons, clubs, studios; and the most breathtaking performances I’ve seen by Mr. Missé have been at close quarters in dance studios and in tango-friendly restaurants.AdvertisementBut it takes two. This Saturday night he dances at the Clemente Soto Velez Cultural and Educational Center with Guillermina Quiroga in a single late-evening performance. It’s curious to recall that in 2008 Ms. Quiroga, then partnered by Cesar Coelho, shared that Symphony Space program I saw. She, a beautiful dancer, and Mr. Coelho went in for too many overhead lifts — but she’s elegant, dignified, commanding. It should be fascinating to observe this new partnership. Does she have Mr. Missé’s brilliance? Are they a pair?An earlier version of this article misstated the location of Gabriel Missé’s performance on Saturday. It is at the Clemente Soto Velez Cultural and Educational Center, not at Dardo Galletto Studios.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.