By DAVID ALLENNOV. 17, 2015
BOSTON — Philip Glass has rewritten his Civil War opera, “Appomattox,” for the Black Lives Matter era. But the troubled Boston Lyric Opera’s enthralling new site-specific production of his “In the Penal Colony,” a 2000 chamber opera with a libretto by Rudolph Wurlitzer, takes a different approach to making Mr. Glass’s work relevant to contemporary debates.The opera is based on a Kafka short story that explores the themes of due process, torture and capital punishment. To this depressive, already pertinent tale, the young director R. B. Schlather has added another, often confusing political layer: Edward J. Snowden, the leaker of information about the National Security Agency’s surveillance tactics. Presented here at the Cyclorama in the South End and seen on Saturday in its penultimate performance, this gymnastic, super-slo-mo rethink suggests that the virtues of justice are never black and white.In the story, the Visitor — or Mr. Snowden, in this production — is on a prison island, where he is given a demonstration of a brutal execution machine by the Officer, an apostle of a former Old Commander, now dead. As the last adherent of an antiquated justice system, the Officer hopes to use the Visitor to perpetuate his cruel and unusual vision in a new political order. When the Visitor refuses to support him, the Officer frees a Condemned Man and uses the contraption on himself, in an act of suicide. Unlike his previous victims, he gains no transfiguration from his pain.Mr. Schlather’s inspirations were Minimalist artists like Dan Flavin and Richard Serra, and the staging is mostly abstract, set at eye level by Julia Noulin-Mérat. He still makes clear that we are in a prison: The musicians and their conductor, a less-than-incisive Ryan Turner, parade to their places in convict uniforms before the music begins. But Kafka’s meticulously described apparatus is mostly absent, barring some light bulbs hung from the ceiling that evoke the needles that the machine uses to punish its prey.AdvertisementThe Visitor, sung strongly by Neal Ferreira, is dressed by Terese Wadden in off-white pajamas and wiry glasses, a reference to the scenes in the movie “Citizenfour” in which Mr. Snowden sits in his hotel room. The analogy refocuses the drama around a question that is somewhat peripheral to Kafka but not alien to the story: Is there always a duty to reveal a wrong, whatever the consequences?AdvertisementMr. Schlather piles more on top of that. The Officer, maliciously portrayed by David McFerrin, wears a frightening red hazmat suit to avoid being contaminated by crime or by the values of a world beyond his colony’s shores. Yet as he realizes his fate, he gradually undresses, revealing his pajamas. Both the Officer and the Visitor mirror the movements of the condemned Man (the dancer Yury Yanowsky).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All three are implicated, and so are we: Silver panels encircle stage and audience alike, making listeners part of the drama. Like the crowds that trooped to the Cyclorama to view its 360-degree mural of the Battle of Gettysburg in the 1880s, before it became an industrial space and later part of the Boston Center for the Arts, we are Visitors to our own world.Just as Mr. Glass’s familiar music feels distant, Mr. Schlather leaves too much unexplained for empathy to build with the characters in a short one-act drama. Even the text breaks down: The projected supertitles, set in a coder’s font and all lowercase, flicker between lines of libretto, with the letters in words often missing as the Officer’s hopes are increasingly dashed. They gain grammatical precision only when he dies.Yet Mr. Schlather makes good use of this reverberant space, which is clad in red brick, covered in ventilation pipes and rises to a dome. This was the latest production in the Lyric Opera’s Opera Annex series, a program that presents opera in nontraditional spaces like a synagogue or the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library.Even so, performances like these do not address the Lyric Opera’s greatest problems. Last month it decided not to renew its lease at the Shubert Theater in Boston, which is not well suited for opera. The company has not announced a home for the 2016-17 season. Critics have written beseechingly about the need to build a real opera house in Boston. As Jeremy Eichler noted in The Boston Globe, “Of the 10 largest cities in the country, it is the only one without a dedicated home for this art form.”Off-site productions cannot become the norm for a major presenter. Strong work is being done here, not least in promoting talents like Mr. Schlather, an alumnus of the Lyric’s young artist program. Moreover, one of the world’s leading opera conductors, Andris Nelsons, is the music director at the Boston Symphony. (Imagine that ensemble performing as an occasional pit band.) If the city is to solidify its musical renown, it must give its artists the performance spaces they need to grow.A version of this review appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Confronting Injustice in a Hell Outside Time.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.