
Blindspot By                     
 NEIL GENZLINGER
 
NOV. 17, 2015
Forget the dress-up-night fun; the first 58 minutes of Monday night’s “Blindspot” on NBC were blown right out of our heads by the last two minutes. David? One of the show’s best characters? Killed? Heartbreaking. I couldn’t quite tell if Guerrero was also killed in those final moments or merely wounded, but either way, the series certainly woke us all up, didn’t it?Until the closing scenes, this was a relatively lighthearted episode, at least for this humor-free series. Jane and Weller got to play married so they could go undercover at a high-dress gala to try to recover some vital stolen data. That pitted them against a guy with the hilarious name of Rich Dotcom, or was it Rich.Com, or Rich Dot Com, or … oh, never mind; the point is, it was a wonderfully named villain, and wonderfully played by Ennis Esmer. The plotline culminated in a pretty cool shootout that saw the cavalry – i.e., other members of the F.B.I. team – ride in aboard a helicopter, guns blazing, to save the day. Nice.But meanwhile, poor David was trying to win back Patterson by turning investigator, tracking a woman he noticed in the library apparently using the coded-book message system. And what did he get for his troubles? He got dead, that’s what. A gutsy move by the writers, one beautifully juxtaposed with the team’s celebratory drinking after successfully besting Rich Dot-whatever.Carter and Mayfair spent the episode arguing about what to do with Guerrero, but Carter apparently made it a moot point by having him murdered at the episode’s end, too. I think. Didn’t see it very well; was too teary over David.Anyway, how do we feel about killing off appealing characters? I’d thought David actually might turn out to be a bad guy in geek’s clothing, but apparently he was as harmless and well intentioned as he seemed on the surface. Now I feel guilty. Bet Patterson does too. It’ll be interesting to see how she reacts, because the team would be nowhere without her tattoo-decoding skills.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »