AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckDick Wolf adds more Windy City bluster to the Tuesday night lineup; “Frontline” looks at tots in terrorist training; and Valery Gergiev takes on Prokofiev’s five piano concertos — all at once.CHICAGO MED 9 p.m. on NBC. To “Chicago Fire” and “Chicago P.D.,” Dick Wolf adds another layer of heroics with this medical drama set in the city’s latest high-tech trauma center. S. Epatha Merkerson is its esteemed administrator, Colin Donnell its new ace surgeon, and Oliver Platt the head of psychiatry. “‘Chicago Med’ is so exactly what you expect it to be that there’s practically no point describing it, a bad thing if you like your shows innovative and unpredictable, but a good thing if you can’t get enough trauma room gore and dramatics,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The New York Times. (Image: Nick Gehlfuss as chief resident)GRANDFATHERED 8 p.m. on Fox. Jimmy takes Gerald out on the town to pick up women — then doesn’t approve of the one he falls for. In “The Grinder,” at 8:30, Stewart persuades Dean that he can’t keep acting like a celebrity if he wants to be treated like a regular guy. And in “Scream Queens,” at 9, Denise riles up the Kappas with a whopper of a ghost story. (Image: Rob Lowe, left, and Fred Savage in “The Grinder”)THE MUPPETS 8 p.m. on ABC. Scooter’s life heats up when he books his TV crush, Chelsea Handler, on “Up Late.” In “Fresh Off the Boat,” at 8:30, Jessica tries to outdo her sister at Thanksgiving.FRONTLINE: ISIS IN AFGHANISTAN 10 p.m. on PBS. The journalist Najibullah Quraishi travels into Afghan territory held by the Islamic State and visits a school where children as young as 3 are taught “jihad lessons,” as well as how to behead victims and be suicide bombers.MTV TRUE LIFE: I’M GENDERQUEER 11 p.m. on MTV. In honor of Transgender Awareness Week, this series follows two young people in New York who identify as neither male nor female.2 DAYS IN NEW YORK (2012) 11:05 p.m. on Starz Cinema. Julie Delpy and Chris Rock star as Marion and Mingus, a photographer and a journalist living with their blended family in bantering, bickering bliss. Then her father arrives from Paris with cheese and sausage taped to his body, and her sister has noisy sex with her boyfriend in Marion and Mingus’s bathroom, possibly involving Mingus’s electric toothbrush. “The driving crazy part is hilarious and persuasive,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. (Image: Mr. Rock and Ms. Delpy)What’s Streaming NowPROKOFIEV IN MUNICH on Medici.tv. Valery Gergiev conducts the Munich Philharmonic and the Mariinsky Orchestra in a marathon of Prokofiev’s five piano concertos, performed by Herbert Schuch, Denis Matsuev, Behzod Abduraimov, Alexei Volodin and Olli Mustonen. The concerts took place last Sunday. You can view them separately or in a single sitting. (Image: Mr. Gergiev)Advertisement