AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperIt rang out at the Metropolitan Opera, with Plácido Domingo conducting, and before performances by the Philadelphia Orchestra, the Lyric Opera of Chicago, the Detroit Symphony Orchestra and others. Muslim leaders sang it in Paris at the scene of one of Friday’s deadly terror attacks. London’s Wembley Stadium will display its lyrics on large screens to help English-speaking soccer fans muddle through it Tuesday when England plays France.“La Marseillaise” has echoed around the world since Friday’s terrorist attacks — an expression of solidarity with the people of France and of outrage at the carnage caused by the terrorists who killed 129 people Friday during a series of coordinated attacks in Paris. But the ubiquity of the song, the French national anthem, reflects something else too: the way “La Marseillaise” resonates emotionally around the world in a way few other national anthems do.What other anthem can boast of being quoted by the Beatles (in the introduction to “All You Need Is Love”), Tchaikovsky (“1812 Overture”) and Debussy (who used fragments in his “Feux d’artifice”)? Or of being covered by the jazz guitarist Django Reinhardt and the singer Serge Gainsbourg, who recorded a reggae adaptation? Or of anchoring emotional scenes in two masterpieces of world cinema: Jean Renoir’s “Grand Illusion” and, a few years later, “Casablanca,” in the unforgettable scene where the regulars at Rick’s Café Américain sing it as an act of defiance to drown out Nazis singing a German patriotic song?Of course there were other songs taken up after the Paris attacks. Madonna paid tribute to the people of France, and Édith Piaf, by singing “La Vie en Rose” during a concert in Stockholm on Saturday. Coldplay, at a concert in Los Angeles on Saturday, paid its own tribute to the people of Paris by playing a cover of John Lennon’s “Imagine.”But it is “La Marseillaise” that has provided much of the soundtrack since the attacks — from the French soccer fans who sang it as they were evacuated from the stadium to the mourners who gathered around the world, from the French Embassy in Dublin to Union Square in New York, where French students sang it.And, since the attacks, the anthem has been played at sporting events around the world, including at N.B.A. games at Madison Square Garden, where the Knicks played the New Orleans Pelicans, and at the Staples Center in Los Angeles, where the Clippers played the Detroit Pistons, and at several N.H.L. games in Canada.It is a rousing anthem but, as French speakers can attest, hardly a song of peace. Its most bloodthirsty verses — especially one calling for spilling the “impure blood” of enemies — have long attracted controversy. Over the years there have been calls by prominent French citizens, including, in 1992, by Danielle Mitterrand, who was then France’s first lady — to rewrite its most bellicose lyrics. But traditionalists won out, and the call to spill impure blood remains.The song took a twisty path to becoming France’s national anthem. It was written in 1792 by Capt. Claude Joseph Rouget de Lisle to inspire French troops under siege by Prussian soldiers in Strasbourg, and it was originally called “The War Hymn of the Army of the Rhine.” It soon became an anthem of revolutionary France, and was given its current name after soldiers from Marseilles sang it on their marches. It fell in and out of favor in France during the 19th century, but was adopted by liberal and revolutionary movements elsewhere in Europe and around the world, and officially became the French national anthem in 1879.“There are two sides to ‘La Marseillaise,’” the French scholar Michel Vovelle once wrote in an essay included in “Realms of Memory: The Construction of the French Past.” “On the one hand it is a revolutionary rune that extols not just liberty but the values of a new world, while on the other hand it is a war song that expresses, with a zeal sometimes deemed ‘sanguinary,’ the patriotic sentiments of an embattled nation.”At the Metropolitan Opera, where it was played Saturday before a matinee of Puccini’s “Tosca,” the lyrics were included in an insert in the programs, along with a message that read: “The Metropolitan Opera mourns the victims of the Paris terrorist attacks and will perform the French National Anthem as a show of our solidarity with the citizens of France at today’s matinee performance.”The audience stood. Many sang, drowned out by the chorus and opera singers onstage. And when it was over, there were cheers, and shouts of “Vive la France!”Advertisement