By SIOBHAN BURKENOV. 16, 2015
Anyone walking down LaGuardia Place in Greenwich Village on Sunday night could glimpse Heidi Latsky’s “On Display” through the tall glass doors of the Skirball Center for the Performing Arts. That was just one inclusive dimension of this hourlong movement installation, which was the prelude to an evening shared by Heidi Latsky Dance and Axis Dance Company honoring the 25th anniversary of the Americans With Disabilities Act. Both troupes are made up of dancers with and without disabilities, and reject the notion that disability is a limitation, exploring the potential of many kinds of bodies.Nearly 30 performers participated in “On Display,” stationed on pedestals throughout the two-tiered lobby as audience members filtered downstairs into the theater. In Anna Kathleen Little’s chic, clinical white costumes, they struck model-like poses while an automated voice recited physical descriptions of people identified by gender, age and defining features, from “wears fashionable glasses” to “missing entire left leg at the hip.” Those same words scrolled across monitors in the lower lobby, where the widest spectrum of living statues stretched across the room.Ms. Latsky’s interest here, as explained in a program note, is “what our gaze is drawn to, and how long we will linger there,” a fertile subject. But “On Display” merely grazes the surface of watching and being watched, protecting the audience and performers from the vulnerability of that exchange.A similar blandness crept into the night’s other offerings, not helped by drawn-out set changes between pieces. Axis, visiting from Oakland, Calif., began the evening’s onstage portion with “Divide” by the dance company’s guest artistic director Marc Brew. Here and in Joe Goode’s “To Go Again,” a new work inspired by veterans’ stories that closed the program, Dwayne Scheuneman, in a wheelchair, proved a dexterous partner, supporting his peers in their leaps and spins, and Julie Crothers, who is missing her left forearm, was a voluminous mover.Yet these dancers deserve more inspired material than Mr. Brew’s diffuse choreography, which took shape on and around a jagged line of light, and Mr. Goode’s text, which, as the dancers in “To Go Again” reminded us repeatedly, comprised “real words from real people.”As with Ms. Latsky’s recent program at Montclair State University in New Jersey, the highlight was her own “Solo 1,” in which she brews up a kinetic storm while planted in one place. That energy spills over into “Somewhere,” for nine members of her company, whose physical differences she both flattens and teases out.A version of this review appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Using Dance to Challenge Boundaries.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.