By VIVIEN SCHWEITZERNOV. 16, 2015
Before the pianist Yefim Bronfman’s concert on Friday evening at Zankel Hall, Clive Gillinson, executive and artistic director of Carnegie Hall, requested a moment of silence in honor of the victims of the terrorist attacks in Paris.Mr. Bronfman has a businesslike demeanor: After a curt nod to the audience he sat down and plunged straight into Prokofiev’s Sonata No. 1 without a moment of mental preparation or any of the customary fussing with the piano bench. He seemed to channel the rage and grief of multitudes into his magnificently communicative playing in this concert, the first of three this season featuring Prokofiev’s nine piano sonatas in chronological order.Prokofiev eventually deemed his short Piano Sonata No. 1, a student work, “a naïve and simple little piece,” but there was nothing trivial about Mr. Bronfman’s performance, in which the melody emerged with stately warmth amid the tumultuous chords. In the enigmatic, lyrical Piano Sonata No. 2, he conveyed the work’s roiling, unstable moods, with a gently seething Andante and a brilliantly articulated Vivace.Prokofiev’s single-movement Piano Sonata No. 3 also traverses eclectic terrain. With a silky touch, Mr. Bronfman rendered the serene moments starkly against the emotional outbursts elsewhere. The Piano Sonata No. 4 is equally tense, its dark undercurrents illuminated here with riveting intensity and the bravura finale dazzling for its energy and clarity.For the first encore, Mr. Bronfman offered Chopin’s Étude No. 8 (Op. 10), whose rippling arpeggios unfolded with a rare delicacy. Then came a moving interpretation of the Romance from Schumann’s “Faschingsschwank aus Wien” (“Carnival Scenes From Vienna”), performed with such tenderness and purity that for a few blissful moments you could pretend all was right with the world.A version of this review appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Seemingly Channeling  a Mix of Rage and Grief.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »