AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian Seibert“Ballet (New York),” a new work by the Conceptualist French choreographer Jérôme Bel, has moved. Having made its debut this month at the Marian Goodman Gallery in Midtown Manhattan, it migrated over the weekend to a much more hallowed space for New York dance: the studio, currently occupied by the Martha Graham Dance Company, that was long the workshop of Merce Cunningham.Mr. Bel’s work, a commission for Performa 15, gathers together a motley crew of 13 New Yorkers whose training in dance runs from seemingly zero to good enough for New York City Ballet (Megan LeCrone, a soloist with that company, is in the cast). Their responses to simple instructions from Mr. Bel, whose direction is laissez-faire, are supposed to illuminate something about dance and the people doing it.According to the program note, the work is also supposed to be about how different environments “frame and shape the way we see and ‘feel’ dance.” Hence the move. On Thursday “Ballet (New York)” will shift locations again for a final performance, this time at El Museo del Barrio.Compared with the Goodman Gallery, the Martha Graham Studio Theater offers slightly more comfortable seating. Gorgeous afternoon light streamed in through the space’s famous windows. But “Ballet (New York)” was no more resonant in this place than it had been at the Goodman.Where, at the Goodman, there had been an element of surprise in one-by-one entrances, here everyone entered en masse. Doing the tasks, several performers introduced new comic business, and they all appeared to know one another a little bit better. Otherwise, apart from the inclusion of the woman controlling the music (not a taxing job) in the waltzing section, the show was largely the same as before: slightly sweet, half-baked.The pirouettes and approximations of pirouettes were basically unchanged — no evidence of between-show coaching that would violate Mr. Bel’s vérité principles — yet many of the moonwalks had greatly improved. How did that happen? Just from the less skilled watching the more skilled? Or did those with the secret share it with others?Those are the kinds of questions that “Ballet (New York)” elicits, along with the big ones: Why did these people sign up to do this? What do they want out of the experience? What was Mr. Bel thinking?“Ballet (New York)” will end on Thursday at El Museo del Barrio, 1230 Fifth Avenue; 212-680-0569, 15­.performa-arts­.org.Advertisement