AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerMost days, Chicago is only the third-largest city in the United States, but beginning this week it may seem as if it’s the dominant one on Tuesdays, as “Chicago Med” joins “Chicago Fire” on NBC’s schedule for that night. If Dick Wolf didn’t have himself a “Chicago” franchise before, he certainly does now; he’s behind those two shows as well as “Chicago P.D.” on Wednesdays.No one is better than Mr. Wolf at executing formula television, whether the formula is one he largely invented or, as with the “Chicago” shows, one you’ve seen before from other producers. “Chicago Med” is so exactly what you expect it to be that there’s practically no point describing it, a bad thing if you like your shows innovative and unpredictable, but a good thing if you can’t get enough trauma room gore and dramatics.The premiere starts out fast and rarely slows down. At the very moment that a ribbon-cutting is taking place for a new emergency department at Chicago Med, a train derailment sends a flood of patients its way. One of the train’s passengers is Dr. Connor Rhodes (Colin Donnell), a dashing young man who hasn’t even begun his new job as trauma fellow at Chicago Med yet; he comes in with the wave of injured, introducing himself to his new colleagues as he’s making snap-judgment medical decisions.You know what follows: Each patient has a story; some live, some don’t. Each doctor and nurse also has a story, which will be revealed a little at a time: Dr. Natalie Manning (Torrey DeVitto), pregnant and single; Dr. Will Halstead (Nick Gehlfuss), brother of a detective on “Chicago P.D.” (Yes, there will be cross-pollination among the three series.)The show is almost indistinguishable from CBS’s “Code Black,” another emergency-room newcomer this season (which goes head-to-head with “Chicago P.D.” on Wednesday nights). And it will no doubt do decently, since the appetite for medical TV seems endless. “Code Black” has already received an order for six more scripts, and even the ABC comedy “Dr. Ken,” one of the worst new shows of the fall, has received a full-season order. Expect reliable, relentlessly paced drama from “Chicago Med.” Just don’t expect to be surprised.Advertisement