AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertIs it true that “an amalgamation of dance styles” always “reveals the versatility of dance?” Those words are printed in one of the programs for this year’s Fall for Dance Festival at City Center. They could be printed every year, as part of a slogan advertising the festival’s popular mix-and-match approach to dance from around the world. But they applied particularly to Program 2 on Friday, and not just to its range of offerings. Each of the four selections was in itself an amalgamation of styles.In the program, those words could be found in a description of the shortest selection, “Czardas,” a five-minute solo choreographed and performed by the Royal Ballet dancer Steven McRae. Here the mix was of tap, ballet and the conventional ballet stylization of Hungarian folk dance. In jeans, a tank top and tap shoes, Mr. McRae folded his arms across his chest or posed with a hand at the back of his neck before adding percussive footwork to whirlwind turns. His manner was a hybrid of peacock and innocent, and though his taps were a bit muddy at top speed, he won ovations.The opening number, “What the Day Owes to the Night” by La Compagnie Hervé Koubi, combined martial arts, capoeira and hip-hop with the Algerian heritage and French training of its choreographer, Mr. Koubi. The bare chests of a dozen strapping men immediately prompted wolf whistles, but the beauty went deeper. There was a mesmerizingly fluid strength in their low-skimming flight and slow tumbling, and whistles were replaced by gasps as one man after another ran up the backs of his fellows to leap or fall backward or be tossed shockingly high into the air.Nubian music in the recorded score and skirtlike flaps on the costumes gave a dervish character to Bronx-derived spinning on heads, but when European choral voices arrived like an intermittent radio signal, was that infiltration benign? It was tempting to look for clues in the music because the dance was frustratingly cryptic: patently spiritual in its tone and arms reaching upward, but static in its repetitions.In “One Last Good Chance” by Pam Tanowitz, a New York premiere commissioned by Fall for Dance and the Vail International Dance Festival, ballet and Merce Cunningham were mingled. Is it the Cunningham precedent that sometimes leads Ms. Tanowitz to pick scores that seem to repel dance (and most audience members)? This one, played by the Flux Quartet, was made of long chords and longer silences, with random drum comments from its composer, Greg Saunier.Ms. Tanowitz doesn’t need extra randomness. At its best, her eccentric choreography has a thrilling, witty unpredictability. This work for three excellent dancers from American Ballet Theater wasn’t her best, though she transformed a loading gate at the rear of the stage into a magic portal, gave new life to old ballet positions with odd footwork and indulged periodically in beauty. When Devon Teuscher luxuriated in the arms of Calvin Royal III, just for a moment, it was emblematic of Ms. Tanowitz’s prickly attitude toward ballet’s pleasures.Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater closed the program with Ronald K. Brown’s 2013 work “Four Corners.” Mr. Brown’s blend of African and modern dance is one of the most potent amalgamations in dance today, and although this piece shares some of the meandering of Mr. Koubi’s, the juicy dancing of Jamar Roberts and Linda Celeste Sims made it irresistible.The Fall for Dance Festival continues through Sunday at City Center, Manhattan; 212-581-1212, nycitycenter­.org.Advertisement