By JAMES R. OESTREICHNOV. 16, 2015
The English pianist Paul Lewis was to have more or less anchored the White Light Festival at Lincoln Center this fall, with major appearances early and late. But appendicitis  prevented him from joining the tenor Mark Padmore in three Schubert song cycles last month.Happily, Mr. Lewis seemed restored to robust health for his recital of Beethoven’s final trilogy of piano sonatas (Nos. 30 to 32) on Saturday evening at Alice Tully Hall. And stamina was needed, given Mr. Lewis’s decision to play these demanding works in quick succession, with no intermission.The recital was evocatively titled “Last Soliloquy.” Beethoven’s piano sonatas, like his string quartets, were personal statements that grew ever more inward. Beethoven, immersed in thought and feeling, was speaking mainly to himself, seemingly oblivious to what his public and posterity might make of those utterances.Mr. Lewis, with an introverted style, might seem the ideal interpreter of these works, and many have found him so. His technique rises readily to any pianistic challenges, and he wastes no effort on virtuosic display.AdvertisementBut as with that notion of playing the works straight through, he can seem like a man in a hurry. His demeanor and approach project a certain matter-of-fact dispatch, and he does not always allow the music time to breathe, or the listener time to ruminate and reflect.AdvertisementHe did so to wonderful effect at times on Saturday. At the start, the opening of the E major Sonata (Op. 109), Mr. Lewis’s playing offered warmth and fluidity with no loss of clarity. His deliberation in the Fugue of the A flat Sonata (Op. 110) allowed the audience to savor the welter of detail. And his contemplativeness in the Arietta of the C minor Sonata (Op. 111) transported a listener to the world of late Schubert.In all, this was an impressive achievement. If it also showed room for further growth, of whom can that not be said of late Beethoven?The White Light Festival runs through Sunday; 212-721-6500, whitelightfestival.org.A version of this review appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Undertaking a Trilogy  in One Take.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.