AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperCarnegie Hall — whose former chairman, Ronald O. Perelman, stepped down last month after clashing with its executive and artistic director, Clive Gillinson — announced on Monday that a legal review that it commissioned had found no evidence to support allegations that Mr. Gillinson had tried to undermine Mr. Perelman’s oversight responsibilities.The hall said in a statement that the review, completed by lawyers from O’Melveny & Myers, had concluded that “although there was a serious breakdown in the working relationship between Mr. Gillinson and Mr. Perelman, there is no evidence to support allegations that Mr. Gillinson sought to undermine Mr. Perelman’s or the board’s oversight responsibilities, or that his staff’s actions impeded the proper governance of Carnegie.”But Carnegie Hall offered no details about what the review determined about the specific charges that Mr. Perelman had made against Mr. Gillinson in a letter he sent in September to members of Carnegie’s board of trustees. In the letter, he accused Mr. Gillinson of a “troubling lack of transparency,” suggested that Carnegie was not properly vetting transactions for potential conflicts of interest, and charged that at one point Mr. Gillinson had gone ahead with a contract that Mr. Perelman had ordered him to suspend.Over the summer, Mr. Perelman, a hard-charging billionaire businessman, suspended Mr. Gillinson, only to see members of the board reinstate him the next day.Carnegie said that in light of the legal review, members of the executive committee of its board were “satisfied that Mr. Gillinson complied with his professional responsibilities” and that Mr. Gillinson “continues to have their full support.”Mercedes T. Bass, who became acting chairwoman of Carnegie’s board after Mr. Perelman stepped down, said in a statement, “Along with Carnegie Hall’s entire extended family, the trustees are committed to looking ahead, building on our institution’s illustrious past and working toward an exciting future under Clive Gillinson’s excellent artistic and executive leadership.”Mr. Gillinson said in a statement that he looked forward to concentrating on the hall’s future.“I think it was important for Carnegie Hall to have undertaken such a thorough and independent review and I am, of course, very pleased with the conclusions,” he said. “I have especially appreciated the large number of people who reached out to me in recent weeks to express their support. The generosity of spirit has meant so much to me.”There was no written report of the review’s findings. Howard Heiss, the lawyer who led the inquiry, said in a brief interview: “We’re not faulting Mr. Perelman for raising the issues. And we believe that consistent with his oversight responsibilities, he made legitimate requests for financial information, which he ultimately received.”And Mr. Heiss said that the inquiry did not fault Mr. Perelman for raising concerns that the Warner Music Prize, a $100,000 award for young musicians who played at the hall, might be a related-party transaction, since the Warner Music Group is owned by a firm founded by Len Blavatnik, who sits on Carnegie’s board. But he said that “we have reviewed those issues and have concluded that they don’t raise any more general governance concerns.”Christine Taylor, a spokeswoman for Mr. Perelman, said in an email: “We are pleased that the lawyer tapped by Carnegie Hall concluded that Ronald Perelman raised legitimate issues. However, it is unfortunate that Carnegie Hall’s leadership seems to have reverted to a familiar pattern of self-protection when it comes to transparency, governance issues and related-party transactions.”Carnegie Hall, which announced the review’s conclusions in a news release, did not offer more details about what the lawyers it engaged had determined happened when it came to Mr. Perelman’s specific accusations, or provide further details about what the review found.Advertisement