AdvertisementSupported byOpera ReviewBy Michael WhiteLONDON — Life, death and what comes after are the core materials of opera, whose composers sweep their heroines, like Gounod’s Marguerite, up to heaven or dispatch their heretics, like Don Giovanni, down to hell.But Georg Friedrich Haas’s “Morgen und Abend,” which had its world premiere at Covent Garden on Friday, revisits these conventional plot devices in an unconventional way — renouncing the high camp of angelic choirs, demonic choruses and blazing trumpets for a serious and sober, though ultimately radiant, imagining of what it might be like to die and pass into another kind of sentience.“Morgen und Abend” (Morning and Evening), which runs until Nov. 28, is directed with restraint by Graham Vick and conducted like an exercise in mindfulness by Michael Boder. The libretto is by the Norwegian playwright Jon Fosse, whose work is spare, austere and inscrutable, indebted to Beckett, without the absurdity, and Pinter, with the silences.In academia it is known as “postdramatic,” which means nothing much occurs. But there is a sense of something in the nothingness that gives it potency. And that is what Mr. Haas picks up on in his opera, across 90 minutes of unbroken music.All that happens is that a Norwegian fisherman is born — an event recounted in spoken words against the orchestra — and dies (in song), only realizing that he is dead when he encounters people long deceased but sent to help with his transition to the afterlife.They are like the angel in the Elgar oratorio “Dream of Gerontius.” But where “Gerontius” is passionate and perfumed in its Catholicism, “Morgen und Abend” is contemplative and quietly mystical, with no particular theology for all its Christian resonance.Mr. Haas, an Austrian who lives in New York, has said that his musical interpretation of the afterlife owes much to a near-death experience that he had in childhood and remembers as involving bright light.More concerned with texture than event, his music uses a large orchestra divided into overlapping choirs of instruments that surge, swell and deflate across long time durations. It recalls — perhaps on purpose — measures in the score of Britten’s “Billy Budd” in which no one sings and the stage is empty, but an overlapping sequence of orchestral triads signals that momentous things are happening out of sight.It also probably owes something to the so-called Holy Minimalists — Arvo Part, Henryk Gorecki, John Tavener — although its simple processes are spiced by a discriminating use of microtones that edge the tuning into areas of interesting discomfort.But whatever their indebtedness, these great surges of sound are richly colored and a sonic analogue for the intense, pulsating light of Mr. Haas’s childhood trauma. They create a heavy atmosphere that wraps around the small number of voices on the stage — five singers and one actor — without swamping them. And they are more memorable than the vocal writing, which is loosely lyrical without the boldness of a real tune.Structurally, the opening stretch of spoken melodrama that describes Johannes’s birth is problematic. It functions like an awkwardly ill-fitting prelude to the more important business of his death. And though the orchestration has gestures of great impact, with a startling battery of bass drums that hammer home the shock of being born, the speech is dull. That was especially apparent at the premiere, with hazy sound enhancement of the voice against the music and a disengaged performance from the veteran actor Klaus Maria Brandauer, a big name in German theater but out of his comfort zone in this piece.More successful were the sung roles, led by the baritone Christoph Pohl, whose Johannes combined impressively strong definition with a touching, rabbit-in-the-headlights sense of vulnerability as death closed in. The tenor Will Hartmann, as Johannes’s fisherman friend Peter (could his last name possibly be Grimes, you wonder?) also made a good impression.But it was principally the dazzling sheen of the orchestral playing under Mr. Boder that made the premiere so memorable — together with a staging of seductive stealth. In truth, there was little to look at: A bare white space (designed by Richard Hudson), a few items of white furniture, and a white fishing boat that recalls “Peter Grimes.” But they were all on a revolving platform that turned as slowly as the hands of a clock, shifting the focus between objects until finally resting on a door frame: the inevitable threshold that Johannes has to cross.With equal subtlety, the lighting gradually intensified until its brightness was unbearable (presumably from the proximity of God). The opera’s text, which up to that point had been video-projected onto one of the white walls, began to fade — as if words were vital signs of life. And very gently, Peter led Johannes through the door.A work of quietly mesmerizing beauty, “Morgen und Abend” shows how simple narrative can be invested with profound significance and beauty. If death does eventually turn out as Mr. Haas, Mr. Fosse and Mr. Vick suggest, it may not be so bad.Morgen und Abend.  Directed by Graham Vick. Covent Garden. Through Nov. 28.Advertisement