By GIA KOURLASOCT. 4, 2015
The latest package of dances at New York City Ballet, “Americana x Five,” feels like American comfort food — the healthy kind. In a program on Friday at the David H. Koch Theater honoring American composers with repertory that spans nearly eight decades, the company showed aspects of the American spirit: youth, experimentation, moxie, power and humor.In Peter Martins’s “Ash,” set to Michael Torke’s urgent, bounding score, the cast, led by the invigorating pair of Ashly Isaacs and Taylor Stanley, is young, just as it was at its 1991 premiere when dancers like Ethan Stiefel and Wendy Whelan swept through its sprightly beats and assertive jumps. A lighting and costume overhaul would help — the color palette of drab blues and purples screams chain hotel — but there’s an effervescent appeal to its speed and attack, in which 10 dancers, one lead couple and four demi-soloists, splinter off in canon formations.For all its vivacity, “Ash” is ruled by too much symmetry, and Mr. Martins frequently repeats himself. Mildly intriguing movements, as when Mr. Stanley quickly ducks under Ms. Isaac’s turning arabesque, are flattened the moment they reappear. But “Ash” is a showpiece for dancers, and threaded through it are solos that reveal a jumper here, a turner there.Richard Tanner’s 1982 “Sonatas and Interludes,” set to sections of John Cage’s 1946–48 score for prepared piano, played onstage by the excellent Cameron Grant, provides a setting both lean and dreamlike for Tiler Peck and Anthony Huxley. Wearing white, they begin hand in hand as if two sides of a shadow teasing space with distance and proximity. Ms. Peck, placid in one moment and impassioned in the next, mirrors Mr. Huxley’s beautiful manner: sculptural, refined, firm though never hard.AdvertisementLouis Moreau Gottschalk, born in New Orleans, composed the joyful music for George Balanchine’s 1964 “Tarantella,” which reunites Megan Fairchild with Joaquin De Luz — happily, judging by the way Mr. De Luz tossed his tambourine into the air before the final exit.The rest of the program was golden: Justin Peck’s “Rodeo: Four Dance Episodes” (2015), set to Aaron Copland, rewards with repeated viewings. Ms. Peck (no relation) is the sole woman, but what’s at stake are ballet boys turning into men.AdvertisementWithin his choreography, Mr. Peck creates structures, like set pieces, with clusters of bodies. Amar Ramasar is the hero, but Andrew Veyette, dancing with a newfound looseness, is another valiant presence in a recurring pas de trois with Mr. Huxley and Daniel Ulbricht. The music is Mr. Peck’s secret weapon: While he still works from a point of structure, the vibrant score gives this playful dance mystery and magnitude.And has there ever been a bombshell like Sara Mearns? Watching her Striptease Girl in Balanchine’s “Slaughter on Tenth Avenue” is like seeing the ballet for the first time. Her voluptuous plasticity and impulsive phrasing is hypnotic; she’s sexy without playing sexy. The only demoralizing part of the evening was walking into the lobby and seeing City Ballet’s current campaign of Jamie Lee Reardin illustrations that make it look as though the dancer with the worst eating disorder wins.New York City Ballet performs through Oct. 18 at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, nycballet­.com.A version of this review appears in print on October 5, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Comforting Mix With America at Its Core.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.