Kurt Sutter swung the ax on his own series, opting to end “The Bastard Executioner” after its debut season, which concluded on Tuesday. The show runner announced the end of the FX show, a swords-sandals-and-revenge drama set in 14th-century Wales, in an ad that appeared in outlets including Variety and The Hollywood Reporter. It read, in part: “The audience has spoken and unfortunately the word is ‘meh.’ So with due respect, we bring our mythology to an epic and fiery close.”The show was Mr. Sutter’s followup to “Sons of Anarchy,” his popular motorcycle gang drama that ran on FX for seven seasons.In an interview with The Hollywood Reporter, Mr. Sutter acknowledged the complexity and expense of shooting a period drama in Wales, with elaborate sets and horses. But the bottom line was the bottom line: The show ended because it did not draw enough ratings. It debuted in September to around four million viewers but lost roughly half of its audience within six weeks.“I don’t want to write something that nobody’s [expletive] watching,” he said. The decision to end the show was made in consultation with John Landgraf, the chief executive of FX Networks, but the timing and delivery of the cancellation announcement was Mr. Sutter’s call. The advertisement, which thanks the cast and crew members, “was about letting folks know what a great experience I had, and how proud I was of them,” Mr. Sutter told The Hollywood Reporter. He notified them in advance, he said.“Executioner” starred the Australian theater actor Lee Jones as a former soldier and farmer impersonating a punisher, for a variety of reasons. There was also a mystical plot involving rival religious sects. “I think the mythology was a little too dense for some people,” Mr. Sutter said in the interview. “There’s a glut of period pieces on right now, and I’m sure timing has something to do it.”Mr. Sutter is developing a “Sons of Anarchy” spinoff about the Mayans, a rival gang in the show, among other projects.Mr. Sutter also let fans know the show was ending via an Instagram post that read, in part: “The final episode of ‘The Bastard Executioner.’ Truths revealed. Love professed. Limbs severed. Bloody good end.”A version of this article appears in print on 11/19/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Kurt Sutter Ends u2018Bastard Executioneru2019.