By ZACHARY WOOLFENOV. 18, 2015
Good morning, music lovers! If you’ve attended performances over the past few days, you may well have heard “La Marseillaise” played as a show of solidarity with France after Friday’s terrorist attacks; The New York Times’s Michael Cooper wrote about the history of the stirring anthem.There’s a final burst of concerts in the week before a little Thanksgiving lull, so go find them! I’d especially recommend the avant-garde harpist Zeena Parkins’s residency at the Stone and the latest installment in the Attacca Quartet’s traversal of all 68 of Haydn’s string quartets.A Symphony for DetroitFriday brings the Detroit Symphony Orchestra’s premiere of “Symphony in D,” Tod Machover’s latest city symphony. An ambitious amalgam of spoken-word storytelling, electronic sounds, live soloists, prerecorded excerpts and traditional orchestral writing, the work wants to be nothing less than a summation of the highs and lows of a struggling city — all in just half an hour.A few weeks ago, I followed Mr. Machover around Detroit as he met with musicians and other performers, young and old, and discovered that the most moving part of “Symphony in D” may, in the end, be less the concerts than the way in which the composition process brought people together.AdvertisementI traveled to Detroit not just to witness part of the creation of “Symphony in D,” but also to explore how an orchestra that canceled its 2010-11 season because of a musicians’ strike has managed, in the short time since, to return to stability and become a national leader in programming new and modern American music. (Hint: The key has been financial support from foundations; a new model that de-emphasizes performances at the downtown Orchestral Hall; and committed leadership from Leonard Slatkin, the orchestra’s music director; Anne Parsons, its president and chief executive; and Erik Rönmark, its general manager and artistic administrator.)While in town I got to hear Nadia Sirota play Nico Muhly’s recent Viola Concerto, still available online as part of the Detroit Symphony’s extensive replay archive. The piece has swirling prettiness; you can hear Mr. Muhly still working through the material that filled his opera “Two Boys.”AdvertisementA New Conductor for New JerseyGood news for those of us still concerned about the gender balance among high-level conductors: Xian Zhang, a fast-rising Chinese-American star, has been named the next music director of the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra.This excellent ensemble would get more attention if it didn’t have to compete with the New York Philharmonic (where Ms. Zhang was once an associate conductor) and other groups passing through. New Jersey’s current associate conductor, Gemma New, is also a woman, showing the institution’s admirable commitment to this issue.Berlin’s Beethoven: For Good or Ill?The mighty Berlin Philharmonic dominates New York’s music scene this week with five consecutive evenings of concerts at Carnegie Hall, working through the nine Beethoven symphonies.The Times’s Anthony Tommasini starts off the marathon with a note of doubt: “coming from an institution that has shown us, as much as any, what a major modern orchestra can really be, making a big statement with this most well-worn of cycles is a missed opportunity.”What’s your thought on Berlin’s Beethoven? Let me know in the comments, tweet @zwoolfe or email zach.woolfe@nytimes.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.