By ANTHONY TOMMASININOV. 17, 2015
Putting together a thoughtfully varied recital program can be as difficult as playing your chosen pieces beautifully. The Norwegian pianist Leif Ove Andsnes demonstrated how to pull off both feats in his superb recital on Monday evening at Carnegie Hall.The phrase “solo recital” was first used by Liszt in 1840  to describe his solo concerts. Audiences and critics were baffled. How can someone “recite” with a piano? Yet that’s exactly what Liszt did by selecting works that together created the musical equivalent of a varied literary reading. Mr. Andsnes played no Liszt on Monday. But his program exemplified the Lisztian recital heritage.There were also no contemporary works, which, for me, usually suggests that a pianist is playing it safe. Not this time. Mr. Andsnes opened with a 25-minute selection of seldom-heard Sibelius piano pieces from the early 20th century, music so jarringly, wondrously strange that it was like hearing bracing new works.Mr. Andsnes began with “Kyllikki,” a three-movement suite from 1904. From the start, the music is alluring yet elusive. A long-lined, folk-tinged melody hovers over a flow of shimmering tremolos and oscillating chords. At first it seems simple enough, basically a wistful tune and a hazy accompaniment. But sudden, subdued bursts interrupt the flow, and the music keeps making willful, even weird harmonic shifts. The final movement is at first all cascading arpeggios, punctuated by stretches of elfin dances. There Sibelius seems a latter-day Finnish Schumann.AdvertisementMr. Andsnes then turned to five beguiling, curious character pieces. “The Birch Tree” was especially fascinating, with its chirping tune over swaying chords. “Spring Vision” sounded like some slightly ominous children’s song, with insistent chants and rippling passagework.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What could follow these Sibelius selections? Mr. Andsnes, who has been immersed in Beethoven’s concertos for the last few seasons, choose Beethoven’s Sonata No. 18 in E flat (Op. 31, No. 3), a playful, clearheaded piece that might seem a complete departure. But Mr. Andsnes conveyed the jolts of fervor beneath the impish surfaces. He dispatched the madcap finale with eerie coolness, even at a breathless tempo.After intermission, a Debussy group included three inventive études from 1915, showing the composer in his Modernist mode. Mr. Andsnes ended with four Chopin works that, though different from one another in mood, seemed to have a narrative connection. He was especially compelling in the episodic Ballade No. 4 in F minor, shifting from passages of poignant lyricism to bouts of thickly textured intensity.AdvertisementEven the two Chopin encores (an étude and the popular Polonaise in A flat, played with heroic brio) continued the sense of a story being told. Liszt would have approved.A version of this review appears in print on November 18, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: In the Spirit of Liszt.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.