By MICHAEL COOPERNOV. 17, 2015
The New Jersey Symphony Orchestra’s next music director will be familiar to some concertgoers in the region: The orchestra announced on Monday that the role would be filled by Xian Zhang, a rising Chinese-American star who was an associate conductor at the New York Philharmonic for several years before concentrating her recent career in Europe.“This actually feels quite like a homecoming,” Ms. Zhang, 42, said in a phone interview last week from Cardiff, Wales, where she had led a concert on a day off from Puccini’s “La Bohème,” which she is conducting at the English National Opera in London.Ms. Zhang, whose full name is pronounced she-YEN jhong, has been music director of the Orchestra Sinfonica di Milano Giuseppe Verdi in Italy since 2009, and has been a guest conductor with orchestras around the world, including the London Symphony Orchestra and the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra in Amsterdam.She is joining a small but growing cohort of women who are breaking the glass ceiling that still makes the sight of female conductors rare, long after women have made gains playing in most orchestras. A handful of women lead orchestras in the United States, including Marin Alsop at the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra and JoAnn Falletta at the Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra. The New Jersey Symphony’s associate conductor is the New Zealand-born Gemma New.AdvertisementIn New Jersey, Ms. Zhang will succeed Jacques Lacombe, who plans to step down in June after a six-year tenure to become principal conductor of the Bonn Opera in Germany this spring. Ms. Zhang will begin her four-year contract as music director in September, but will first lead the orchestra, which she has conducted before, in Tchaikovsky’s Fourth Symphony and Barber’s Violin Concerto in April.Advertisement“I’ve conducted the orchestra several times, and really enjoyed it, really enjoyed the connection with the musicians,” she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Zhang was born in Dandong, China, near the North Korean border, to musical parents, and began studying the piano when she was 3. Her father, an instrument maker, built her a piano since they were hard to come by at the end of the Cultural Revolution.As a music student she began studying conducting and, at the age of 20, made her professional debut conducting Mozart’s “The Marriage of Figaro” at the Central Opera House in Beijing. She moved to the United States in 1998, and got her big break in 2002, when she shared first prize in the inaugural Maazel/Vilar Conductors’ Competition at Carnegie Hall.That success led Lorin Maazel to bring her to the New York Philharmonic, where she conducted Young People’s Concerts, concerts in the parks and several subscription programs. Anthony Tommasini wrote in The New York Times in 2006 that her “technique appears to be flawless.” When she brought the Verdi orchestra to the BBC Proms in 2013, The Guardian of London called her “an exciting, heart-on-sleeve Verdian.”Ms. Zhang said that she would continue to lead the Verdi orchestra — which she said was “in crisis” after its government funding was seriously cut back — next season, but that she planned to spend only six weeks there, down from 12. She will conduct the New Jersey Symphony in seven subscription classical programs in her first season as music director.A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Xian Zhang to Take the Podium of the New Jersey Symphony, as Music Director.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.