By NEIL GENZLINGERNOV. 17, 2015
We love to despise absurdly rich people and revel in their misfortunes, but have we spent enough time doing the same for the enablers of absurdly rich people — sellers of yachts, operators of polo clubs, designers of $10,000 gowns? Probably not. “The Art of More,” a tasty new drama on Crackle, is determined to make up for this oversight.The series, which is that streaming service’s first original drama and whose 10 episodes become available on Thursday, is a behind-the-scenes story about high-end auction houses, those places that sell art, memorabilia and baubles to millionaires at prices that make minimum-wage workers weep. Turns out that there’s a lot of dirt beneath those slick, snooty events where status is flaunted by the wave of a paddle.Christian Cooke stars as Graham Connor, who when we first meet him, in a flashback to 2009, is a not-so-honorable American soldier in Baghdad. Then, in the present day, he turns up as the newest account executive at the Parke-Mason auction house in New York. He’s a local boy, but he’s a long way from his tough neighborhood in the ways that matter, and he’s determined to hustle, bend rules and do whatever else is required to be taken seriously.There’s a rival house, of course, DeGraaf’s, and Graham instantly earns himself a personal rivalry as well in the form of Roxanna (Kate Bosworth), the daughter of DeGraaf’s chief executive. She too has something to prove, namely that she isn’t just riding on nepotism, and she’s as ruthless in her own way as Graham is. The push-and-pull between these two, though, is only the beginning of the fun in this show.AdvertisementCrackle, Sony’s streaming service, has a growing reputation built on humor — Jerry Seinfeld’s “Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee,” the recent “SuperMansion.” “The Art of More” too could easily have been a comedy, so outrageous are some of the things Mr. Cooke and Ms. Bosworth’s characters will do to land an account, but it’s far better as a drama. And Crackle has surrounded them with a strong supporting cast, led by Cary Elwes as Arthur Davenport, the rich guy who was Graham’s first big signing, and Dennis Quaid as Samuel Brukner, another rich guy being courted by both houses.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Not counting Ms. Bosworth’s character, the women in this series seem mostly to be eye candy, but presumably that’s in service to the central theme, which is that money and the pursuit of it have a dehumanizing effect. Graham certainly finds himself in a cascading nightmare that makes even murder secondary to the quest for the big score. Roxanna too has a particularly nothing-to-be-proud-of moment involving an art collector on his deathbed. Both these business people find that poor choices lead to more poor choices. The rich clients they serve and try to exploit also tend to discover that money is a magnet for bad karma.AdvertisementGraham’s past in Iraq comes back to haunt him when the sinister men he dealt with there (the main one, Hassan, is played by Patrick Sabongui) turn up in the United States and force him to help them unload more ill-gotten antiquities. That gives the series a current-events ominousness.It’s all served at a brisk pace, and with a sort of voyeurs’ glee. Some episodes start with flashbacks showing the history of a particular collectible — an 1899 robbery; a rock ’n’ roll vignette from 1969. And subplots revolve around eclectic memorabilia, like Sally Ride’s spacesuit and a Ferrari once driven by Steve McQueen.The casting is delicious, the characters and their stories grow more complex with each episode, and Graham and Roxanna find that you can’t serve the rich without becoming caught in the quicksand of greed. And you know how quicksand works. The harder you struggle against it, the farther it sucks you in.A version of this review appears in print on November 18, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: The White Gloves Come Off on the Auction Block.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.