By JAMES PONIEWOZIKNOV. 17, 2015
Must the show go on? After Friday’s terrorist massacre in Paris, as often happens after violent tragedies, a few shows didn’t. CBS announced that it would replace scheduled Monday episodes of “Supergirl” (whose plot concerned a series of urban bombings), and “NCIS: Los Angeles” (involving a possible terrorist recruitment scheme). TNT, likewise, pulled a Monday episode of the F.B.I. drama “Legends,” which reportedly depicted a terrorist shooting in Paris.In a way, it’s surprising that there weren’t more similarly timed episodes. Brutal, disturbing, fictional terrorism has been a staple of prime time for years — specifically, since Sept. 11, which spurred a broad, public discussion about violence in popular culture. This is a familiar cycle now: A certain kind of entertainment depicting terrible things becomes briefly inappropriate; then it becomes widespread, practically mandatory.I don’t blame networks for pulling unfortunately timed episodes out of sensitivity. It’s considerate, and they would be pilloried if they didn’t. Calling “too soon” over a story that’s merely coincidence is sanctimony that helps no one, but someone is always ready to do it.But I also wouldn’t have blamed them if they had simply decided to broadcast the episodes anyway — as the terrorism-themed dramas “Homeland” and “Quantico” did on Sunday night, with disclaimers about their content. If there’s one thing an atrocity like the massacre in Paris reminds us of, it’s that blame, offense and outrage are better directed toward the perpetrators.AdvertisementThere is a kind of ritual-offering aspect to these cancellations and postponements. It happens after terror attacks. It happens after mass shootings. It happened in August, when the finale of USA’s “Mr. Robot,” involving a live-on-video suicide, was pulled after an on-camera shooting of journalists in Virginia. It aired a week later. The finale was no less disturbing and worthy by then, the real-life slaughter no less painful.AdvertisementAfter the Sept. 11 attacks, I remember the numerous cancellations, postponements and think pieces — I wrote some of them — about whether and how “everything would change,” about where the new cultural boundaries were. I had watched the World Trade Center burn from the roof of my apartment building. In those days, yes, a violent TV show could bring up painful emotions. But so could a rerun of “Sex and the City” set in pre-9/11 Manhattan. My worst trigger was my baby son’s board book about airplanes. After a trauma, there’s no clean line distinguishing what pop-culture content is unsettling and what isn’t, when or to whom.Maybe a better rule would be: Tell good, substantive stories about things that matter to people, regardless of the timing. But even lightweight, mindless popcorn entertainment, with special-effects fireballs and papier-mâché villains, does a service. It helps us confront our persistent fears, as it has from the allegorical sci-fi of the Cold War to the terrorism thrillers of today.“24” was one of the most-anticipated shows of the fall 2001 season. The Sept. 11 attacks raised doubt about whether it could ever run. Its pilot had its premiere two months later, scarcely edited, and the show ran for years, a wish-fulfillment fantasy of terrorist butts kicked and names taken, one day at a time. We got skeptical takes like “Sleeper Cell” and “Rubicon.” We got terror-fighting as family drama in “Alias.” We got the deep-space, religious-war allegory of “Battlestar Galactica.” We got dozens of stories, serious and escapist, brilliant and dumb, because we had things we needed to work through, and we responded to them.Pop culture is how we dream collectively. And it’s how we share nightmares — communal, cathartic nightmares that allow us to conceive awful things at a safe remove. It matters. Even the silly stuff.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.We should not be surprised that extremists excoriate pop entertainment and its liberties, that they attack cartoonists and concertgoers at a rock show. Even the frothiest expressions of art have something to say. We should know that; the murderers plainly do.So, because of the attacks in Paris, CBS pulled an episode of “Supergirl” and instead broadcast the show’s Thanksgiving episode a week early. It was a decent concession in response to a terrible situation. That’s one way of looking at it.But here’s another: The week after a barbaric attack, for which repressive, misogynist fundamentalists claimed responsibility, CBS ran a story about a superpowered woman who holds down a career, makes her own decisions and fights on behalf of justice.That may not be a perfect response. But it’s a damn good one.A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: When Terror Strikes Close to Your TV.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.