AdvertisementSupported byOpera ReviewBy Michael WhiteLONDON — The director Calixto Bieito has never been afraid of frightening horses, or humans for that matter, with productions steeped in blood, gore and sex.There were frightened horses of both the metaphorical and literal kind in his new staging of Verdi’s “Force of Destiny” that opened last week at the English National Opera and runs until Dec. 4.Conducted by the company’s new music director, Mark Wigglesworth, and to be shared with the Canadian Opera Company in Toronto and New York’s Metropolitan Opera, it moved the action from 1750s Spain and Italy to the Spanish Civil War nearly 200 years later, a context of significance to Catalans like Mr. Bieito. The set design by Rebecca Ringst — though largely architectural, with the facades of falling buildings thrusting dizzily in all directions — came with video-projected images of equine terror referencing Picasso’s “Guernica.”But the forewarning of “adult material,” always a selling point in opera, wasn’t really necessary. Not that it was pleasant to watch pregnant women being kicked or, in the final scene, the heroine strangle herself with barbed-wire. But compared with Mr. Bieito’s past work, in which few characters survive to Act III without being raped, beaten or otherwise abused, this show is restrained, and high-impact in a more productive way: making its mark with energy and pace, and only sometimes side-tracked into sensationalism.Energy and pace are all-important in a piece like “Force of Destiny,” whose complicated plot requires a strong hand to contain it. It’s a story of domestic vengeance writ large (hence the relevance of civil war, where like fights like), starting with an elopement that goes wrong when the girl’s father is killed, accidently, but not before he manages with his dying breath to utter a curse.The rest of the narrative activates the curse as the girl’s brother pursues the lovers with the aim to kill them. If that sounds straightforward, the pursuit happens across several years, through several countries, in and out of wars, taverns and monasteries.The virtue of Mr. Bieito’s approach to this story is that he’s not overly concerned with the details. One scene swept breathlessly into another, leaving anybody in the audience who didn’t know the piece struggling to follow, but excited. Not least to be caught up in that excitement were the singers.The two cursed lovers, Gwyn Hughes Jones (Alvaro) and Tamara Wilson (Leonora) weren’t exactly Romeo and Juliet to look at, but they sounded wonderful. Mr. Hughes Jones is an open-throated, brightly resonant and fluid lyric tenor, and Ms. Wilson, who turned heads singing Aida at the Met last season, has a dramatic voice of thrilling power, security and stamina. This was her London debut, one that will earn her invitations back.Anthony Michaels-Moore was so blisteringly monomaniac as Carlo, the avenging brother, that the roar of his delivery didn’t always hit the note dead center, but that was a negligible price to pay for such a dynamic performance. Rinat Shaham’s Preziosilla made the most of a role that was upgraded from gypsy mischief-maker to gun-toting military commander, though the enthusiasm with which she battered pregnant women and single-handedly executed an entire unit of prisoners didn’t enhance her charm. And there was a delectably silken but sinister account of the Father Superior by James Cresswell that stood out as the most eloquent singing of the evening.You might ask, though, why this priest needed to be so sinister. Verdi was no friend to the church, and enjoyed portraying clergy warts and all. But in “Force of Destiny” the church does offer a (reluctant) refuge for the runaways and some hope of redemption from the curse they carry, a redemption Mr, Bieito handles with a warped grasp of theology.We know from past productions that his memories of a Spanish Catholic childhood are unhappy ones. This show suggests the same. When she is given refuge in the monastery, poor Leonora undergoes a grisly ritual that subjects her to afflictions of a Christ-like character. Her hands are bound as though for the stigmata and she’s forced to wear a “crown of thorns” made of barbed-wire.That this wire eventually becomes the means to kill herself is Mr. Bieto’s idea: Verdi has her killed by Carlo. Substituting suicide suggests that Leonora ultimately takes her destiny into her own hands, perhaps cheating God of the last word. And the last word on the music belongs to Mr. Wigglesworth, for whom it represents a second triumph in his new job, after a decisive opening of the season with Shostakovich’s “Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk.”His mastery of the score was total, and his leadership clearly inspiring from the way the orchestra and chorus played and sang. The opera has been through bad times during the past six months in terms of money, management and morale. But from a show as bold and confident as this, one would never know. Force of Destiny.  Directed by Calixto Bieito. English National Opera. Through Dec. 4. Advertisement