For David Bowie, even a jazz-influenced new album is best set in a futuristic hellscape featuring a bejeweled skull inside an astronaut helmet and human scarecrows in crucifixion poses.On Thursday, Mr. Bowie debuted the 10-minute video for “Blackstar,” the first single and title track for his 28th studio album, due out Jan. 8, which also happens to be the singer’s 69th birthday. (The title is styled minimally on the album cover as a single character: a black star.)“On the day of execution/Only women kneel and smile,” Mr. Bowie sings in the doomsday video for the foreboding track, which also scores the title sequence for the T.V. series “The Last Panthers.” Johan Renck, who directed the show, returned the favor for Mr. Bowie by making a short film for the song’s music video.“They say don’t meet your heroes but when it comes to Bowie, he truly is the most brilliant person I’ve ever met,” Mr. Renck said in an interview with N.M.E. “I haven’t done a music video in a long time, but when Bowie asks, you’d jump at it.”“Blackstar” (Iso/Columbia) follows Mr. Bowie’s album from 2013, “The Next Day.” Tony Visconti, a longtime producer for the singer, said in an interview with the British music magazine Mojo that the new album “came from a different space.”“’The Next Day’ started out trying to do something new, but something old kept creeping in,” he said. “Not this album.”Mr. Bowie recruited jazz musicians including the saxophonist Donny McCaslin, the guitarist Ben Monder and the pianist Jason Lindner for recording sessions earlier this year.“If we’d used David’s former musicians they would be rock people playing jazz,” Mr. Visconti said. “Having jazz guys play rock music turns it upside down.”The album isn’t Mr. Bowie’s only fresh project: His Off Broadway show “Lazarus,” a spiritual sequel to “The Man Who Fell to Earth,” in which Mr. Bowie starred in 1976, started previews this week at the New York Theater Workshop. “Lazarus,” which features new and reworked songs by Mr. Bowie, opens on Dec. 7.