‘Americano’
Pablo Villegas, guitar
(Harmonia Mundi)
This charismatic Spanish guitarist offers repertory from the Americas, including works by Villa-Lobos, Augustín Lara, John Williams, Bernstein (excerpts from “West Side Story”) and lesser-known composers including Luiz Bonfá. Throughout, Mr. Villegas’s virtuosic playing is characterized by its vividly shaded colors and his irresistible exuberance, contrasted with the intimacy he conveys in the more introverted sections. The disc concludes with some foot-tapping bluegrass selections, performed with the guitarist James Chirillo. (Vivien Schweitzer)‘Luys i Luso’
Tigran Hamasyan, piano; Yerevan State Chamber Choir; Harutyun Topikyan, conductor
(ECM)
Fifteen centuries of Armenian sacred music are sublimated into one dreamlike sequence of free-floating hymns, cantos and other liturgical forms in these gorgeous arrangements by the pianist and composer Tigran Hamasyan. His own delicate, jazz-tinged piano improvisations weave in and out of the choral tapestry, adding a contemporary, personal voice to this entrancing ancient music. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)BACH: Inventions and Sinfonias
Zhu Xiao-Mei, piano
(Accentus Music)
Bach composed his two-voice Inventions and three-voice Sinfonias to teach students how to play polyphonic music cleanly and expressively. Following her superb release of Bach’s monumental “Art of Fugue,” the pianist Zhu Xiao-Mei turns her attention to these smaller-scale pieces, finding the drama in each miniature and rendering the set with myriad nuances. She follows Bach’s instructions to perform in a “cantabile” style, the melodic lines always emerging with crystalline clarity over the counterpoint. (Vivien Schweitzer)MOZART, BERG: ‘13’
Christian Tetzlaff, violin; Mitsuko Uchida, piano; Ensemble Intercontemporain; Pierre Boulez, conductor
(Decca)
Two weeks ago I heard Mozart at the New York Philharmonic and Berg at the Met: How better to prepare than with this completely unexpected release from 2008? Pierre Boulez’s Berg is a known quality, and his “Chamber Concerto” is here clear, composed and almost Classicist. But his Mozart? Ravishingly demure. The conductor’s talent for lightness and his immaculate balancing makes the Ensemble Intercontemporain sound less like a chamber ensemble than a single instrument, from the solo lines of the oboe and clarinet to the gloriously audible bassoons. (David Allen)‘Christmas Vespers: Music of Michael Praetorius’
Apollo’s Fire; Jeannette Sorrell, conductor
(Avie)
Delectable may seem an odd word to describe the music of religious services, but Praetorius is like that, a composer virtually made to herald the joy of the Christmas season. The two sets of his music here – “Awaiting the Messiah: A Lutheran Advent Service” and “A Vespers Service for Christmas Day” – make no attempt to reconstruct actual services. Rather, Jeannette Sorrell culls highlights in an attempt, she says, “to create a vivid and compelling concert experience.” In that she succeeds admirably, in this re-release of a 2005 recording. Directing from the harpsichord, Ms. Sorrell supplements Apollo’s Fire, her Cleveland-based period-instrument band, with seemingly half of the city: Apollo’s Singers, the treble choir Apollo’s Musettes, the children of the Oberlin Choristers and the Children’s Choirs of St. Paul’s Church. Sheer delight. (James R. Oestreich)SPOTIFY PLAYLISTTracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)