By MICHAEL COOPEROCT. 4, 2015
The conflict that has rocked Carnegie Hall, an enduring monument born in the last Gilded Age that will open its season on Wednesday, erupted in an inner sanctum of the new Gilded Age: the sleekly modern offices of Ronald O. Perelman, the hard-charging billionaire who became chairman of Carnegie’s board in February.Mr. Perelman had suspended Clive Gillinson, the executive and artistic director of Carnegie, on Aug. 18, citing concerns about his leadership and whether Carnegie was following the laws governing nonprofit organizations. Then he summoned the executive committee of Carnegie’s board to an emergency meeting the next day at MacAndrews & Forbes, his holding company, where members met around a glass table in a conference room with a Pop Art canvas by Ed Ruscha on one wall and a pill cabinet by the British artist Damien Hirst on another.Many of the 15 committee members — some listening in on a conference call — were stunned that their new chairman had suspended Mr. Gillinson, who has led Carnegie for more than a decade, without consulting them, according to a board member who was granted anonymity to describe confidential meetings.“The executive committee was totally blindsided, had no idea there were any issues and instead of being informed and consulted, it was presented with a fait accompli,” the board member said.AdvertisementThe committee quickly reinstated Mr. Gillinson and agreed to appoint a lawyer to investigate Mr. Perelman’s concerns. But the tumult did not end there. Mr. Perelman is stepping down this week as Carnegie’s chairman after just eight months; Mr. Gillinson remains in charge but under an internal investigation; and Carnegie, the most important concert hall in the nation, if not the world, finds itself facing an unusual public crisis in the midst of a $125 million fund-raising drive.AdvertisementIt is not how the hall expected to be starting an anniversary season, 125 years after opening with Tchaikovsky conducting his “Marche Solennelle.” The conflict — pitting Mr. Perelman, one of the nation’s wealthiest businessmen, against Mr. Gillinson, a former cellist who was knighted in 2005 for his work as managing director of the London Symphony Orchestra — has transfixed the worlds of music and philanthropy. And it has raised anew questions about the proper roles of boards and staffs at nonprofit institutions.Both sides have remained publicly silent on the issue. Mr. Gillinson issued a statement when Mr. Perelman’s criticisms first surfaced last month saying that he had served Carnegie Hall “to the best of my ability for 10 years.” But Carnegie and Mr. Gillinson will not comment further “while an internal review is ongoing,” said Synneve Carlino, a spokeswoman for the hall, and Mr. Perelman declined to comment as well. But letters to the board, and interviews with people sympathetic to both camps who were granted anonymity to discuss a matter that is under investigation, provided a fuller, but still incomplete, account of the dispute.The tumult is adding a dose of unexpected, and unsought, drama to the gala performance (featuring the New York Philharmonic and the pianist Evgeny Kissin) and dinner planned for Wednesday. The evening is expected to draw Mr. Gillinson and members of the board, but probably not Mr. Perelman. And many will be thinking about the board meeting scheduled for the next day, when a new chairman is supposed to be selected.The appointment of Mr. Perelman, who has a reputation for being aggressive, and even pugnacious, as chairman after Sanford I. Weill stepped down in February surprised some board members. Some figures in the classical music world were alarmed when Mr. Perelman was quoted as saying that he hoped to stage more pop performances at Carnegie, as was done decades ago; he later sought to reassure people that he understood the importance of classical music at Carnegie, and bought a box for the whole season.Mr. Weill, a former Citigroup chief who gave more than $75 million to Carnegie during nearly a quarter century as the board’s chairman, talked up his successor, noting Mr. Perelman’s record of philanthropy over the years to hospitals, universities and arts organizations. (The stage at Carnegie Hall and the rotunda at the Guggenheim Museum are both named for Mr. Perelman.) Mr. Weill, who did not return several calls seeking comment, was quoted by Bloomberg News in May as saying, “You are going to see a nicer, kinder, less litigious Ron than you’ve seen in the past.”The trouble between Mr. Gillinson and Mr. Perelman began last spring, when Mr. Perelman began asking about what he later described in a letter to the board as “profits and losses involving performances” and was “told that such financial information was never shared with the board or even the chairman.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Perelman eventually received the financial information he was seeking in early June, according to two people familiar with the proceedings who spoke anonymously because they were discussing confidential business. But there had been delays. Carnegie officials initially worried about sharing the fees artists are paid for their performances, the two people said. (Artist fees are typically kept secret to avoid bidding wars between, say, rival pianists.) And Mr. Perelman’s suspicions were apparently aroused when a batch of data he obtained in late May came in an unreadable format, one said.The flash point arrived when Mr. Perelman turned his attention to the Warner Music Prize, a $100,000 award to a young musician that was supposed to be presented at a benefit at Carnegie Hall. Noting that the Warner Music Group is owned by a company founded by Len Blavatnik, who sits on Carnegie’s board, Mr. Perelman began raising questions about whether the arrangement had been properly vetted for potential conflicts of interest, since it was effectively promoting the name of a business controlled by a board member, according to a person familiar with the matter who was granted anonymity to discuss the private deliberations.AdvertisementMr. Blavatnik’s company beat out several other suitors, including Sony/ATV Music Publishing, which was working with Mr. Perelman, when it bought the Warner Music Group in 2011. But the two men have socialized since then: In 2012 Mr. Blavatnik attended a fund-raiser for the Apollo Theater at Mr. Perelman’s estate in East Hampton, N.Y., according to Bloomberg News.Mr. Perelman wrote in his letter to the board that he had directed Mr. Gillinson to put the prize “on hold” and that Mr. Gillinson had “led me and others to believe that he had done so,” but that Mr. Gillinson had executed a contract related to the prize anyway. That, Mr. Perelman wrote the board, was what led him and Edward C. Forst, the board’s treasurer, to suspend Mr. Gillinson on Aug. 18 with what he described as “input” from Scott A. Edelman, the board’s secretary.Carnegie has faced questions about potential conflicts before. When it began what eventually became a $230 million project to renovate the studio towers around the hall to add rehearsal and educational spaces, it hired Iu & Bibliowicz, the architecture firm of Mr. Weill’s son-in-law, Natan Bibliowicz. In 2007 Carnegie told state officials, who provided a $5 million grant for planning and design costs that year, that the institution had followed its policies for addressing potential conflicts of interest at the time, and the state declared itself satisfied. Since then the firm has been paid $16.7 million, according to Carnegie’s tax filings, but an official at the hall said that some of that money had gone to other companies hired by the firm.Mr. Perelman grew impatient when nearly a month passed without the board appointing a lawyer to investigate his accusations, and announced on Sept. 17 that he would stand down rather than run again for chairman when the board meets on Thursday. But the member of Carnegie’s board said that by that point, Mr. Perelman should have realized he would not have been able to win another term as chairman.A version of this article appears in print on October 5, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Carnegie Faces Strife as It Enters New Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.