“Miss Saigon” is helicoptering back to Broadway.Cameron Mackintosh, the storied British producer best known for bringing the megahits “Cats,” “Les Misérables” and “The Phantom of the Opera” to New York, said on Thursday that he planned to present a revival of “Miss Saigon” on Broadway in the spring of 2017.“History has caught up with ‘Miss Saigon’ — the story is more relevant than it was when it first came out 26 years ago,” Mr. Mackintosh said in an interview. “Since then, the kind of wars that happened there have spread around the world, and the whole ethos of what can happen when two innocent people get caught up in tragic circumstances is something we see every day.” The production, which began in London last year with revisions to the original book, a new song and a new look, is directed by Laurence Connor, who is now represented on Broadway as the director of a “Les Misérables” revival and the new musical “School of Rock,” which is currently in previews. The London production of “Miss Saigon” is closing in February, and the show’s two stars will come to New York: Eva Noblezada, a 19-year-old from North Carolina as Kim (the role that won Lea Salonga a Tony in 1991); and Jon Jon Briones, who  lives in Los Angeles, as the engineer (the role that won Jonathan Pryce a Tony).  Ms. Noblezada, the daughter of a Filipino father and a Mexican-American mother, was discovered by a casting director at a high school awards ceremony; Mr. Briones was born and raised in the Philippines. Their heritage is significant because the original production faced controversy in the United States over the use of white actors in some key roles. “Miss Saigon” is a love story between an American soldier and a Vietnamese woman set largely in American-occupied Saigon in 1975. Mr. Mackintosh said that he was proud of the opportunities that the show had provided Asian actors over the years.“The irony is that the cause célèbre that happened was less about ‘Miss Saigon’ than the plight of Asian actors, and it happened over the show which has given more work, and more opportunities, to Asian performers than any show in history, as has been proven by the last 25 years of ‘Miss Saigon’ all over the world,” he said. “It’s given incredible opportunities to people, and created several careers, and I’m very proud of that, and now in New York you’ve got ‘Allegiance’ and ‘The King and I’ — more shows for Asian performers to do, and ‘Miss Saigon’ can hold its head up high.”Mr. Mackintosh said the Broadway revival would run for less than a year — until January 2018 — and would then go on a national tour. He called the new production “less operatic than the original, and much grittier,” and said that a new American lyricist, Michael Mahler, had been enlisted to rework about 10 percent of the libretto. The original “Miss Saigon” premiered in London in 1989, with music by Claude-Michel Schönberg and lyrics by Alain Boublil and Richard Maltby Jr.; it opened on Broadway in 1991. The Broadway production ran for 10 years; it was nominated for 11 Tony awards and won 3. The show has been staged in 28 countries. Meanwhile, Mr. Mackintosh is keeping busy. He said that he and Andrew Lloyd Webber are working on a possible return of “Cats” to Broadway (“if it comes, we want it to be terrific”) and that he and Jeffrey Seller hope to bring “Hamilton” to London in 2017 (“it’s a fantastic show that will still be being done when I am dead and buried”).“Miss Saigon” is one of two productions announced for the next Broadway season on Thursday. The Roundabout Theater Company said that it would stage “Holiday Inn,” a musical inspired by the film of the same name, in the fall of 2016; the show will feature music and lyrics by Irving Berlin and a book by Gordon Greenberg and Chad Hodge.“Miss Saigon” will also be one of two love stories set at the end of the Vietnam War in New York next season. The Manhattan Theater Club announced Thursday that next fall it would stage an Off-Broadway production of “Vietgone,” by Qui Nguyen, which it describes as “a love story between two Vietnamese refugees after the fall of Saigon.”