Ta-Nehisi Coates and Adam Johnson were two of the big winners at Wednesday night’s National Book Awards ceremony. Mr. Coates’s “Between the World and Me,” one of the year’s top-selling and most-discussed books, won the award for nonfiction.In The New York Times Book Review, Michelle Alexander wrestled at length with her reaction to Mr. Coates’s book and its emphasis on “the apparent permanence of racial injustice in America” and the “foolishness” in trying to change things. “I will confess that after the first reading of ‘Between the World and Me’ I was disappointed,” Ms. Alexander wrote. “Initially I was enthralled by Coates’s characteristic brilliance and insight, as well as the poetic manner in which he addresses his son. . . . But by the end, I was exasperated.” On a second reading, she said, “my frustration diminished. I came to believe that the problem, to the extent there is one, is that Coates’s book is unfinished. He raises numerous critically important questions that are left unanswered.”In The Times, Michiko Kakutani called the book “powerful and passionate,” a “searing meditation on what it means to be black in America today.” She also wrote of the “Manichaean tone to some of the passages in this book, and at times, a hazardous tendency to generalize.”Jennifer Schuessler spoke to Mr. Coates in July, and the author wrote about his influences and reading habits in By the Book.Mr. Johnson won the National Book Award for fiction for “Fortune Smiles,” a collection of short stories. (His novel “The Orphan Master’s Son” won the Pulitzer Prize in 2013.) In The Times, Ms. Kakutani wrote that the best stories in “Fortune Smiles” “straddle the worlds of realism and fable, and attest to Mr. Johnson’s elastic and idiosyncratic voice: his ability to write with both tenderness and satiric verve, and his electro-magnetic feel for the absurdities of life and the human costs they represent.”In the Book Review, Lauren Groff (whose novel “Fates and Furies” was one of the finalists beaten out by Mr. Johnson) said that reading the stories one right after the other, it can feel like Mr. Johnson is “holding the reader at arm’s length.” She concluded that the stories “may be best appreciated when taken out into the sunshine one by one, each allowed to exist as an individual text and left to resonate until the reader forgets the previous story enough to allow the next to speak its piece in full. Adam Johnson’s stories certainly deserve this kind of slow and loving attention. As a writer, he is always perceptive and brave; his lines always sing and strut and sizzle and hush and wash and blaze over the reader.”The award for Young People’s Literature went to Neal Shusterman’s “Challenger Deep,” and the award for poetry was given to Robin Coste Lewis for “Voyage of the Sable Venus.”