AdvertisementSupported byEmpireBy Doreen St. FelixEach episode of “Empire” carries forth the show’s permanent, ambient theme: the scrimmage for every player’s control of the family name. So far in its sophomore season, nimble corporate defection has been the primary course by which Cookie, Hakeem and Lucious have made their harried grabs for Lyon supremacy. As if an ode to vintage season one “Empire,” this week saw the family scramble situate itself squarely in the arena that started it all: the music.At a neon-drenched Leviticus, Lucious, still reeling from his estranged son’s pointed emasculation of his music production, coolly sends Hakeem a rap call-to-arms via his Gutter Life Records protégé, Freda Gatz. The missive’s brutally coy hook — “Daddy’s little girl / You’re just daddy’s little girl” — inflames Hakeem as much as it ennobles Gatz, who has been groomed into something between surrogate child and unknowing executor of the barely-hidden id of the man who killed her father in prison. It’s disconcerting, watching the one viable female artist in the Lyon universe take on Lucious’s paternal insecurity rather than the profound contours of her own life story. But despite the petty subject, Gatz’s expert interplay between high masculine and low feminine delivery invigorates the show’s sometimes dull man-child music landscape.Jamal and Cookie continue meeting furtively in studios at night, the two building a saccharine sound that is less progressive or scene-changing than their wildly satisfied grins let on. But the clandestine collaboration is endearing, if mostly because mother and son are bonding again despite the constant surveillance of Lucious and Thirsty. (If Cookie’s bedridden romp last week with The Man with the Longhorn Tattoo inspired fear that Delgado might destroy her too, her defense of her son against Delgado’s aggression provided a needed assurance).Loyalty lines across Cookie’s scrappy startup and Lucious’s rickety Wall Street behemoth have been eroding for quite some time, and Jamal’s nomination to be the next face of Pepsi surfaces as the fault-line. Jamal baits Cookie and Lucious into coming to a studio session, hoping that the two might meld their angelic flutes and brutish percussion into one electronic monster. Their petulance prevails, however, but it’s more a bruise to Jamal the son than a setback to the Jamal the Musician. Jamal ends up cutting and pasting the two songs together himself and winning the Pepsi competition.The rap battle between Freda and Hakeem was unambiguously presented as the episode’s cathartic zenith, and according to the performance logic undergirding the differences in street and studio rap, it was laughably obvious Freda would bring the carnage. Prep scenes showed Hakeem satisfactorily riffing on word associations, Freda annihilating her opponent with daggered lyrical quips. To me, and likely every viewer marginally familiar with commonly agreed-upon rules of battle rap engagement, Freda was obviously the winner. She zeroed in on Hakeem as her target, deftly weaving sophisticated lyrical attacks athletically and flamboyantly. And although it was meant to cut her opponent down, Freda’s expression of admiration for Cookie’s hustle makes me wonder what a Gatz/Dynasty track would sound like.Hakeem, advised by Jamal to play up his (dubious) performance skills, aims past Gatz’s petite frame to that of his hoodied-father, symbolically self-emancipating against The Man With the Mack beat and destroying his illuminated last name. I couldn’t help thinking about how the show may later manifest the impossibility of his wild electrical show: there’s no way he could destroy the name Lyon without eventually having his own lights dimmed, too.Cookie’s celebration of her son’s victory ends abruptly when Lucious’s sneer informs the after-party that her sister Candice is outside the club. Through her (according to Cookie) practiced hysteria about their third sister’s alleged drug bender, we learn from Candice that Cookie’s real name is Loretha. Cookie hadn’t been born a Lyon — a flashback intimates that neither had Lucious, likely taking the name as an child abandoned on the street — and up until now, her lineage outside of Lucious hadn’t been much referenced, leaving the show’s relatively clueless audience hungry to know how Cookie came to be.Speaking of hunger, here are five scenes where food provided moments of biting realism:• During a meeting with the C-suite at SwiftStream, Lucious attempts to conceal his obvious misgivings about the deal. Perhaps Lucious is finally registering Andre’s financial caution as shrewd advice rather than a kind of Christian liability? Or maybe he is getting sick (again)? At any rate, nursing the bulb of a petite strawberry lollipop does nothing to make Lucious appear intimidating to his new business partners, or to distract them from the fact that he is sweating profusely.• The two vessels for Empire’s future share green smoothies at the gym as Rhonda unwittingly gives a pregnant Anika the information she needs to plan her way back in: Lucious softens to the point of putty in the presence of kids, especially, Anika’s eyes seem to surmise, those that are his grandchildren.• An unexpected doorbell ring cuts short a casual session in preparation for the big Pepsi showcase and Lucious stumbles in while Cookie and her lunch scamper to the closet. When the two leave, Cookie hilariously bites into her whole wheat vegetable wrap.• Back at Empire, Gatz’s Brownsville crew adoringly encircles her as she prepares for her battle against her new rival. Last time we saw her all-male team, they tore up the main conference room in deference to Gatz disapproval of Andre’s falsely aggressive bid to get her to sign a contract. Now trusting of the operation, Gatz’s hype-men seem comfortable, chomping down on wings together.• Fraternal rivalry has melted at least temporarily, and Jamal and Hakeem giggle like little boys over jerky and hot-sauce-doused chips. It’s good to see the two by the fireplace, advising each other on their looming music endeavors, totally unaware of their parents’ plan to swap out their debut albums on the whims of a childish betAdvertisement