
American Horror Story By                     
E. A. HANKS

NOV. 19, 2015
This week on “American Horror Story: Hotel,” the grand mystery of The Countess was revealed to be quite a common Hollywood story: a young woman came out West, fell in with a bad crowd, and never was the same again. Add polyamory, a vampire romance, and an unfortunate tango number, and you’ve got “Flickers.”The Countess was just another extra on the sidelines of a feature film, perhaps “The Sheik,” before she was seduced by silent film star Rudolph Valentino and his wife, Natacha Rambova, (“Why am I here?” “Because, little mouse, gods have appetites.”) It seems the Countess picked Tristan, the tempestuous model killed in last week’s episode for loving Liz Taylor, for his striking resemblance to Valentino; both are played by Finn Wittrock, who resembles the silent era star.When Valentino and Rambova are assumed dead, The Countess marries, if not for love, for money: “If I was to live in grief, I might as well have been surrounded by beautiful things, even if it was with a man for whom I felt nothing. I was drawn to the darkness I felt within him. I ached to be consumed by it.”The man in question is Hotel Cortez architect and homicidal maniac, James Patrick March (played by Evan Peters, bringing clarity and character to a season in need of both). The Countess and March, it turns out, have monthly dinners. Given that last week we learned that they have a child, if you’d call it that, one would assume that they would discuss that Bartholomew escaped room 33 and ran amok, sneaking away from the Hotel Cortez in Detective Lowe’s suitcase. There was no mention of any of that however. Instead, conversation ran to the Countess’s plans to wed fashion designer, and new owner of the Cortez, Will Drake.AdvertisementBut of course Valentino and Rambova aren’t dead, merely undead. F.W. Murnau, German director of the horror classic, “Nosferatu,” itself a reimagining of Bram Stoker’s “Dracula,” was “infected” with vampirism while scouting the darkness of the Carpathian Mountains, and decided to share this gift with Valentino. In one of this episode’s many flashbacks, Murnau tells Valentino that the advent of talking pictures spells the death of all the gods of the silent era. Supernatural immortality becomes these fading stars’ best efforts at staving off irrelevancy.AdvertisementOr so the show would have us think. Again, “Hotel” is circling an interesting idea — what is fame if not a battle against morality? — but dig too deep, and everything falls apart: how does vampiric immortality help movie stars stay relevant when they’re not allowed to show their face in public anymore?When Valentino and Rambova returned, they turned The Countess and they planned to all be happily ever after.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Except.As possessive as the Countess is — we saw her kill to keep Ramona (Angela Bassett) close, and she murdered Tristan rather than share him — her ghost husband has his own green streak. “I could never compete with the shadow of a god on a screen 20 feet tall,” March bemoans.Turns out, rather than compete, he locked vampires Valentino and Natacha away in a hidden hallway of the hotel, and left them to wither. New construction to turn the Cortez into Drake’s atelier has set them, and their unslakeable thirst, free on the world. (Maybe they’ll meet up with that horde of infected children?)“Flickers” was chock-full of references to old Hollywood glamour. Valentino, Rambova and Murnau are all real people who flourished in the days before movies had sound, and struggled when the tectonic plates of movie making shifted under their feet. Even the Garden of Allah, where Valentino and his wife first seduce the Countess, was a real hotel that was temporary home to everybody from F.Scott Fitzgerald to Buster Keaton, a sort of Chateau Marmont of yesteryear.Speaking of Buster Keaton, all this talk of the former greatness of the silent picture stars brought to mind the famous scene in “Sunset Boulevard,” in which faded star Norma Desmond plays bridge with, as Joe Gillis puts it, “Dim figures you might remember from the silent days. I use to think of them as her wax works.”For all of the back story we got on the Countess, much remains unclear. How does a shy, lovelorn woman suddenly become a gleeful witness to homicide? Why does the Countess want to keep the Cortez — she doesn’t love March and told him so much over cold beef Wellingtons. Why is she called The Countess? Why does she collect blonde children?These are important questions but I find myself distracted by thoughts like, what if Liz Taylor and ghost Tristan have a threesome with Tristan’s doppelgänger, vampire Valentino? Stranger things have happened.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »