LONDON — Thirty-seven short films based on Shakespeare’s plays will screen this spring as part of Shakespeare’s Globe’s commemorations of the 400th anniversary of the playwright’s death, the company announced Thursday.The 10-minute movies will include new material shot in areas including Elsinore, Denmark (a “Hamlet” reference); and near the pyramids in Egypt ( “Cleopatra”). They will include new footage being filmed this year and next, mixed with images from Globe productions, archival clips from early film adaptations of Shakespeare, and animations. Casting has yet to be announced.“Shakespeare spent half his life in London, wrote all his plays there, and presented them all beside the Thames,” The Globe’s artistic director, Dominic Dromgoole, said in a statement. “We think it is suitable and fitting that the huge range of his work should be celebrated 400 years after his death in a big free public event, utilizing the very latest technology, along a public walkway beside the same dirty old river, so rich with history.”The project, called “The Complete Walk,” will take place from April 24 to 26 and will show on a public thoroughfare that runs along the Thames from Westminster Bridge to Tower Bridge. On those same dates, the Globe’s “Hamlet” world tour, a production that aims to tour to every country in the world, will return to London for four final performances at the Globe. (The two-year touring show has so far visited almost 150 countries.)“What I wanted to do first, which was insane, was to film the whole play in every particular place on that afternoon, and then feed them all into a livestream,” Mr. Dromgoole said in a phone interview on Thursday. But he said that the costs of production made the idea impossible. He retained the idea of filming bits of the movies on location as a way of exploring a new angle on Shakespeare’s work. “Shakespeare didn’t travel much. He hardly got outside of England,” he added. “We just wanted to sort of place the language against the landscape and see what happened.”Some of the plays raise tricky questions about location.“Twelfth Night” for example, “is set in an Illyria that is on the coast, and Illyria at the time had no coast at all,” Mr. Dromgoole said. “You’re dealing with someone whose sense of geography was deeply faulty, and more, sort of magical than it was literal.” For that production, the company will likely film in London’s Middle Temple Hall, where the play was first presented. “We might make a quick dash to the coast of Croatia and just do the ending scene there,” he added.Mr. Dromgoole, who co-directed the “Hamlet” world tour and conceived the film project, will end his tenure this spring, after a decade in the role. Emma Rice, of the theater company Kneehigh in Cornwall, England, will take up his role.A version of this article appears in print on 11/23/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Short Films to Celebrate Shakespeareu2019s Plays.