By KATHRYN SHATTUCKNOV. 19, 2015
The holiday starts early, and a mite strange, with a lip sync battle and a series about art smuggling. And it’s the last chance in 2015 for a Shonda Rhimes night.THE ART OF MORE on Crackle. Sex, blood, dirty money: It’s all there in Crackle’s first original drama, about the ugly side of pretty things. Dennis Quaid and Cary Elwes swagger through as two of the city’s most conspicuous consumers in the $10 billion art-smuggling business. Christian Cooke is the former soldier in Iraq turned antiquities thief who has maneuvered his way into a top Manhattan auction house — and whose mission it is to get them to look his way. But he can’t outrun his past when some artifacts, courtesy of the Islamic State, and their cutthroat handlers, show up. Writing in The New York Times, Neil Genzlinger called it “tasty.” (Image: a scene)What’s on TVLIVE WITH KELLY AND MICHAEL 9 a.m. E.S.T. on ABC. Hillary Rodham Clinton talks about her life and her presidential campaign.TIM GUNN’S ULTIMATE THROWBACK THURSDAY 8 p.m. on Lifetime. Making it work, over and over: The deliciously tart-tongued Mr. Gunn, who recently let us know that he has never met a Kardashian whose clothing he liked, looks back at his favorite moments from the “Project Runway” vault. Then in “Project Runway Junior,” at 9, he mentors the fledgling designers in creating garments from carwash paraphernalia.THE BIG BANG THEORY 8 p.m. on CBS. Sheldon and Amy try being just friends when they hang out at the aquarium on Thanksgiving. In “Life in Pieces,” at 8:30, Joan invites her recently widowed neighbor to celebrate the holiday. In “Mom,” at 9, Christy and Bonnie find themselves addicted to the rush of helping others. And in “2 Broke Girls,” at 9:30, Max and Caroline get jobs at a swanky gym to use the locker room after their shower at home breaks. (Image: Elon Musk, left, with Simon Helberg in “The Big Bang Theory”)AdvertisementGREY’S ANATOMY 8 p.m. on ABC. Shonda Rhimes Night wraps for the fall season as Grey Sloan Memorial is overrun with injured wilderness firefighters; Olivia makes like the first lady in “Scandal,” at 9; and Annalise’s shooter is revealed on “How to Get Away With Murder,” at 10. (Image: Viola Davis, center, in “Murder”)DINERS, DRIVE-INS AND DIVES: ULTIMATE TURKEY FEST 8 p.m. on Food Network. Turducken, turkey-shaped bread loaves and a complete turkey dinner fried into bite-size balls: Guy Fieri samples them all.LIP SYNC BATTLE HOLIDAY SPECIAL 10 p.m. on Spike. Seth Rogen, Joseph Gordon-Levitt and Anthony Mackie of “The Night Before,” opening Friday, and some surprise guests — Run DMC, anyone? — get merry with the mike.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 19, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Watch Thursday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.