AdvertisementSupported byBy Vivien SchweitzerBefore introducing his piece “Flashbacks” on Monday evening at National Sawdust, the new performance space in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, Mario Davidovsky joked that he didn’t know how he ended up on a lineup of such “talented and handsome” composers.The program, called “Young Americans,” was part of the New York Philharmonic’s Contact! new-music series and focused on composers under 40. Mr. Davidovsky, the odd man out, is an 81-year-old Modernist who was born in Argentina and emigrated to the United States in 1960. A pioneer of electroacoustic music, he became known for a series of works for acoustic instruments and recorded tape called “Synchronisms.”In the program notes, he described his sextet “Flashbacks” (1995-96) as a “fantasy attempting to make an intelligible musical narrative out of an apparently chaotic landscape.” How to interpret abstract works coherently is also the challenge facing those listening to such music, in which narrative, pulse, rhythmic momentum and other traditional markers are replaced with what can seem like random outbursts of sound. Scored for an ensemble of piano, violin, cello, clarinet, flute and percussion, “Flashbacks” (conducted here by Jeffrey Milarsky) retains interest with its rapidly shifting moods and intersection of colorful timbres and textures.The works by the younger generation, rendered with commitment by members of the Philharmonic, also focused on timbre, although only one left a strong impression. Caroline Mallonée (a former student of Mr. Davidovsky’s) used the same basic ensemble as “Flashbacks” for her “Unless Acted Upon: Manifestations of Newton’s First Law,” whose six brief movements depicted forces like friction, gravity and magnetism with fluttering fragments, high sonorities and contrasting gestures.In Nathan Heidelberger’s “Halve Time (Quartet After Zeno)” for clarinet, violin, cello and piano, material from the brief opening section is experimented with in mathematically related ensuing sections, with the second movement half the length of the fourth, for example. Adam Schoenberg’s “Fleeting” sounded unfocused, although there were alluring moments, like an echo-like effect created by the clarinetist while facing the cavernous interior of the piano.Kate Soper’s “Into That World Inverted” proved the most memorable of the newer pieces. Written at Tanglewood as part of an assignment to compose for unusual instrumental pairings, the piece deftly explores the timbral possibilities of both the piano (deftly played by Steven Beck) and the horn, whose sighing, melancholy gestures were elegantly rendered by Richard Deane.Advertisement