AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenJason Danieley embodies an emerging theatrical archetype: the dashing but sensitive hero, the key word being “sensitive.” This formidable Broadway tenor divests the most grandiloquent Broadway ballads of the chest-beating grandiosity associated with several generations of leading men. Even in swashbuckling roles, he exhibits the fleetness and grace of a dancer, not a warrior.In the high point of his new show, “Romantic Notions,” at Feinstein’s/54 Below on Friday evening, he gently removed “And This Is My Beloved,” the Borodin melody adapted into a love song for “Kismet,” from its gold-plated throne. Taking it at a relatively brisk clip, he toned down its oratory, transforming flowery metaphors that invite Mario Lanza-style bluster into the expression of a lover straining for words to express an ineffable passion.Throughout the show, Mr. Danieley talked about love in very personal terms. As many know, his wife and sometime vocal partner, the lustrous Broadway star Marin Mazzie, who was present, is recovering from ovarian cancer, and Mr. Danieley talked movingly about their bond. The two are about to celebrate their 18th wedding anniversary, and her prognosis is hopeful. The words in “Nature Boy,” the opening number, set the tone of the evening: “The greatest thing you’ll ever learn/Is just to love and be loved in return.”Mr. Danieley was accompanied by a trio whose leader, the pianist Tedd Firth, was joined by Pete Donovan on bass and Clint DeGanon on drums. Typical of their innovative arrangements was a starchy Rodgers and Hart ballad, “With a Song in My Heart,” that changed pace and acquired a racing pulse, and “For Once in My Life,” injected with a shot of humor as Mr. Danieley simulated the slippery moves of a Las Vegas lounge performer.He pumped up a supercharged version of Huey Lewis’s “The Power of Love” with dazzling rock poses. In a more reflective mode, his version of the Marc Blitzstein ballad “I Wish It So” zeroed in on the expression of painful longing distilled in the words “There’s an unrest inside me and I think I’ll go mad.”“To Be a Man,” a little-known ’80s song by Boston, took on the ring of a personal credo. This refutation of macho bluster asks, “What does it take to be a man?” The answer: “It takes tenderness.”Jason Danieley will perform Monday at Feinstein’s/54 Below, Manhattan; 646-476-3551, 54below­.com.Advertisement