By JON CARAMANICANOV. 18, 2015
Absence has a way of ossifying an idea and amplifying a legend. Those have been gifts for Adele, who has just returned after a break of almost five years with her third album, “25” (XL/Columbia).Her place in pop music held steady as she retreated from the spotlight, toward a more nourishing life that includes motherhood. And time has fixed the idea of Adele’s sound, leaving a brightly blinking beacon for her to return to.To that end, “25” manages to sound all of a piece, even as the songs veer from phenomenal to tepid. In places, everything comes together. “Million Years Ago” bursts with melodrama and perhaps has a quiet echo of Mariah Carey’s “My All” amid the flamencoesque guitar.“Hello,” the album opener, begins with melodramatic, earnest piano (as do several other songs), followed by an invitation: “Hello, it’s me/ I was wondering if after all these years you’d like to meet.”AdvertisementThis is Adele at her savviest: “Hello” functions as an extended hand to old fans and also a seeming chapter-closer on the relationship that defined “21,” her last album.And by midsong, she is also at her best: Even when she is singing at her most powerful — “Hello from the other siiiiiide, I must have called a thousand tiiiiiiimes” — she’s never anything other than calm.AdvertisementThat is Adele’s gift. On songs like “I Miss You” and “Water Under the Bridge,” she renders the most acute pain with severe clarity and composure. If her singing wasn’t so loud, it would be tranquil. In places, on “Hello” and “Million Years Ago,” so total is her chill that she recalls a far less technically accomplished but even more steadfastly serene singer: Lana Del Rey.And so firm is her vision that it rescues unambitious songs like “Remedy,” written with and produced by Ryan Tedder, and “River Lea,” written with and produced by Danger Mouse, which might otherwise drown in numbing organ. “Love in the Dark,” about the last embers of a dead relationship, moves at a funereal pace, but Adele issues her self-loathing like a command: “Take your eyes off of me so I can leave/I’m far too ashamed to do it with you watching me.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pop moves and mutates, but Adele more or less does not. Naming her albums for different ages in her life doesn’t indicate radical changes from era to era, but rather reinforces the reassuringly slow march of time. Her music is like time-lapse photography of a busy street: Small parts move, but the structure of the whole picture remains essentially intact.What sets her apart, though, are those steady parts: a gargantuan and smooth voice, deployed with casual control and a cathartic fluency with heartbreak.On “25,” she remains a plainly declarative singer (and songwriter — she has a writing credit on every song on this album). She’s emphatically firstperson and doesn’t get belabored or obstructed by metaphor or concept. She also offers little in the way of emotional surprise: For Adele, distress is restorative. (The album closes with “Sweetest Devotion,” a blast of optimism so ecstatic and saccharine it threatens to upend the 40 minutes of anguish that preceded it. )Where “21” made gestural concessions to contemporary pop music, “25” largely does not. It comes closest on “Send My Love (to Your New Lover),” which was produced by Max Martin and Shellback. They haven’t varnished Adele, the way they have with so many before her. The song begins with a stray studio comment from Adele — “Just the guitar. O.K., cool” — before about a minute of acoustic guitar and what sounds like hand-played percussion. This is Adele the pop refusenik, still intact.But then the thickly layered harmony vocals and fuller arrangement arrive, faintly echoing the thunderous drop in “I Knew You Were Trouble,” by Taylor Swift, another singer whom Mr. Martin and Shellback have compressed for pop consumption and extruded new things from. There is a Swiftian moment, too, on the song’s chorus, when she sings “lover” like a cheerful taunt — usually Adele’s message is one of shared melancholy; it’s refreshing to hear her sass. (It’s also more in line with her off-record persona; she exudes off-the-cuff charm. At a taping for a television special at Radio City Music Hall on Tuesday night, she was chipper and affectionately profane, joking about kicking off her shoes and commenting that since she had to have her nails removed so she could play guitar, she had “potato fingers.”)It suggests, also, that Adele is not wholly impervious to influence, not bigger than her songs. Take two very different examples on “25” that show different versions of this. “When We Were Young” was written with Tobias Jesso Jr., the cloying Eagle Rock Randy Newman with stars in his eyes and a droop in his voice. In the verses, she sounds comfortable, but when she slips in to the chorus — “You look like a movie, you sound like a song” — she echoes Mr. Jesso’s vocal gestures, better suited to a voice that’s thin like his, and needs exaggeration, than one as rich as hers. It sounds like Adele singing a Tobias Jesso Jr. song, not Adele singing an Adele song.AdvertisementContrast that with “All I Ask,” produced by the Smeezingtons, Bruno Mars’s crew, and written by Adele with Mr. Mars, Philip Lawrence and Christopher (Brody) Brown. It’s a Streisandian tale full of harrowing, exquisite loneliness:I will leave my heart at the door I won’t say a word They’ve all been said before, you know So why don’t we just play pretend Like we’re not scared of what is coming next Or scared of having nothing leftAt the beginning of the pre-chorus, Adele sings, almost offhandedly, “Look don’t get me wrong I know/There is no tomorrow,” holding the last syllable out until it decays. It’s a palpable gear shift, a form of singing that’s as confident in attitude as in acuity, and it enlivens this song to something like a masterpiece. Mr. Mars and his pals have extracted some new vim from Adele. For this, they should get a MacArthur grant, or an M.B.E. from the Queen. All together, they have made a mold-breaking song, one that’s even bigger than the legend.The New Music column on Thursday, which included a review of Adele’s album “25,” misstated part of a lyric from the song “Hello.” Adele sings “Hello from the other siiiiiide, I must have called a thousand tiiiiiiimes”; “Hello from the outsiiiiiide” appears later in the song.The New Music column on Nov. 19 misstated part of a lyric in the song “All I Ask” from Adele’s new album, “25.” It is “There is no tomorrow,” not “There is a tomorrow.”A version of this review appears in print on November 19, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Holding  Firm While  Pop Shifts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.