AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike Hale“Jessica Jones,” the second of Netflix’s original series based on Marvel comic books (after “Daredevil”), is reluctantly superheroic. Created by Melissa Rosenberg, the screenwriter of five “Twilight” movies as well as a writer on TV shows including “Dexter,” and starring the acerbic Krysten Ritter of “Don’t Trust the B____ in Apartment 23,” it’s a clever 21st-century take on film noir, featuring a heroine who hides her superstrength because it’s at the root of her extreme emotional vulnerability and fear. There’s a tricky balancing act going on — crossing a moody detective show with both a comic action thriller and a woman-in-peril psychological drama — but Ms. Rosenberg proves to be mostly up to the task.It’s tempting to say that “Jessica Jones” is to the superhero show what “Transparent” has been to the sitcom or “Game of Thrones” to the sword-and-sorcery series, extending and reinventing a television genre. It would be a stretch, though. The premise of the former costumed hero turned detective after catastrophic events was established in the comic book Alias, which introduced the Jessica Jones character in 2001. And in the new series, whose 13-episode first season will be available to stream on Friday, it doesn’t really feel as if Ms. Rosenberg is refashioning the superhero genre. It feels as if she’s adapting it to another goal: making as fond and meticulous a homage to the spirit of “Veronica Mars” as possible.“Jones” is darker, sexier and much more violent than “Mars,” but from the playful noir style to the mystery-story arc to Ms. Ritter’s wry narration, the comparison (through the seven episodes available to critics) is inescapable. And like “Mars” (and “Buffy the Vampire Slayer”), “Jessica Jones” is a show about female heroism, but more so — the four central characters arrayed against the season’s sociopathic male villain are all women.Like the original comic book, the TV series begins in a present where Jones is a working private investigator with an alcohol problem, who mostly hides her ability to lift cars off the ground and leap onto fourth-floor fire escapes. Her back story in the comics, fully fleshed out over years of appearances in different series, is only hinted at in the early episodes, and will probably be largely dispensed with.What has been retained from the comics is Jones’s principal antagonist, a mutant named Kilgrave whose power is mind control. He’s played by David Tennant in his best eerie-psycho mode — if you’re not familiar with that, track down the British TV movie “Secret Smile” — and he’s a great, creepy villain, the stuff of real nightmares.He’s also a potent symbol: With his ability to make women do what he wants them to, and his fixation on Jones, he’s a superpowered stand-in for the obsessive, deluded male stalker. Jones’s presumably season-long battle with him is a mythical version of a battle millions of women fight in real life, and her companions in it are mostly women — her foster sister, Trish, a radio talk-show host (Rachael Taylor); the high-powered lawyer she works with, Hogarth (Carrie-Anne Moss); and Hope (Erin Moriarty), a victim of Kilgrave’s.In her previous television lead role, on “Apartment 23,” Ms. Ritter perfected a sardonic, lightly self-lacerating comic manner, and her best moments in “Jessica Jones” are the funny or caustic ones, of which there are many. The tone gets heavier as the season goes along and Kilgrave emerges, though, and while Ms. Ritter carries off the more serious business (reminiscent of her short run as a drug addict on “Breaking Bad”), she’s not quite as distinctive at it.With shows like “Orange Is the New Black,” “Daredevil,” “Sense8” and “Narcos,” Netflix has been charting a course between the darker, often more pretentious sensibilities of high-end cable and the lighter, poppier sensibilities of broadcast and USA Network fare. “Jessica Jones” isn’t a procedural mystery, but it has the heart — the storytelling beats and essential optimism — of a very good broadcast-network show. It might not be the best idea to binge-watch it — it feels as if it should be watched weekly.Advertisement