AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeThis city has not done right lately by Pierre Boulez, who turned 90 in March. The New York Philharmonic — of which he was music director from 1971 to 1977, in a tenure now often criticized as recondite in its programming (untrue) and dire in its ticket sales (ditto) — did nothing to honor the birthday. Nor did our other major cultural institutions.It has taken a series of concerts this week at National Sawdust in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, featuring members of the International Contemporary Ensemble and the venerable bassoonist Pascal Gallois, for Mr. Boulez to be the focus of a sustained tribute here. And it’s a well-plotted tribute that does justice to a composer, conductor, pianist and theorist whose influence looms peerlessly large over the past half-century of music.The four concerts juxtapose Mr. Boulez’s works with those of other artists and, appropriately, center on his “Dialogue de l’Ombre Double” (1984), which recurs throughout the week. “Dialogue” is, as you can imagine, a conversation, but it’s unexpected: between a clarinetist (here the alert Joshua Rubin) and that musician’s recorded self. Skipping, fluttering, demanding, the score moves with perplexing yet alluring smoothness between live and amplified sound, as the recorded lines slip stealthily around the room, from one speaker to another.Mr. Boulez later created versions of the piece for different instruments, and in 1995 made one for Mr. Gallois. The bassoon brings a more grounded, earthy quality to the score than the clarinet, especially since Mr. Gallois’s interpretation, while just as virtuosic as Mr. Rubin’s, is less pert and more natural.In Olga Neuwirth’s new version of her “In Nacht und Eis” for two bassoons, Rebekah Heller matched Mr. Gallois in inspired naturalness. The music, a genial if passionate partnership, moves from low, oscillating growls to husky floods of notes. George Lewis’s “Emergent” surrounded the flutist Claire Chase with electronic echoes of her ferocious yelps, like the ricocheting calls of a flock of excited birds.Ms. Neuwirth’s piece returns on Thursday, alongside new and recent works by Sabrina Schroeder, Franck Bedrossian, Mario Diaz de Leon and the bassoon version of “Dialogue de l’Ombre Double.” The series culminates on Saturday with a program of Modernist masterpieces: Nono’s shimmering, skittish “Polifonica-Monodica-Ritmica”; the brooding twinkles of Stockhausen’s “Kontra-Punkte”; and Mr. Boulez’s “Éclat” and his solemn, seminal song cycle “Le marteau sans maître.” Eight months late, it’s the birthday gift he deserves.The series continues on Thursday and Saturday at National Sawdust, Brooklyn; 646-779-8455, nationalsawdust­­.org.Advertisement