By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMNOV. 18, 2015
“Why so little Rilke-music?” a critic from The New York Times asked over 20 years ago, noting how many composers have kept a respectful distance from this great poet. Among those who have heeded the challenge of setting his texts is the composer James Primosch, who has turned to Rilke’s religious poetry for a number of songs that elegantly combine personal fervor and worldly sophistication.On Tuesday at the Juilliard School’s Paul Hall, the New Juilliard Ensemble presented the New York premiere of Mr. Primosch’s “From a Book of Hours,” set to devotional texts Rilke first published in 1905. With one evoking “the calm between two notes” that get along with difficulty, yet “are reconciled, with trembling, in the dark rest,” it’s the sort of poetry that’s aching to be sung.Alexandra Razskazoff gave a beautiful performance of this captivating work, which benefited as much from her richly faceted, slinky soprano as from the expressive clarity she brought to the German text. Art song requires a singer to lavish as much thoughtfulness and art on diction as on musical phrasing, and Ms. Razskazoff appears to have the makings of a great recitalist.The ensemble, under the assured direction of Joel Sachs, sounded most comfortable in this work, with its late-Romantic language laced with idiosyncratic colorings. In some of the other works, all premieres, there was a certain respectful rigidity in the playing that seemed more concerned with getting it right than making it speak.AdvertisementDu Yun’s “Quatrain (Slow Portraits iii)” plunged the listener into a noisy bazaar of sounds and styles, in which Moorish melodies played on the oboe wrestle for attention with Chinese-flavored violin solos, hard-edge percussion and conciliatory strains from guitar and harp. In the end the music seemed to dissolve into thin air like a mirage.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Michael Zev Gordon’s “Sehnsucht” for mixed ensemble opened with the kind of musical gestures one might expect in a work titled “Longing”: a flourish that won’t quite let go of its final note; a swelling cello sigh. But what followed was a fascinating play on textures with moments of fit-to-burst tension, pulsating with microtonal heat, that eventually led to a delicate, fragile ending.Jaunty short ensemble phrases and spirited solos, interspersed by flat patches of sustained dissonant chords, characterized Elliott Sharp’s “Wannsee Noir” with spotlight-stealing turns by the trumpeter Matthew Mead and cheeky challenges by the clarinetist Shen Liu and the bass clarinetist Kristina Teuschler.AdvertisementA polished performance of Kurtag’s “Brefs Messages” (Op. 47) also offered opportunities for individual players to shine in a witty and economically drawn series of portraits that investigated the nature of musical conversation and community.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.