AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayIf the thought processes within Twyla Tharp’s dances could be written down in book form, it would be the world’s most densely packed, intelligent, artful guide to high-entertainment dance-making. Already the author of a series of American dance classics, she is celebrating her 50th anniversary as a choreographer by presenting a double bill of premieres. This week, that program, after two months of touring the United States, has reached the David H. Koch Theater (though it’s the Joyce Theater that’s presenting it). The first half is to Bach (“Preludes and Fugues”), the second to jazz (“Yowzie”).Both halves of the program leave me at once cold and irritated — and yet throughout the New York premiere on Tuesday, I kept thinking, “How very much she knows about the art of making dances.” The mind within the movement is exceptionally fast, accomplished, diverse, unpredictable. Solos, duets and trios happen at different speeds simultaneously only to melt into a unison ensemble. Symmetry, asymmetry, peripheral space: Ms. Tharp draws on a lexicon of contrasting resources; at times she aims movement to address the audience, while at others she focuses it as if the fourth wall were down. Ballet, modern, ballroom, slapstick: A plethora of styles fluently coexist. You sense not just the experience of all her career but lessons learned, too, from watching choreographers who have gone before.Does this make it sound as if this is merely dancing as virtuoso organization? The opposite proves true. This is performance as bravery in action. You can see how boldly the 12 Tharp dancers — all vividly individual — seize the moment. They spin and then stop on a dime, crash — bang! — to the floor, happily hold long balances, casually leap and leap again as if over a brink.There’s something silent-movie about Tharpism. (Each half of the program is introduced by choreographed fanfares, to music by John Zorn; and the dancers enter to these with the heightened vitality of beloved silver-screen players.) On Tuesday night, the easy courage of her dancers reminded me how Gloria Swanson entered the lion’s den for Cecil B. DeMille and how Harold Lloyd hung on to the hands of a clock above the street below.Every part of the body plays its vivid part. Locked in each other’s arms as if moving round a ballroom, a couple rotate their pelvises together as if moving a single hula hoop around their butts. In a classic Tharp move, dancers end a step or phrase with a shimmying ripple that sends energy in a wave outward from the waist through shoulders, arms and thighs. Tics, wriggles, flourishes are as natural as pirouettes and extensions.Ms. Tharp has said that “Preludes and Fugues” is the world as it ought to be and that “Yowzie” is the world as it is. Sure enough, “Yowzie” is a comedy where some things go wrong. But much of “Preludes and Fugues” is comedy, too; though everything goes right, its performers aren’t impossibly idealized — they’re mortals who often dance on their heels and flex their feet in the air.There’s much more to praise here — but my heart’s not in it. The music for both halves is taped. This is a particular drawback in “Preludes and Fugues,” whose keyboard music (20 movements from “The Well-Tempered Clavier”) is played here on piano and in recordings by David Korevaar and Angela Hewitt.Almost as soon as the dancing begins, you sense a peculiar disconnect between movement and music. Often the dancing feels twice as fast as the Bach, sometimes twice as slow; but what’s irksome is not rhythm so much as accentuation. Ms. Tharp shows during the Bach that she has many musicalities — none of which feel persuasively right for the duration of any single number. In the past, she’s been one of a number of dissimilar choreographers who have made us feel that their Bach is our Bach. Here, however, she seems to be trying 20 ways of taking Bach by (sometimes comedy-style) force.And for all the sensuous “’Twas nothing” emphasis of Tharpian dance, force is a pervasive ingredient of the performing style she asks from her dancers here. They’re remarkable, but they know so much about charm that they’re seldom amiable. The polished knowingness and merrily slick timing of these determinedly cute, brilliantly skilled pranksters backfires.From this, I always except Kaitlyn Gilliland, Savannah Lowery and Reed Tankersley. In “Yowzie,” those two women are elegant, insouciant exemplars of Tharpism at its best; and Mr. Tankersley behaves with a kind of innocent objectivity that makes him the most truly charming person onstage. Rika Okamoto and Matthew Dibble nearly give knockout star performances as the “Yowzie” couple who are too smashed to hold their relationship together. Instead, however, these two tricksters make sure we know how sure they are of every engaging effect.Ms. Okamoto has the role that Ms. Tharp would once have given herself; and in one drunk scene she strongly recalls Ms. Tharp’s performance in “Eight Jelly Rolls” (1974). Yet the difference between these two so similar dancers is huge. Ms. Tharp seemed artless, helpless, naturalness itself; you followed her pratfalls with your heart in your mouth. Ms. Okamoto encourages us to adore her while letting us know she knows she’s doing a drunk act.James F. Ingalls’s lighting is especially admirable in “Preludes and Fugues,” perfectly locating dancers against the surrounding darkness. But the costume and décor for “Yowzie” by Santo Loquasto make matters worse; they show us rainbows having nervous breakdowns on scales small and large. (The tinsel-plumage headdress he gives Ms. Okamoto would have scuppered even Ms. Tharp’s own dancing.) Yet his contributions are in key with the over-the-top exuberance of Ms. Tharp’s work. The whole program is a study in excess.Twyla Tharp’s 50th anniversary tour continues through Sunday at the David H. Koch Theater; joyce.org.Advertisement