AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertOn Tuesday night, the interior of St. Mark’s Church was a beautiful ruin. Shards of white plastic like crushed ice or shattered plaster were strewn in long lines from the altar to the exit, suggesting the wake of some powerful force. Two people entered in silence and stared at each other, as if to say, “What do we do now?”Those people were the dancer-choreographer Jean Butler and the cellist-composer Neil Martin. The most engrossing aspect of their duet at Danspace Project, “this is an Irish dance,” is the sense of a search for a way to communicate, she with her body and bare feet, he with his cello.The work grew out of such an exchange, the pair improvising together in a church in Ireland, and it retains a fitful, improvisatory rhythm. It’s nearly as fragmented as the plastic shards (designed by Frank Conway).For Ms. Butler, the violent force evoked by those shards could be “Riverdance.” She was one of the original stars of that spectacle, which hit the traditional Irish dance of her Irish-American upbringing like a meteor, and her career since has been an admirable quest for another path: quieter, experimental, exposed. (Anyone curious about the opposite course can catch the farewell performances of the other original star of “Riverdance,” Michael Flatley, in his “Lord of the Dance: Dangerous Games” at the Lyric Theater.)In “this is an Irish dance,” step-dancing appears like a ghost or a memory. It’s in Ms. Butler’s vertical carriage and the hang of her arms. And it’s in stimulating segments of quick stepping, which are sometimes contained, so that she resembles one of ballet’s sleepwalkers or spirits, and sometimes space-eating, with one foot chasing the other but neither let loose for very long.As in her last work at Danspace Project, the 2013 solo “hurry,” these fragments appear within a more contemporary mode (ghosts of Trisha Brown or Jodi Melnick). Rolling her ankles, shoulders and hips, Ms. Butler tests out motions and arranges them into spiral patterns. Her absorbing focus, inwardly directed in “hurry,” is here directed at Mr. Martin, whose music likewise contains echoes (and only echoes) of Irish tradition.Mr. Martin also moves about occasionally, traveling among various sitting spots. Yet these shifts — in the most dramatic, Ms. Butler momentarily takes his cello — don’t go anywhere or change anything, though they seem as if they could. There’s a feeling of sticks rubbed together and sparks that Ms. Butler won’t blow into a flame. Holding back is a survival mechanism that can outlast its use.“This is an Irish dance” continues through Saturday at Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, Manhattan; danspaceproject­.org.Advertisement