By BEN RATLIFFNOV. 18, 2015
“Montage of Heck: The Home Recordings”(Universal Music)There are a few lines about Kurt Cobain in “Strange Tools,” an enlightening new book by the philosopher and cognitive scientist Alva Noë about what art can teach us about ourselves.He’s reacting to an earlier opinion about Cobain’s band Nirvana written by Roger Scruton, the conservative English philosopher of aesthetics. Mr. Scruton argued that the group represents a vanishing point in the pop era, where “the audience does not listen to the music, but through it, to the performers” because, he said, performers like Cobain are shaman-like, and there is not much musical material to listen to, and what there is tends to be crude or simple.Mr. Noë — born only three years before Cobain, as opposed to Mr. Scruton, who’s a generation older — comes at it from another angle. He seems fine with Nirvana; there are just certain things he doesn’t expect from pop heroes. “These artists aren’t in the close listening business,” Mr. Noë said. Pop is about spectacle, exhibition, fandom, he explains; “it isn’t about the music.”I disagree in general, but let’s talk about Nirvana in particular. It had a defined group sound. Cobain had his own favorite traditional musical grammar, and had worked out a way to make his voice, with a salted-dough squashiness and asperity, melt into the cracks of his songs. Imperfect gestures and howls and feedback can be organized into musical material that is not necessarily simple at all; he knew this.AdvertisementBut regarding “Montage of Heck,” the new album of Cobain’s solo home-recording scraps, Mr. Noë might be at least half right.AdvertisementIt’s a collection of bits that sound variously like fun and art and practice, some of which were used in the soundtrack of the recent HBO documentary of the same title by the filmmaker Brett Morgen. There are two editions of the album: standard, with 13 tracks, and deluxe, with 31. There is no reason to bother with the short version. This is for completists. Delimiting completism makes no sense.Of some interest: an authentically personal version of the Beatles’ “And I Love Her,” and a few run-throughs of songs that Nirvana later recorded, including a semi-engaged “Been a Son.” But there are also shapeless minutes of Cobain singing absent-mindedly, or with a comically low or high or screaming voice over repeated riffs, or playing with delay and wah-wah pedals. There are doodley sound collages and spoken-word pieces, funny or acerbic or alarming, that might give you a little window on his personality and process, but don’t teach us anything particularly new about him. Close listening doesn’t really help.Yet, in one way, “Montage of Heck” is about the music. This is probably private-private music, but Cobain paid close attention to public-private music: rough, low-fidelity four-track recordings, the kind of thing made in the late ’80s by Daniel Johnston, Sebadoh, the Frogs and others. It’s not impossible to imagine him releasing a solo album somewhat like this, if he were contractually able to. But it would almost certainly be much, much better.A version of this review appears in print on November 19, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: Kurt Cobain’s ‘Montage of Heck: The Home Recordings’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.