AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben Sisario“Love overshadows evil.”That is the message that Eagles of Death Metal, the American band playing at the Bataclan concert hall in Paris on Friday, conveyed in the group’s first comments about the attacks there.In a statement posted Wednesday morning to its Facebook and Twitter accounts, the band said that it had returned home but was still shaken. “We are horrified and still trying to come to terms with what happened in France,” the statement said.“Although bonded in grief with the victims, the fans, the families, the citizens of Paris and all those affected by terrorism,” Eagles of Death Metal wrote, “we are proud to stand together, with our new family, now united by a common goal of love and compassion.”“We would like to thank the French police,” the group’s statement continued, “the F.B.I., the U.S. and French State Departments, and especially all those at ground zero with us who helped each other as best they could during this unimaginable ordeal, proving once again that love overshadows evil.”A video of the band onstage at the Bataclan, apparently taken by an audience member, shows it bashing away at a heavy rock riff when shots began to ring out in quick succession. Of the 129 people who have been reported dead in the attacks throughout Paris, 89 were at the Bataclan, a 150-year-old theater that once showcased Maurice Chevalier and Édith Piaf but in recent decades has become a popular venue for rock bands.The band, from Palm Desert, Calif., had not spoken publicly since late Friday, when it posted a brief message saying that it was still trying to account for all members and its crew.Among those killed at the Bataclan were Nick Alexander, a 36-year-old from Colchester, England, who was selling band merchandise and was well known among touring musicians. Cat Stevens and Kylie Minogue were among the stars who posted tributes to Mr. Alexander after the attacks.Eagles of Death Metal’s statement — which also included tributes to Mr. Alexander as well as Thomas Ayad, Marie Mosser and Manu Perez, who worked for its record company, Mercury — was posted with an image of hand signs from the group’s first album, “Peace, Love, Death Metal,” superimposed over the colors of the French flag. All of its concerts, the band said, have been put on hold.“Vive la musique, vive la liberté, vive la France, and vive EODM,” the band concluded.Eagles of Death Metal’s statement was made shortly after another by White Miles, an Austrian duo that had opened the show at the Bataclan.“We are happy, but miserable at the same time,” White Miles’s two members, Medina Rekic and Hansjörg Loferer, wrote in a statement on their website. “Happy, because we may be within our family circles, who immensely help us to feel safe again; miserable, because we know that many families have to mourn since the weekend.”Mr. Rekic and Mr. Loferer added that their planned tour with Eagles of Death Metal has been canceled but that they planned to dedicate a concert in Innsbruck, Austria, on Dec. 17 to Mr. Alexander.Advertisement