
Jessica Jones By                     
SIMON ABRAMS

NOV. 21, 2015
Control is everything in another thoughtfully character-driven, albeit tonally wonky episode of “Jessica Jones.” We are constantly reminded of the show’s thematic concern with control through dialogue that underscores the way that everyone, from supervillain Kilgrave to good guy Luke Cage, struggles to stay on top of their lives. Jones knows that struggle well, as we see when she nurses a drink while investigating Kilgrave’s case. She snaps at her upstairs neighbors for the same reason: She can’t see the world beyond her own problems, and therefore despises people she imagines can’t handle their own private lives — in private.On the one hand, “A.K.A. Crush Syndrome” is thematically tidy to the point of being distracting. Everybody serves as a foil for Jones’s problems, even best friend Trish Walker, and sometimes employer Jeryn Hogarth, two women who appear to be much more in control of their lives than Jones.On the other hand, while parallels between these characters are sometimes strained, it’s gratifying to see the episode’s writer Micah Schraft actively juxtaposing the show’s various characters, who never stop showing you how they reassert control over their lives.Jones struggles to do the right thing by clients like Hope, Kilgrave’s latest victim, because she’s been attacked in similar fashion. So Jones pressures Hogarth into taking on Hope’s case in spite of Hogarth’s insistence that Hope is a “loser.” And Jones goes off in search of Kilgrave, and inadvertently discovers his one weakness: He refuses to be anesthetized lest certain parts of his brain be shut down. The significance of this piece of information is largely implied — anesthetic can shut down the part of Kilgrave’s brain that grants him his mind-control powers — though that confusion is deliberate: we watch actions as they unfold, and wait for their greater significance to reveal itself.AdvertisementThankfully, we never have to wait too long. Jones tracks down information on Kilgrave pretty quickly, reminding us that the show is less about detective work, and more about Jones’s anti-heroine journey as a down-and-out ex-superhero trying to get her mojo back. Jones’s motives aren’t always clear, as we see when the married woman that Cage fools around with in the first episode confronts Jones, and asks her why she’s falsely claiming that she was hired to investigate Cage’s affair. Jones similarly thinks she knows what’s going on with her upstairs neighbors (kinky sex), but clearly has no idea, as she finds out when one neighbor reveals that the woman he’s always arguing with is his twin sister, not his spouse. Jones constantly excuses her misanthropy, like when she insists that she lives alone because “people distract her.”AdvertisementMr. Schraft excuses Jones’s misanthropic worldview by presenting optimism as a sucker’s bet. There’s a revealingly gratuitous narrative detour in “A.K.A. Crush Syndrome” concerning Maureen, the mother of the Kilgrave victim Jack Denton. Maureen’s religious faith is presented as pie-in-the-sky wishful thinking. She tells Jones that her prayers were answered when Jack, a recovering alcoholic — “He was on liquor all the time” — was not only returned home, but had his missing kidneys replaced with a dialysis machine leased by a mysterious wealthy donor.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“God is with us,” Maureen insists, but Jones disagrees.“God didn’t do this,” she tells Jack. “The Devil did. And I’m going to find him.”Jack proves Jones’s perspective to be the correct one: He’s in so much pain that he begs Jones to kill him, making his mother’s positive outlook to be childishly naive.The only subplot that’s handled with relative restraint in this second episode is Jones and Cage’s budding relationship. Viewers learn more about Cage’s powers in the scene where a rugby team attacks Cage in his bar, and fails to put a scratch on him, not even when they use broken bottles to prod at him. Still, when Cage shows off his invulnerability to Jones later on, it’s not a pointless act of show and tell: He’s coming clean to her, and showing her a side of himself that few people get to see. (“I saw you. And you saw me.”)Cage also suggests that his hang-ups are complementary to Jones’s when he insists, “You can’t fix me: I’m unbreakable.” This is a welcome preamble to a Jones/Cage relationship, one that treats both characters like adults who get rid of their problem through punching, sex or talking. This unusually upbeat conversation works so well because it convincingly shows Cage regaining perspective, and yes, control of his life just by sharing it with Jones. Here’s hoping that glimmer of hope isn’t just a fluke.Read our recap of episode three.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »