Benjamin Clementine, a pianist, poet, singer-songwriter and former Paris busker, was awarded the 2015 Mercury Prize on Friday in London for the best British or Irish album of the year. The prestigious award, which calls itself “the music equivalent to the Booker Prize for literature and the Turner Prize for art,” comes with a cash prize of 20,000 pounds, or about $30,500.Mr. Clementine, 26, won for the album “At Least for Now” (Behind/Capitol), which the critic Nate Chinen called the singer’s “declaration of selfhood, an album very much about the act of becoming, with a tightrope balance of dramatic artifice and diaristic detail.” Among Mr. Clementine’s influences are powerful vocalists like Leonard Cohen and Antony Hegarty, as well as the poet William Blake.“I can’t believe I’ve actually won this,” Mr. Clementine said in his acceptance speech, according to The Guardian. “If anyone is watching, any child or youngster or student, the world is your oyster. Go out there and get what you want to get.” He dedicated his win to Paris — where he lived as a teenager — following last week’s terror attack. “I went ’round that train playing as if I was playing in a stadium,” Mr. Clementine has said of the Paris metro. “I’ve always performed this way. I went on the streets and played, and I could still go and play on the streets today if I felt like it.”The other 11 shortlisted albums for the prize were: Aphex Twin’s “Syro,” “My Love Is Cool” by Wolf Alice, “Hairless Toys” by Roisin Murphy, “Architect” by C Duncan, Eska’s self-titled album, Florence and the Machine’s “How Big, How Blue, How Beautiful,” Ghostpoet’s “Shedding Skin,” Jamie xx’s “In Colour,” SOAK’s “Before We Forgot How to Dream,” Gaz Coombes’s “Matador” and “Are You Satisfied” by Slaves.Jamie xx, the D.J. and producer known for his work in the xx, was considered the bookmaker’s favorite, according to the BBC. The Mercury Prize was founded in 1992, and has been known to push fringe acts to greater renown. Last year’s winners, the experimental hip-hop group Young Fathers, had sold fewer than 3,000 albums before winning. The group saw sales for its album “Dead” rise more than 4,000 percent the next week, breaking it into the Top 40 in the United Kingdom.