AdvertisementSupported byPopcastBy The New York TimesListen to this week’s podcast | Subscribe: iTunes | RSS | StitcherToday, Adele makes her return to music. In a review of the album, Jon Caramanica, a pop music critic for the Times, writes:“Absence has a way of ossifying an idea and amplifying a legend. Those have been gifts for Adele, who has just returned after a break of almost five years with her third album, “25” (XL/Columbia). Her place in pop music held steady as she retreated from the spotlight, toward a more nourishing life that includes motherhood. And time has fixed the idea of Adele’s sound, leaving a brightly blinking beacon for her to return to. To that end, “25” manages to sound all of a piece, even as the songs veer from phenomenal to tepid. In places, everything comes together.“Million Years Ago” bursts with melodrama and perhaps has a quiet echo of Mariah Carey’s “My All” amid the flamencoesque guitar. “Hello,” the album opener, begins with melodramatic, earnest piano (as do several other songs), followed by an invitation: “Hello, it’s me/ I was wondering if after all these years you’d like to meet.” This is Adele at her savviest: “Hello” functions as an extended hand to old fans and also a seeming chapter-closer on the relationship that defined “21,” her last album. On songs like “I Miss You” and “Water Under the Bridge,” she renders the most acute pain with severe clarity and composure.Pop moves and mutates, but Adele more or less does not. Naming her albums for different ages in her life doesn’t indicate radical changes from era to era, but rather reinforces the reassuringly slow march of time. Her music is like time-lapse photography of a busy street: Small parts move, but the structure of the whole picture remains essentially intact.What sets her apart, though, are those steady parts: a gargantuan and smooth voice, deployed with casual control and a cathartic fluency with heartbreak.”“25” is full of songs that continue her tradition of extracting deep ache, with a few twists courtesy of new collaborators like Bruno Mars, Tobias Jesso Jr. and Max Martin. Jon Pareles, chief pop music critic for the Times, spoke with Mr. Caramanica about how Adele has grown, or not, or whether it doesn’t matter either way.Advertisement