LONDON — The skull of Winnipeg, the bear who inspired “Winnie-the-Pooh,” has gone on display for the first time at the Hunterian Museum in London.In the mid-1920s, A.A. Milne wrote his beloved children’s classic “Winnie-the-Pooh,” inspired by trips to the London Zoo with his son to see Winnipeg, a celebrity bear who was brought to the zoo during World War I. (Milne’s son’s own teddy bear was named Winnie, after the real-life animal.)Winnipeg’s body was donated to the Royal College of Surgeons’ Odontological Museum when she died in the 1930s and has remained in the collection since. It survived a 1941 bombing that destroyed much of the collection.In a phone interview the Hunterian’s director, Sam Alberti, said that curators had recently conducted a review of their holdings to assess which works would be of particular interest for visitors. “It made us look with fresh eyes at the skull,” he said.The skull is on view in a display about the items added to the predominantly 18th-century collection during the 20th century. Mr. Alberti said that curators hoped that the well-known bear’s skull would serve as an entry point into the collection for visitors who might not otherwise go to the Hunterian.He also said that aside from its celebrity value, Winnipeg’s skull offered a particularly interesting case study. “She lived with quite severe gum disease, you know, undoubtedly because of the honey on the sticky buns that she was being fed by the museum visitors out of love,” he said. Through the bear, he said, “We can have a look and see what happens to animals when their diet is, I’m sure, delicious, but utterly inappropriate.”Asked whether he thought the exhibition ran the risk of scaring children, he said: “We did think carefully about this because we didn’t want the message to be, ‘Come to the Hunterian Museum and see Winnie-the-Pooh.’ No. It’s a skull. I mean it’s a very well-preserved skull, but nonetheless.”“It’s a happy message,” he added, “that Winnipeg, the bear who inspired Winnie-the-Pooh, has had this afterlife.”