Paradi$e Bitch
White Rabbit Gallery. Through Jan. 31.This large-scale group show takes its name from a video artwork by Tianzhuo Chen that features two dwarves in blingy jewelry dancing to rap music (the artwork was recently on display at the Palais de Tokyo in Paris in a solo exhibition dedicated to a religion that the artist invented). “Paradi$e” is showing alongside monumental works by China’s leading contemporary artists. Others in the show include Chen Wei, Bu Hua, and Xu Zhen, who made a series of enormous artworks in which traditional East Asian-style statues grow from the heads of fake Greco-Roman works.Buddhist Art of India
The National Museum.
Through Nov. 30.This monthlong exhibition focuses on artworks inspired by Buddha and Buddhism. Works include sculptured renderings of Buddha’s life, Buddhist symbols and statues depicting Buddhist lore. Many of the works hail from what is now India, though one section focuses on the Buddhist diaspora, which reached across south and east Asia.Aida
Deutsche Oper.
Nov. 22-Dec. 10.A new production of Verdi’s epic about an Ethiopian Queen turned Egyptian slave is opening at the Deutsche Oper. The director Benedikt von Peter fills the stage with modern touches, like video projections and blaring TV screens. Tatiana Serjan sings the title role and Alfred Kim plays her beloved, Radames.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Opening
National Gallery Singapore.
Nov. 24-Dec. 6.Singapore’s new national gallery, a cavernous museum dedicated to southeast Asian art and artifacts, opens its doors on Nov. 24. The museum is housed in two giant Art Deco-era buildings, the former Supreme Court building and the former City Hall. (Artworks from across Asia will be showcased at the courthouse, while the focus at City Hall will be art from Singapore.) It opens with a two-week series of events in and around the city-center campus. Music and dance performances will take place throughout; on Nov. 27-29, a giant light show will illuminate the museum’s facade at nighttime.Singapore International Film Festival
Various venues.
Nov. 26-Dec. 6.This annual festival offers a glimpse of modern Asian cinema as well as a look back at some classics. The event opens with “Panay,” a Taiwanese movie about a rural family whose life is interrupted by fast-paced development. Ten feature movies from Asia will compete for the festival’s top prize, the Silver Screen Awards. Other films that will be shown include Chinese documentaries and older Asian films, like the Filipino movies “Insiang” and “A Portrait of the Artist as Filipino.”Paint
Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek.
Nov. 26-March. 3.Nine paintings by Monet, Manet, Cézanne and several other French masters will go on view under somewhat unusual circumstances in this show: They will be displayed unframed, in an effort to show them in a new light by stripping them of their usual context. The show also includes an array of French paintings — with frames — grouped by appearance and painting style, rather than chronology or theme. The museum is also showing an exhibition of sculpture by Degas (through Dec. 31).Yoko Ono: From My Window
Museum of Contemporary Art.
Through Feb. 14.This retrospective highlights works from the career of Ms. Ono, a Tokyo native. It includes some of her best-known pieces, like “Instructions for Paintings,” short manuals that she included in her book “Grapefruit.” The book, filled with lyrical instruction manuals, challenged orthodoxies of what art could be, and helped establish Ms. Ono as one of the leading conceptual artists of her day. Some lesser-known works are on view as well, including art she made as a teenager.Spanish Masters: The world of El Greco, Ribera, Zurbarán, Velázquez, Murillo and Goya
Hermitage Amsterdam.
Nov. 28-May 29.This exhibition tracks the evolution of oil painting in Spain. It features major works from the Hermitage Amsterdam’s parent museum in St. Petersburg, Russia. In addition to the major names in its title, the show includes some works by less-famous artists, like Pedro de Moya.The Elixir of Love
Arts Center Melbourne. Nov. 21-28.Adina and Nemorino — the heroes of Donizetti’s opera on misbegotten love — all live in the Australian outback in the director Simon Phillips’s lighthearted update for Opera Australia. The production moves the action to World War I, around the time that Australia joined in a military effort with other Commonwealth nations. Aldo di Toro plays Nemorino, the lovelorn village boy; and Conal Coad plays Dulcamara, who offers to solve his problems with a potion.