By KATHRYN SHATTUCKNOV. 20, 2015
It’s Fantasy Friday, viewers, with “The Man in the High Castle,” Philip K. Dick’s alternate history, and “Marvel’s Jessica Jones,” a superhero with an alcohol problem. Meanwhile, Alicia Keys, John Legend and Pharrell Williams raise their voices for racial harmony.What’s Streaming NowTHE MAN IN THE HIGH CASTLE on Amazon. Philip K. Dick imagines a new world order, circa 1962. The Nazis had developed the nuclear bomb first, the Allies lost the war, and America is occupied by Germany in the East and Japan in the West, with a buffer zone in the Rocky Mountains. That’s ash, not snow, gently falling through the air. James Poniewozik, the New York Times critic, called it a Holocaust story, a sci-fi story, an espionage thriller and a tale of mysticism rolled into one. “The result,” he added, “is bracing but shaky.” (Image: Rupert Evans)MARVEL’S JESSICA JONES on Netflix. Krysten Ritter skulks around as a tormented gumshoe with an alcohol problem, who’s living in Hell’s Kitchen and has put her superhero past behind her, mostly — except to get at her tormentor, a mutant with a special kind of mind control who can make women do what he wants. (He’s David Tennant, after all.) Mike Hale of The Times called it “a clever 21st-century take on film noir.” (Image: Ms. Ritter)MAKERS: ONCE AND FOR ALL on Makers. Hillary Rodham Clinton, Jane Fonda and the former Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright look back at the 1995 Beijing Women’s Conference, a keystone in the global women’s rights movement.AdvertisementWhat’s on TVSHINING A LIGHT: A CONCERT FOR PROGRESS ON RACE IN AMERICA 8 p.m. on A&E, FYI, History, H2, Lifetime and LMN. John Legend, Pharrell Williams, Bruce Springsteen, Sting, Morgan Freeman, Jamie Foxx, Miguel, Nicki Minaj, Pink, Smokey Robinson, Jill Scott, Ed Sheeran and Sia take the stage at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles to promote reconciliation and positive change. “Shining a Light: Conversations on Race in America,” at 10 on A&E, follows Alicia Keys, Mr. Legend and Mr. Williams to Baltimore; Ferguson, Mo.; and Charleston, S.C., where they perform and meet with residents in areas that have become synonymous with racial inequality and violence.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MASTERCHEF JUNIOR 8 p.m. on Fox. The mini-cooks face an out-of-this-world mystery box challenge overseen by the astronaut Tracy Dyson.BIG GAME (2015) 9 p.m. on Starz. One giant leap for mankind: When the president of the United States exits a sabotaged Air Force One via parachute pod and lands in the Lapland wilderness, it’s up to a 13-year-old boy to save him — and prove his manhood along the way. Samuel L. Jackson and Onni Tommila are the dynamic duo. The Finnish director Jalmari Helander’s “irresistible fable-thriller,” Andy Webster wrote in The Times, “has got a heart.” (Image: Mr. Jackson)Advertisement20/20 10 p.m. on ABC. Barbara Walters interviews the Republican presidential candidate Donald J. Trump and members of his family.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page C21 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Watch Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.