AdvertisementSupported byBy Roslyn SulcasIN the continuing discussion about the scarcity of female choreographers in the ballet world, one name inevitably crops up: Crystal Pite.The Canadian-born Ms. Pite, who lives in Vancouver, where she has her own company, Kidd Pivot, is part of what might be called the Forsythe diaspora — agroup of choreographers, including Richard Siegal, Helen Pickett and Jacopo Godani, who have emerged from William Forsythe’s Frankfurt Ballet and Forsythe Company. Since forming Kidd Pivot in 2002, Ms. Pite (rhymes with “might”) has established a reputation as one of the most talented and intriguing choreographers working today, with a movement style that combines a slippery, buckling fluidity with an unusually emotional theatricality. She has commissions in hand from both the Paris Opera Ballet and the Royal Ballet in London.But Ms. Pite, 44, whose “Polaris” is part of “Thomas Adès: Concentric Paths — Movement in Music,” which opens at New York City Center on Friday as part of Lincoln Center’s White Light Festival, said that she doesn’t really see herself as part of the ballet world.“Right from the early days my choreography tended to push against ballet, as much as I could while still immersed in it,” she said in a telephone interview soon after arriving in New York, where she was rehearsing 60 students from New York University, for “Polaris,” a roiling, seething mass of group movement that transforms the ensemble into morphing forms and shapes.Mr. Adès, who will conduct the Orchestra of St. Luke’s and play the piano with the Calder Quartet at the “Concentric Circles” performances, said, “I think she really found the great subject matter of ‘Polaris’; human evolution, or empires rising and falling, who knows, but she manages to evoke all that without a single word.”Alistair Spalding, the director of Sadler’s Wells in London, said he thought immediately of Ms. Pite when planning an evening centered on the music of Mr. Adès, the British composer. Together with Mr. Adès, Mr. Spalding selected a number of pieces that could be suitable for dance, and invited Ms. Pite and the young British choreographer Alexander Whitley to choose from them. (He also picked two other existing works to scores by Mr. Adès; “Outlier,” choreographed for New York City Ballet by Wayne McGregor, and “Life Story,” by Karole Armitage.) Ms. Pite already knew Mr. Adès’s music after choreographing for his opera “The Tempest” in a 2012 production by Robert Lepage at the Metropolitan Opera House.The score for “Polaris” requires 75 musicians; it’s “massive and huge and preposterous,” Ms. Pite said. “I was drawn to it like a moth to a flame. I knew I wanted a cast of thousands.” That translated into 60 students and the members of Kidd Pivot as “team leaders,” all working together in amoeba-like mutating formations.Ms. Pite grew up in Victoria, British Columbia, and started dance classes at 4. “Ballet, tap, jazz, drama, played in the school band, sang in choir, made up dances for high school musicals,” she said. “I always knew I wanted to be a dancer and I always choreographed.” At 17, she joined Ballet British Columbia, a small ensemble with a focus on European-based choreographers like Mr. Forsythe and Jiri Kylian, and on new Canadian work. “I had my eyes opened from the beginning as to what was possible in contemporary ballet,” she said.Ms. Pite created her first work for Ballet British Columbia just two years after joining the company, and its success led to further commissions from Canadian companies. But at 25, she “put all that on hold” and moved to Germany to join Mr. Forsythe’s Frankfurt Ballet. “This was new territory in the body I was interested in,” she said. “It turned out to be intense and rich and constantly changing.”After five years, wanting to dance in her own work, she returned to Vancouver, where she formed Kidd Pivot and within a few years became the resident choreographer at Nederlands Dans Theater and Les Ballets Jazz de Montreal. In 2010, the Künstlerhaus Mousonturm in Frankfurt offered her a three-year residency, during which she created “The You Show” and “Tempest Replica,” which toured widely and created a distinct buzz around her work.“I think she immediately attracted attention because she has such a specific voice,” said Mr. Spalding. (Ms. Pite has been an associate artist at Sadler’s Wells since 2013.) “Although she tends to make more pure-movement work for outside companies, and more theatrical, text-based works for her own company, her great gift is to be able to overlay movement with meaning.”Asked about her coming commissions and the tiny number of female choreographers who receive major ballet company invitations, Ms. Pite said that she had never felt anything standing in her way. “But I started in a small, creation-based company, and I soon moved into the contemporary dance world where it’s a nonissue,” she noted.Ms. Pite isn’t anxious, though, to define her work as part of one world or another. Her goal, she wrote in an email, is to make dance “that is detailed and beautiful but also brave and brutal.”Advertisement