By MICHAELANGELO MATOSNOV. 19, 2015
NEW YORK has hosted a handful of electronic dance music, or E.D.M., extravaganzas in the past few years. But the two-day Time Warp U.S. festival coming to Brooklyn’s 39th Street Pier this weekend is something different: It aims to draw an older and more sophisticated audience than youth-oriented events like Electric Zoo or Electric Daisy Carnival New York.The festival, presented by the German promoters Cosmopop, emphasizes grittier, subtler music that is often in debt to 1980s and early-’90s Chicago house and Detroit techno, rather than the hits and careening bass drops of stadium E.D.M. And its headliners include an intergenerational bunch of longstanding underground house and techno D.J. favorites, such as Sven Väth, Luciano and, playing back to back for four hours, Seth Troxler and Jamie Jones. All promise a weekend of dance music that moves away from the bleating stadium norm.“In more underground music, you have a crowd that is inherently interested in the history and the lineage of the music,” said Sam Fotias of the Detroit promoters Paxahau, which has put on that city’s Movement festival since 2006. “In the E.D.M. realm, everything is about being huge, in your face. In the house and techno realm, it’s more internalized. The journey you’re taking is in your mind as you’re listening to the music.” He calls Cosmopop “meticulous professionals” whose signature event in Mannheim, Germany, is “one of those pilgrimage events” on the global techno calendar.Time Warp began in 1994, and today has satellite events in the Netherlands and Argentina, as well as the United States. Though last year’s festival — also at the 39th Street Pier, and Time Warp’s first United States date — drew 7,000 attendees over two days, this year ticket sales have been up “50, 60 percent,” according to Steffen Charles, the managing director of Cosmopop. (By contrast, the E.D.M. festival Electric Zoo drew 80,000 over three days.)AdvertisementOne reason for this year’s sales uptick is a rare appearance by the Chilean-born Berliner Ricardo Villalobos, one of techno’s most mercurial talents. Long a vocal critic of the United States’ foreign policy, Mr. Villalobos’s Time Warp set will be his first American D.J. gig in 13 years. He agreed to it as a favor to Mr. Charles; the two men met while working dance retail in Frankfurt a quarter-century ago. “He knows where I’m coming from — from the dance floor,” Mr. Charles said.Advertisement“Time Warp really is about this evolution of German underground dance music,” said the Detroit-born D.J. and producer Seth Troxler, who has appeared at the Mannheim edition “five or six” times over the years, beginning with the group Visionquest. “We were opening acts in the really small room,” he said, adding in reference to Mr. Väth and Richie Hawtin: “It’s Sven, Richie, all my techno heroes all in one place. It’s like an all-star game. We’re involved with that tradition, which is really beyond belief.”Mr. Troxler is an enormously popular D.J. He’s also adventurous: his volume of the D.J.-mix series “DJ-Kicks,” released last month, features tracks ranging from the icy minimalist techno of Cobblestone Jazz to a clutch of warm, soulful house tracks before finishing with a live Sun Ra track. At Time Warp, Mr. Troxler will play a back-to-back set — in dance-music parlance, “b2b”: trading off selections in real time — with the London D.J. Jamie Jones.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.New York’s club world has tended to be the place where European party blueprints have been tried out in recent years: The Manhattan nightspots Pacha NYC and Space Ibiza New York both descend from chains based in Ibiza, Spain.However, Time Warp’s two years in New York haven’t come without hiccups. In 2014, the plan was to use the Kingsbridge Armory in the Bronx as its site; that idea was abandoned in mid-October. For a full month, while relocating to the 39th Street Pier, Time Warp was forced to stop sales, as well as refund some 900 tickets.This year’s edition was announced for the Bedford Armory in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, but trouble struck last week when neighborhood officials held a news conference, insisting that the Department of Citywide Administrative Services, which issued the permit to Cosmopop for the show, had not consulted them. Councilwoman Laurie Cumbo stated that she was “unequivocally” opposed to the “rave party” being held there, and that security and transportation issues had not been discussed with local officials. Last Friday morning, Time Warp was informed it needed a new home.Mr. Charles said that security and transportation plans had been covered in detail with the Department of Citywide Administrative Services, but added that the new setup was ready to go by Saturday night.“I got the impression that everything got very political,” Mr. Charles said. “I said, ‘Let’s not force and push through a venue where we have the community against us.’ That’s not how we want to do business. We are looking to establish something long-term.”A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Electronic Dance Music With a Grittier, Subtler Sound.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.