AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Ken JohnsonOne of Denmark’s most celebrated artists, Vilhelm Hammershoi (1864-1916), was known in his day as “the painter of tranquil rooms.” He worked during an era of great changes in Western art: Around the turn of the 20th century, traditional realism no longer seemed an adequate way to express the myriad revolutionary ideas percolating all over Europe. As viewers may observe in “Painting Tranquility: Masterworks by Vilhelm Hammershoi From SMK – The National Gallery of Denmark,” a beautiful small exhibition at Scandinavia House, his paintings convey a distinctively modern psychological complexity. But unlike another famous Scandinavian, the Expressionist Edvard Munch, Hammershoi practiced a kind of representational painting dating back to Rembrandt and Vermeer. With their severely muted colors, Hammershoi’s portraits and pictures of women in nearly empty rooms may call to mind the suavely subdued paintings of James McNeill Whistler. Although influenced by him, Hammershoi never pushed as far toward abstract abbreviation as Whistler.Hammershoi’s early work puzzled many of his contemporaries, who saw only its colorless bleakness. But his reputation grew, and eventually he had a following throughout Europe. After his death, he was mostly forgotten outside of Scandinavia until his works turned up in “Northern Light: Realism and Symbolism in Scandinavian Painting, 1880-1910,” an acclaimed exhibition organized by the art historian and curator Kirk Varnedoe, which appeared at the Brooklyn Museum in the early 1980s.This Scandinavia House show presents 24 paintings from the collection of the Statens Museum for Kunst  selected by Kasper Monrad, its chief curator. (Coincidentally, “The Danish Girl,” a movie in which the two main characters’ austere apartment design is inspired by Hammershoi’s room paintings, opens in New York next Friday.)What marks Hammershoi’s paintings as modern isn’t style as much as a searching, melancholic mood. His most compelling works depict rooms eerily empty or occupied by a single woman. “Interior: An Old Stove” (1888), an early example, represents a dim room vacant but for a hulking black furnace to the left. Through an open door to the right is a closed white door on the other side of a more brightly lighted hallway. What lies beyond that further door? Probably just another room, but there’s a poetic suggestiveness about it. If the painter could have opened that door, maybe he would have discovered another, more colorful, world.Painted that same year, “Woman Seen From the Back” is similarly tantalizing. A woman in a black dress and white apron stands before a wooden table and a blank gray wall, head bent over a task we can’t see. Something is hidden, and it’s not just whatever it is that she is doing. Hammershoi’s rooms are spaces of spiritual inquiry animated by transcendental vibes that are felt but not seen.In “Interior in Strandgade, Sunlight on the Floor” (1901), bright sunlight illuminates a large, central window with sheer curtains drawn to the sides. To the right is a closed white door; to the left, a woman in a long black dress sits on a chair at a small oval table, bending her head over an unknown activity.Reading metaphorically, this picture suggests a choice for the viewer. The door might lead out into the light of divine reason; or your attention might move left toward a kind of inwardness embodied by the meditative woman. Hammershoi seems stuck at the threshold of alternative modes of consciousness, paralyzed by existential uncertainty, and that gives his paintings a smoldering psychology of doubtful hesitancy. His rooms are not so tranquil after all.Hammershoi’s paintings of outdoor scenes are nearly as mysterious as his indoor pictures. In “Amalienborg Palace Square, Copenhagen” a Renaissance-style equestrian statue stands on a high pedestal with a palatial, neo-Classical facade looming in the background. Without a soul in sight, it has the look of a cold and misty early morning. Reminiscent of De Chirico’s depictions of empty plazas, it seems fraught with some unknown, perhaps unknowable, import, like a dream.A landscape called “Near Fortunen, Jaegersborg Deer Park, North of Copenhagen” (1896) departs from the mournful gloom of Hammershoi’s cityscapes. With light from a low sun filtering through a hilltop grove of leafy trees with black, serpentine branches and trunks, the painting captures what seems a moment of ecstatic pantheism.Among the portraits in this exhibition are four likenesses of the artist’s wife, Ida (1869-1949), made at different times (two from 1890; one each from 1894 and 1907). They track her progress from ingénue to mature woman. In the last, a dark painting made after she had recovered from a long illness, she appears in a plain brown sweater, the years seeming to show in her pensive expression as she stirs the contents of a teacup on a bare table top. In this tenderly unflinching image you behold the gaze of long-haul love.“Painting Tranquility: Masterworks by Vilhelm Hammershoi From SMK – The National Gallery of Denmark” continues through Feb. 27 at Scandinavia House, 58 Park Avenue; 212-779-3587, scandinaviahouse .org.“Painting Tranquillity: Masterworks by Vilhelm Hammershoi from SMK – The National Gallery of Denmark,” runs through Feb. 27 at Scandinavia House, 58 Park Ave., Manhattan; 212-779-3587, scandinaviahouse .org.Advertisement