By ROBERTA SMITHNOV. 19, 2015
In memory, the still lifes of the Italian painter Giorgio Morandi (1890-1964) can sometimes seem like the medium’s best comfort food — familiar, satisfying and a little monotonous. His repeating images of humble domestic objects — bottles, long-necked vases and little cookie tins set against expanses of empty wall and tabletop — can blend together and appear steeped in nostalgia. This view is encouraged by the seemingly narrow circumstances of Morandi’s existence: he died in the same Bolognese apartment where he was born and lived his whole life, with his three unmarried sisters.But when you actually stand before Morandi’s paintings and prints, they provide a much more complicated, invigorating form of sustenance. His exclusive concentration on still life (and sometimes landscape) pushed to the brink of abstraction can bowl you over. So can the searching tenderness with which he illuminates and joins subject, form and content by repeatedly rendering the same few objects in slightly different combinations and arrangements. While reveling in his works’ serene beauty, you’re also examining painting as object, personal expression, visual philosophy and mirror — not just of reality but of existence itself.Right now two downtown exhibition spaces offer the chance to view the focused yet exhilaratingly open universe that Morandi created. In Chelsea the David Zwirner gallery is showing 20 paintings dating from 1941 to 1962. The majority are from after 1950, Morandi’s mature years, and have about them a lucid perfection, at once cerebral and impassioned.Simultaneously, the Center for Italian Modern Art, which occupies the fourth floor of a SoHo loft building and exists primarily to serve young art historians, has mounted its third season-long exhibition: 35 Morandi paintings from 1913 to 1963 that trace his struggle for perfection. (Since opening in 2013, the center has devoted shows to Fortunato Depero and Medardo Rosso.)AdvertisementThe center, which charges a $10 entrance fee, requires not only reservations but also submission to a 30-minute guided tour, of which there are four every Friday and Saturday, for a maximum of 15 people. The visit begins with a cup of espresso in the center’s dining area, a space greatly enhanced by the large color photographs of Joel Meyerowitz, which documents several of the humble vases, bottles and containers Morandi used in his still lifes. Each is seen in the artist’s studio on a patch of tabletop layered with pencil marks recording various still life arrangements.The photographs also show how Morandi regularly altered his objects. He extended the necks of some vases and painted others. He coated the interiors of clear glass vessels with paint and covered blocks of wood with paper. Several of these items migrate from painting to painting in both galleries. If Morandi couldn’t find what he needed, he sometimes had it made. One such object is displayed at the center: a copper can that is like a stage backdrop, with a flat back made of gray metal. Only the front mattered.AdvertisementIn the center’s show, the paintings, along with three etchings, a drawing and a watercolor, provide a powerful sense of Morandi becoming Morandi, a hard-won battle. Half the works are from the 1930s, a pivotal phase in the struggle, which is not well known in the United States.In the hallway, a painting from 1916 is an overgrown cousin of the artist’s mature style. It is a large (for Morandi) still life of two thin-necked bottles and a candy dish, all white, starchy and flattened. They would reappear in his paintings for years to come, as seen in a 1955 still life next to it. Nearby a painting of a squat cactus from 1917 has the dry precision of Charles Sheeler, although the delicate shadows portend Morandi’s care with light and shadow.Elsewhere there’s a painting of an isolated vase of roses from 1917 — all pale pinks and grays — whose tonalities and composition points to mature Morandi even while its steeply angled tabletop and clunky brushwork reminds us of his admiration for Henri Rousseau. Four still lifes from the 1920s indicate an apprenticeship to Chardin’s great, quiet realism, with its more natural colors, more normal arrangements (the objects have space between them) and closer agreement between brush work and form. These paintings are more conservative than anything else here, as if from another era.The numerous paintings from 1929 to 1941 show Morandi fighting his way to maturity. He has found his subject, but everything else is up for grabs. He crowds his compositions with household objects that sometimes pile up chaotically, then lines up only four or five, like sentinels. He shrouds everything in brown, then lets in more color, and a sense of real light that can, oddly, confuse positive and negative forms. The brush strokes flail notably in a tilting 1936 still life that might almost have been painted by Philip Guston. Then order — maybe in excess — is imposed in two pristine 1938 still lifes whose colors verge on loud: bright coral, white, brown and a little deep blue.Things calm down at the center in the few paintings from the 1950s and early ’60s. The colors fade, and the objects decrease in number and close ranks into single, irregular masses. The canvases shrink a bit but the objects do, too. New expanses of plain wall and tabletop become major actors in a construction of space that now hints at theater stage or landscape.The Zwirner show is a very different story. Hanging in the austere glamour of the gallery’s International White Cube style, the paintings mostly feature Morandi settled into his distilled vocabulary, perfecting the art of constant adjustment. The horizon lines formed by the meeting of tabletop and wall rise and lower. Brush work varies tremendously, veering from thin and loose — proposing the objects as mirages — to thick and measured, creating nearly solid backgrounds that bump against the objects. This is most extreme in a canvas in which Morandi clusters his vessels at the corner of the tabletop. On the right, a wall that is ostensibly behind them pushes forward; it might almost be a stage curtain about to close.While the center has several landscapes by Morandi, including one marvelous valentine to Cézanne’s Mount St.-Victoire, the single example at Zwirner is especially telling. It is from 1941 and its small, slippery strokes clarify how Cézanne taught Morandi to give every brush stroke life and make it count. The cascading brush strokes also suggest that the great outdoors could seem overwhelming; the controlled forms and spaces of his tabletop world actually offered more freedom.AdvertisementIn the show’s final gallery, a nearly identical group of vessels — as well as the horizon line — hold steady across four canvases from 1952, illuminated by a suffused light out of Piero della Francesca. In front of these works, you see that reality was perhaps almost a mirage for Morandi, or at least that the act of painting was a kind of curtain that he drew across it, as if to confirm both the artifice of art and its dependence on the world.An art review on Friday about exhibitions of work by Giorgio Morandi at the Center for Italian Modern Art and the David Zwirner gallery, both in Manhattan, misstated the center’s entrance policy. There is a $10 charge; admission is not free.The Center for Italian Modern Art’s Giorgio Morandi show is on view through June 25 at 421 Broome Street near Crosby Street, Manhattan; 646-370-3596, italianmodernart­.org. The David Zwirner gallery’s show continues through Dec. 19 at 537 West 20th Street, Manhattan; 212-517-8959, davidzwirner­.com.A version of this review appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page C23 of the New York edition with the headline: Creating a Universe  on a Tabletop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.