By LAUREL GRAEBERNOV. 19, 2015
Flying takes more than wings. Especially if you’re a penguin.That’s the harsh reality confronting the little avian protagonist of “Flight School the Musical,” Vital Theater Company’s first children’s show of the season. The production, which just moved to a new Manhattan location, draws its inspiration from Lita Judge’s picture book “Flight School,” about a penguin who can’t accept that he was meant to swim, not soar. After all, he has the other qualities children’s book heroes need to succeed: pluck, determination and, most of all, heart.With a script by Cara Lustik, music by David Mallamud and lyrics by Joshua H. Cohen, “Flight School” is a charming adaptation that supports Penguin’s dreams while not ignoring the basic laws of aerodynamics. Running about 45 minutes, it transforms Penguin’s fellow fledglings — mostly cute illustrations in Ms. Judge’s book — into full-fledged characters: the arrogant bully, Pelican (Owen Beans); his less self-confident and rather birdbrained buddy, Seagull (Clint Hromsco); and the shy and bookish Owl (Alie B. Gorrie).They meet at Flight School, where Penguin, played with androgynous brio by Jennifer Smith, arrives via boat from Antarctica, trumpeting, “There’s an eagle in my soul.” The instructor, a flamingo (Ashtia Jewell), expresses skepticism, but by the show’s end, she wonders, in one of its more clever lines, if she shouldn’t be taking pigs as pupils.Simple and straightforward enough to be understood by a 3-year-old, but engaging enough to amuse a parent, “Flight School” also owes its successful takeoff to Wendy Seyb’s fast-paced direction (she doubles as choreographer) and Bobby Pearce’s costumes. His beaked and bulging-eyed headgear goes a long way toward making young actors convincing birds. (Above, from left: Ms. Jewell, Mr. Hromsco, Ms. Smith, Mr. Beans and Ms. Gorrie.)AdvertisementThe production’s biggest boon, however, may be its score. Here, Mr. Mallamud has written music worthy of bigger stages, variously embracing classical lyricism, pulsing pop, the poignant ballad and at least one all-out, Alice Cooper-style rock rant. It’s delivered by the prancing Pelican, who windmills an air guitar as he bellows all the reasons Penguin will never take wing. Unfortunately, the recorded instrumentation sometimes muffles Mr. Cohen’s lyrics, but you get the idea.AdvertisementPenguin does get off the ground and not, as Pelican snidely suggests, by buying a plane ticket. Without giving too much away, let’s just say that he flies with a little help from his friends.(Sundays at 11 a.m., through Dec. 6, at Theater at Blessed Sacrament, 152 West 71st Street; 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.) ‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (continuing) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing Middle Eastern artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (around 1900) where young archaeologists can dress in costume and portray early-20th-century immigrants to Palestine. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Brooklyn Sewers: What’s Up Down There?’ (through May 29) When it comes to subterranean infrastructure projects, New York City’s subway system seems to get all the attention. But a group of teenage curators at the Brooklyn Historical Society would like to introduce you to another underground marvel: Brooklyn’s sewer system, one of the city’s oldest and most extensive infrastructure projects. This exhibition explores engineering conundrums and courtroom battles and tells the story of the sewer system through photographs, drawings and maps. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.‘Brigadoon’ (Friday through Sunday) Break out the bagpipes and the kilts. The St. Jean’s Players have revived this 1947 family musical, the first big hit from the classic writing team of Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe. The plot of the show, which closes this weekend, revolves around the unexpected encounter of two 20th-century New Yorkers with Brigadoon, a wholesome 18th-century Scottish town that comes to life for just one day every 100 years. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.; St. Jean Baptiste High School Auditorium, 167 East 75th Street, Manhattan, 212-868-4444, smarttix.com.‘Connected Worlds’ (continuing) Human choices and actions have an impact on the world’s ecosystems, but people usually can’t see the effects as they happen. That isn’t true in this new permanent exhibition in the renovated Great Hall of the New York Hall of Science. Consisting of huge screens (one is 38 feet tall), the show depicts six interconnected environments with a shared water supply. With the help of technology that responds to gestures, “Connected Worlds” allows children to use simple motions to plant, harvest, cut trees, create clouds and make other changes in the projected landscapes — and see how the native flora and fauna fare. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.‘The Discovery of King Tut’ (Saturday through May 1) The Egyptian pharaoh Tutankhamen died when he was only a teenager, but the magnificent riches of his tomb have made him immortal in the public imagination. This touring show at Premier Exhibitions 5th Avenue recreates Tut’s tomb as it was when the British archaeologist Howard Carter discovered it in 1922. The display includes reconstructions of the tomb’s three chambers and reproductions of more than 1,000 treasures and ritual objects, accompanied by video documentaries and texts. 417 Fifth Avenue, at 38th Street, tutnyc.com.Advertisement‘Disney on Ice Celebrates 100 Years of Magic’ (through Sunday) What better place to enjoy the characters of “Frozen” than on an ice rink? But Anna, Elsa and Olaf aren’t the only Disney folk now gliding across the arena at the Prudential Center in Newark. This skating extravaganza also features scenes from movies like “Toy Story,” “The Lion King,” “Finding Nemo” and “Beauty and the Beast,” along with more than 30 songs that young audience members can join in on. Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 3 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at 1 and 5 p.m.; 165 Mulberry Street, Newark, 800-745-3000, prucenter.com; ticketmaster.com.‘Frolic!’ at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan (through Dec. 31) You’re never too young to rock — and this space proves it. A new pop-up installation at the museum, “Frolic!” uses rock music and a themed décor to stimulate sensory play and learning in visitors ages 5 and under. In addition to a stage, a pretend ticket booth and ’70s-style props — including a Volkswagen minivan to climb into — the 1,500-square-foot area has programs of workshops and live performances to help little ones get into the groove. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’ (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Fridays at 7 p.m.; Saturdays at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sundays at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘The Hunger Games: The Exhibition’ (through Jan. 3) What enterprising 12- or 13-year-old wouldn’t like to foment a little rebellion? Such a visitor can do so vicariously at this attraction at Discovery Times Square, stepping into the role of Katniss Everdeen, the teenage heroine of “The Hunger Games” and the ultimate leader of the resistance against her nation’s totalitarian government. Based on the Lionsgate film adaptations of Suzanne Collins’s novels, the show includes costumes and artifacts from the movies, as well as re-creations of Katniss’s journey and interactive, role-playing elements like a gamesmaker’s table and a chance to learn and practice stunt choreography. 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com, thehungergamesexhibition.com.‘If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home’ (through Jan. 17) Maps present facts, but they can also engage the imagination. This new exhibition at the Children’s Museum of the Arts explores the intersection of cartography and art, showing work that expands upon, redefines or simply refers to maps. Among the eight artists represented are Matthew Cusik, who makes collages from map fragments; Joyce Kosloff, who layers images and textured paint onto maps; Loren Munk, who adds plaques of color and information to street maps; and Nikki Rosato, who subtracts from maps, cutting away all but roads and rivers. In the museum’s Cynthia C. Wainwright Gallery, 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Jean-Michel Cousteau’s Secret Ocean’ (through Jan. 10) Ever encounter a goby or a blenny? How about a Christmas tree worm? These small marine species, often unnoticed and uncelebrated, are among the stars of this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History. Filmed by Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau, and Holly Lohuis, a marine biologist, the film captures 30 species that are among the tiniest to inhabit the seas. Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Kids ‘N Comedy: ‘The Preturkey Show’ (Sunday) The class clown gets applause, not detention, at this series, in which tween and teenage comics perform stand-up. At this show, which celebrates Thanksgiving and the approaching holiday season , the young performers will consider traditions and a few things they really aren’t grateful for, like interminable family dinners and overbearing relatives. The material is recommended for children 9 and older, but there’s no need to worry about appropriateness (profanity is banned) or knock-knock jokes (these aspiring stars are sophisticated). Reservations required. At 1 p.m., Gotham Comedy Club, 208 West 23rd Street, Chelsea, 212-877-6115, kidsncomedy.com.Kids’ Workshop: Swedish Wooden Toys (Saturday) Sometimes the best playthings are the most basic. This program at the Bard Graduate Center accompanies the exhibition “Swedish Wooden Toys,” which showcases the dollhouses, pull toys, trains, planes and more that artisans have created out of the simplicity of wood. Children — the suggested ages are 6 through 12 — can invent their own works at this event, led by the Brooklyn organization ConstructionKids, which teaches young builders how to put together safe, child-size projects. From 1 to 3:30 p.m., Bard Graduate Center, 38 West 86th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3011, bgc.bard.edu. Registration is required via telephone or email to programs@bgc.bard.edu.‘The King of Chelm’ (Saturday) What happens when you cross the comic-book universe with the shtetls of Jewish folklore? In this musical from the National Yiddish Theater Folksbiene and Lost & Found Project, a boy named Aaron, who longs to be a superhero, wakes up one day in Chelm, the fictional Polish village known for its foolishness. Written by Boris Zilberman, with music by Dmitri Slepovitch, and based on the work of the Soviet poet Ovsey Driz, the show charts Aaron’s investigation of what it means to be a hero. Each performance is followed by a 30-minute audience workshop. (Also plays on Nov. 29.) At 1 p.m., Kraine Theater, 85 East Fourth Street, East Village, eventbrite.com or mjhnyc.org/chelm. (Sold out.)Advertisement‘LARD: Life’s a Real Dream’ (Saturday) This show about LARD, the concept, has nothing to do with lard, the substance. An acronym for “Life’s a Real Dream,” “LARD” is the title of a rollicking musical production starring Lard Dog, who also happens not to be a dog. The alter ego of the multimedia artist Steven Erdman, Lard is a gregarious out-of-this-world character who has flown in from the planet Belopio on a giant pretzel. He and his Band of Shy perform this hourlong entertainment, which includes cartoon graphics and a pretzel toss. (Through Jan. 2) Saturdays at 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, houseoflard.com.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’ (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.Music in Motion (Saturday) That motion is the gentle rocking of a boat for this series of family neighborhood concerts presented by Bargemusic, the floating barge at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge. As always, the material — announced just before the performance — is chamber music, but these programs differ in important ways from the regular Bargemusic fare: With unreserved seating, they last only an hour, include a post-show question-and-answer session with the musicians and are free. (Through Nov. 28) At 4 p.m. (doors open at 3:45), Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org.‘My Favorite Something’ (Sunday) Although memories can last a lifetime, the objects that inspire them often dwindle or fade away. This children’s play, which inaugurates the new MJH Kids Theater Series, for ages 4 through 8, at the Museum of Jewish Heritage, adapts two storybooks devoted to that theme: Simms Taback’s “Joseph Had a Little Overcoat” and Phoebe Gilman’s “Something From Nothing.” Both books are inspired by a Jewish folk tale in which a boy’s cherished possession is recycled into something progressively smaller and smaller, until it seems that nothing is left — or is there? Snacks and a crafts workshop are included. At 10:30 a.m., 36 Battery Place, Lower Manhattan, 646-437-4202, mjhnyc.org.‘NYC & Me: A Little Bite of the Big Apple’ (through Jan. 18) There’s one place where little citizens can safely run loose on the streets of New York: the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. This new interactive 3,000-square-foot gallery is a city microcosm for small visitors, allowing them to pretend to be taxi drivers, bus drivers, construction workers, street performers and, most impressively, the mayor. Activities include directing traffic, erecting a skyscraper, “ice skating” in their socks and investigating urban tales on the steps of the New York Public Library. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.Preservation Detectives: ‘Tevye and the Great Turkey Scavenger Hunt’ (Sunday) If Tevye, the patriarch of the musical “Fiddler on the Roof,” had become an American immigrant — forget about a rich man — as he seemed destined to do at the show’s end, he might well have gone to services at the Eldridge Street Synagogue, the 1887 landmark where many Jewish newcomers to New York worshiped. The synagogue, now the Museum at Eldridge Street, is offering a series of fall programs inspired by the coming Broadway revival of “Fiddler,” including one of its Preservation Detectives tours for children ages 4 through 11. Activities will include making fiddler-shaped challah, creating art inspired by the show (a tzedakah, or charity, box) and joining in a singalong of “Fiddler” tunes. And, yes, searching for a hidden fake turkey while learning about past days of giving thanks on the Lower East Side. From 11 a.m. to 1 p.m., 12 Eldridge Street, between Canal and Division Streets, Lower East Side, 212-219-0302, eldridgestreet.org/visit/family. Reservations are required.Tada! Youth Theater Dance-A-Thon (Saturday) If you can walk or run for a cause, why not dance? This fourth annual dance-a-thon, open to young people ages 5 through 12, raises money for scholarships and programs at Tada! Youth Theater, the musical theater troupe for children. Interested participants ask family and friends to sponsor them for 180 minutes’ worth of dancing. The party will include refreshments, giveaways, snacks, prizes, a professional D.J. and, according to the organization, no boogieing adults. From 6 to 9 p.m., Tada! Theater, 15 West 28th Street, second floor, Manhattan, 212-252-1619, tadatheater.com. Registration: crowdrise.com/tadadance-a-thon.‘A Taste of Magic’ (Friday, Saturday and Tuesday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various Manhattan restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind-reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a three-course meal. All performances this week are at 8 p.m. Friday at Gossip Bar and Grill, 733 Ninth Avenue, between 49th and 50th Streets, Clinton. Saturday at Docks Oyster Bar & Seafood Grill, 633 Third Avenue, at 40th Street. Tuesday at Ben & Jack’s Steakhouse, 225 Fifth Avenue, between 28th and 29th Streets. Information and registration: atasteofmagicnyc.com.AdvertisementThalia Kids Book Club: ‘The Marvels’ (Sunday) One story, told in pictures, unfolds in 1766; the other, told in words, takes place in 1990. Both concern an unusual family called the Marvels, and both are at the heart of the author and illustrator Brian Selznick’s new book. Known for “The Invention of Hugo Cabret” and “Wonderstruck,” Mr. Selznick will visit the children’s book club at Symphony Space to read from “The Marvels,” his latest, and sign copies. Geared to young readers 9 and older, the event will also feature Lucas Elliot Eberl performing his own original music, and the actress Barbara Barrie reading from Shakespeare, whose work helped inspire Mr. Selznick. At 4 p.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.‘The Three Bears Holiday Bash’ (Friday through Wednesday) There’s no word on whether Goldilocks is invited to this seasonal celebration, but Santa Claus definitely is. An annual production from the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, this puppet musical centers on a variety show put on by the Bears, in which Baby Bear asks Santa to star. The fun draws on Hanukkah and Kwanzaa, as well as on Christmas. (Through Dec. 30.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional 2:30 p.m. performance on Wednesday (there is no show on Thanksgiving); weekends at 1 p.m.; Swedish Cottage, 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org. Reservations required; some shows are sold out.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’ (continuing) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. On Sundays through Dec. 13, and on Thanksgiving Day, the museum will also present “Soil to Oil,” a workshop in producing olive oil and using it to light a Hanukkah menorah. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.‘The World Is Round: A Children’s Audio Play’ (Saturday and Sunday) Yes, the world is round, and at every point on it where there are people, there are children’s stories. This new work by Arthur Yorinks, to be performed before an audience at the Greene Space at WNYC and WQXR, focuses on a mother drawing on a variety of global tales, from Africa to Scandinavia, to try to get her daughter to go to sleep. Performed by a full cast of actors and employing pictures as well as words, this production will end with a chorus of city public school students performing an excerpt from a new opera by the Israeli composer Ronnie Reshef. Saturday at 2 and 5 p.m.; Sunday at 5 p.m.; 44 Charlton Street, at Varick Street, SoHo, thegreenespace.org.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page C32 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.