By JOSHUA BARONENOV. 19, 2015
Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Friday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events.American Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (continuing) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out infection. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.American Museum of Natural History: ‘The Secret World Inside You’ (continuing) In recent years, the microbiome — the roughly 100 trillion bacteria living inside and on human bodies — has been a popular talking point for science journalism. With ever-evolving research into this mysterious area of study, there’s still plenty left to explore. Now, it’s getting the exhibition treatment in this look at what scientists are learning about the role bacteria plays in health. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Brooklyn Americans: Hockey’s Forgotten Promise’ (through March 27) The New York Islanders may be new to Brooklyn, but the borough isn’t new to hockey. This exhibition tells the story of its first National Hockey League team, the Brooklyn Americans. The team wore red, white and blue jerseys and represented Kings County at the height of World War II and in the early days of the N.H.L. Still, as the exhibition shows, the team was unsuccessful and ultimately financially doomed. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.AdvertisementCenter for Jewish History: ‘After the War: Recovery, Relief, and Return, 1945-1949’ (through Jan. 15) This exhibition commemorates the 70th anniversary of World War II’s end with a look at its bleak aftermath. Photographs from the International Center of Photography’s Roman Vishniac Archive, as well as artifacts from the American Jewish Historical Society and Leo Baeck Institute, tellhow the war led to mass destruction and displacement, and how Europe and the United States moved on toward revitalization. 15 West 16th Street, Flatiron district, 212-868-4444, cjh.org.Advertisement‘The Discovery of King Tut’ (Saturday through May 1) The king himself won’t make an appearance at this exhibition; the focus is the wealth of treasures from his tomb, along with the history of what happened when the British archaeologist Howard Carter discovered it in 1922. Replicas of the artifacts will be on display with explanations about how excavation and preservation work were carried out. Premier Exhibitions at 5th Avenue, 417 Fifth Avenue, between 37th and 38th Streets, Midtown South, 646-979-4120, tutnyc.com.‘Global Citizen: The Architecture of Moshe Safdie’ (through Jan. 10) This touring exhibition, a retrospective of Mr. Safdie’s career of more than 50 years, makes its way to New York with new material based on the architect’s recent work related to dense urbanism in Asia. Donald Albrecht from the Museum of the City of New York organized the material in this show, which also explores Mr. Safdie’s design philosophy that buildings should be extensions of their physical, historical and cultural contexts. National Academy Museum, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-369-4880, nationalacademy.org.Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum: ‘On the Line: Intrepid and the Vietnam War’ (continuing) Visitors familiar with this museum are likely well aware of its flight deck, perhaps even some of its wartime history. During the Vietnam War, the Intrepid served three tours overseas between 1966 and 1969. Now, in an exhibition set in the space where the crew lived and worked, the museum tells their stories with artifacts, film clips and photographs. Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.Museum of Chinese in America: ‘Sub Urbanisms: Casino Urbanization, Chinatowns and the Contested American Landscape’ (through March 27) Stephen Fan, an architecture professor and curator, examines the trend of Chinese casino workers in Connecticut converting suburban homes into multifamily communities. This exhibition is both creative and historical; it takes the present to imagine the future of housing design while looking back on the events that created the trend of suburban migration. 215 Centre Street, between Howard and Grand Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-619-4785, mocanyc.org.Museum of the City of New York: ‘The New York City Marathon: The Great Race’ (through March 8) At the beginning of the month, more than 50,000 runners made their way through all five boroughs of New York, starting on Staten Island and ending in Central Park. This annual race — a spectacle for anyone watching along the course — began modestly in 1970, with 127 people running laps around Central Park. City Museum’s timely exhibition tells the story of how the New York City Marathon became the world-class race it is today, including photos from amateurs and professionals on display. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘How Cats Took Over the Internet’ (through Jan. 31) Even people who hate cats can’t easily get through an hour of browsing online without coming across some kind of feline clickbait. This exhibition takes a critical look at and tells the story of how we, as a society, got to this point. Yes, there are cat GIFs. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us; closed on Thanksgiving.National Museum of the American Indian: ‘Meryl McMaster: Second Self’ (through Dec. 11) Meryl McMaster, an artist from Canada and a Plains Cree member of the Siksika Nation, shows her “Second Self” photography series, which uses portraiture to explore the complex ways in which identity is constructed. 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.AdvertisementNew York Hall of Science: ‘Gingerbread Lane’ (through Jan. 9) In recent years, the chef Jon Lovitch has worked every holiday season to break his own record for the world’s largest gingerbread village. He locked in Guinness World Records in 2013 and 2014. He’s back to do it again: 500 edible square feet with more than 1,050 houses and structures including a department store and a double-decker carousel. Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org; closed on Thanksgiving.New-York Historical Society: ‘Holiday Express: Toys and Trains From the Jerni Collection’ (through Feb. 28) Toys of yore are on view in a mountainous landscape for trains and scene-setting trinkets pegged to the holiday season. This massive display also incorporates theatrical lighting and soundscapes, including a multimedia installation designed to make it feel like the museum’s 77th Street entrance is in the midst of passing trains. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Superheroes in Gotham’ (through Feb. 21) New York is safe as long as its long roster of comic-book heroes stick around. It’s been this way for nearly a century as these characters have defended the city in books, TV shows, movies, video games — even the Broadway stage. New-York Historical Society’s latest exhibition tells the story of how super heroes became a cultural staple for all ages and media. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Public Library: ‘100 Years of the Picture Collection: From Abacus to Zoology’ (through May 15) The library celebrates the centennial of its Picture Collection with a sort of greatest-hits exhibition chosen from nearly 1.5 million images. (Lined up, the length of the photos surpasses even the height of the Empire State Building, which is of course included in the archive.) Subjects in the collection are organized alphabetically and number about 12,000. Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman; free; closed on Thanksgiving Day.New York Transit Museum: ‘Bringing Back the City’ (continuing) This new exhibition comes three years after Hurricane Sandy took a swipe at the city’s infrastructure. But what of the people who put the pieces back together? “Bringing Back the City” tells the stories of everyday services — like electricity and mass transit — that become extraordinary in times of crisis. Boerum Place, at Schermerhorn Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-694-1600, bringingbackthecity.com.Rubin Museum of Art: ‘Sacred Spaces’ (continuing) This exhibition’s premise is a question: What is a sacred space? It could be the museum’s Tibetan Buddhist Shrine Room, an immersive look at a traditional space for prayer and meditation. Or it could be a panoramic vista among the Himalayas. It could even be a video installation about Jain devotional rituals. All are on view in this exploration of veneration and its venues. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org.‘Sea Level: Five Boroughs at Water’s Edge’ (through Dec. 31) In its first pop-up exhibition for the Seaport Culture District, the American Institute of Architects presents a water’s eye view of the city through photos by Elizabeth Felicella and accompanying essays by Robert Sullivan. The panoramic view of New York starts at New York Harbor and makes its way along the East River, showing the shore of each borough along the way. Center @ the Seaport, 181 Front Street, South Street Seaport, Lower Manhattan, 212-683-0023, cfa.aiany.org.Trinity Wall Street: ‘Blood Mirror’ (through Dec. 1) After decades of banning gay and bisexual men from donating blood, the Food and Drug Administration updated its policy earlier this year to allow them to donate, but only after a year of celibacy, regardless of marital status. In response, the artist Jordan Eagles has gathered nine gay, bisexual and transgender men to donate a pint of blood each for this exhibit: a reflective, 7-foot-tall monolith that cases and preserves their blood in resin. Among the donors is the Rev. John Moody, who has been involved with Trinity for more than 40 years. Broadway at Wall Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-602-0800, trinitywallstreet.org/bloodmirror; free.AdvertisementAmerican Fine Craft Show (Saturday and Sunday) Richard and Joanna Rothbard, founders of An American Craftsman, the Manhattan galleries, host this annual event that brings in about 90 of the country’s top craft artists. Handmade ceramics, jewelry, furniture and more will be on display. The price of admission also gets visitors into the Brooklyn Museum, which is hosting the show in its Beaux-Arts Court. From 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, americanfinecraftshowbrooklyn.com.Goddard Riverside Book Fair (Saturday and Sunday) This annual fund-raiser doubles as a rare chance for book buyers to get new hardback best sellers at a 50 percent discount. This community center teams with major publishing houses for this sale, which goes toward the center’s services: youth programs, college counseling, adult support and outreach to homeless people. Saturday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., Goddard Riverside Community Center, 593 Columbus Avenue, at 88th Street, 212-873-6600, goddard.org.Latin American Cultural Week (through Sunday) This festival, organized by Pan American Musical Art Research, is back for its 10th year with organizations across the city participating to spread awareness and appreciation of Latin American arts. Events — including dance, music, theater, film, visual art and readings — will take place at various venues in multiple boroughs. A schedule and more information are at lacw.net.Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade (Thursday) It’s time for Snoopy’s fall trek to Herald Square. The beloved balloon beagle will soon be joined in the sky by inflatable friends like SpongeBob SquarePants and on street level by performers like Mariah Carey and the cast of Broadway’s “School of Rock” for the 89th edition of Macy’s seasonal spectacle.The festivities begin on Wednesday, when anyone can stop by the American Museum of Natural History from 3 to 10 p.m. to watch the balloons go from flat masses to pop culture favorites. To catch a glimpse, enter the inflation area at Columbus Avenue and 79th Street on the Upper West Side.On Thursday, the parade begins at 9:30 a.m. at 77th Street and proceeds south along at Central Park West to Columbus Circle. From there, it moves east on 59th Street to Avenue of the Americas, where it heads downtown to Macy’s on Herald Square. Macy’s recommends arriving along the first stretch at 6 a.m.; late risers are advised to find spots along Avenue of the Americas.More tips for attending the parade, as well as the lineup and information are at social.macys.com/parade. NBC will air a live television broadcast from 9 a.m. to noon.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Santasia’ (Tuesday) This holiday musical comedy takes both a snarky and sentimental look at Christmas and family. Written by Shaun and Brandon Loeser, with choreography by Tania Pearson-Loeser, the show incorporates songs, sketch comedy and even Claymation movies. Tuesdays through Dec. 22 at 8 p.m., with 2 p.m. Wednesday matinees on Dec. 2, 16 and 23. St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, between Eighth and Ninth Avenues, Clinton, 212-239-6200, santasia.com.Union Square Holiday Market (through Dec. 24) If you can brave the nearly constant crowd, this can be a one-stop shop for holiday gifting, recognizable by the red- and white-striped tents that take over the park. The pop-up shops include craft vendors, as well as established stores like Strand Book Store. Food (and wintry drink) vendors, like Momofuku’s Milk Bar, are scattered throughout the market grounds as well. East 14th to East 17th Street, Broadway to Fourth Avenue, urbanspacenyc.com/union-square-holiday-market.(Un)Silent Film Night (Tuesday) The New School’s silent-film event returns, featuring Harold Lloyd’s 1928 classic, “Speedy.” Bill Irwin, the Tony Award-winning actor and comedian, will host the evening, which includes live musical accompaniment for the film, composed by Carl Davis and performed by the school’s Performing Arts Theater Orchestra. At 7 p.m., Tishman Auditorium of the New School, 63 Fifth Avenue, at 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-229-5873, events.newschool.edu; free.AdvertisementVideology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesday) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videologybarandcinema.com.‘West Side Story’ (Sunday and Monday) This big-screen presentation of the classic movie musical includes a post-show Q. and A. with George Chakiris, who plays Bernardo, the doomed leader of the Sharks gang. On Sunday he’ll speak with Susan Haskins, co-host of “Theater Talk” (PBS), and on Monday he’ll be joined by the theater critic and author Peter Filichia. Plot refresher: “Romeo and Juliet” on the Upper West Side, with music by Leonard Bernstein and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim. Sunday at 5 p.m.; Monday at 7 p.m., SVA Theater, 333 West 23rd Street, Chelsea, 212-592-2980.Winter Village at Bryant Park (through March 6) The ice rink is back. Admission is free if you bring your own skates; if you don’t have any, they’re available for rent. Through Jan. 3, the park will also host an open-air market for holiday shopping with about 125 vendors. Avenue of the Americas, at 40th Street, 212-661-6640, wintervillage.org.Louis Begley (Tuesday) Mr. Begley — the author, lawyer and member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters — discusses his latest novel, “Killer, Come Hither,” which was released in April. He is known as a thriller-minded observer of New York’s upper crust. His new book follows that tradition, with an international twist: scenes in Sag Harbor and the rural western plains of Brazil in a search to solve a mysterious death. At 8 p.m. , National Arts Club, 15 Gramercy Park South, between Park Avenue South and Irving Place, Gramercy Park, 212-475-3424, nationalartsclub.org; free.Rick Moody (Tuesday) “Hotels of North America,” Mr. Moody’s latest novel, is “a close examination of the middle-aged American male in sexual, emotional and financial free fall,” the critic Dwight Garner wrote in The New York Times. The author, most famous for “The Ice Storm” (1994), will read from and discuss the new book, written as a series of fictional reviews. At 7 p.m., Book Culture Columbus, 450 Columbus Avenue, near 82nd Street, Upper West Side, 212-595-1962, bookculture.com; free.B. J. Novak (Saturday) Mr. Novak, of “The Office” and “The Mindy Project,” entered the book-writing game last year with “One More Thing: Stories and Other Stories,” an eclectic collection of comedic short fiction. For his next trick, he has written a children’s book — but, as the title “The Book With No Pictures” suggests, with no art. The point is to read the book aloud, as Mr. Novak will, which makes for a silly experience when parents inevitably come across words like “glibbity globbity.” At 2 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.Long Island City Tours: Queens Cool Uncovered (Sunday) The idea behind this tour is that Queens is due for more attention, starting with Long Island City. The tour includes highlights of the neighborhood’s history and arts scene, with stops at galleries and crafts and food vendors. The meeting location is given at registration. At 1:30 p.m., 212-209-3370, bqetours.com.Bushwick Brooklyn Gallery Tour (Saturday) Bushwick’s art galleries are more scattered than, say, those in West Chelsea. But its exhibition spaces are growing in number as well as in prominence. Among the stops on this survey of seven of them is a Moroccan artist’s video-sculpture hybrids and a talk with the artist Linda Griggs. At 2 p.m., beginning at 260 Johnson Avenue, near Bushwick Place, Williambsurg, Brooklyn, 212-946-1548, nygallerytours.com.AdvertisementFlatiron District Walking Tour (Sunday) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.In the Footsteps of Edgar Allan Poe: A Walk From Poe Cottage to High Bridge (Saturday) The High Bridge, which recently reopened to the public, was newly constructed in the mid-19th century, when Poe lived in the Village of Fordham — now part of the Bronx. This three-mile tour, led by Angel Hernandez of the Bronx County Historical Society, covers the areas the author explored in his strolls from his cottage to the bridge. The tour meets at 11 a.m. at his home in Poe Park, at Grand Concourse and East Kingsbridge Road, Fordham Manor, Bronx, 718-881-8900, bronxhistoricalsociety.org.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com; no tour on Thanksgiving.Little Ireland, Chinatown and Little Italy History and Tasting Tour (Saturday) Think of this tour as an amuse-bouche for Thanksgiving, as well as a celebration of the cuisine brought to New York by immigrants who settled on the Lower East Side. The stops include tastings (of the likes of cannoli, spring rolls and dumplings) and landmarks like the site of Five Points. At 2 p.m. The meeting location is available upon making reservations, which can be arranged by calling NYC Discovery Walking Tours at 212-465-3331.Save the Village (Saturday, Sunday and Tuesday) Last year the Steven Kasher Gallery in Chelsea put on an exhibition with the photography of Fred W. McDarrah, who documented the changing scene of Greenwich Village since the 1960s. Now, the spirit of that show has taken the form of this walking tour, which includes stops at the places McDarrah captured on film: locales like Washington Square Park and the Stonewall Inn. At 10 a.m.; the tour meets at Christopher Park, Stonewall Place, at Seventh Avenue, West Village, savethevillagetours.com.A Taste of Jewish New York: Borough Park Tour (Sunday) Participants in this tour will get an insider’s look at the customs of the Hasidic residents of Borough Park, Brooklyn. Highlights include a stop at a lively shopping area and the chance to try a variety of traditional foods. Modest attire is requested — no shorts, low necklines or sleeveless clothing. The tour meets at 9:10 a.m. at Fort Hamilton Parkway and 44th Street; 718-339-2302, timelinetouring.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturday) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page C32 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.