NOV. 19, 2015
Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ Thomas Adès: ‘Concentric Paths — Movements in Music’ (Friday through Sunday) At 44, the British composer Thomas Adès is already a lion of contemporary classical music. In this Sadler’s Wells London production, his music – described as “sonic surrealism” – is muse to four choreographers. Wayne McGregor tackles “Concentric Paths,” a violin concerto; Karole Armitage sets a duet to “Life Story” with piano and voice; and Alexander Whitley interprets “Piano Quintet” (with Mr. Adès on piano). The showstopper is Crystal Pite’s “Polaris,” set to the orchestra of the same name, which she has called “epic.” With 66 dancers, so too is her dance. Part of Lincoln Center’s White Light Festival. Friday and Saturday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, whitelightfestival.org. (Brian Schaefer)Lizt Alfonso Dance Cuba (Saturday, Sunday and next Friday through Nov. 29) Dance exports from Cuba tend to portray the island in cheerful, apolitical terms, and Ms. Alfonso’s “Cuba Vibra,” performed by her company of two dozen musicians and dancers, is no exception. This energetic show at the family-oriented New Victory Theater, appropriate for ages 6 and up, packs five decades of Cuban dance history into 95 minutes. The synchronized precision of the Rockettes meets the flair of flamenco and salsa. Saturdays and next Friday at 2 and 7 p.m., Sundays at noon and 5 p.m., 209 West 42nd Street, 10th floor, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org. (Siobhan Burke)★ Ballet Hispanico (Friday and Saturday) The Brazilian choreographer Fernando Melo makes his New York debut, compliments of Ballet Hispanico performing “If Walls Could Speak” at the storied Apollo Theater. The evening-length work is an ode to Mr. Melo’s birthplace in all its cultural richness and political complexity, accompanied by live percussion and samba. That work occupies the evenings; a Saturday matinee aimed at families features selections from the company’s repertory. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., 253 West 125th Street, Harlem, 212-531-5305, ballethispanico.org. (Schaefer)AdvertisementBlaktino Dance Concert (Saturday) This is the final offering of the monthlong BlakTinX performance series, featuring artists – many hailing from the Bronx – who work in a variety of dance styles. The title of the performance is “Souls of Our Feet,” suggesting it will be both heartfelt and grounded. Participating choreographers include Oxana Chi, Gierre Godley, Jasmine Hearn, Zavé Martohardjono, Angie Pittman, Christopher Rudd, Acharo Smith, Nelida Tirado and Lorenzo Walker. At 8 p.m., Bronx Academy of Arts and Dance, 2474 Westchester Avenue, at St. Peters Avenue, 718-918-2110, baadbronx.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement★ Ronald K. Brown (through Sunday) For three decades, Mr. Brown and his company, Evidence, have been important contributors to American movement with their seamless blend of traditional African dance and modern dance. The result is usually energetic, and often spiritual. To celebrate the company’s 30th anniversary, Mr. Brown presents two programs of work from the past 20 years, including “Why You Follow/Por Que Sigues,” originally created for the Malpaso Dance Company in Cuba and now part of Evidence’s repertory. At 8 p.m., BRIC House, 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. (Schaefer)★ Jean Butler (through Saturday) Steeped in Irish dance from a young age, Ms. Butler has had a fascinating journey — from the original starlet of “Riverdance” in the mid-1990s to a choreographer working on a much smaller, more experimental scale. In “This Is an Irish dance,” a new duet with the cellist Neil Martin, she continues exploring the form and her relationship to it, with a focus on the interplay between dancer and musician. At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)★ Company XIV (Wednesday through Jan. 17) If the traditional “Nutcracker” evokes the transition from childhood to adolescence, then Company XIV’s “Nutcracker Rouge” might be the subsequent crossover into adulthood and the accompanying sexual awakening. The choreographer Austin McCormick combines a strong dose of burlesque, baroque and ballet with glittered pasties and G-strings for a charmingly sensual and playful holiday romp. Tchaikovsky never sounded so scandalous. Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., Sundays at 5 p.m., Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-745-3000, companyxiv.com. (Schaefer)Complexions Contemporary Ballet (through Nov. 29) Having relocated to Atlanta after 20 years in New York, Complexions returns to its native city for a busy season at the Joyce Theater. Its two-week run includes new works set to Metallica, Bach and the jazz singer Jimmy Scott, as well as a tribute to Maya Angelou and a premiere by the company’s co-director Dwight Rhoden, an extension of his 2009 ensemble work “Mercy.” Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m., Sundays at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Murray Louis — A Celebration of the Legendary Choreographer’ (Friday) Alwin Nikolais has been called “modern dance’s pioneer of multimedia.” One of his star dancers and artistic comrades was Murray Louis, who in 1953 created his own eponymous dance company. As part of the 92nd Street Y’s Fridays at Noon series, dancers from Marymount College will perform three of Mr. Louis’s works: “Bach Suite” (1956), “Geometrics” (1974) and “Four Brubeck Pieces” (1984). Archival footage will also be shown, and original members of Mr. Louis’s dance company will discuss his avant-garde impact on 20th-century dance. At noon, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Schaefer)New Chamber Ballet (Friday and Saturday) The latest program from Miro Magloire’s company includes four works by Mr. Magloire: an expanded version of “Gravity,” a trio to music by the 90-year-old Austrian composer Friedrich Cerha; “The Other Woman,” set to Bach; “Friction,” which depicts interpersonal tension to music by Richard Carrick; and a new duet to solo piano by Beat Furrer. The company’s resident choreographer Constantine Baecher contributes “Mozart Trio,” in which the dancers discuss their feelings, in words as well as movement. The often-unfamiliar music, played live, is always a highlight. At 8 p.m., City Center Studios, 130 West 56th Street, Manhattan, 212-868-4444, newchamberballet.com. (Schaefer)★ Miki Orihara (Friday through Sunday) The conundrum of the thought experiment called “Schrödinger’s cat” concerns the unknown point of transition from one physical state to another. That question inspired the dancer and choreographer Miki Orihara, celebrated for her captivating work with the Martha Graham Dance Company, to create “In the Box.” Directed by the theatrical visual-effects specialist Hiroyuki Nishiyama (a.k.a. nissy), “In the Box” uses interactive projections to explore the paradox of “Where Technology Meets the Body,” as the show’s subtitle explains. Friday and Saturday at 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Sunday at 7:30 p.m., Martha Graham Studio Theater, 55 Bethune Street, at Washington Street, West Village, 212-229-9200, inthebox-nyc.com. (Schaefer)Paul Taylor Commissions: Doug Elkins & Larry Keigwin (Saturday and Sunday) Earlier this year, when Mr. Taylor expanded his dance company to become a center for preserving and promoting American modern dance, he took the big step of commissioning new works from younger artists to add to his extensive repertory. Excerpts from creations by Mr. Elkins and Mr. Keigwin are the focus of this program, performed by Mr. Taylor’s troupe as part of the Guggenheim Museum’s Works & Process series. Several of Mr. Taylor’s own dances, as well as a discussion with Mr. Elkins, Mr. Keigwin and the Paul Taylor biographer Suzanne Carbonneau, will round out the evening. At 7 p.m., Peter B. Lewis Theater, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3575, worksandprocess.org. (Schaefer)AdvertisementPilobolus (Friday through Dec. 6) A girl on the verge of womanhood falls asleep and wakes up in a surreal fantasy world. Nope, not “The Nutcracker” (though stay tuned). This is “Shadowland,” a new adventure from Pilobolus receiving its United States premiere. In collaboration with Steven Banks, a writer of “SpongeBob SquarePants,” the company delivers a mix of theatrical spectacle and physical inventiveness soaked in wonder. As per its title, “Shadowland” showcases two-dimensional silhouettes formed by creative contortions of the body. (No performances on Thanksgiving and Nov. 30.) At various times, Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, 566 La Guardia Place, at Washington Square South, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111, nyuskirball.org. (Schaefer)Twyla Tharp (through Sunday) Celebrating 50 years of making dances, this weekend Ms. Tharp concludes her 10-week cross-country tour at Lincoln Center. An offsite presentation of the Joyce Theater, the bill includes two golden-anniversary premieres: “Preludes and Fugues,” set to Bach’s “The Well-Tempered Clavier,” and “Yowzie,” to selections from the American jazz music compilation “Viper’s Drag.” Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com. (Burke)U-Theater (through Saturday) This Taiwanese dance and music group returns to the Brooklyn Academy of Music with “Beyond Time,” billed as “a visual and auditory spectacle that reflects on man’s relationship to the universe.” The troupe approaches that big theme through many means, from Tibetan throat singing and taiko drumming to martial arts and video projections. At 7:30 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Burke)Nami Yamamoto and Manami Fukuoka (through Saturday) In Gibney Dance’s DoublePlus series, established choreographers present the work of less widely known colleagues. The second edition continues with selections by Yasuko Yokoshi. Ms. Yamamoto offers “Headless Wolf,” a meditation on life’s painful and pleasurable transitions that she began in 2010. Manami Fukuoka, whom dancegoers may recognize from Ms. Yokoshi’s striking “Zero One,” draws from Japanese movement traditions including Butoh and Noh theater in “Dance of a Trio.” At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Burke)A version of this schedule appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page C18 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Dance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.