Season 1, Episode 4: “Haunted House”Not to brag, but the record will show that a certain recapper predicted that Gigi would turn out to have been a crucial part of the 1995 bathroom death that kicked off Fox’s “Scream Queens” (see my first recap). Sure enough, that appeared to be her in the final scene of Tuesday night’s episode, identified as the mysterious Hag of Shady Lane, possible guardian of the baby born in said bathtub. So there.The bragging does have a point: Let’s leave behind the debate over whether this show is any good (heck, if you’re still watching, you must think it is), and instead put more effort into guessing stuff, which presumably is the point. Who do you think the killer is? Is there actually more than one? Who is going to be the last character left standing? And so on.It was a fairly uneventful episode for the first two-thirds, except for the memorable impression of Kate Hudson and Matthew McConaughey in “How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days” that was turned in by Pete and Grace. An attempt to satirize the so-called cotton ball diet – yes, it’s a thing – fell flat, to me.But things livened up in the final third of the episode when Zayday (Keke Palmer, who along with Niecy Nash is the best thing about this series) decided to hold a fund-raising haunted house in an actual haunted house. The bodies of five people killed in the first three episodes somehow turned up as exhibits in the haunted house, making for a moderately creepy few minutes in a series that hasn’t had many of them.The episode was short on humor, though the graveyard scene in which Chad and Hester exchanged necrophilic sexy talk was sort of amusing. What it lacked in jokes it made up for in accusations, however: Grace’s dad accused Dean Munsch of being the killer, Grace accused her dad, Denise accused Zayday, Zayday accused Denise.Me, I’m scrutinizing the less-obvious candidates, like Chanel No. 5 and Earl. But we’ll see who dies in the next few weeks. One thing we did learn this week: The baby in the bathtub was a girl, apparently. Does that clarify anything? 