NOV. 19, 2015
Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.‘La Bohème’ (Monday) “Turandot” is taking a break at the Met, but have no fear: You can keep your Franco Zeffirelli diet regular with the director’s “La Bohème.” In the first of 17 performances this season, Barbara Frittoli is Mimì, Ana María Martínez plays Musetta, and Ramón Vargas sings Rodolfo. Paolo Carignani continues his occupation of the conductor’s rostrum in Puccini. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (David Allen)★ Juilliard Opera (Wednesday and next Friday) In their first performances of the season, these reliable students present a double bill of dark comedies: Poulenc’s “Les mamelles de Tirésias” and Viktor Ullmann’s caustic “Der Kaiser von Atlantis,” written in the Theresienstadt concentration camp. Ted Huffman directs, and Keri-Lynn Wilson conducts the Juilliard Orchestra. (Also at 2 p.m. on Nov. 22.) At 7:30 p.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, Lincoln Center, 155 West 65th Street, 212-799-5000, events.juilliard.edu. (Allen)★ ‘Lulu’ (Saturday and Tuesday) William Kentridge’s new production of Alban Berg’s wrenching masterpiece is an instant Metropolitan Opera milestone. The South African artist’s gripping ink drawings and animations are projected onto sliding walls to evoke this staging’s German Expressionist setting. The cast is excellent, especially the stunning soprano Marlis Petersen in her signature role as Lulu, a young woman who emerges here as both temptress and victim. The conductor Lothar Koenigs draws urgent, colorful and viscerally expressive playing from the great Met orchestra. (Derrick Inouye conducts the Tuesday performances.) The Saturday matinee is an HD broadcast to international movie theaters. Saturday at 12:30 p.m. and Tuesday at 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)Advertisement‘Tosca’ (Saturday and Wednesday) Luc Bondy’s grim-louche production has hosted a rotating cast of principals this fall. On Saturday, at 8:30 p.m., Plácido Domingo conducts with the soprano Oksana Dyka in the title role opposite the tenor Marcello Giordani as Cavaradossi and the veteran bass-baritone James Morris as Scarpia. On Wednesday, at 7:30 p.m., Joseph Colaneri assumes the musical direction while the voluptuous-voiced Liudmyla Monastyrska takes over as Tosca, alongside the wonderful tenor Roberto Aronica as Cavaradossi and Marco Vratogna as Scarpia. Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)AdvertisementBerlin Philharmonic (Friday and Saturday) The legendary Berlin Philharmonic, under conductor Simon Rattle, ends its cycle of the complete Beethoven symphonies with the last two of five programs this weekend at Carnegie Hall. Friday’s program offers the Fourth and Seventh Symphonies; Saturday’s is devoted to the Ninth, with the Westminster Symphonic Choir and four strong vocal soloists. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)Cantata Profana (Sunday) This innovative vocal and instrumental ensemble celebrates French music, ranging from the baroque composer Louis-Nicolas Clerambault’s solo cantata “Médée” to Poulenc’s “Bal Masqué.” The program, called “France Dance Revolution,” features the dancer Caroline Copeland. At 8 p.m., Dixon Place, 161A Chrystie Street, between Rivington and Delancey Streets, Lower East Side, 212-219-0736, cantataprofana.com. (Vivien Schweitzer)★ Jeremy Denk, Stefan Jackiw and New York Polyphony (Saturday) The unfailingly interesting pianist Jeremy Denk and the rising violinist Stefan Jackiw offer a rare chance to hear all four of Ives’s sonatas for violin and piano. They’re interspersed with the folk songs and hymns that Ives quotes, performed by the wonderful ensemble New York Polyphony. At 8 p.m., Kaufmann Concert Hall, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Ensemble Signal (Tuesday) Miller Theater’s Pop-Up series (free entry, free beer) continues to outdo itself with this program. Doug Perkins, Ensemble Signal’s percussionist, gives the premiere of a new work by Ken Thomson, and performs David Lang’s “Stuttered Chant,” Caroline Shaw’s “Boris Kerner” and Iannis Xenakis’ pioneering “Psappha.” With the cellist Lauren Radnofsky. At 6 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com; admission is first come first served. (Allen)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ JACK Quartet and Anthony McGill (Friday) The American Music Project, a new organization dedicated to fostering performances and commissioning American music, presents its first concert in New York — an enticing program featuring the dynamic JACK String Quartet and the superb clarinetist Anthony McGill (principal clarinet with the New York Philharmonic). There are works by John Luther Adams, John Cage, Earle Brown and the premiere of Geoffrey Gordon’s Clarinet Quintet. At 8 p.m., Roulette, 509 Atlantic Avenue, near Third Avenue, Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, 917-267-0363, roulette.org. (Tommasini)Juilliard Orchestra (Tuesday) The student orchestra par excellence makes its annual appearance at Carnegie Hall, led by Alan Gilbert, a member of the Juilliard faculty. His “synthesis” of Wagner’s “Ring” is the main event, with Schumann’s “Manfred” overture and Berg’s “Three Pieces for Orchestra” also on the bill. At 8 p.m., Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Juilliard String Quartet (Monday) The cellist Joel Krosnick is in his final season with this foursome, so this chance to hear them play a specialty, Elliott Carter’s String Quartet No. 1, should not be missed. Schubert and Debussy make up the rest of the program. At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-799-5000, events.juilliard.edu. (Allen)Music on the Edge (Tuesday) For its first New York show, this Pittsburgh-based new music series offers Burr Van Nostrand’s “Fantasy Manual for Urban Survival,” performed by the cellist Dave Eggar, the flutist Lindsey Goodman and the pianist Eric Moe. The program also features works by Mr. Moe, Amy Williams, Roger Zahab, Lee Hyla and Mathew Rosenblum. At 7:30 p.m., SubCulture: Arts Underground, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 212-533-5470, subculturenewyork.com. (Schweitzer)Advertisement★ New York Philharmonic (Friday through Sunday, Tuesday) On Friday and Saturday the brilliant young Russian pianist Daniil Trifonov, the featured artist for the New York Philharmonic’s three-week Rachmaninoff Festival, plays the composer’s seldom-heard Fourth Piano Concerto, with Neeme Järvi conducting a program also including the First Symphony. On Tuesday, Mr. Trifonov tackles the mighty Rachmaninoff Third Concerto, part of a program also offering the Symphonic Dances, with Ludovic Morlot conducting. Friday at 2 p.m., Saturday at 8 p.m. and Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. And on Sunday at 3 p.m., Mr. Trifonov plays Rachmaninoff’s “Trio élégiaque” with musicians from the Philharmonic in a chamber music program at the 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue. 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Tommasini)New York Youth Symphony (Sunday) This energetic ensemble of musicians, ages 12 through 22, performs with polish and conviction. Joshua Gersen conducts Strauss’s “Till Eulenspiegel’s Merry Pranks,” Gershwin’s “An American in Paris” and the premiere of Gabriella Smith’s “Lost Coast,” featuring the cellist Gabriel Cabezas as soloist. At 2 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)Zeena Parkins (through Sunday) The legendary harpist joins an array of musicians in a residency at the Stone, in which she plays at least one set per night. Highlights include a performance of new music for brass in a set anchored by the fiercely original Tilt Brass Sextet on Friday, and work with the percussionist William Winant on Saturday. At 8 p.m. and 10 p.m., Avenue C and Second Street, East Village, thestonenyc.com. (Allen and da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Il Pomo d’Oro (Friday) The elegant, virile countertenor Max Emanuel Cencic presents a program of Neapolitan baroque music consisting of arias by Porpora, Scarlatti and others, accompanied by the Italian period-instrument ensemble Il Pomo d’Oro in its New York debut. At 7 p.m., Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org/tickets. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)A version of this schedule appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page C18 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.