AdvertisementSupported byAntiquesBy Eve M. KahnA new alliance of preservationists wants to hear from anyone who has uncovered murals executed in the United States before 1860. The group has set up the Center for Painted Wall Preservation in Hallowell, Me., to document the works of itinerant artists who painted scenes of pastures, harbors, cityscapes and farmsteads, as well as flowery stenciling.One of the center’s founders, the art scholar and painter Linda Carter Lefko, said the group’s members had been sifting through decades of published and unpublished research. (In 2011 she wrote a book, “Folk Art Murals of the Rufus Porter School: New England Landscapes: 1825-1845,” with Jane E. Radcliffe, about one of the best-known American muralists of that era, Rufus Porter.) Her team is also tracking newly unearthed artworks, including some that have come up for sale or are threatened by decay and demolition.Painted walls rank as “one of the greatest forms of American folk art,” Ms. Lefko said. But they are vulnerable to the elements and changing tastes, and usually unprotected by landmarks designations.At the Center for Painted Wall Preservation’s website, pwpcenter.org, mural owners and other devotees can register paintings, describing their motifs, the histories of the buildings in which they were created, restoration work performed and layers of wallpaper added over the years. The site has a list of museums, mostly in New England, that have acquired murals from rooms that were renovated or destroyed, or have acquired buildings where patrons hired artists to enliven the walls during the 19th century.Ms. Lefko said that she was hoping that curators, dealers, historical society staff members and real estate agents, among others, would contact the center about forgotten murals. The website’s wall listings will be searchable by location, artist’s name, original homeowner, motifs and techniques. This online resource will help scholars identify painters who worked in particular areas and developed distinctive styles. Ms. Lefko said she was currently researching a Maine stenciler and muralist she would not yet name who often incorporated red and black birds into designs.The center’s founders will offer advice to homeowners who want to repair damaged murals, cover them with wallpaper without harming them or remove them to display elsewhere or sell. The center can also recommend strategies for protecting properties with preservation easements, which prevent owners of such buildings from demolishing or changing the painted walls.Similar databases have been established for other forms of endangered painted artifacts. Curtains Without Borders, a conservation group that focuses on painted theater curtains produced from the 1890s to the 1940s, has unearthed about 500 examples so far. It has concentrated on New England but is now expanding its surveying efforts nationwide.Such textiles turn up in performance spaces, fraternal organizations, grange halls, government offices and schoolhouses. They advertise local businesses and depict actual buildings, as well as romanticized views of riverbanks, castles, groves and chariot races.This year Christine Hadsel, the project director of Curtains Without Borders, published an in-depth study of the subject, “Suspended Worlds: Historic Theater Scenery in Northern New England” (David R. Godine). The project team, she said, conserves fabrics and offers advice on their display and storage. Curtains registered in the central database are more likely to be noticed and cared for, and the registration of discoveries can prompt other curtain owners to add theirs to the list.“I feel like we are just in time to save whatever’s out there,” she said.Pierre Bergé, the longtime partner of Yves Saint Laurent, is winnowing his possessions this fall, and Saint Laurent memorabilia is also surfacing on the market.Last month the Artcurial auction house in Paris sold about 300 pieces from the Jardin Majorelle, a garden and villa in Marrakesh, Morocco, that Mr. Bergé and Saint Laurent acquired in 1980 and restored. A museum on the property operated by their foundation has displayed Arab and Islamic material from various countries over the years and now focuses on Berber objects; exhibitions about Saint Laurent’s career are scheduled to open in 2017. At Artcurial, a ceramic oil lamp used during traditional wedding ceremonies in Algeria sold for about $4,000. A pair of cedar doors from a Marrakesh mosque, carved with religious inscriptions and bearing traces of vermilion paint, brought about $100,000.On Dec. 11, Sotheby’s in Paris will host the first of a half-dozen sales of books and manuscripts owned by Mr. Bergé. The lots, many of them with estimates over $100,000 each, range from 15th-century religious tomes to studies of 20th-century abstract art.Benoît Forgeot, one of the specialists overseeing the sale, said that Mr. Bergé had collected books for decades. “This is the only passion that was not shared with Saint Laurent,” with whom he collected scores of art objects, he said.Mr. Bergé, now 85, focused on volumes annotated and inscribed by authors and original owners including Flaubert, Stendhal, Apollinaire and the Marquis de Sade. Given the copious writing on some of the pages, Mr. Forgeot said, “Every book is alive.”After Sotheby’s cataloged the material, Mr. Bergé withdrew four books that had been estimated together to bring a total of about $4 million. Bearing the handwriting of Stendhal, Zola, Paul Verlaine and André Breton, the books have been entrusted instead to institutions including the National Library of France.On Dec. 5 Augusta Auctions of Bellows Falls, Vt., will conduct an online sale of thousands of pieces recovered from a forgotten storage unit that belonged to an Yves Saint Laurent executive in the United States. Estimates start at around $100 each for clothing, hats, sunglass prototypes, scarves, advertisements, drawings, perfume bottles and photographs of runway models including Jerry Hall. Files of correspondence include pages signed by Saint Laurent and Mr. Bergé, mourning the death of their friend the fashion editor Diana Vreeland.Advertisement