AdvertisementSupported byFriday FileBy Mary Jo Murphy“France is at war,” President François Hollande declared last week after terrorists attacked Paris. And while Parisians gathered their shattered wits and mourned, the city’s celebrated cultural life — its cafes, its shops, its arts institutions — went quiet. This week, proud and defiant, Parisians returned to the streets, unwilling to give in to terror. But will the city ever return to “normal”?An article on the front page of The New York Times on Christmas Day, 1914, was published under the headline “Paris’s Gaiety Gone: Even Restaurants Not Allowed to Keep Open Longer Than Usual.”The article began: “For the first time in decades Paris has foregone her famous Christmas Eve celebration — ‘le Reveillon,’ when cafes and restaurants remained open all night, dazzling with lights and the jewels of beautiful women; when pierrots and harlequins danced through the boulevards, followed by huge crowds in all sorts of bizarre attire; when life was so effervescent that such things as home dinners and gift giving had to wait over until New Year’s. For the first time has the day ceased to be a fete and the real solemnity of the occasion become manifest.“It proves, almost as much as the manner in which the French went to war, that there is indeed a new France. Walking the silent, almost deserted boulevards today with a well-known French journalist, I asked his opinion as to whether Paris would ever again be like the Paris of old. He shook his head decidedly and said: ‘Some of its gaiety will return with time, for that is the French temperament, but the old Paris of vice, extravagance, and folly is gone forever. It will not be allowed to return.’”It did, of course, but not that Christmas, just as this holiday season will be forever changed for so many. The article went on: “There is scarcely a home in France not represented in the trenches, hospitals, or recent graves, so along with unshaken confidence in the allied armies a note of solemnity and sadness prevails.”Even the holiday rituals that did happen were colored by the war:“Although sidewalk booths are open on the boulevards as in former years, their wares are mostly military toys for children,” the article said. “Among the most popular is a pig to represent the Kaiser, with mustache and helmet. The pig is inflated, and when deflated squeals horribly.”The cultural institutions, too, were all about the war:“During tomorrow holy communion will be solemnized in all the churches, while about a dozen theatres will give patriotic matinees and evening performances. At the Opera Comique ‘La Vivandiere’ will be given, and at the Trianon Lyrique ‘The Daughter of the Regiment.’ Even the variety houses will give patriotic revues, such as ‘Under the Flag’ at the Bataclan.”Yes, that Bataclan.Advertisement