AdvertisementSupported byFor full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.★ Angel Haze (Monday) After grabbing indie hip-hop fans by the lapels with “Cleaning Out My Closet,” her lacerating 2012 track that detailed childhood sexual abuse, Angel Haze — whose real name is Raeen Roes Wilson — continues to thrive. At this show, the local rapper will celebrate “Back to the Woods,” her second album of clever turn-of-phrase and confrontational gusto. At 7 p.m., S.O.B.’s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, South Village, 212-243-4940, sobs.com. (Stacey Anderson)★ Awesome Tapes from Africa (D.J. Set) (Friday) The excellent blog Awesome Tapes from Africa culls obscure cassettes from the continent and uploads them free of charge, devoid of pretension, to thousands of listeners each month. Its creator, the former Fulbright scholar Brian Shimkovitz, also occasionally spins his found sounds in D.J. sets that are acquiring their own cult adoration. At 9 p.m., BAMcafé, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org; free. (Anderson)Ani DiFranco (Friday) This iconoclastic folk singer-songwriter dabbles in some intriguing instrumentation on her latest studio release, “Allergic to Water”: the tamburitza (a type of lute), the sousaphone and the clavinet all get the spotlight on the album’s empowerment tracks. The record is a stark turn from its predecessor, “¿Which Side Are You On?,” which toyed with Brazilian tropicalia and experimental jazz. With Mike + Ruthy. At 8 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)The Juan Maclean (Friday) The disco-house D.J. John MacLean and the former LCD Soundsystem member Nancy Whang have found their groove in a steady stream of mixes and outtakes in recent years. Last fall, they released their first album in several years, “In a Dream,” a punk-synth excursion of charming call and response. At 11:59 p.m., Cameo Gallery, 93 North Sixth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-302-1180, cameony.net; free with R.S.V.P. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret Many big guns of cabaret have lined up with new shows to carry Manhattan’s fall season through the Thanksgiving holidays. Leading the list are John Pizzarelli and Jessica Molaskey with “My Generation,” at Café Carlyle through Nov. 28 (35 East 76th Street, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com).At Feinstein/54 Below, Julia Murney, an alumnus of “Wicked,” performs through Saturday; Ann Hampton Callaway, celebrating women songwriters, begins the first of seven performances on Sunday; and the red-hot Broadway star Lena Hall (“Kinky Boots,” “Hedwig and the Angry Inch”) has the first of 10 performances of her new show, “The Villa Satori: Growing Up Haight Ashbury,” on Nov. 28. (254 West 54th Street, 646-476-3551, 54below.com.)At Birdland, the Tony Award-winning actress Christine Ebersole and the Grammy-winning musician Billy Stritch reunite Monday through Thursday (315 West 44th Street, Clinton, 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com).And at the Italian restaurant and bar Pangea, the singer-pianist Eric Comstock performs Tuesdays evenings and the ethereal vocal phenomenon Carol Lipnik on Sundays (178 Second Avenue, East Village, 212-995-0900, pangeanyc.com). (Stephen Holden)My Morning Jacket (Tuesday, Wednesday, next Friday and Nov. 28) The psychedelic rock-and-country showmen turned to naturalistic themes on “The Waterfall,” the group’s seventh album. That effort, released in May, trod panoramic paths and failed relationships atop jam-heavy melodies that ultimately swelled with hope. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)Okkervil River (Saturday through Monday) These erudite indie-rockers from Austin, Tex., are known for vast conceptual albums, with the most popular being the plights of a heroin-addicted folk singer on “Black Sheep Boy.” They will reprise that solemn-yet-inspiriting album in full at this concert, 10 years after its release. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)★ Oneohtrix Point Never (Friday) The local experimental artist-producer Daniel Lopatin is a curious creature. His textural, ethereal work brims with dark ideas and realized wanderlust; though almost all of the tracks on his standout album “Replica” clock in at under five minutes (brevity itself in the avant-garde world!), they feel meaningful and complete. He leapt to the prominent Warp Records in 2013 and released “Garden of Delete” last week. At 9 p.m., Villain, 50 North Third Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, songkick.com; sold out. (Anderson)Robert Randolph and Family Band (Tuesday and Wednesday) Mr. Randolph, an impressive pedal steel guitarist and singer, leads his funk-soul ensemble through dizzying jams and succinctly affecting ballads with equal dexterity. His charisma is on par with multitasking frontmen like Dave Matthews and Eric Clapton, who both collaborated on this band’s 2006 album, “Colorblind.” Mr. Randolph has favored Brooklyn Bowl as his New York performance spot for several years; the hall’s rowdiness does him justice. At 8 p.m., Brooklyn Bowl, 61 Wythe Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-963-3369, brooklynbowl.com. (Anderson)Toshi Reagon and BIGLovely (Sunday) The elegant folk singer-songwriter served as an emotional core of the Women of the World Festival this June at the Apollo Theater — she performed with her mother, the scholar and musician Bernice Johnson Reagon, and her daughter, the student and activist Tashawn Reagon. Fittingly, she comes from poetic soil; she is named after the wife of her godfather, Pete Seeger. At 7 p.m., Joe’s Pub, at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com. (Anderson)★ Stevie Wonder (Tuesday) “Sir Duke” will ride again as the venerable Mr. Wonder continues to extend his first national tour since 2009. He will perform his quintessential 1976 record, “Songs in the Key of Life,” the double album that has inspired scores of R&B dreamers. In 2005, the Library of Congress added it to the National Recording Registry. The fortunate audiences of his recent festival performances — including sets at the Global Citizen Festival and Bonnaroo — can attest to his charisma, still broad onstage. At 8 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)Advertisement