By ROBERTA SMITHNOV. 19, 2015
Joe Grillo, who emerged at the turn of the century as the youngest member of the Dearraindrop collective, has titled his first solo show in New York City, at the Hole, with an implied streak of profanity, “#%@&?!!!.” His raucous, densely composed works are crowded with apparent pop-culture figures and motifs that are nearly all invented. Rendered in saturated colors outlined in black, they operate in an area bounded by painting, cartooning, graffiti and perhaps video games. Mr. Grillo’s efforts bring new energy to the high-low graphic tradition that includes artists like Pierre Alechinsky, William Copley, Keith Haring, Kenny Scharf and Sue Williams. However, a crazed retinal overload tends to distinguish Mr. Grillo’s works from those of his predecessors. He has pop culture in his veins, but his efforts stop short of garishness and mechanical slickness by being visibly improvised by hand.Mr. Grillo practices his striking, somewhat obsessive automatism daily, as attested by the more than 300 drawings and collages, nearly all from 2015, that cover three walls here. Also on view: three new paintings executed in black on white that at first seem diminished by the lack of color. But they bring a new clarity to Mr. Grillo’s instinctive gifts for drawing and composition. It may be essential to his development that he unpack the complexity of his art now and then.Mr. Grillo’s horror vacui has a nearly perfect foil in the “vacui” of “Badlandz,” an installation by Zane Lewis that comes across, at least partly, as a wry riff on zombie formalism. It consists of seven canvases skillfully spray-painted with clouds of different colors whose shifting tonalities and densities have a glowing, slightly psychedelic look. These suggest an admiration for Jules Olitski, the California Light and Space movement and Las Vegas; their effects are intensified by the floor, which provides a kind of punch line. It has been spray-painted with diaphanous textures as delicate as those of the canvases. The totality is at once self-consciously banal and unexpectedly beautiful.While the Hole bills Mr. Lewis’s show as his “first major U.S. solo,” he has also had solos shows at the Mixed Greens gallery in Chelsea in 2007 and ’09, where he presented paintings that look online like woefully obvious mixes of abstraction and appropriated images. His latest work is an improvement. Whether it constitutes the beginning of a genuine development or just savvier opportunism remains to be seen.Joe Grillo‘#%@&?!!!’Zane Lewis‘Badlandz’The Hole312 Bowery, near Bleecker Street, East VillageThrough SundayA version of this review appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page C26 of the New York edition with the headline: Joe Grillo and Zane Lewis in Separate Shows at the Hole.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.