AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Holland CotterUntil 1989, the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s late night was Tuesday. It was a good time for a visit; attendance was sparse. So I went a lot. It was also when I’d bump into the artist Martin Wong who briefly, and somewhat improbably, worked as a clerk in the Met’s bookstore. I say improbably because I was accustomed to seeing him in a different setting, on the Lower East Side, where he often dressed like a rodeo cowboy and ran with graffiti artists who were tagging the neighborhood.Wherever encountered, he was a spark, spilling over with information, talking nonstop. A chance meeting downtown might lead to a high-speed tour of fresh street art, and then of his painting-crammed studio. At the Met, there were tours too, equally avid, of the latest books in stock about classical Chinese art, which he knew and loved with a connoisseur’s hungry eye.Fervor, desire and coded insider-outsider knowledge crackle through “Martin Wong: Human Instamatic,” a retrospective survey at the Bronx Museum of the Arts. Organized by Sergio Bessa and Yasmin Ramirez, and with nearly a hundred paintings, it brings to New York for the first time a complete view of one of our great urban visionaries, from his precocious juvenilia to the unearthly little pictures from the year before his death from AIDS.Born in 1946, he grew up in San Francisco. His parents were Chinese-American, but because his father also had Mexican ancestry, Mr. Wong came to refer to himself as ethnically Chino-Latino. Culturally, he was a hybrid, too, being neither quite old enough to have been a beatnik, nor young enough to have been a true 1960s hippie. His solution was to live in the cracks between countercultures and take from all of them as needed.One thing he needed was change. He went to school, first for architecture, then for ceramics. After college, he worked as a sidewalk portrait sketcher, billing himself as the Human Instamatic. In the 1970s, he joined a gay theater troupe called the Angels of Light, an offshoot of the Cockettes. (In any setting, he was a witty, natural, charismatic performer.) He collected and sold Asian antiques, traveled in Asia a bit, then decided to teach himself how to paint. During this phase, in 1978, he visited New York and decided to stay, mainly because he found a cheap room in a crumbling, and to him romantic, transient hotel near the South Street seaport.That room is the subject of a 1984 painting, “My Secret World, 1978-1981,” which has been taken for an update on Van Gogh’s depiction of his bedroom in Arles, though with differences. In Mr. Wong’s painting we’re outside the room, peering in, like voyeurs, through two windows. The space is neat and clean, though densely packed with the artist’s possessions. Clearly he’s an eclectic reader. Books lined up on a bureau included “The Universe,” “Magic,” “Flying Saucers,” “How to Make Money,” “Famous Disasters,” “Pro Hockey” and “Unbeatable Bruce Lee.”And he’s been hard at work, judging by three paintings on the wall, all of which Mr. Wong actually did in his early New York days. (Two are in the show’s first gallery.) One is of an eight ball, another of a pair of dice. A third is an image of several detached hands spelling out words in American Sign Language — “Demon dogs drive man to murder,” a reference to the Son of Sam killings that had rattled New York the year before the artist’s arrival.Several facets of Mr. Wong’s personality as an artist are on display: the self-dramatist; the mythologist; the existential tourist; and the virtuoso realist. Every brick of the hotel facade has been individually painted and mortared into place.In 1982, Mr. Wong, again in search of cheap rent, moved to the Lower East Side, known by its black and Latino residents as Loisaida. Young artists were moving into the East Village; many others were showing there, and he met some: Charlie Ahearn, Julie Ault, Jane Dickson, Keith Haring. And he met Miguel Piñero, whose prison play, “Short Eyes,” had been a hit some years earlier. Mr. Wong hung out with him, fell in love and began to see the neighborhood, which would become his great subject, from Mr. Piñero’s impassioned perspective.They sometimes collaborated, as they did in the painting “Attorney Street (Handball Court With Autobiographical Poem by Piñero),” dated 1982-84. The initial idea was Mr. Piñero’s. He asked Mr. Wong to paint, and in that way preserve, the image of a graffiti mural done by a friend on a handball court wall. Mr. Wong copied the mural in exacting miniature, then did more. He painted its setting: the chain-link fencing that surrounded the wall, the prisonlike tenements lined up behind it. And into this grimness he floated apparitions. A low-lying cloud of gesturing hands spelling out hip-hop lyrics hangs in midair, the way calligraphic inscriptions do on Chinese landscape scrolls. And the sky is filled with the handwritten words of a Piñero poem as piercingly anguished as a pop love song.Many of Mr. Wong’s city paintings from the 1980s take a similarly mystical turn, but one always with contradictions. Neighborhood buildings are fortresslike, crushing, sinister. Empty lots are piled with trash. Yet there are miracles everywhere: gold paint shines in windows, night skies bloom with stars. We are touring the Heavenly City of Oz to the tune of “All Along the Watchtower.”This resurrectionist vision of ghetto New York reaches its apotheosis, and takes on an erotic charge, in “Big Heat,” from 1988. Here dark-windowed tenements, rising from billows of thick smoke, are tinted a very pale pink and yellow, as if they were white-hot, or maybe sugarcoated. Whatever, two firefighters in the foreground, with helmets on and air tanks on their backs, don’t notice or care. They’ve got their own blaze going: They’re locked in a tender kiss.Homoeroticism is central to Mr. Wong’s art. And Mr. Piñero’s work provided useful imagery, inspiring a series of prison paintings. Some are standard beefcake, and you can argue with Mr. Wong’s blanket inclination to romanticize, and fetishize, the Outlaw. More interesting and complex, are two 1988 pictures directly related to “Short Eyes.” One, “The Annunciation According to Mikey Piñero (Cupcake and Paco),” stages a meeting, and psychologically fraught exchange, between two convicts as a kind of sacred event. Another, “Penitentiary Fox,” depicts the entire play being dreamed by Mr. Piñero, who died that year from liver disease at 43.By the end of the 1980s, many people were dying. Drugs took some. AIDS took others. And gentrification, which arrived on the coattails of art, was eating away at Loisaida and pushing its residents out. Mr. Wong’s art, which always feels lonely, became lonelier. In 1985 and 1986, he painted a remarkable series of life-size trompe l’oeil pictures of shuttered and padlocked storefronts, and called an exhibition of them “The Last Picture Show.”It was roughly at this point that he started to shift his attention to nearby Chinatown and to that neighborhood’s San Francisco counterpart. In a rich 1996 interview with Ms. Ramirez in the catalog he says that he waited to tackle this subject until he had improved as a painter. The Chinatown pictures are almost too expert, too polished, too close to cartooning. But they represent a core element of this proto-globalist’s self-identity, an element that kept him an exotic outsider in New York, including (still) in the New York art world.He had an easier time in San Francisco, where he returned, ill, to live with his parents. He still made city-themed work, but also did small paintings of constellations, the night sky viewed through a telescope, and others — they can only be called portraits — of small cactuses and succulents, each with a personality, a zany Daoist soul, that grew in his mother’s garden. In 1998, a year before his death at 53, he was elected grand marshal of the city’s Chinese New Year Parade.There’s talk these days of the art world being gripped by nostalgia for earlier times, namely the 1970s and 1980s. I don’t feel it. For better and worse, the art situation hasn’t fundamentally changed, except to grow bigger and richer, because people haven’t changed. And it’s only people I miss, individuals. Martin is one. I’d give a lot to be with him in a museum bookstore where he’d read, mind wide-awake and absorptive, almost everything on the shelves, or in downtown Manhattan where, as he well knew, the best art wasn’t in galleries, and he could take you to where it was. What he’d do with the world today, I don’t know. Keep painting it, I guess: paint history, paint it with a global eye, which means paint it critically, which means paint it from the heart, which is where the Bronx show comes from.“Martin Wong: Human Instamatic” continues through Feb. 14 at the Bronx Museum of the Arts, 1040 Grand Concourse; 718-681-6000; bronxmuseum­.org.Advertisement