By JAMES R. OESTREICHNOV. 19, 2015
The Juilliard Opera folks could not have known, when they programmed their current double bill, how appropriate it would be at a time of escalating international terrorism. Francis Poulenc’s “Les Mamelles de Tiresias” (“The Breasts of Tiresias,” 1947) and Viktor Ullmann’s “Der Kaiser von Atlantis, Oder der Tod Dankt Ab” (“The Emperor of Atlantis, or Death Abdicates,” 1943), though contrasting in style and mood, are both lunatic satirical responses to the carnage of World War II.The zaniness of “Les Mamelles” starts to become evident in the title, since Tiresias is the male name adopted by Thérèse when she declares her independence, wanting to make war instead of babies, growing a beard and shedding her breasts. (Balloons, the inevitable stand-ins for free-floating breasts, are about all I remember from Seiji Ozawa’s presentation of the opera with the Tanglewood Music Center in 1997.)But France needs to repopulate, according to the stated (tongue at least partly in cheek) moral of the opera, which is based on a 1917 surrealist play by Guillaume Apollinaire written in reaction to another devastating war. So Thérèse’s unnamed Husband has to learn how to make babies without her and does so prodigiously in some unexplained manner (“Where there’s a will, there’s a way”), producing 40,049 of them in one day.“Der Kaiser” is an altogether darker affair. Ullmann, who was murdered at Auschwitz in 1944, composed it inside the belly of the beast, at the Terezin concentration camp, to a libretto by a fellow inmate, Peter Kien.An allegorical figure, Death, who has been rendered all too obsolete by mass slaughters, squares off against Emperor Überall, pretty much a dead ringer for Hitler, if slightly more rational in the end. Even Kien and Ullmann, it seems, could not imagine the worst.AdvertisementTed Huffman directs vivid stagings, based on earlier ones of his own, in the Peter Jay Sharp Theater. The “Kaiser” production is especially evocative, incorporating the creators’ prison experience into the play, as it were, with a striped-pajama motif in most of the costumes, designed by Paul Carey. That Terezin inmates did not wear stripes matters little in this fanciful context.AdvertisementThere were too many fine singers in the dual casts on Wednesday evening to mention. In “Les Mamelles,” Samuel Levine (the beleaguered Husband) and Liv Redpath (the rebellious Thérèse) were both wonderfully appealing. In “Der Kaiser,” Daniel Miroslaw (Death) and Dimitri Katotakis (the Emperor) were imposing, worthy adversaries.Keri-Lynn Wilson conducted the Juilliard Orchestra in nuanced and well-paced accounts.As announced beforehand, the performance of “Mamelles,” set in Paris (or Zanzibar; it is never quite clear), was dedicated to “the spirit of the French people.”­The production will be repeated on Friday evening and Sunday afternoon at the Peter Jay Sharp Theater, Juilliard School; 60 Lincoln Center Plaza, 212-799-5000, juilliard.edu.A version of this review appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Responses to Carnage From Another Era.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.