By JAMES PONIEWOZIKNOV. 19, 2015
The flag of Nazi-ruled America of 1962 in “The Man in the High Castle” has red and white stripes and a swastika on a field of blue. But even more chilling is how fascism has stamped itself upon American popular culture.People still go to Rock Hudson movies, but they open with Nazi propaganda newsreels. There are cop shows on TV; one is about the adventures of the “Reich Patrol.” Times Square is still riotous and noisy, but one blazing sign reads “Work Will Set You Free,” the slogan — in German, “Arbeit Macht Frei” — that hung on the gates of Auschwitz.In “The Man in the High Castle,” the unsettling, if uneven, alternative-history thriller whose 10-episode first season begins Friday on Amazon Prime, fascism has not simply conquered America. It has insinuated itself, with disturbing ease, into America’s DNA.Frank Spotnitz (“The X-Files”) adapted the series, with significant changes, from the Philip K. Dick novel of the same name. In this world, Hitler (still alive, but feeble) got the atomic bomb and dropped it on Washington. The Axis partitioned North America: the Greater Nazi Reich in the East, the Japanese Pacific States in the West and a no-man’s-land buffer zone in the Rocky Mountains.AdvertisementA few Americans resist. Some collaborate. Most try to convince themselves that their lives are normal, like a Missouri highway cop who explains to a passer-by a gentle snow of falling ash. “That’s the hospital,” he says. “Tuesdays they burn cripples, the terminally ill. Drag on the state.”AdvertisementIn San Francisco, under the marginally less brutal rule of the Japanese, Juliana Crain (Alexa Davalos) studies aikido, distinguishing Japan’s ancient culture from its 20th-century atrocities. Her boyfriend, Frank Frink (Rupert Evans), an artist under a regime that considers modern art “degenerate,” keeps his head low. He’s of Jewish ancestry, though he considers himself secular, and “Jews,” as a Japanese official tells him, “don’t get to decide if they’re Jews.”Their separate peace is broken when Juliana’s sister is killed for carrying a banned film, “The Grasshopper Lies Heavy.” It appears to be newsreel footage from our historical timeline — victorious United States troops raising the flag, Franklin D. Roosevelt meeting with Joseph Stalin and Winston Churchill. Juliana sets out to finish her sister’s job, smuggling the reel to the Rockies, where she meets Joe Blake (Luke Kleintank), on a similar mission of his own.From there, the series unfolds like an origami sculpture, with visually stunning detail that conveys a wealth of information. The Nazi East is a brutally well-ordered, high-tech Aryan wonderland; the Pacific is more traditionalist and polyglot.But the most disturbing details are human. Only when Juliana travels to the mountains do you see many black and brown faces. Racial minorities, gays and Jews are doomed in the Reich, barely tolerated in the Pacific, free — for now — only to escape to the poor territories.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The Man in the High Castle,” in other words, is a Holocaust story. Mr. Spotnitz doesn’t minimize or cheapen the implications of this, but they are ghastly, and that may be a deal breaker for some viewers.The character-building, unfortunately, is far weaker than the world-building. The dialogue is often B-movie grade, and Juliana and Frank, the closest thing the ensemble has to leads, are dull and dour. By the end of the six episodes provided to critics, they begin to emerge as individuals, but until then the plot does all the work.An exception is Obergruppenführer John Smith (Rufus Sewell), a pitiless American Nazi leader who’s a mild-mannered patriarch at home, like Captain von Trapp of “The Sound of Music” gone bad. (The theme song is a ghostly rendition of “Edelweiss,” its paean to a “clean” and “white” blossom ringing horrific in this racially cleansed dystopia.) The series’ most terrifying invention is to depict Nazi America not as Germanized but as representing a kind of perverted hyper-Americana, a “Leave It to Beaver” nightmare in which homogeneous suburban neighbors greet one another with a hearty “Sieg heil!”“The Man in the High Castle” marries its heady ideas with an assortment of genres. It’s a sci-fi story. (Germany, the world’s sole nuclear hegemon, also has supersonic rocket planes.) It’s an espionage thriller. It’s a tale of mysticism, with a running theme of characters consulting the oracular I Ching.AdvertisementThe result is bracing but shaky. The series is trying to explore difficult themes — the psychology of defeat, free will vs. fate, the tensions between conquering cultures — but its thin characters and pulp story twists raise doubt as to whether its sophistication matches its ambition.That said, I finished six episodes eager to see the last four. “High Castle” is at least addictive as a mystery: Is the “Grasshopper” film, for instance, simply technically adept propaganda or is it somehow an actual glimpse of an alternative universe?The questions abound. The series takes its title from the banned film’s supposed maker, who doesn’t appear in the previewed episodes, about whom much is said but little known. “The Man in the High Castle” could be a productive enigma, but only if it can make the characters we do meet as compelling as the one we haven’t.A version of this review appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: America, One Nation Under Two Flags.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.