AdvertisementSupported byBy William GrimesMichael C. Gross, a graphic designer and film producer who created the logo for the 1984 movie “Ghostbusters” and a series of unforgettable parody covers for National Lampoon magazine, where he was an art director in the early 1970s, died on Monday at his home in Oceanside, Calif. He was 70.The cause was cancer, his son, Dylan Gross, said.Mr. Gross joined National Lampoon as art director in 1970, a year after its founding, replacing a loose collective of underground artists called Cloud Studios. He brought with him a crisp visual style and a pinpoint, deadpan approach to parody that put the magazine on the cultural map.His first cover, for the November “nostalgia” issue, mimicked a Norman Rockwell painting, with an old-time barber giving a buzz cut to a hapless hippie wearing beads and a peace medallion. In January 1973, for the “death” issue, the cover showed a hand pointing a revolver at the head of an adorable black and white dog, its eyes swiveling apprehensively toward the barrel. The cover line read, “If You Don’t Buy This Magazine, We’ll Kill This Dog.”In 2005, the American Society of Magazine Editors ranked that design seventh on its list of the 40 best magazine covers of the previous 40 years.The “Ghostbusters” logo, a blobby white figure bursting from a red universal “No” sign, came about when the film’s producers wanted to print a teaser poster at a time when the studio had not yet secured the rights to the name. Mr. Gross, an art director and associate producer on the film, worked with one of his artists, Brent Boates, to generate an image that would get the idea of the film across without actually using a title.The ghost soon became one of the most recognizable and most imitated logos in popular culture. Mr. Gross, in an interview with The Daily Telegraph of London this year, said that he had realized years earlier that the image had gained traction when he saw it on the nose of a B-52 bomber at an air show.“I looked at it and I laughed,” he said. “I said to myself, ‘So when I look out the window and I see the horizon light up with mushroom clouds, I’ll know that over Moscow my logo is dropping a missile.’ ”Michael Curtiss Gross was born on Oct. 4, 1945, in Seattle and grew up in Newburgh, N.Y., after his parents divorced. He was deeply interested in science fiction and horror films as a boy. When he was 16, the magazine Famous Monsters of Filmland published paintings he had made of a skeleton and a dragon from “The 7th Voyage of Sinbad.”At 17 he married his high school girlfriend, Glenis Wootton, who died in 2006. In addition to his son (who changed his surname), he is survived by a daughter, Gina Misiroglu, and three grandchildren.He studied art at the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn but left before graduating to take an entry-level design job at Cosmopolitan magazine. After working at the trade magazine Medical Economics, he accepted an offer from Robert Pellegrini, a fellow Pratt student, to come to Mexico City to design posters for a cultural program tied to the impending 1968 Summer Olympics.After returning to New York, he worked as art director for Family Health and then Eye, a short-lived youth magazine published by Hearst. While at Eye, he pitched a feature called “Funny Papers,” which would allow panel cartoonists like Gahan Wilson to do comic strips.It was rejected but later came to life at National Lampoon. “I went to Henry Beard and presented the same idea,” he told The Comics Journal in March, referring to one of the magazine’s founding editors. “Of course, the attitude at Lampoon was ‘Fine, that’s eight pages less we have to think about!’ ”In an initial interview with Douglas Kenney, the principal editor of National Lampoon, Mr. Gross pointed to the shortcomings in a series of wacky postage stamps that Cloud Studios had created for a previous issue of the magazine.“The way that this will pay off is if they look like real postage stamps,” he recounted in his Comics Journal interview. “Then the humor is doubled. And they got that, and that’s what I hoped. And that changed the magazine.”Mr. Gross worked in tandem with David Kaestle, his former roommate at Pratt, to produce parody versions of material including menus, advertisements, invitations and bumper stickers. The parody 1956 high school yearbook they designed for the nostalgia issue anticipated the now-classic stand-alone “National Lampoon 1964 High School Yearbook Parody.”“Being at National Lampoon was like being at Sun Records,” Mr. Gross told Rick Meyerowitz, the author of “Drunk, Stoned, Brilliant, Dead,” a history of the magazine.In 1974 Mr. Gross left the magazine to start his own design partnership, Pellegrini, Kaestle & Gross, whose clients included Simon & Schuster, Jim Henson and Mobil Oil. The firm also did special projects for National Lampoon. For a year, he worked for John Lennon, a fan of National Lampoon, and Yoko Ono, creating Christmas card and book designs.After working as the art director of Esquire in the late 1970s he moved to Hollywood, where he produced “Heavy Metal,” an animated film based on the National Lampoon sister publication of the same name. Uncredited, he also designed the Griswold family station wagon and the Wally World moose for the film “National Lampoon’s Vacation.”He was a producer on nearly a dozen films, including “Ghostbusters II,” whose logo he updated to show a ghost holding up two fingers, as well as “Beethoven,” “Kindergarten Cop” and “Dave.” He also produced the animated television series “The Real Ghostbusters.”In 1995 he moved to Italy to paint. He later returned to California, where he was a curator at the Oceanside Art Museum.There were times when National Lampoon required skills not taught at art school. When the editors decided that the cover of “Gold Turkey,” an album of comedy sketches from the magazine’s radio show, required a live turkey, painted gold, Mr. Gross obliged.A New Jersey farmer supplied him with the turkey and a handful of turkey tranquilizers. “It took a lot of downers to stop it flapping," Mr. Gross told Tony Hendra, an editor at the magazine, for a 2002 article in Harper’s Magazine.He worried that, like the doomed secretary in “Goldfinger,” the bird would die after being gilded. “The turkey, however, didn’t die, but it was so stoned it couldn’t stand up,” he said. “And all anyone was really interested in was whether the massive amount of drugs we’d given it would affect us if we ate it.”Advertisement