AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RatliffIt’s going to be rare to see the improvising drummer Tyshawn Sorey do anything mechanically or thoughtlessly at the Village Vanguard this week. He’s got hyperprecision technique; he could keep you engaged for a long time with straight swing or regularly accented music, and he’s done that in plenty of groups led by other people, jazz or otherwise.But he doesn’t do that with his own bands. Instead he tendsto move through his music with a flowing sense of ritual and constant alertness. It involves a lot of silence. It also involves a lot of attack, but in very short and concentrated doses, sometimes as short as one great, purposeful smack on a drum head or a quick crescendo of mallets on cymbals that floods the club’s entire atmosphere. This isn’t volume in the service of good times; it’s in the service of satori.Mr. Sorey has played around New York a lot over the last 10-plus years; this is his first time leading a band at the Vanguard. The moments you review in your mind, as you leave the club, might well be moments of drift — or of sudden, crashing pinpoint clarity. All three musicians are listening and reacting on a high level, and it’s possible that paying attention to their nervous systems will be your way into the music, rather than the narrative structure of the music itself.The group — which made its first album, “Alloy,” last year — looks like a standard jazz piano trio but isn’t. In Tuesday’s late set, its bassist, Chris Tordini, played the most casually of the three, by which I mean woolly, textural and almost continuous. Its pianist, Cory Smythe, who played with exactness and purpose, had a lot of sheet music. To what degree it reflected what you were hearing wasn’t very clear: They were improvising interactively, and not stopping.The group played “Movement,” a balladlike piece from the album, though not in a self-contained way: I couldn’t tell where it began and ended. At one moment, about a third of the way through the set, a melodic line came through that sounded unusual for Mr. Sorey, with a spilling, rushing motion; it turned out to be Carla Bley’s “Sideways in Mexico.”In the past, I’ve seen this band play music that sounded more intricate and, to my ears, more ordered and plotted. What I heard at the Vanguard felt looser. Looser seems appropriate for the greatest jazz club in the world. Still, this band feels unusual for the club, even unlikely.It’s not that the Vanguard doesn’t bring in experimental or avant-garde groups: It’s been having a big year for music like that, with weeks by Steve Coleman and John Zorn and Henry Threadgill. But Alloy is something else again. In its drift and clarity, it’s more connected to a modern-classical music tradition — of, say, Xenakis and Feldman. It’s gestural, and philosophical, and sometimes hard to get a fix on; it also sounds excellent in the close confines of the Vanguard.The set’s final piece — “Flowers for Prashant,” dedicated to the Indian-American filmmaker Prashant Bhargava, who died this year — seemed like an outlier at first: Mr. Sorey played strict percussive patterns, fast and narrow, like drum-and-bass rendered on tablas. But the piece didn’t slope toward an ending or break itself off suddenly. Instead, in a final stretch, against Mr. Tordini’s quiet textural scraping, Mr. Sorey played his cymbals at nearly a sub-aural level and finally came to a complete stop without lifting his mallets off the metal, letting the remains of the sound travel on. He held them there, as if freezing time, for about 30 seconds: a great sequence of listening and clarity. Then he was really done.Tyshawn Sorey and Alloy continue through Sunday at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, Manhattan; 212-255-4037, villagevanguard­.com.Advertisement