
The Knick By                     
 MIKE HALE
 
NOV. 21, 2015
Early 20th-century medicine often looks like a circus sideshow on “The Knick,” but never as literally as in this week’s episode. Haunting the dime-museum arcade, John Thackery took in a not-very-convincing hypnotist and a very persuasive pair of conjoined Russian sisters. Both put ideas into his head. Hypnotism seemed like a possible answer in his search for a cure to addiction, though an experiment involving Tom Cleary didn’t go so well. The sight of the twins inspired his pure medical curiosity, and soon, with Cleary’s help, he was kidnapping them from their manager and pimp and preparing to surgically separate them, with the help of his trio of protégés, Bertie Chickering, Algernon Edwards and Everett Gallinger. (The pimp was played with understated grotesquerie by Fred Weller of “In Plain Sight,” while the sisters were played by Miranda and Rebecca Gruss and an armature of artificial flesh.)The consequences of inquisitiveness and desperation were on display throughout the episode. In its poignant centerpiece, Chickering and Edwards tried to save Chickering’s cancer-ridden mother with experimental surgery performed in secret at Mt. Sinai, in defiance of Levi Zinberg’s ban on risk-taking (hence the episode’s title). Her tumor was too large and entwined with her larynx, however, and despite the expert help of Zinberg — who burst in, enraged, during the operation — she died on the table. Chickering was heroic in failure — “You had the courage to try,” his physician father told him — and his resignation from Mt. Sinai led, as we knew something would, to his return to the Knick, where Thackery embraced him like the prodigal son he was. “I need the speed of this place,” Chickering told him. “Of you.”The episode also revisited one of the show’s purest instances of quackery, with Gallinger returning home to find that his wife, Eleanor, had invited to dinner Dr. Henry Cotton (John Hodgman). He was the man who pulled all of her teeth, and over dinner he regaled her, Gallinger and Gallinger’s sister with the story of a boy whose life he saved by removing teeth, tonsils, spleen, colon and testicles. A confrontation between Cotton and Gallinger was avoided when Cotton suddenly started to feel ill and left, probably because of something Gallinger slipped into his drink.Having begun as a dark carnival of mystery and malpractice, the hour concluded in a rush of romance. The always helpful and practical Genevieve Everidge supported Chickering in the wake of his mother’s death and planned an evening alone for them at her apartment. Lucy Elkins, seen earlier shoving her hand down Henry Robertson’s pants to persuade him to invite her to the gala for the new hospital (a scene far sexier than any of the show’s actual nude sex scenes), received her engraved invitation with her usual cryptic smile. Cleary, upset by Sister Harriett’s treatment at the home for wayward women, reiterated his demand that she come and live, platonically, at his place. Even the weaselly Herman Barrow showed the effects of love, bringing his favorite prostitute, Junia, to the apartment he was setting her up in. And finally, Thackery got over himself. When Abigail (the terrific Jennifer Ferrin) told him that she couldn’t have him sleeping in her house when she knew they had no future together, he gave her a long kiss that lasted into the closing credits.In less interesting matters, Cornelia Robertson continued to be sidelined in television’s most boring murder mystery, inching closer to the true fate of the health inspector Jacob Speight. A scene in which she went to the harbor to learn how immigrants were handled was graced by some Steven Soderbergh compositions that recalled the photographs of Alfred Stieglitz (such as “The Steerage” from 1907, roughly the time period of the show).We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »