By KATHRYN SHATTUCKNOV. 21, 2015
Get your Saturday night jollies with the turkeys, whether “Fifty Shades of Grey” or a couple of movies starring the actual bird. Then fall asleep to bittersweet lullabies from Adele.What’s on TVFIFTY SHADES OF GREY (2015) 8 p.m. on HBO. For those loath to part with a couple of Hamiltons when this turkey landed at movie theaters, Christian Grey, that kinky billionaire bachelor, and Anastasia Steele, his sort-of-willing supplicant, make it to cable. Jamie Dornan and Dakota Johnson star in Sam Taylor-Johnson’s adaptation of the E. L. James book that started tens of millions of wine-soaked fantasies. So pop the cork already. “‘Fifty Shades of Grey’ might not be a good movie — O.K., it’s a terrible movie,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times, “but it might nonetheless be a movie that feels good to see, whether you squirm or giggle or roll your eyes or just sit still and take your punishment.”FREE BIRDS (2013) 8 p.m. on NBC. A couple of turkeys from opposite sides of the tracks put aside their differences to get off the Thanksgiving menu once and for all. Owen Wilson and Woody Harrelson are the gobblers.JIM HENSON’S TURKEY HOLLOW (2015) 8 p.m. on Lifetime. A divorced father and his two kids head off the grid to spend Thanksgiving with his eccentric aunt in the turkey capital of the Northwest — where some peculiar new friends await them. Mary Steenburgen stars in this movie based on characters and a story written in 1968 by Mr. Henson and Jerry Juhl. Ludacris narrates.DOCTOR WHO 9 p.m. on BBC America. The Doctor and Clara are swept into a magical world hidden in plain sight in London.AdvertisementTHE RETURNED 10 p.m. on Sundance. Jérôme and Berg visit the hamlet where Victor’s family was murdered. Léna reunites with her mother and sister at the housing complex.Advertisement48 HOURS 10 p.m. on CBS. Kurt Sonnenfeld says that his wife shot herself in the head in 2002. The police think otherwise. But he’s living a new life, with a new wife, in Argentina, where he has told journalists that the American government wants to silence him because of something he saw at ground zero.TINY HOUSE WORLD 10 p.m. on FYI. Mini pads in Paris; Sydney, Australia; and Dublin for buyers with big dreams and dinky budgets.SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE 11:30 p.m. on NBC. Hello from the other side: Adele performs. Matthew McConaughey hosts.What’s StreamingCATASTROPHE on Amazon. If more mainstream eroticism is your thing, snuggle up with this comedy, starring the comedians Rob Delaney and Sharon Horgan, about an American adman who meets an Irish schoolteacher during a six-day business trip to London. But after lust comes pregnancy — and trying to do the right thing.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Watch Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.