AdvertisementSupported byArtist’s JournalBy Twyla TharpTwyla Tharp is writing about rehearsing, touring and creating new work, 50 years after her first dance concert.LOS ANGELES — It’s about time.Time can be lost in space. I know we are in Los Angeles and in our third week of touring, but moving through a series of buses, hotels, backstages, airports, I have lost track of what day it might be. This condition is not helped when, checking into our hotel at midday, I step out of the elevator into a black mirrored void. I am disoriented, suspended in space with no east or west and a time zone yet to be determined.Time is fluid. Time can be very, very short. In our tech rehearsal for Thursday’s performance, our first at the Wallis Annenberg Center in Beverly Hills, I adjusted one of the follow spot’s cues by less than a second, moving it from the upbeat to the downbeat. Makes a big difference to set the spot before the action starts.Time can be very, very long. Sitting waiting for a curtain, five seconds can be a lifetime.Time nails value. Novelty is fugitive. That which endures, timeless we say.We like to believe age brings wisdom. Not always so.Thursday night’s show is our fifth opening night in three weeks. Opening night shows are tricky because their audiences are reserved and often self-conscious. They tend to withhold and worry about being uninformed. They respond politely. They do not really tell me what they feel. That’s why I am looking forward to a group of youngsters coming the next morning.Friday at 11 a.m. five busloads of kids from inner city Los Angeles high schools are filling the seats of the Wallis Center for a performance of “Yowzie,” one of the dances on our touring program. Speaking with the center’s education director beforehand, we decided to let the kids have a real show: no curtain speeches telling them what they are about to see, or lectures on the value of the arts in their lives. Just take up the curtain.And the dancers perform. Full show, full energy. Afterward, I take questions from the audience.I begin by asking, “What did you see?”“There’s a story,” someone yells out. I agree.“There’s some drunk people, like in New Orleans.” Again I agree and say that New Orleans comes not from what they saw but what they heard. The music is composed by Jelly Roll Morton and it is really early jazz. From New Orleans. Got that right.And they go on to prove that they are a really smart audience. They see a man and a woman, dreaming, fighting. Splitting up. The woman is “lost” quite a long while; she was a victim but then gets her act together. Rises over them all. Then she and the guy get back together, but it is the same old, same old. Someone yells out, “Devil best known.”But another speaks up: “No, not the same. She’s leading now. She’s in front.”Yup, I say and then I add, we have a finale, right, we celebrate, right? Because we are all alive and because someone has learned something.And then another comment, about a subplot: “The guy who was chasing the girls wanted them all but he didn’t get either one.”Another suggests, “No maybe he got both.”And someone else says, “Either way you got to be careful what you wish for — you might get it.”And I have the feeling that many of these kids are probably from families with one parent and that in many of those with two, both are working 10 to 12 hours a day. These kids have seen a lot and seem to have seen this story already. I did not make it up, there is truth in it for them. And I am grateful to them for sharing with me.The biggest laugh of the day comes when I say, “Ask more questions, that way you can stay out of school longer.”So one kid asks, “How long does it take to make a dance?”“A lifetime,” I say. “My first Jelly Roll Morton piece was in 1969. But it was very different. I hope you too will find a way of connecting to something you can think about for a really long time.”Another question: “Why did you do it?”This one I respond to with: “Because theater can make a better world. Look at us; diverse crowd and we are unified. This is a political story. In this country I can make this dance and you can see it. And it can tell the story of a woman who has a really tough time of it but comes out ahead. Not in every country can you tell this story.”And then I thank them for being with us and tell them they have been a really great audience and have done a fine job reading this dance.And for me, here’s the most important part: They got it by themselves. I did not tell them what they were seeing, they told me.One last question: “How do you know you’re done?”The answer used to be, “When I know the title.” But recently I have taken to answering, “When I am bored.” Really the answer is, “When it is.”Saturday I am still not sure it is time to let go. I spend several hours reviewing back-of-the-house video from a number of our performances. I am looking to see if moments that do not quite land are in the execution or in concept. For example, late exits that are stepping on the toes of action center stage: execution. A gag that is not playing for the trio: change the business.I have set an hour apart for notes later that evening before the show’s warm-up. It is the first of these tuneup sessions I have scheduled since leaving New York. Notes of this sort cannot be given just in words and will sometimes need to be massaged before a performance. This time round, the dancers are very responsive and humor keeps it light.The Saturday night show goes very well. Both “Preludes and Fugues” and “Yowzie” are solid, well phrased, sparkly, the dancers even more secure after our notes session. On the way backstage after, I comment to my assistant, “Brady, a really good show.” He agrees, for I have elbowed him very little this evening: we use a “pokeage” system for notes. During a performance, he will write the place in the dancing where I elbow him and then we debrief the notes after the show. Very few pokes. Tomorrow’s notes shouldn’t take long at all.With so few notes, I know “Yowzie” is done. Also, finally I understand the title. When I settled on “Yowzie,” it was because we needed a title for promotion long before the dance was finished, and I saw the word only as an exclamation inside a cartoon balloon. But the students’ comments on Friday helped me see that Yowzie was a person, and that she had grown up into quite a strong young lady capable of telling her own story. Now the work exists in its own space and time zone apart from mine. I may still be needed for maintenance work, a tuneup every now and again, but Yowzie can take over. I wish her a very long life.Twyla Tharp is a choreographer, dancer and writer.Advertisement