By ZACHARY WOOLFENOV. 20, 2015
The New York Philharmonic played two famous failures on Thursday: the pieces that brought Rachmaninoff perhaps the most excoriation when they were new.The 1897 premiere of his Symphony No. 1 is renowned in the annals of fiascos: Nationalistic critics were out for the blood of this cosmopolitan young composer, and the conductor may well have been drunk. Thirty years later, Rachmaninoff was the soloist when his Piano Concerto No. 4 was performed for the first time; it, too, was blasted by critics.Both works have ended up far less popular than their composer’s blockbuster favorites. (This week’s performances at David Geffen Hall, in fact, are the Philharmonic’s first of the First Symphony.) But Daniil Trifonov, the star of the orchestra’s three-week Rachmaninoff festival, makes the Fourth Concerto (revised in 1928 and 1941) entirely persuasive. This is hardly a piece that avoids pianistic fireworks, yet even in its most virtuosic passages it’s strangely inward-looking. After a strong, focused opening theme, as calmly majestic and clean as a suspension bridge, Mr. Trifonov relaxed, reveling in impressionistic little cadenzas and confidently weaving in and out of the orchestral textures.Sleek and hurtling, his playing was precise in floods of passagework, while he seemed to try out a different color at every moment of the Allegro finale: One chord would be velvety, the next — a fraction of a second later — pearly, the next stark. In its pounding moments, his sound had a coppery tang rather than steely hardness.AdvertisementWithout overemphasizing the work’s debt to jazz — Rachmaninoff was at the 1924 premiere of Gershwin’s “Rhapsody in Blue” — Mr. Trifonov brought to it a smiling sense of freedom. If he seemed coy about sounding truly grand, in an old-fashioned way, that may just be his understanding of 21st-century taste.His encore on Thursday, a transcription of the Silver Fairy variation from Tchaikovsky’s “Sleeping Beauty,” was a tender wink. Lovers of music really should hear him, either in this program or in the festival’s final concerts (featuring the Third Concerto) next week.AdvertisementOh, and a conductor and an orchestra were onstage, too, you say? I suppose there were, in Neeme Jarvi and the Philharmonic, which was a willing foil to Mr. Trifonov in the concerto but came across as overemphatic and stolid in both Rachmaninoff’s “Russian Theme” and the First Symphony. That latter work, an early one, had volume here but little spirit. In the final movement, just a shiver of tam-tam gong remains after an enormous burst of sound. When the orchestra emerges from the pause, it should be like an entire world reconstituting itself. In this account, it was colorless.This program is repeated on Saturday, and the Rachmaninoff festival continues through Nov. 28, at David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center; 212-875-5656, nyphil.org.A version of this review appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Blend of Fireworks and Rumination.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.