By BEN RATLIFFNOV. 20, 2015
Ten minutes before the start of “More Up a Tree,” if you had walked into the Fishman Space, the black-box theater within BAM Fisher, you would have first seen the performers themselves, the dancer Claudia de Serpa Soares and the drummer Jim White, both in the middle of a wood-framed glass enclosure in the center of the room. You had nothing else to look at — except the other members of the audience, free to walk around the enclosure before and during the performance.What was this going to be about? Surveillance? Containment? Objectification? Vitrine-ism?Mr. White is an Australian drummer whose playing is deep and loose and untroubled; he’s been part of the band Dirty Three since the early ’90s. He has brambly hair, a medium-size belly and the placid expression of someone who might not mind sleeping in his clothes. He lay on his back on the floor. He’d taken his boots off, and put them neatly together next to his drum kit, with his sticks and mallets inside them. Ms. de Serpa Soares — an alert, narrow-faced Portuguese dancer, based in Berlin, who’s done a lot of work with the choreographer Sasha Waltz — knelt near him. She was massaging his feet, which were in socks. The massage wasn’t part of the performance, really, except to the unavoidable extent that it was.“More Up a Tree” is their collaboration with the multimedia artist Eve Sussman, developed over the last few years. Thursday was its world premiere, and the first of its three nights at BAM Fisher, where it was part of both the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Next Wave series and Performa 15, this month’s citywide performance art biennial. It’s categorized as performance art, but it’s not terrifyingly conceptual.Mr. White got behind his kit, still shoeless, and started playing in slow and regular patterns on a tom-tom and a low-tuned bass drum. Ms. de Serpa Soares started to move along the walls, as if tracing the dimensions of their space, and gradually set up a series of repeated motions: relaxed shoulders, knees pointed outward, arms swinging loosely; bent over and walking on hands; and so on. Sometimes she made gestures in direct reaction to his beats, and sometimes vice versa. But for the most part, they were following a plotted structure.AdvertisementAnd soon the smoky-looking glass of the enclosure turned out to be a two-way mirror. Depending on the changing lighting above and inside the enclosure, audience and performers could see one another; or we could see them, and they could see only their own reflections; or they could see us, and we could see only our reflections; or, best of all, we could see our reflection and the performers, as if we were in the enclosure with them.As a result, the spectators might have suddenly become aware of their spectatorship, for better or worse. And the performers might have suddenly felt that their public performance was a private one, which seemed only for the better. At one ecstatic high point — the only stretch of fast backbeats in the 50-minute performance — Ms. de Serpa Soares danced athletically but also like someone in a private space, smiling only to her own reflection. The mirror, of course was fooling her: We were watching her, too, and smiling, taking our part in a kind of satisfaction loop.AdvertisementDespite its structure, ”More Up a Tree” was a natural kind of performance — organic, joyful, generous. Would it have been nicer without the enclosure and the two-way mirror? I’m not sure. The box intensified the action. The two-way mirror, drawing a line between performance and practice, might have prevented the artists from becoming either too loose or too precise in their performing. And it might have done much the same with our judgment.“More Up a Tree” continues through Sunday at the Fishman Space at BAM Fisher, 321 Ashland Place, Brooklyn; 718-636-4100; bamorg.A version of this review appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Dancer, a Drummer and a Looking Glass.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.