AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Stephen HoldenJulia Murney doesn’t mince words. The high point of her untitled opening-night show at Feinstein’s/54 Below on Thursday was a sing-along rendition of Sara Bareilles’s “Sweet as Whole.” It was prefaced by an anecdote about a man urinating in a New York subway station, Ms. Murney’s disgust and another observer’s mean-spirited reaction.The number evoked a fact of life in a crowded big city where thousands of poker-faced riders on public transit are silently cursing rude behavior and passing judgment while simultaneously trying to summon compassion. That man, Ms. Murney realized, was probably desperate, having no place to relieve himself. A fellow rider remarked that he would get a police officer, then, to her annoyance, complained that a delay would make him late. The audience delightedly joined the chorus, which celebrates vulgarities we silently mutter as we go about our business. You might call it a communal release.That story distills the blunt honesty of Ms. Murney, a rangy Broadway soprano who played Elphaba in “Wicked.” Asked to sing a song from that show, her response was a curt no.Ms. Murney was well served by a quintet whose arrangements by her pianist and musical director, Will Van Dyke, toughened her music with a strain of country-rock and softened it with a cello. It was an ideal setting for a singer who began many of her songs in a delicately reflective mode and built them up to Liza Minnelli-like skyscrapers.She was unusually frank about the insecurities of performers at the mercy of producers who audition them and critics who judge them. (To this day, she said, she is still smarting from a review of her performance of the Stephen Schwartz ballad “Meadowlark.”) The sturdiest ballad performance astutely paired the Bonnie Raitt hit “I Can’t Make You Love Me” with Kate Bush’s “This Woman’s Work.”The most biting, unfamiliar song was Susan Werner’s “Misery and Happiness,” whose narrator faces a choice between a sexy flirt (Misery) and a devoted mate (Happiness). She knows which decision is right. But will she make it?Julia Murney performs through Saturday at Feinstein’s/54 Below, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 646-476-3551, 54below­.com.Advertisement