By NEIL GENZLINGERNOV. 20, 2015
In “Saints & Strangers,” National Geographic’s compelling two-part film about the Mayflower settlers and the first Thanksgiving, the cast members playing American Indians speak their lines in an almost extinct language called Western Abenaki. It’s a bold choice, both because of the challenge for the cast and because it means much of the film is subtitled. But it’s strikingly appropriate, since in this story, the language barrier is everything.The film, being broadcast in two-hour blocks on Sunday and Monday nights, is grounded in the real story of what happened when cultures collided in 1620 as a boatload of religious separatists (the “Saints” of the title) and adventurers arrived off the coast of Massachusetts.Those who survived the voyage were sick and hungry, but they had enough energy to be arguing among themselves even before they hit land — the “trust in God” Pilgrims not meshing well with their profit-oriented fellow travelers or the sailors who had ferried them across the ocean. Soon they had even more to argue about: how to regard, and deal with, the people whose territory they had landed on.The ample cast includes Vincent Kartheiser of “Mad Men,” who does fine work as William Bradford, the leader of the religious group and eventual governor of the Plymouth colony. The cast of settlers also includes Anna Camp as Bradford’s wife, Dorothy; Michael Jibson as Myles Standish, the military man; Ray Stevenson as an ornery Stephen Hopkins; and Natascha McElhone as Hopkins’s wife, Elizabeth.AdvertisementNot all of their characters have enough screen time to be fully defined; in truth, the most striking figures are among the Indians, especially Raoul Trujillo as Massasoit, the leader of the Pokanoket tribe, which eventually formed an alliance with the newcomers; and Tatanka Means as Hobbamock, an elite warrior. The Indian scenes don’t entirely banish some stereotypes that are as old as television, but we at least see characters who debate possible courses of action just as vigorously and knowledgeably as the white ones do.At the center of it all is Kalani Queypo as Squanto, the bridge between the two worlds because, initially, he alone speaks both languages. In this telling and, to an extent, in history, he is a bit of a mystery, his loyalties and motives unclear. By virtue of those subtitles, we see him deliberately mistranslating as he mediates between Indians and Westerners, sometimes harmlessly, sometimes not. In this film, the Thanksgiving tale is the story of language and its manipulation.AdvertisementThe film had multiple writers, and keeping the many characters straight requires some effort, but it stays watchable to the end. And it stays relatively true to events, even those that don’t fit into a Scriptwriting 101 template. Characters die early and often, whether or not we’ve been given the dramatic buildup we expect from fictional shows. Real life is like that.A version of this review appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Thanksgiving Story, Abenaki Version.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.