AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony TommasiniIt’s all in the details. That could almost be a motto for Stephen Sondheim, who works so hard to get the details right in his songs.He has said that when he hears his songs “interpreted” by singers and pianists, even small changes to his vocal lines and harmonies can make him wince. But the pieces that have been composed for the pianist Anthony de Mare’s seven-year project, “Liaisons: Reimagining Sondheim From the Piano,” are “a different matter entirely,” as Mr. Sondheim comments in liner notes for a new recording.In 2007, Mr. de Mare, a contemporary-music champion and Sondheim devotee, had the idea to commission diverse composers to transform their favorite Sondheim songs into piano pieces. The response was enthusiastic from both the composers he approached (including some Mr. Sondheim suggested) and the donors who provided support.The project kept growing until Mr. de Mare had 36 pieces by composers young and old, from all styles and camps of contemporary music, including jazz, pop and film: Steve Reich, William Bolcom, Frederic Rzewski, Annie Gosfield, Tania León and more. Most of these works are less arrangements of Sondheim songs than elaborate fantasias on them.On Thursday night at Symphony Space, Mr. de Mare played the third and final installment in a series of programs introducing the “Liaisons” pieces to New York. (The first concert was in 2012.) Recently the label ECM released a three-disc set of Mr. de Mare playing the complete project.In the program, he gave the New York premieres of the final four pieces, along with repeat performances of nine others, including Mr. Reich’s brilliant take on “Finishing the Hat,” which transforms that Sondheim song from “Sunday in the Park With George” into a restless work of perpetual motion for two pianos. (Blair McMillen joined in playing it.) Mr. de Mare also offered an encore, “Sunday in the Park — Passages,” his own contribution to the project.As a fellow Sondheim devotee, I’ve been fascinated to hear how particular composers fixate on certain elements of these songs and transform them into original piano pieces. In the spirit of “The Ballad of Guiteau” (from “Assassins”), Jherek Bischoff’s inventive version keeps shifting a rousing, ballad-like anthem into punchy, dark, twisted bursts of chords and riffs. Wynton Marsalis’s “That Old Piano Roll” (a song cut from “Follies”) evokes the styles of three jazz piano legends: the stride of James P. Johnston; the “obtuse style” of Thelonious Monk, to quote Mr. Marsalis; and the ragtime-swing of Jelly Roll Morton, spinning the different elements into a percolating, restless dance.Duncan Sheik, the composer of the musical “Spring Awakening,” currently playing on Broadway, takes a different approach in “Johanna in Space,” based on “Johanna,” from “Sweeney Todd.” The piano plays fairly faithful yet harmonically atmospheric transformations of the song. This music is heard alongside an electronic backdrop that layers dozens of takes of guitar improvisation through a tape echo.I especially enjoyed Andy Akiho’s take on the opening number from “Into the Woods.” He uses “prepared” piano techniques — sticking screws and tacks into various strings to produce cymbal effects, metallic sounds, thumps and such — to evoke the different characters we meet during this prologue, all the while weaving strands of the music into a free, perky arrangement.Many of these pieces are technically daunting. Except for some scrambled passages now and then, Mr. de Mare gave vibrant, colorful performances, his enthusiasm for the project he has fostered coming through palpably. He warmly thanked Mr. Sondheim, who was present, for his support, and for writing the songs that have inspired so many.Advertisement