AdvertisementSupported byCritic's NotebookBy Jon ParelesThe 16th annual Latin Grammy Awards took a pointed political turn for a few minutes midway through the show, which was broadcast live on Univision from the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas on Thursday night.Fher Olvera, the lead singer of Maná, the long-running Mexican band that won this year’s Best Pop/Rock Album award, joined the California norteño band Los Tigres del Norte to sing “Somos Más Americanos,” (“We’re More American”), a song Los Tigres released in 2001 and Maná revived on “Cama Incendiada,” its 2015 album.“Somos Más Americanos,” which was a hit for Los Tigres, examines history and insists that with Spanish and Native American bloodlines, Mexicans are more American than the descendants of Anglo-Saxon immigrants. “I didn’t cross the border — the border crossed me,” one line declares.When the song ended, Mr. Olvera and members of Los Tigres held up a large banner that read, in Spanish, “United Latinos, Don’t Vote for the Racists!” Univision’s camera did not cut away.It was a moment of bluntness during an event that generally preaches Latin unity as a mix-and-match international dance party: dozens of performances briefly interspersed with awards. The event’s staples are ardent love songs and what it calls “urban” (meaning reggaetón) come-ons, performed among walls of digital video and bevies of hip-swiveling showgirls.But the major winner this year was Natalia Lafourcade, a Mexican songwriter with a literary streak in her lyrics and a finely calibrated balance of vintage and new sounds in her music. The title song of her 2015 album, “Hasta la Raíz,” (“To the Root”) was both Song of the Year (an award for the songwriters, Ms. Lafourcade and Leonel García) and Record of the Year (for Ms. Lafourcade and her producers and engineers).In awards handed out before the Univision show, “Hasta la Raíz” was also named Best Alternative Album, and the song won Best Alternative Song.During the broadcast, Ms. Lafourcade noted that the album grew out of feelings from a breakup and said, “Anything that gives us pain can be transformed into this, into beautiful moments shared with friends.”But “Hasta la Raíz” itself is also about a cultural heritage, and in her next speech, Ms. Lafourcade urged, “Take care of our roots. Take care of our origin. It’s very important to hold on to them even if you travel far away.”The Best New Artist award was given to a cleverly anachronistic group: Monsieur Periné, a Colombian band that often harks back to Parisian Hot Club jazz.Another nominee for Best New Artist, the Puerto Rican singer Raquel Sofía, galvanized the audience with a volatile performance of her tango-tinged rocker, “Te Amo Idiota” (“I Love You, Idiot”).Longtime repeat winners collected a few more awards. Juan Luis Guerra, the Dominican songwriter who had 15 previous Latin Grammys, won Album of the Year for “Todo Tiene Su Hora” (“Everything Has Its Time”), and performed the title song, which promises comfort in sad times as a gift from God. The album was also Best Contemporary Tropical Album; another song from it, “Tus Besos,” was Best Tropical Song.The Spanish singer and songwriter Alejandro Sanz, with 16 previous awards, won another for Best Contemporary Pop Vocal Album. He also performed a raspy, flamenco-charged “A Que No Me Dejas” (“I Dare You to Leave”) that he shared as a Spanish and Portuguese duet with the Brazilian singer Paula Fernandes, joined by a mariachi band, Mariachi Sol de México.The show’s many love songs encompassed suave ballads, raucous emoting and, in the night’s slyest musical twist, Prince Royce’s bilingual dance-floor flirtation, “Back It Up,” turned into a reverent croon, backed only by piano and female singers. Natalia Jiménez’s self-reliance anthem, “Creo en Mí,” got pop-operatic harmonies from Il Volo.Many of the show’s matchups featured reggaetón added to other idioms; its beat meshes easily, and it gives more established styles an up-to-date accessory. A wry, 84-year-old Rita Moreno was one of the presenters for Best Urban Music Album. Before handing the award to Tego Calderón, she proclaimed her love for reggaetón with vigorous dance moves.The reggaetón rapper Wisin joined both the brass band Banda El Recodo De Don Cruz Lizarraga (Best Banda Album winner) and Ricky Martin. J Balvin, who won Best Urban Song, performed with the English-language dance-pop group Major Lazer featuring MØ, and Fifth Harmony, a pop-R&B vocal quintet, backed Maluma. Nicky Jam (Best Urban Performance) shared one segment with the Jamaican-American singer OMI doing his hit, “Cheerleader,” and another with the Colombian singer Silvestre Dangond. Nicky Jam dedicated his first Latin Grammy to “the people of Paris.”Will Smith did some bilingual rapping as the guest of the Colombian band Bomba Estéreo, whose lead singer, Li Saumet, was dressed as a glittery Las Vegas version of a Native American monarch.In a different coalition, the Colombian group ChocQuibTown performed its “Salsa & Choque” surrounded by Lizt Alfonso Dance Cuba, the first dance troupe from Cuba to appear on the Latin Grammys. It was one further expansion of Latin unity, in motion to a tropical beat.Advertisement