By NATE CHINENNOV. 19, 2015
“The paranoid spokesman sees the fate of conspiracy in apocalyptic terms,” a recorded voice intoned at the Harvey Theater at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Wednesday night, about an hour into the premiere of “Real Enemies.” Amid a lingering, eerie stillness, the voice went on: “He is always manning the barricades of civilization.”Onstage, the bandleader and composer Darcy James Argue stood silently in his three-piece suit and fedora, a Joseph Cotten silhouette at the center of a round platform designed to resemble a clock face. Most of his 18-piece big band, the Secret Society, flanked the platform’s perimeter, in a semicircle. An array of 15 video screens above the stage was momentarily dark, having just flickered with imagery: a moon rover, a bee colony, a soundstage.This heavily stylized tableau came courtesy of Mr. Argue, the writer-director Isaac Butler and the theatrical film designer Peter Nigrini, who created “Real Enemies” as a whirlwind rumination on conspiracy theories in American life. Wildly discursive, twitchily allusive, but taut in its adherence to a larger theme, it’s a work of furious ambition that feels deeply in tune with our present moment — even as it suggests linkages through history, true to the subject at hand.That passage of spoken text, the bit about the barricades, comes from “The Paranoid Style in American Politics,” the epochal essay by Richard Hofstadter, published in 1964. (The voice-over is by the actor James Urbaniak, a nerd specialist deliciously cast to type.) Hofstadter’s essay is one of a handful of familiar reference points for “Real Enemies,” whose title was borrowed from a book by Kathryn Olmsted; among the others are Don DeLillo novels (especially, it would seem, “Libra” and “Underworld”) and John Frankenheimer films (like “The Manchurian Candidate”).AdvertisementThis subject matter feels ideally suited to Mr. Argue, who formed (and named) the Secret Society a decade ago, and presented his previous multimedia opus, “Brooklyn Babylon,” at the Harvey in 2011. (That piece, like this one, was part of the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Next Wave Festival.) Like his partners, Mr. Argue drew inspiration from a range of sources — notably the 12-tone techniques that figure not only in serialist composition but also in the soundtrack for “The Parallax View,” the 1974 Alan J. Pakula film. (Add that to the reference pile.)Advertisement“Real Enemies” is structured, significantly, in 12 movements, each bearing a wry or evocative title: “Best Friends Forever” concerns the military-industrial complex, while “The Enemy Within” recalls Red-scare McCarthyism. There are other sly implications in the music, like a stuttering five-note figure that appears in the overture, played by a muted horn — a possible nod to Thomas Pynchon’s “The Crying of Lot 49” — and reappears in the third movement against grainy video footage of the twin towers.That five-note figure carries a symbolic weight in the piece, which alludes at one point to the Five Points of Fellowship, an aspect of Masonic ritual. Mr. Argue sets the fifth movement in a brooding 5/4 meter; the following movement incorporates 15/8, first in a flowing pulse and then with a destabilized lurch.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Secret Society is a working band, well attuned to the metabolism of Mr. Argue’s music. So the group’s performance was impressive both in the minute particulars and the grand, sweeping whole. (Among the many laudable soloists were Nadje Noordhuis, playing fluegelhorn, and Jacob Garchik, on trombone; they improvised in tandem, while slowly walking around the clock face.) One potent moment in the piece features a slowly building cacophony of improvisers, growing one by one at first, and then in a gathering throng.Elsewhere the score for “Real Enemies” dwells in pastiche, evoking 1980s synth-funk, vintage Cuban son and the atmospheric dread of incidental film music. Still, there was a strong sense of unity to the work, and a prevailing mood of insinuative bombast. And it was psychologically astute, presenting the suite’s many fragments of text on the multiscreen array without ever enlisting a vocalist; it gave the words a more interior quality, even a sort of chilling intimacy, implicating the audience in a web of sinister conjecture.That adherence to a particular tone, dispassionate but urgent, was what made “Real Enemies” feel like something other than a stylish jumble. The farther fringes of conspiratorial thought — those obsessed with the Illuminati, or Barack Obama’s birth certificate — show up in the piece without editorializing, alongside historical plots that have since been proven as facts.So Edward Snowden makes an appearance. There’s a nod to the secret aftermath of the Bay of Pigs invasion. A movement titled “Dark Alliance” touches on the collusion in the 1980s between Nicaraguan drug traffickers and government agents, at one point flashing a series of dossiers: informants, assets, spooks. One of these happens to be Duane R. Clarridge, who was in the news this week for his comments about a presidential hopeful he has advised.“A final characteristic of the paranoid style is related to the quality of its pedantry,” wrote Hofstadter, in a portion of his essay that doesn’t appear in “Real Enemies.” Despite its overwhelming barrage of information, the piece isn’t pedantic, or out to prove anything about conspiracies other than their endless fascination. And while it’s hardly a perfect piece of art, its deftly inextricable play of image, text and sound suggests something close to a perfect collaboration — which is a more benign way of implying that it’s a you-know-what.“Real Enemies” continues through Sunday at the Harvey Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Brooklyn; 718-636-4100, bam­.org.A version of this review appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Conspiracy Theories Wrapped in Sounds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.