By GIA KOURLASNOV. 18, 2015
Complexions Contemporary Ballet, a company formed in 1994 by Dwight Rhoden and Desmond Richardson, has done what, for many midsize companies, remains impossible: It has lasted. But for a troupe named in honor of the multicultural makeup of its dancers, it remains distressingly bland. Where diversity also matters — in its choreography — is where this company falls short. No matter the mood or music, a sequence often repeats in Mr. Rhoden’s pieces: After a running start, a dancer slides onto the stage, strikes an assertive pose and then — as if trapped inside a force field — shifts position by flicking a hip or tossing off a pirouette before retreating to the wings.This isn’t dance for the stage, but for the camera; Mr. Rhoden choreographs in close-ups. On Tuesday, Complexions returned to the Joyce Theater with the first of three programs, including a premiere, to Metallica songs. With the exception of William Forsythe’s “Approximate Sonata,” the dances are all by Mr. Rhoden, including “Ballad Unto …,” set to Bach and originally choreographed for Tulsa Ballet. A work for 14 dancers who fade in and out of Michael Korsch’s dewy lighting, this ballet, an exploration of facets of love, echoes Mr. Rhoden’s narrow choreographic palette with several pas de deux. Interspersed between group sections, they draw on George Balanchine’s neo-Classical aesthetic, but too often feel like parody.Still, there is the dancing of Ashley Mayeux, whose silken line and elegance sets her apart. In “Cryin’ to Cry Out,” danced to Jimmy Scott, she performs a pas de deux with Andrew Brader, whose stellar partnering magnifies details, giving their pairing a sweetness and a naturalness. It was the one time Mr. Rhoden seemed to rise beyond his usual impulses and deliver something with a sense of humanity. In the solo “Imprint/Maya,” inspired by Maya Angelou, the dancer, again, is the key: Here, the veteran virtuoso Mr. Richardson remains crisp and spontaneous despite the forgettable material.The sad part about “Strum,” set to Metallica songs, is its tameness. Under red and yellow lights, again by Mr. Korsch, 15 dancers decked out in silver costumes by Christine Darch mimic the melodrama of the operatic rock music but never revel in it. Timothy Stickney, more manic than nimble, emerges as the main character — dashing onto the stage, he whips his head with the fury, but it’s all an act: He possesses little power of projection. What would Beavis and Butt-Head say? At least there was no air guitar.Complexions Contemporary Ballet performs through Nov. 29 at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, Manhattan; 212-242-0800; joyce­.org.A version of this review appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Heavy Metal Affair, With Writerly Whispers and Bach, Too.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.