By NATE CHINENNOV. 18, 2015
“Cecil Taylor: From the Five Spot to the World,” a gala concert at the Harlem Stage Gatehouse on Tuesday night, opened with welcoming remarks wrapped around a disclaimer. “Cecil will not be with us this evening,” Pat Cruz, the executive director of Harlem Stage, announced in a soothing tone, “and we will miss him.”The news sent a ripple through the room. “Oh,” said a woman sitting near me, conveying in one syllable a mix of disappointment, dismay, confusion and concern. But the moment was brief, as the audience made a mental adjustment, recalibrating for a tribute without its featured guest.Mr. Taylor, the redoubtable pianist, composer-improviser and sound sorcerer, is 86. He hasn’t made many public appearances in the last few years, mostly staying within the orbit of his home in Brooklyn. His influence, on the other hand, has traveled widely, guiding more than one generation of improvisers, and not just on the piano. The avant-garde is unimaginable without his contribution, and so is a good deal of what now constitutes the progressive mainstream.Tuesday’s concert, a benefit for Harlem Stage, featured Jason Moran and Geri Allen, two prominent jazz pianists who count Mr. Taylor among their lodestars. It also featured two notable elders of the avant-garde: the bassist Henry Grimes and the composer, saxophonist and flutist Henry Threadgill. But first came a video clip of Mr. Taylor circling a grand piano with the fluid abstraction of modern dance, from the 1981 documentary “Imagine the Sound.”AdvertisementMr. Moran’s spontaneous solo performance seemed to take this footage as a starting point, opening with a series of low blurts, separated by pockets of space, and slowly accruing density. There was direct emulation of Mr. Taylor’s pianism in the careful disruptions and variations of attack, and in one stuttering rumble that opened in a mournful bloom. It was sharply compelling, but when Mr. Moran shifted to a slow gospel prowl, he imparted the feeling of returning to home base.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Allen did less to evoke Mr. Taylor’s signature, while fully inhabiting his style, with a crystalline touch and an oblique harmonic logic. She was prickly but patient in duologue with Mr. Grimes, rooting around “Enter, Evening,” a ballad-like piece from Mr. Taylor’s 1966 album, “Unit Structures,” on which Mr. Grimes played. Then Mr. Threadgill joined the duo for a guided improvisation, playing his alto saxophone in tart, bracing gulps. This trio piece, purposeful and cryptic, evoked Mr. Taylor powerfully but with a spirit of license.Mr. Threadgill also played bass flute on “Sail,” in a starkly exploratory duo with Mr. Moran. The mood of the piece, by Mr. Threadgill, was somber and autumnal; left unspoken was the fact that they first performed it this summer at a memorial service for Ornette Coleman, Mr. Taylor’s peer in the aesthetic revolution commonly known as free jazz.AdvertisementTwice during the concert there were recorded snippets of the dancer and choreographer Bill T. Jones recalling stories involving Mr. Taylor. And, as a finale, there was one more video clip of Mr. Taylor, this one recorded during a recent triumph, at the Harlem Stage Gatehouse in 2012. Mr. Taylor, attacking the piano with percussive rigor and sensitivity, was once again a transfixing presence, an inviolable force, a creative world unto himself.A version of this review appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Honoring a Sonic Sorcerer of Endless Influence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.