
Jessica Jones By                     
SIMON ABRAMS

NOV. 23, 2015
This episode of “Jessica Jones,” which picks up seconds after the previous one, feels like a corrective for every little imperfection in the first two. Jones finally seems to be taking active strides to regain control of her life. For example: Jones doesn’t treat Hope Schlottman, the latest victim of Jones’s arch-nemesis Kilgrave, like a client that she also happens to care personally about. Instead, Jones does her best to protect Hope because she primarily wants to stop Kilgrave, and summarily feels obligated to protect people from him.As a result, this entry is more action-intensive. Jessica doesn’t just look for clues, she looks for Kilgrave, and tries to draw him out so that she can stick him with a syringe full of Sufentanil. That focus on action set pieces makes the show’s de rigeur cynicism sting a little less, mostly because there are fewer scenes where supporting characters patly illustrate Jones’s lack of faith in humanity.Jones repeatedly goes out of her way to help people without there being any promise of an immediate reward. She becomes re-invested in her super-heroic calling after Cage says that he doesn’t stick his neck out for other people because that always winds up causing problems later on.Jones may not be immediately thinking about what Cage said when she goes hunting for Kilgrave, but she doesn’t have to be. As in the last two episodes, events conspire to remind Jones that wherever she goes, she will be reminded of her obligation to other people. Sure, she chooses to help her neighbor Malcolm whenever it’s convenient, like when a biker assaults and then lectures Malcolm in the most cartoonishly obnoxious way (“I’m on my bike because I care about the planet!”). But when Jones can, she uses Malcolm as a distraction in order to steal Sufentanil from a hospital pharmacy. Jones regrets the decision, but she also can’t even meet Malcolm’s gaze when she passes him by on her way out.AdvertisementThis quietly effective sequence reminds us that the heroic measures Jones takes to stop Kilgrave are costly even if they’re not as over-the-top as the comparatively high stakes of the show’s pilot. Compare Jones’s small, but moving altercation with Malcolm with the dramatic scene that caps “AKA Ladies’ Night.” When Hope kills her parents, Jones feels guilty for not having done enough to take care of her client. A similarly heavy guilt weighs on Jones here when she pushes Malcolm into harm’s way, and uses him to sneak away unnoticed, though this time it doesn’t take a double homicide to make Jones feel responsible for her actions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Likewise, Jones and Cage’s sex scene this time around is notably less chaotic than their previous one. This is entirely by design since Jones and Cage are sober and more capable of enjoying each other’s company. This sequence is shot in extreme close-ups at first, then in relatively long takes that emphasize Krysten Ritter’s heavy breathing and Mike Colter’s imposing physical presence. Jones is also shown taking control this time around, and even breaks his bed.The action scenes in “AKA It’s Called Whiskey” are similarly exciting because they allow viewers to watch characters making decisions without constantly second-guessing themselves. Jones and best friend Trish Walker brawl their way through a handful of tense, involving scenes that aren’t especially well-choreographed, but do effectively make viewers feel the impact of body blows without being gratuitously brutal. The scene where Walker takes on a cop that Kilgrave brainwashed is especially commendable for being rough enough without being excessive.AdvertisementThe gauntlet of Kilgrave victims that Jones has to fight her way through is similarly wearying, but also imaginative enough to keep you wondering how Jones will escape her next opponent. The layered, character-driven drama makes this the best of the initial bunch of episodes, and the visceral, earthy pleasures also make it the most memorable.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »