AdvertisementSupported byThe AffairBy Mike HaleNoah, Noah, Noah.Even in his moment of triumph, Noah Solloway will find a way to turn us against him. It was bad enough in the opening Helen chapter of this week’s episode of “The Affair,” when Helen and Whitney, on a trip to Williams — Helen and Noah’s alma mater — ran into Noah and it was clear he was oblivious to Whitney’s college tour. (That could be the fault of the nefarious publicist Eden, keeper of his calendar.) Helen’s point of view was actually largely sympathetic — she found herself happy to see her cheating husband, though maybe it was just the beer and the familiar surroundings.Things were far worse in his own chapter. At the campus for a reading of “Descent,” he was too preoccupied by his chances of winning a PEN/Faulkner award to much care when Alison (by video chat) showed him their newly furnished nursery. At the reading, he saw the young women in the audience as much more worshipful than they had appeared in Helen’s chapter, and when a dish named Daisy asked to have her book signed, his pickup line plumbed new depths of dorkiness and sleaziness: “Is there a green light at the end of your dock, Daisy?” (In one of the episode’s less believable turns, it worked — she slipped him her phone number, which Helen later confiscated.)But that was just the start! The gyre of egotism, insecurity and infidelity just kept widening. Sharing a pitcher with Helen at their favorite old haunt, he first blamed affirmative action for a Chinese-American writer’s PEN/Faulkner victory and then had to be stopped by Helen from confronting a critic who had panned “Descent” in the student newspaper. (The student newspaper!) Helen left when he insulted her father one too many times, after which Noah went back into the restaurant and took a swing at the critic, missing and collapsing in a heap against the bar. Back at his room, Eden showed him the video, already online — and already being spun by her as “bad boy” behavior — and Noah, naturally, pulled her into his room and tried to have sex with her. In perhaps the episode’s least credible sequence, she fell onto his bed, let him take off her top, then announced she wouldn’t mix business with pleasure and immediately left.When Noah wasn’t making a fool of himself, we saw Whitney declaring that she’d been talent-spotted by a professional photographer and, rather than go to college, she would go to New York and become a model. The purpose of this was to give Helen one more thing to berate herself for — when Noah pointed out that she was treating Whitney in the same controlling way her parents had treated her, she actually pounded her head against a table in remorse.There were revelations: Noah apologized for encouraging Helen to have an abortion during their college years; Helen apologized for being relieved when Noah’s first novel failed, hoping it would make him give up his dream and focus on her and the children. The arc of both chapters involved Helen being pulled back toward Noah after their accidental meeting and then walking away from him. Her take was melancholy — after they parted amicably, he called her back, but he was just asking for the cap he’d lent her. His was more bleak — after leaving the restaurant angry, Helen tells him to go home and sleep it off — “alone” — and climbs into a cab without responding to his “Helly Belly” and “Good seeing you again.”The most unusual thing about the episode was the increased space given to the murder mystery, now that we’re four episodes from the Season 2 finale. The future time line got four scenes, but no answers. Reluctantly buying into Gottlief’s attempt to frame Alison for Scotty Lockhart’s death, Helen went with Noah to watch their son Martin wrestle. Noah brought his and Alison’s baby, and when he dropped the baby’s pacifier, Helen grabbed it, later delivering it to Gottlief for the DNA test that he hopes will prove Scotty was the father.Let us know your thoughts about the latest episode of “The Affair.” Suggestions are welcome for a better come-on than “Is there a green light at the end of your dock?”Advertisement