AdvertisementSupported byHomelandBy Judith WarnerSeason 5, Episode 8 Recap: “All About Allison”This recap contains spoilers for Sunday’s episode of “Homeland.”“Oh my God. Allison.”And so, with a trembling lower lip, the traitor is named.I want to rewind just for a moment to congratulate myself (and the readers who agreed) for perceiving that Allison’s unflattering skirt length — the dowdiness of her suit on the day when General Youssef was blown up — was a “tell” indicating that something about her was amiss. Her clothing matters, as does her whole look, which has been substantially transformed since 2005, as Allison has morphed from a slightly gawky, Wisconsin-bred civil servant with ill-fitting safarilike outfits and Hannah Montana hair, to the sleekly elegant double agent who waits for Carrie in a picturesque German cafe this week, the understated chic of her clothes, grooming and accessories worthy of a Tod’s ad.We know she cares a whole lot about looks; witness the fact that the only time she even momentarily loses her cool is when she gets a look at Carrie’s atrocious wig. (“I’m in hiding. My life’s in danger,” Carrie says, which seems to make it O.K.) We also know that Allison likes to shop, and that she has a taste for expensive things. And though she’s not raking in the big bucks on a government salary, the fact that she has a cool $4 million lying in wait probably means she’s not worrying too much about feeding her 401(k).I enjoyed the back and forth of Carrie and Allison’s memories this week; I admired the clever and seamless way Carrie’s recollection ended while Allison’s ticked on, providing us at last with the story of her becoming a turncoat, a bit of plot and character development that I, at least, found highly believable.Human foibles — not grandiose, Machiavellian plans — are what drive Allison and trap her: She wants to rise, she wants to buy clothing in Milan, she wants above all to avoid going to jail. Perhaps that’s why she doesn’t have it in her (just yet, at least) to do Carrie in; “We used to be close,” she has told Ivan, and I get the feeling that Allison, like Carrie, doesn’t have a whole lot of female friends. Her “Watch your back, Carrie” seemed real to me.And yet, after all this well-spun cleverness, I was disappointed and a bit befuddled by the ease with which Carrie learns of Allison’s perfidy at the episode’s end. Time, we know, is running short; Dar Adal is on his way to grab Saul, and answers must be found fast. But still, for the key to the whole Season 5 mystery to reveal itself on a screen saver seemed a bit too much of a shortcut. And then, for the snake-of-all-trades Ahmed Nazari to be photographed in Allison’s fantasy bar in St. Lucia — at an angle that makes his location as eye-catchingly obvious as a painted yellow railing against a bright blue sea — was, well, a little bit too much.Was Ahmed drinking alcohol? Did he and Allison buy matching pukka shell necklaces and post photos on Facebook? And did they actually become romantically involved, even after he trapped her and played her right into the hands of the Russian S.V.R.?As a reader, David Ho, said in the comments for last week’s recap: “In a story the author is free to make up a lot of things, but no matter the time and place, human character and emotion need to ring true.”Moving on, here’s a funny tidbit: On Saturday afternoon, I happened to drift by a TV tuned to CNN, and heard a familiar voice talking about Syria. It turned out to belong to Peter Quinn, whose on-the-front-lines insights from Episode One of this season were judged by the show’s host and a guest expert to be right on target. Which makes it all the more a pity that, just when Berlin really, really needs him, Quinn is all bound up in duct tape, rattling away in a dirty truck, with a whole lot of nasty-looking chemicals at his feet, and a brand-new head wound, transfused Iraqi blood drying on the side of his neck. If anyone has ever needed a beach vacation and an umbrella drink, it’s this guy.Saul — Allison’s now highly suspect talk of “creature comforts” aside — isn’t much one for catching a break, either. Though Etai Luskin, the Israeli ambassador, has turned out to be a real friend, the state of Israel clearly doesn’t want the aggravation of the Saul-Dar show brought to its door. And while we’re on Dar: Remember his disdainful excuse-me’s to Allison earlier this season? It’s her turn now to serve up the mock-polite rebuke, as Dar grills her about Saul’s whereabouts. I wonder what that little turnaround means.Another funny detail: Ahmed, resisting Carrie’s friendly overtures as his soon-to-be handler, says:“Do you think I’m a child? You can tempt me with cake?” — a line whose oddness echoes the nauseating moment last season when Carrie seduced the man-child Aayan Ibrahim with an offer of “pastries.” It may be my imagination, but it seemed to me that Carrie flinched and even looked down shamefacedly at the word (which, I’m well aware, she’s almost a decade away from uttering). Still, it felt like foreshadowing, in some odd, time-warped sort of a way.Weirdly, too, I ended the show tonight feeling sympathy for Allison. Maybe it’s the striver in me that connects with the striver in her. How very many of us, after all, share that particular need — so masterfully exploited by Ivan with his soothing voice and suitcases full of cash — for, as he puts it, “something to take the edge off all of the uncertainty”?Or maybe I just liked her purse.Do you believe that Allison will let Carrie live if her old friend does honor her promise that “none of the hacked documents see the light of day ever again”? Can Carrie honor that promise? Does Allison have the power to keep Carrie alive? Will Allison herself make it out of this season alive? And more important still: How will Quinn become unbound and save Berlin?Do post your thoughts.Judith Warner, a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine, is the author, most recently, of “We’ve Got Issues: Children and Parents in the Age of Medication.”Advertisement