AdvertisementSupported byThe LeftoversBy Jen ChaneySome of the best television series of the past 25 years have given us at least one mind-scrambler episode: a slice of brazenly surreal storytelling that dazzles, confuses, amuses or — ideally, when all the pots on the weirdo stove are really cooking — accomplishes all three at the same time.“The Sopranos” did it in “Funhouse,” the episode peppered with Tony’s food-poison fever dreams. “Mad Men” did it when Roger Sterling took that freaky LSD trip in Season 5. “Twin Peaks” did it a bunch.This week, “The Leftovers” delivered a brain-shredding masterpiece set in the middle space between Earth and the permanent afterlife. Turns out that purgatory is a luxury hotel where the cable is constantly on the fritz and Patti Levin is running for president. It’s also the place where Kevin lands after drinking poison at the end of last week’s episode, and from which he eventually escapes, re-emerging from his grave as living proof of a Miracle miracle. The expletive that the ordinarily chaste Michael blurts out puts the perfect punctuation mark on this head trip, saying what many viewers have probably been thinking the entire time they were watching it.What a fantastic work of “what-the-hell?” TV this is, one that forces us, as Virgil instructs, not to think in straight lines. In every scene, you can feel how much fun the writers Damon Lindelof and Nick Cuse — son of Mr. Lindelof’s “Lost” collaborator Carlton Cuse — had while creating this oddball parallel universe that mixes tones, genres and references. During the fight scenes, “International Assassin” feels like an exciting and suspenseful spy drama. Collectively, it’s also a homage to ’70s cinema, with nods subtle and explicit to “The Godfather” (Kevin flat-out acknowledges that the gun-in-the-toilet routine was ripped from Francis Ford Coppola); “All the President’s Men” (that secret parking garage meeting with Virgil); and “A Clockwork Orange,” which uses Beethoven to underline its violence the same way this episode uses Verdi’s “Chorus of the Hebrew Slaves” to accent the brutal confusion of Kevin Garvey. Or is it Harvey? (It’s never been more clear that the all-white ensembles of the Guilty Remnant share something in common with the clothes donned by Stanley Kubrick’s droogs.)There’s also obvious connective tissue between this episode and “Lost,” and not just because it was written by a Lindelof and a Cuse. The fact that Kevin is thrust into the role of international assassin reminds me of “The Economist,” the Season 4 “Lost” episode in which Sayid, in a post-plane-crash future, works as an assassin for Benjamin Linus. It’s notable, too, that when prompted by that Epictetus quote on his room’s door — “Know, first, who you are, and then adorn yourself accordingly” — Kevin bypasses the police uniform in the closet, choosing the black-and-white suit that seals his assassin path. That ensemble looks awfully similar to what Jack Shephard wears in the opening moments of the “Lost” pilot.More important, though, this episode thrusts us into an alternate timeline that imagines its characters in completely different roles, something at which “Lost” always excelled. Hence, Holy Wayne is Patti Levin’s head of security. Gladys, the Guilty Remnant member who was kidnapped and stoned to death in Mapleton, is Patti’s right-hand woman who now orchestrates kidnapping and torture. (The best line of this episode belongs to Gladys, as she instructs Kevin about what he’s permitted to discuss with Patti during their meet-and-greet: “You are welcome to talk about anything you’d like for five minutes or so, as long as you don’t ask her about North Korea, gun control, abortion or Neil.”)And Patti is a split personality: a whack-a-doodle senator seeking this land’s highest office and a little girl mistreated by a man who initially appears to be her father but is ultimately unmasked as Neil, Patti’s awful ex-husband. Maybe TV has recently offered a more eloquently subtle illustration of the lasting scars of childhood abuse and how they remanifest in adult relationships. But I can’t think of one at the moment. The way little Patti notes that her daddy tells her she talks too much, especially given how much Patti has run her mouth in Kevin’s ear all season, is hilarious, until it completely breaks your heart.Perhaps the most important thing this episode does, though, is circle back to this season’s first mind-scrambler: the scene with the primitive pregnant woman and the earthquake. After Kevin realizes he must take younger Patti to the well — as instructed by his dad, who Skypes into Purgatory from Perth — little Patti reads from a brochure that explains how Native Americans built a well outside Jardin that serves as a conduit between the living and the spirit world. That well, of course, is located in the exact same spot where the primitive pregnant woman gave birth. That information and Kevin’s resurrection confirm that, yes, there are genuine miracles in Miracle, and a greater realm beyond the earthly one.But “International Assassin” does not simply declare God the winner in this season’s long-running faith vs. logic argument. Kevin’s journey involves clear elements of free will. He chooses which clothes to wear after reading that quote from Epictetus, a philosopher who believed in divine intervention as well as the human capacity to take control of certain situations. After he pushes little Patti down the well in Jardin — Justin Theroux is conflicted perfection in that scene, by the way — Kevin is only freed after he jumps in and provides comfort to Patti, as opposed to blindly following orders to kill. When Virgil’s guidance doesn’t work, Kevin elects to change course and follows his dad’s advice, which does exactly what was promised.Leftover ‘Leftovers’ Notes• Virgil is definitely dead for good. Not only did he make the mistake of drinking the water in limbo land, he also killed that bird flying around the lobby. Virgil tells Kevin he’s at the Hotel Purgatory to “atone”; perhaps the best way he can atone is by staying dead this time, and giving his son, John, some peace.• Mary Jamison makes an appearance in Purgatory, receiving congratulatory balloons that suggest she’s having a boy. I wasn’t sure what to make of this, but it implies that her and Matt’s baby will be born but that Mary, perhaps, will die in childbirth.Advertisement