AdvertisementSupported byThe Walking DeadBy Jeremy EgnerReminder: This recap (obviously) contains spoilers for this week’s episode of “The Walking Dead.”So those weren’t his guts after all.A few minutes into Sunday’s episode of “The Walking Dead” we learned, as many suspected, that actually wasn’t Glenn being consumed a few weeks ago. It was Nicholas, doing in death what he could never manage in life, which was to take one for the team.[Related: The Internet Reacts]The weeks since then, of course, have been filled with rampant speculation. Or at least it was until it wasn’t, for me anyway. I noted a couple of weeks ago that I stopped caring one way or the other, after the show extravagantly milked the mystery in the weakest episode of the season. That was the one that plumbed the depths of Maggie’s misery. It now seems clear that we were being made to feel some of that agonizing uncertainty, too, as well as, perhaps, the same pivot toward hope she experienced at the end of that episode. And while I’m all for narrative experimentation to elicit emotion, especially from long-running series, there’s a thin line between inventiveness and shenanigans.The whole Glenn Snow thing fell on the wrong side for me, for several reasons. For one thing, it’s simply implausible that with so many zombies descending upon him, not one would give him a nibble. I’m sure fresh innards are the Cronut of the walker diet but do you mean to tell me there wasn’t a single leg-man in the crowd? Glenn’s were just lying there, uncovered by Nicholas, ready for the feasting. (Side note: Happy Thanksgiving!)Thematically, “The Walking Dead” draws much of its emotional power from the fact that everyone is on the menu. The characters’ choices, musings and constant separations and reunions have more weight — and the suspenseful moments are that much more so — because the show is demonstrably willing to kill off nearly anyone. But if you can’t trust that the people it’s apparently killed are really dead, it undercuts its own greatest strength.Finally, there was the gimmickry of this particular stunt. Not just the initial misdirection and later moves like painting Glenn’s name on the death wall just so Maggie could erase it later, but the metatextual gamesmanship, like the show releasing a vague statement claiming “some version of Glenn” will eventually return and then removing Steven Yeun’s name from the credits for a few episodes. (It was back on Sunday.)I realize this is all largely subjective, but for me the bottom line when it comes to any plot device is: Does it enrich the story? Or distract from the story? I doubt I’m the only one who’s felt distracted for the past few episodes.Glenn had it tougher, of course, hanging out under the Dumpster until the swarm lost interest, with nothing to do except stare into Nicholas’s vacant face. (The walkers left that part intact, I guess just to mess with him.) His eventual reward was to babysit Enid, whose back story remains fuzzy but whose current story is pretty clearly about a surly teenager who’s no fun to be around. But hey, balloons.The rest of the episode explored the current state of relations between Rick and everyone else, and lit the fuse on next week’s first-half finale.Father Gabriel is still on the outs — Rick tore down his worship notices like a high school bully raging on LARP-club fliers. But he’s O.K. with Ron, for now. He even taught him how to shoot, which he might have regretted by the end of the episode, if he’d happened to notice Ron stalking Carl with a pistol full of stolen bullets. (Are we sure Olivia’s the best person to oversee the armory?)As for the Alexandrians, in general, Rick was starting to come around to the possibility that they could be something other than total liabilities. “Things moved slow here, and then things just started moving fast, too fast,” Tobin said, lending a hand at the wall. “But don’t give up on us.”But soon Spencer launched his facepalmus ex machina of an aborted wire crossing and Rick was back in a factional head space, castigating Tara for endangering herself in order to help “these people.” (She responded appropriately.)More interesting was the summit with Morgan, speaking of liabilities. We investigated his philosophy a few weeks back and at the time, concluded that his no-kill policy was a mostly unhelpful form of moral narcissism, one that jeopardized the safety of his cohorts. That got unpacked more explicitly on Sunday, as Rick, along with Carol and Michonne, challenged him and noted that the Wolves whom Morgan declined to kill then promptly tried to kill Rick.Why didn’t you kill me when I was out of my head? Morgan responded, continuing that it made sense to do so. But if you had, I wouldn’t have been able to save Daryl and Aaron later.“I did want to kill those men,” he said of the Wolves he spared. “I knew I could end it but I also know people can change, because everyone sitting here has.”I wasn’t exactly convinced but found this more nuanced version of Morgan’s argument to be more persuasive than previous ones, especially the results-based notion that embracing the “all life is precious” credo is what brought him back from the brink.Of course, he left out the part about his sociopathic hostage-patient, which undercuts his righteousness somewhat. That revelation had to wait until later, when he brought Denise in to play vet to the wounded Wolf. Carol saw, followed and confronted him, but any resolution to that and plenty other issues will have to wait until next week.Because no sooner had Glenn’s green balloons taken flight than the bell tower that had been ominously crumbling throughout the episode finally gave way, tumbling through the wall and kicking off what figures to be an explosive capper to the first half of Season 6.[Related: Looking Ahead to “The Walking Dead” Midseason Finale]Advertisement