AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckIt’s Singalong Sunday, with contemporary hits at the American Music Awards, a sequel to a Disney favorite and some rock ’n’ roll classics from the women who made the men sound great. Also, Trevor Noah flaunts his worldview. What’s On TV2015 AMERICAN MUSIC AWARDS 8 p.m. on ABC. Fans have voted, and the winners will be revealed at the Microsoft Theater in Los Angeles in a ceremony hosted by Jennifer Lopez. Taylor Swift leads the pack with six nominations; Ed Sheeran and the Weeknd follow with five each; and Sam Hunt, Nicki Minaj, Sam Smith, Meghan Trainor and Walk the Moon with three. Coldplay, Demi Lovato and Alanis Morisette appear, along with Celine Dion, who will sing Edith Piaf’s “Hymne à L’Amour” in French as a tribute to the recent attacks in Paris. E! will report live from the red carpet at 6. (Image: Jennifer Lopez)THE OPEN MIND 3:30 p.m. on PBS World. Annika Savill, the executive head of the United Nations Democracy Fund, talks about how to strengthen civil society.THE LION GUARD: RETURN OF THE ROAR (2015) 7 p.m. on Disney. Still feeling the love: “The Lion King” saga continues as Kion, the second of Simba and Nala’s cubs, becomes charged with preserving the Pride Lands. James Earl Jones and Ernie Sabella, who voice Mufasa and Pumbaa, are joined by Rob Lowe, Gabrielle Union and Sarah Hyland in this prelude to a television series debuting early next year. (Image: A scene from “The Lion Guard”)THE HUNTING GROUND (2015) 8 p.m. on CNN. The director Kirby Dick and the producer Amy Ziering interview victims of sexual assault at colleges around the country, who recount not only their rapes but also the often unsatisfactory responses of the institutions. The movie was recently criticized by 19 Harvard Law School professors, who said its portrayal is distorted. (Image: A scene)SAINTS & STRANGERS 9 p.m. on National Geographic. The Mayflower settlers and the first Thanksgiving, retold in English and an almost extinct American Indian language called Western Abenaki, with subtitles. “It’s a bold choice,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The New York Times. “But it’s strikingly appropriate, since in this story, the language barrier is everything.”TREVOR NOAH: LOST IN TRANSLATION 10 p.m. on Comedy Central. Mr. Noah, the new host of “The Daily Show,” flaunts his world view.What’s Streaming Now20 FEET FROM STARDOM (2013) on iTunes; also, 9 p.m. on OWN. The backup singers, most of them African-American women toiling in relative anonymity, who made Bruce Springsteen, Stevie Wonder, Mick Jagger and Sting sound great. A. O. Scott of The Times called it “a chronicle of exploitation and appropriation — in other words, the music business — and also a series of tales of professional commitment and artistic triumph.” (Image: A scene from “20 Feet From Stardom”)Advertisement