AdvertisementSupported byBy Roslyn SulcasPARIS — Stéphane Lissner swept briskly into his enormous glass-fronted office at the Bastille opera house, one ear clamped to his cellphone, talking at top speed while motioning at a visitor to sit down. “I tell you, it’s nonsense,” he said impatiently into his cell. “We are not taking them off. We are making them removable. It’s entirely different.”Mr. Lissner, 62, the director of the Paris Opera, was responding to yet another journalist’s questions about work being done on some of the boxes at the Palais Garnier, the 1875 landmark that is one of the Opera’s two theaters. A petition of 3,000 signatures, including that of a former Opera director, Hughes Gall, had been circulating, opposing the changes. Mr. Lissner put down the phone and smiled resignedly. “Always something,” he said.It was 9:45 a.m., just four days before Paris would endure a series of devastating terrorist attacks, some at cafes and restaurants a short walk from the Bastille. (After the attacks, Mr. Lissner, who had met with the directors of other cultural institutions, said it was important for theaters to reopen as quickly as possible: “We must continue as we are and not change our way of life.”)But on that Monday morning, it was business as usual at the Paris Opera, where the final performance of Schoenberg’s “Moses und Aron” was to take place that evening.Famously difficult, the atonal “Moses und Aron,” in a production by the Italian theater director Romeo Castellucci, marked the start of the 2015-16 season, the first programmed by Mr. Lissner. (When he arrived in August 2014, he inherited the final season programmed by his predecessor, Nicolas Joël.) It was a statement of intent, declaring Mr. Lissner’s interest in contemporary work and challenging the public.“I was interested in being able to offer this theme of exodus, because an opera house should be linked to the world in which we live,” he said. A sold-out house for the final performance suggested his gauntlet had been seized. But first, a problem.Philippe Jordan, the company’s music director and the conductor of “Moses,” had severe back pain. He might not be able to lead the orchestra that night, Mr. Lissner explained. “His deputy can do it, of course, but it’s such a difficult score, and I’m nervous that the singers will panic.”A few moments later, Mr. Lissner was threading his way across the Bastille’s enormous stage and through its labyrinthine passages to a rehearsal room. He welcomed the celebrated Finnish conductor Esa-Pekka Salonen, who had arrived for the first full orchestra rehearsal of Bartok’s “Bluebeard’s Castle,” which, paired with Poulenc’s “La Voix Humaine,” opens on Monday, Nov. 23. “It didn’t go very well when he was last at the Opera, 10 years ago,” Mr. Lissner whispered. “I hope it will be very different now.”A quick meeting in his office with his deputy director, Jean-Philippe Thiellay, to discuss the Garnier renovation brouhaha and a newspaper article about a union issue. Asked about handling the fractious unions, Mr. Lissner described it as an inextricable part of the job.“Because the Opera is a cultural institution, there is an irrational aspect, in the sense that it’s made up of artists and the demands are not always predictable,” he said.Mr. Lissner has plenty of experience in handling large, tricky institutions. First establishing his reputation at the Théâtre du Châtelet in Paris, he has led the Orchestre de Paris, the Aix-en-Provence festival and, most recently, the Teatro alla Scala in Milan.“He is not a revolutionary, but he always tries to innovate,” said Manuel Brug, the music critic and editor at the German newspaper Die Welt. “He really tries to make the institution fresher and more open to a younger generation.”Theater, not music, was Mr. Lissner’s first love; his career began at 17 when he opened his own black box theater after high school. “I saw Marguerite Duras’s ‘The Lover’ when I was 15, in a small, modern theater with almost no décor,” he said. “It was honest, there was no artifice or manipulation of my feelings. I came home and said, ‘I’m going to be a theater director.’ I’ve looked for that minimalism and simplicity ever since.”A meeting with 10 members of the communications team. Topics include recent box-office figures, the percentages of tickets sold to people under 25 and to subscribers, web traffic on social media sites and the Opera’s new digital platform, “Troisième Scene.”“What can we do about those people who have signed up for youth tickets and aren’t getting them?” Mr. Lissner asked, referring to the yearlong program of preview performances, oversubscribed at 10 euros a seat. “We mustn’t let them lose faith.”After lunch with the director of the Le Monde festival, Mr. Lissner and members of his team headed to the Ateliers Berthier, where the Opera’s sets and costumes are stored. The building also holds a stage-sized rehearsal space where, today, there were full run-throughs of “Bluebeard” and “La Voix Humaine.” The Polish director Krzysztof Warlikowski sat chewing his nails next to Mr. Salonen and the production team as the singers played their taxing roles. Afterward, Mr. Lissner beamed and complimented Mr. Warlikowski, whose anxious expression relaxed. Barbara Hannigan, the Canadian soprano who is the lone performer in “La Voix Humaine,” threw herself on a couch that is part of the set. “It’s intense!” she exclaimed.Back in his office, Mr. Lissner spoke of the criticism he had drawn for not knowing enough about opera, particularly after a television interview in February in which he failed to identify several arias.“Of course, ideally I’d be a marvelous musician, be up to date with the ongoing evolution of theater in Europe, know new art, video and performance work as well as dance,” he said. “To be a director of an opera today, or a big theater, you cannot be a specialist in a narrow field. That’s finished. It’s important to be courageous, curious and open.”His phone rang. Mr. Jordan was still unsure whether he would be able to conduct that night. “I’d better call Marius,” Mr. Lissner said, referring to Mr. Jordan’s assistant, Marius Stieghorst.Dario Lopérfido, the director of the Teatro Colón in Buenos Aires, arrived for a meeting. They discussed, in English, potential co-productions for the 2018-19 season. After Mr. Lopérfido left, Mr. Lissner said he always comes back to theater in his programming choices: “I have rarely hired opera directors. I like the fragile, artisanal quality of theater.”Mr. Jordan called again. “I can’t make the decision for you,” Mr. Lissner told him. “Come in. You can decide at 7:20 if you like, and I’ll make the announcement.”Mr. Lissner appeared before the curtain and announced Mr. Jordan was indisposed. There were groans from the audience, but when the curtain descended after the 100-minute performance, applause erupted from the orchestra pit and the audience rose to its feet. Mr. Lissner slipped backstage and congratulated a clearly relieved Mr. Stieghorst and the jubilant singers, who were coated in the slick black ink that is poured over the stage during the course of the opera.Earlier in the day, Mr. Lissner had recounted a long-ago meeting with the choreographer William Forsythe, whose company he had invited to become resident at the Théâtre du Châtelet: “I said to him, ‘Let’s start with something accessible.’ And he said, ‘No, we must do the opposite.’ That has influenced my whole professional life.”Advertisement