By JON PARELESNOV. 18, 2015
BACK IN TIMEJudith Hill has the grit of vintage soul and gospel in her voice, and her producer — the hands-on funk historian named Prince — revels in it on her official debut album, “Back in Time” (NPG). Ms. Hill has sung backup for Michael Jackson and many others, and appeared in the documentary “20 Feet from Stardom”; she was also a contestant on “The Voice” and provided an album’s worth of songs for the soundtrack of Spike Lee’s 2012 film, “Red Hook Summer.” The songs on “Back in Time” are all by Ms. Hill, who sings about tenacity, partying, the ups and downs of love and, in the album’s opening song, race relations and police brutality. Backing her up, Prince and the New Power Generation sound like they’re having sheer fun — sinewy, in-the-pocket fun, whether they’re playing snappy funk for “Wild Tonight” or going bluesy and inspirational on “Cry, Cry, Cry.” Flesh and fingers drive the music, not programming. And as prominent as Prince is on these songs, they clearly belong to Ms. Hill.SHHH!!!!Really, your player is working fine. It’s the music on Shmu’s album “SHHH!!!!” (GTZ) that’s gone bonkers: looped, sped up, chopped up, fuzzed up, glitched up, stuttered, racing toward somewhere post-human. Shmu is the studio experiment of Sam Chown, who plays drums and sings in the Austin, Tex., duo Zorch, which is nearly as frenetic as Shmu. Like Animal Collective, Shmu explores what it means to be cybernetically indefatigable with a human component: giving it his physical all — he’s bashing every part of his drum kit at hyperspeed — and then using computers to fracture and repeat at whim. There are pop refrains inside the songs, repeated vocal lines that provide tiny toeholds as the songs hurtle by. The key song on the album arrives near the end: “Sensory Glitch,” which has a guitar loop and a refrain that states “Feeling a change without knowing I’ve changed” and another one later that says “changes she’s come through,” while a looped backup vocal offers “feeling, feeling.” Humans feel changes; machines rush ahead. The album ends with the 13-minute “Harmonic,” starting out physical — bass riff, drum counter-rhythm, guitar chords — and turning into an instrumental that’s physically impossible, artificial and ecstatic.AMERICAN MANThe Yawpers, a three-man band from Denver, can be folky, but not for long. The songs on “American Man” (Bloodshot), the band’s second album, are built on roots-rock basics: picking, strumming, foot-stomping beats and plenty of slide guitar (plus an occasional mandolin). Nate Cook, the band’s lead singer and rhythm guitarist, has a well-scraped voice that often begins a song sounding wearily sincere. He has things to say about the moral struggles behind everyday travails, about “walking the line between what I want and what’s rightfully mine.” But he gets riled up fast, working up to a growly shout as Noah Shomberg’s drums push harder and Jesse Parmet’s slide guitar gets more frantic and more distorted. Some songs follow that path from folk to electric blues to something near punk; some start out rowdy and get even rowdier. Every escalation, pause and lunge does its job.THE YOYOUMETÚ TRILOGYAbraham Gomez-Delgado, the songwriter who leads Zemog El Gallo Bueno, is one of Latin music’s truest oddballs. His rhythm section, his voice and his sense of melody often draw on his Puerto Rican and Peruvian heritage, along with the rest of the Caribbean. But elsewhere, electric guitars aren’t shy about distortion and horns bring the angularity of jazz, sometimes turning the songs polytonal. And his lyrics free-associate with thoughts of family, love, politics, science and cyberspace. Since Zemog’s previous album, in 2009, Mr. Gomez-Delgado has battled depression, invented an instrument — the eje, which lets one player simulate an entire Latin rhythm section — and thought he lost an entire album to a malfunctioning hard drive. “The YoYouMeTú Trilogy” (Afinque) couples the lost album, which was digitally rescued (Vol. 1), with new band recordings that are considerably more skewed (Vol. 2: “Jugamos With Humanos”). “Sometimes the logical path is pathological,” one song observes.ELAENIAThere’s a stealthy grace to the way Sam Shepherd’s recording project, Floating Points, subtly yet continuously wanders from idiom to idiom on its debut album, “Elaenia” (Luaka Bop). Mr. Shepherd has a Ph.D. in neuroscience; he also does D.J. sets as Floating Points. At various moments, his own music is pulsing analog-synthesizer Minimalism, or chamber music for string ensemble, or a bossa nova with a wordless vocal, or shimmering clusters of sustained electric-piano tones, or slow-building instrumental rock, or glimpses of jazz. There are melodic passages and stretches that explore pointillistic rhythm and repetition. But the music doesn’t flaunt its eclecticism. It comes across as thoughtful and curious, not a patchwork but a progression, calmly but purposefully tracing the way one sound or pattern suggests another and then another: a perpetual search, still unresolved as the album ends.A version of this article appears in print on November 22, 2015, on Page AR20 of the New York edition with the headline: Soul and Gospel Grit, Caribbean Strains and Denver Roots Rock.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.