AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair Macaulay“The Nutcracker,” though such a familiar fixture in the calendar, is among the most layered of all works of art. Yes, it contains kitsch and cuteness and adorability. Yes, it’s surrounded by merchandising. Even so, this ballet is larger, stranger, more moving than all of that — and more unknowable. There are mysteries at its heart that don’t vanish and wonders that don’t diminish.Much of the layering derives from E. T. A. Hoffmann’s original 1816 German story “Nussknacker und Mausekönig” (“Nutcracker and Mouse King”). Its narrative is like a Russian nesting doll: It houses another story, which in turn houses another.Hoffmann’s story was adapted, lightened and popularized by the elder Alexandre Dumas, whose 1844 French adaptation “L’Histoire d’une casse-noisette” (“The Tale of a Nutcracker”) became the basis of the Russian two-act ballet of “The Nutcracker,” first staged in St. Petersburg in 1892. Since then, there have been innumerable other versions, especially in America.Five years ago, I undertook a Nutcracker marathon around the United States (28 productions in 12 states); and I’ve made Nutcracker mini-marathons since. Why? And how can I stand it? Inevitably, people do inquire.One answer is that the narrative itself is different in each production. (Most of the choreography changes, too.) This week in New York brings both “George Balanchine’s ‘The Nutcracker’” at New York City Ballet, celebrating with classicism and innocence, and, at the opposite end of the spectrum, the sexed-up burlesque of “Nutcracker Rouge” with Company XIV. December will bring other local productions, among them Mark Morris’s “The Hard Nut” and “The Yorkville Nutcracker.” With every new production — I’ve seen maybe 50 over the years — I sit and watch with the same question: How will it end this time?“Nutcracker” narratives tend to fall into three main categories. In traditional ones, the young heroine (named Clara in some after Dumas’s heroine, Marie in others after Hoffmann’s) joins the young Nutcracker Prince; he, thanks to her bravery in the battle with the Mouse King, has shed his Nutcracker form. Together they voyage to realms of snow and sweets where ballet is dominant. When they reach the Realm of Sweets, they’re welcomed by its monarch, the Sugar Plum Fairy — who, when she dances, becomes the ballet’s pinnacle, its transcendent revelation of the sublime. (Some critics of the original production called her the Electric Fairy; her radiance matched the turning-on of electric lights during special czarist events.)But even traditional “Nutcrackers” tend to choose between two endings. The cuter of the two — in which the young heroine realizes she’s been dreaming and is safe back at home — is not quite satisfying in musical or dramatic terms. The ballet ends with an echo of the travel music that began Act II; and the more judicious ending shows Clara/Marie and the Nutcracker Prince leaving Candyland, together, on the next leg of the journey, to places unknown. The disconcerting implication that she may never see her mother again is both heartbreaking and right.The second main trend of “Nutcracker” stagings derives from Soviet Russia. Here, it’s the young heroine (sometimes called Masha) who, played by an adult and gaining maturity before our eyes, delivers the climactic Sugar Plum numbers with the young ex-Nutcracker. Because she was a good girl, her reward is romantic love, on a heroic scale; so “Nutcracker” becomes yet another ballet love story.Then there are the host of alternative “Nutcrackers,” usually trying to deviate from the ballet’s customary innocence. (These include “The Slutcracker,” “The Butt-Cracker Suite” and “Nutcracker Rouge.”) Many add sexy naughtiness; most end up considerably more childish than the more standard versions.Yet every “Nutcracker” really is an alternative one. No staging follows the full scenario of the 1892 St. Petersburg original. Some otherwise traditional ones are set in San Francisco or New London or New York or Nashville. Plenty try to use more of Hoffmann’s story than the Russian prototype.The best reason for choreographers to reimagine “The Nutcracker” is also the main reason I revisit the ballet: its music. Tchaikovsky feasted on all the layerings and contrasts that the ballet offered him; his score is a cornucopia of color, rhythm, scale, melody. In the famous overture, the high, small, short, quick notes create a sound world of childhood enchantment — but there’s a section where the rhythmic accentuation of the pizzicato under the main melody suddenly turns syncopated: a wonderfully disorienting effect. Twenty minutes later, the magical ascent of the Christmas tree produces a slow surge of utterly dissimilar invention: a colossal, awe-inspiring crescendo.At the zenith of his powers, Tchaikovsky was flexing his muscles, showing just how consummate his art had become. No one production can ever show how much is going on in this music; he seems always to be showing other levels. And listening to it is never the full experience; this score is the very stuff of theater.Sometimes dance is not its best answer. Perhaps the most overwhelming music in the ballet comes in Act I, when the scenery changes from the indoor world to a faraway land, outdoor and snow-clad. Tchaikovsky never meant this change to be danced to — but it’s so rapturous that most choreographers can’t resist. Usually it becomes some kind of pas de deux.Only the version by George Balanchine — the choreographer most famous for ballets that are all dance and no story — has this scene pass with no dancing. In his version, the world onstage changes before our eyes; magically the Nutcracker is metamorphosed into a boy prince. And — while snow falls — there’s an extraordinary recognition scene between him and the young heroine, after which, hand-in-hand, they walk ceremoniously offstage into the unknown. They’re just children, but they’ve come a long way. The aspects of heroism in their actions make this one of the great scenes in world drama.The Balanchine “Nutcracker,” made in 1954 for New York City Ballet and danced each year by the company, has its imperfections. It cuts one number from the score, moves a second to a different place and interpolates a third from another ballet. Important details in the music are better honored in many other productions, from the Colorado Ballet to Mr. Morris’s “The Hard Nut.”Still, the Balanchine version, in most respects the one that best shows the ballet’s dimensions, is a growth industry. In 2015, it will be danced by City Ballet, the Royal Danish Ballet in Copenhagen and six other American companies. (Entering the lists for the first time on Friday, Nov. 27, is a Pacific Northwest Ballet production with new designs by Ian Falconer of “Olivia” the pig fame.)With its kaleidoscopic changes, Tchaikovsky’s score seems both abundant and perfect. Yet many versions of it are played around the world; Balanchine’s is by no means alone in adding, cutting and moving numbers, and most Russian productions have used post-Tchaikovsky editions with changed orchestration.Before the St. Petersburg ballet production, Tchaikovsky, in concerts, conducted an earlier version of the score. This contained at least two items that were cut for St. Petersburg, as well as a more surreal and Hoffmannesque entrance for the magician Drosselmeyer. There has never been a scholarly edition of the score; if we live to hear one, we will have more “Nutcracker” surprises in store.The greatest mysteries, however, remain in the music we already know. What does the Sugar Plum’s adagio express? We can say it’s about the sublimity of a perfect being; we can say its huge, cascading scales are liturgical, Tchaikovsky’s requiem for his beloved sister (who died while he was preparing the ballet); it contains both glory and tragedy. Different stagings have taken me into different layers. As much for its audiences as for its central characters, “The Nutcracker” is a journey into revelation.Advertisement