
Snapshot By                     
 KATHRYN SHATTUCK
 
NOV. 17, 2015
“Nobody gets into comedy because they feel like they’re cool and funny,” said Noël Wells, who was named class clown in her Texas kindergarten. “If they do, they’re megalomaniacs.”Yet critics say that Ms. Wells — who exhibited no psychological disorders in a phone call from Los Angeles — is the coolest, funniest thing going in the year’s best new comedy, Aziz Ansari’s “Master of None” on Netflix. We first meet Rachel — Ms. Wells’s no-nonsense music publicist and maybe girlfriend to Mr. Ansari’s antic Dev — when a broken condom sends them scurrying for a Plan B pill. After a season as a featured player on “Saturday Night Live,” you might say that “Master” is her own Plan B. “I don’t think there was any particular reason why it ended; it was just a complicated time,” she said of the decision not to renew her “S.N.L.” contract. “But I definitely knew when I didn’t come back that it was going to be O.K., even though I was heartbroken.”With a Comedy Central series underway with her real boyfriend, Flint Wainess, things are definitely O.K. “The reviews have been just so insane,” Ms. Wells, 28, said of “Master.” “I’ve been joking that I might start my own backlash just to keep myself on my toes.” Here are excerpts from the conversation.Q. How’d you end up on “Master of None”?A. I had met with [Aziz and his team] when they were about to start writing the show. I thought that the meeting went terribly and that I would never see them again. So when I got the audition three months later, I thought, well, I have nothing to lose.AdvertisementWhat’s it like working with Aziz?Aziz’s mind is a machine, and he’s super super funny, and I really enjoyed riffing with him. He could eviscerate anybody. He can take an idea to its most absurd extreme until he wins. But I think I won a lot.What appealed about the show?I’m a progressive person, very liberal. I have this thing in my head where I’m going to change the world, but with comedy. This is the kind of show that is coming from Aziz’s perspective, but what’s interesting is that instead of having a very righteous take on everything, he’s eager to explore the issues from other people’s points of view.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Whose idea was sex on the chairs?[Laughs.] That was his idea. I feel like having sex on a chair is a very complicated thing.You graduated from the University of Texas, headed to Los Angeles and three years later were on “S.N.L.”AdvertisementI auditioned for “S.N.L.” two years before I got on the show. And I remember the first time thinking, I know for sure I’m not going to get this. But I had this feeling that I would be back. [Starts to cry.] The whole situation is kind of a bummer how it turned out, but I have to be proud of myself.You did memorable impressions. Your favorite? Holly Hunter. I feel like if I had a spirit animal it would be Holly Hunter.Tell me about your series.What if Larry David was dating another Larry David? I was selling it by telling them all the things I’ve done, and they were like, ‘But you seem like such a cute, nice girl.’ And I was like, ‘Oh my God, give me a show, and I’ll show you.’A version of this article appears in print on November 22, 2015, on Page AR6 of the New York edition with the headline: Heartbreak, Then a Backup Plan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »