
Fargo By                     
SCOTT TOBIAS

NOV. 23, 2015
“This family deserves the ground.”So says Simone Gerhardt mere moments after Rye and Otto are laid to rest on the family estate. And this just after Bear spits at the mention of Simone’s father, muttering darkly about a third hole in the ground for Dodd.“Have some respect,” chides Floyd. “My lion didn’t raise that boy to be killed by small-time muscle.” But we know that to be completely untrue. Otto did raise Dodd to be killed by small-time muscle. He did instill the savagery and venality that brought the Gerhardts to power and which now accounts for their bloody demise. There was always rot in the foundation — it just took the Kansas City mob to pry open the floorboards and finally expose it.The tragedy of Simone Gerhardt is that she never had a choice. Her life was over before Bear ended it, and was probably over before it even began. She seemed at first like a femme fatale, a pleasure-seeker and mischief-maker, playing both sides to get what she wanted. But her motives were much less sophisticated: She wanted her father dead. Sleeping with a powerful enemy seemed like the best way to get that accomplished. We don’t know precisely what Dodd did to Simone to lead her to this point, but we’ve seen enough to imagine a long history of abuse — certainly physical and psychological, and likely sexual. Her cocaine habit, in retrospect, now seems less like a wild thing having fun than a damaged child numbing the pain. What happens to her is unfair, because it follows a script she had little part in writing.The awkwardly titled “Did You Do This? No, You Did It!” plows through a lot of narrative business, but it coheres around the theme of family values, with Simone’s demise at the heart of it. For much of the season, the soft-spoken Bear has seemed like the one redeemable figure in the Gerhardt family, quietly steering his son away from violence while submitting to his mother’s plan to compromise with Kansas City. But this episode reveals him as someone who’s more interested in closing ranks and protecting the Gerhardt family than questioning its mission or its values.AdvertisementDodd undermines Bear’s plans for Charlie by sending him on a failed quest to kill the “Butcher of Luverne,” but his bigger crime is disrespecting the Gerhardt hierarchy with Otto out of commission. Mom is in charge, whether Dodd likes it or not. And Simone should be calling Dodd “Dad,” whether she likes it or not. That’s protocol.AdvertisementYet Bear is exposed as a terrible hypocrite, with more in common with his brother than he would care to admit. He goes out of his way to keep anyone from knowing that Dodd has been kidnapped, to the point that he won’t even take the call from his brother’s abductor. (“Take a message,” he grumbles.) He’s acting as a free agent, too, and he wants Dodd dead just as much as Simone does. Still, it’s Bear who leads his niece into the woods for betraying the family, all while conceding that “none of us are family anymore.” Simone doesn’t know that Bear has also trusted a third party to take Dodd out of the picture, but we do, and it adds a note of bitter irony to her execution. In the end, they shared a common goal. She just trusted the wrong guys to carry it out.The episode contrasts the implosion of the Gerhardt family with an affirmation of the Solversons, whose essential decency will ensure its long-term survival, despite the cruel vicissitudes of fate. Betsy Solverson is not going to survive cancer like John McCain survived the thumbscrews of the Hanoi Hilton, but she’s in the process of making peace with that reality. She tells Karl Weathers, a.k.a. “the King of Breakfast,” to look after Lou and Molly when she’s gone and gives consent for her husband to remarry. (Just as long as it’s not Rhonda Knutsen.) Betsy is touchingly aware of the narrow dimensions of her life (“John McCain was a fighter pilot. I live in a starter home in Minnesota and dream of having chickens one day”), but we know from “Fargo,” the movie and the TV show, that the modest comforts of home can be sublime. It’s a cold and dangerous world outside. The Solversons aspire to live in peace, and keep the front door unlocked.At the same time, though, the insularity of the Upper Midwest doesn’t give Lou, Hank and local law enforcement as much distance from the Gerhardts as they’d like. They want to end the war that’s broken out on their territory, but the only way to keep the peace is to choose sides.Floyd wants a blanket deal for helping the police dismantle the Kansas City syndicate and the authorities oblige, tacitly conceding that they don’t have the resources to do the job themselves. The terms of their agreement are exceptionally favorable to Floyd, who secures a free pass for the family’s bygone transgressions (“What’s the point of the deal if it doesn’t cover murder?”), and the oh-so-slight smile that creeps across Floyd’s face signals her victory in the negotiations. Having Mike Milligan’s troops dissolve out of the frame as Floyd comes to terms with the police is a masterstroke — she’s totally outmaneuvered him, at least for the time being. The Upper Midwest of “Fargo” is a country unto itself and it doesn’t take kindly to interlopers. The Gerhardts are citizens and the Solverson men, good as they are, will move to protect them to fend off invasion. Anything to keep those doors unlocked.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.• Nick Offerman has been the MVP of the last two episodes. Karl’s zeal for breakfast food will delight “Parks and Recreation” fans, but just like Ron Swanson, his manly-man persona makes his tender moments that much more affecting. The awkward hug he offers Betsy after her big speech is so beautiful, because he’s not the type to give hugs freely.• Simone: “If I’m going to the noose, I’m going. But I’m done lying down for men.” This season has been about women who attempt to assert themselves in a man’s world, often with dire consequences. Simone gets the noose, but it’s a meaningful statement. These are tragedies that men have set in motion.• Floyd’s hard perspective on death in the family is fascinating. She’s not crippled by grief. She’s a homestead matriarch of a much older school, a time when it “used to be 10 born, two survived.” Hank is haunted by shooting a man through the teeth in Vichy France; Floyd is unmoved.• With Kansas City’s grip loosening, the bosses finally bring race into their sour assessment of Mike Milligan’s performance. When Mike and the remaining Kitchen brother lay waste to “The Undertaker” and his henchman, it’s weirdly heartening to know his bosses will see just how competent he is.Advertisement• The Coen Brothers references were a little out of control tonight. Three more covers of songs used in Coen films (“Just Dropped in (To See What Condition My Condition Was In)” from “The Big Lebowski”; “Danny Boy” from “Miller’s Crossing”; and “O Death” from “O Brother, Where Art Thou”), plus a nod to “The Big Lebowski” in the dialogue, when Mike utters the phrase “Sometimes … there’s a man.”I’m sure there’s plenty more, but overall, the references are a distraction. Lifting the core themes and look of the Fargoverse is one thing, but the show needlessly crosses the fan fiction line on occasion.• Exchange of the night, when Karl claims the Solversons’ couch because of back problems, leaving Sonny to curl up on the carpet: “What’s wrong with your back?”“It hurts when I sleep on the floor.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »