AdvertisementSupported byJessica JonesBy Simon AbramsAny forward momentum that the previous episode gave to the show’s Kilgrave-vs.-Jones plot is lost in “A.K.A. 99 Friends,” a pedestrian investigation-of-the-week episode that only laterally expands Jones’s story.Our main character’s paranoia makes it impossible for her to focus on her work. She becomes obsessed with the idea that she’s being watched, a suspicion that’s ultimately confirmed when she discovers why the obnoxious client Audrey Eastman really paid for her services.Subplots featuring a survivor’s group for Kilgrave’s victims, and a thorny, not-quite-romantic relationship between Trish Walker and Will Simpson, the cop who almost killed her, are relatively more involving. But this episode’s big revelations feel underwhelming since they only confirm the truism that being paranoid doesn’t necessarily mean they’re not out to get you.Jones suspects Eastman, a wealthy socialite who claims she needs photographic proof that her husband is cheating on her, is a Kilgrave dupe. But Eastman isn’t that type of villain. Jones watches her client like a hawk, but never gets the gotcha moment she wants, not even when she catches Eastman shooting up mannequins in an empty warehouse. Jones’s suspicions sort of pay off when she discovers that Eastman is lying to her, though not in the way Jones suspected. Eastman is out to avenge her dead mother, a victim of the Chitauri invasion from the first “Avengers” film. This angers Jones, but it doesn’t sting like her discovery of the photographer who snaps photos of her for Kilgrave.This hour doesn’t throw references to the Marvel universe into the mix with the same ease that “Daredevil” did, with its comparatively well-integrated “Avengers” allusions. In that show, viewers got the sense that everybody had superheroes on the brain, whether they were suspicious or fearful of guys like Thor and the Hulk.By contrast, the only other time that characters have mentioned mistrusting superheroes is in Episode 3, when Hogarth inexplicably claims Hope’s brainwashing defense will be hard to swallow. (Aliens, a giant id monster and a Norse god make sense … but not brainwashing?) So when Eastman turns out to have “Avengers”-related events on the brain, the significance of that revelation is negligible.Thankfully, Will and Trish’s story saves this from being a totally forgettable episode. Will’s admission of guilt makes his obsession with Trish’s well-being that much more compelling. He admits to Jones that he’s never felt so powerless as he did while under Kilgrave’s control, and she reassures him that he didn’t hurt Trish: “You’re still you.” That selfish conversation would be insufferable if we didn’t see how terrified Trish is of Will. But while Trish’s fresh wounds suggest that a romantic partnership with Will should be impossible, the scene where the two talk about childhood toys while seated on opposite sides of Trish’s apartment door makes you want to believe she can both forgive and fall for the man who recently assaulted her.It was also gratifying to see a more open acknowledgment of Jones’s self-serving motive for wanting to help Hope: guilt. Will admits that he feels bad about Trish, and therefore wants to protect her after Jones admitted something similar in Episode 3. Jones indirectly suggested that she’s using Hope as a means of taking care of herself when she told Trish that Kilgrave will be listening to Hope talk on Trish’s show “and thinking about me.”Secretly thinking about yourself when you’re thinking about other people isn’t the worst crime. But that kind of cover narcissism is a fact that most people are incapable of admitting about themselves on a good day. By highlighting that common behavior, “Jessica Jones” sets itself apart from other relatively simplistic superhero shows.Advertisement