The singer Xavier Naidoo will not represent Germany in the Eurovision Song Contest in 2016, it was announced this weekend.Late last week, the radio station Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR) named Mr. Naidoo, a major star, Germany’s 2016 Eurovision contestant. (Each country that participates in the contest sends one musical act to the finale.) The station quickly faced a backlash over accusations that Mr. Naidoo holds homophobic and extreme right-wing beliefs.Several incidents have contributed to Mr. Naidoo’s political reputation. In 2012, Mr. Naidoo and the rapper Kool Savas released a hidden track on an album with lyrics that seem to equate homosexuals with pedophiles. In 2014, Mr. Naidoo spoke at a “Storming of the Reichstag” protest in Berlin, held by the Reichsbürger, a group whose beliefs center around a conviction that the current Federal Republic of Germany places false boundaries around a more expansive German nation. Speaking to a small audience that the newspaper Die Zeit said included “neo-Nazis, anti-Semites, conspiracy theorists” and others, Mr. Naidoo was quoted as saying, “I have no idea who’s here, for me it’s about love.” In several public appearances, Mr. Naidoo has reiterated his belief that modern-day Germany is an “occupied” country.Mr. Naidoo, who is German, comes from a diverse background, and has family roots in South Africa and India.In a statement published in English on Eurovision’s website, Thomas Schreiber, an entertainment coordinator for ARD, the nationwide network that oversees NDR, said that the controversy over the singer’s choice had surprised the organization. “Xavier Naidoo is a brilliant singer who is, according to my own opinion, neither racist nor homophobe,” and added that “the ongoing discussion about Naidoo could harm the image of the Eurovision Song Contest. This is why Naidoo will not represent Germany.”Countries often hold a public vote to determine who will appear in the song contest, but NDR staff members this year made the decision without consulting the public. Last year’s German contestant, Ann Sophie, came in last place, with zero points.After the announcement, Mr. Naidoo posted on his official Facebook account that he accepted the decision. “My passion for music and my commitment to love, freedom, tolerance and coexistence is unbroken,” he wrote in German.NDR is in the process of choosing who will replace Mr. Naidoo, a spokesman for the organization said in an email, declining to comment further.