Most headlines about music sales lately have had to do with Adele. But this week another act has arrived on the charts with a big splash: Justin Bieber.Completing a comeback arc that has included Jack Ü’s summer smash “Where Are Ü Now” and a seemingly endless series of contrite public appearances, Mr. Bieber opened at No. 1 on the Billboard album chart with “Purpose” (RBMG/Def Jam), which sold 522,000 copies and had a remarkable 100 million streams in the United States, according to Nielsen data released Monday.It is the sixth time that Mr. Bieber, 21, has held the top spot on the chart, and the album’s success exceeded industry expectations. “Purpose” sold more copies as a CD or download than any other album has so far this year — although that record is about to be smashed by Adele’s “25,” which came out on Friday and is expected to sail to the biggest opening week in decades.But Mr. Bieber also succeeded in an arena in which Adele is not competing at all: streaming. On Spotify alone, songs from “Purpose” racked up 205 million streams around the world, including 77 million in the United States, both records for weekly streams on that service. On Monday afternoon, seven of the top 10 songs on Spotify in the United States were by Mr. Bieber, including No. 1, “Sorry.” (Adele’s “Hello,” however, remains the No. 1 single on Billboard’s Hot 100 chart for a fourth week.)This week’s album chart had been predicted as a tight race between “Purpose” and One Direction’s “Made in the A.M.” (Syco/Columbia), which opened at No. 2 by a wide margin but also performed far better than many other No. 1 records have this year. “Made in the A.M.,” One Direction’s first since the departure of Zayn Malik, sold 402,000 copies and had 50 million streams.Three more new albums filled out the rest of the Top 5 this week. The rapper Logic’s “Incredible True Story” (Visionary/Def Jam) opened at No. 3, Jeezy’s “Church in These Streets” (CTE/Def Jam) started at No. 4, and “I’m Comin’ Over” (RCA Nashville) by the country singer Chris Young is No. 5. Chris Stapleton’s “Traveller” (Mercury Nashville), the top album for the last two weeks, fell to No. 6.A version of this article appears in print on 11/24/2015, on page C4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Before Adele, Bieber Rules the Album Chart.