By ALASTAIR MACAULAYOCT. 6, 2015
This week is good for crossing dance borders as well as hopping among New York City’s ZIP codes. If, for example, you love the ballerina Tiler Peck or Indian dance, you need to see them in more places than one. This week is cup-floweth-over for dance in the city: The abundance feels profligate.Tiler PeckMs. Peck dances both with her home company, New York City Ballet, at the David H. Koch Theater and at Fall for Dance at City Center. On Sunday, she performs with both.At City Ballet, she’ll dance one of the most taxingly brilliant of all ballerina roles, the “Theme and Variations” finale of “Tschaikovsky Suite No. 3” with its ultra-exposed classicism, often at top speed (on Tuesday and Sunday), and the lead in Myles Thatcher’s new “Polaris” (Thursday and Friday), in which her role is that of a viewer who sometimes joins a changing group that she steadily observes. (Ballet is far more frequently about the male gaze.) On Saturday and Sunday at Fall For Dance, Ms. Peck joins forces with the great clown/actor Bill Irwin in the New York premiere of “Time It Was/116,” a marvelous sketch first seen in August at the Vail International Dance Festival.Indian DanceFrom Tuesday through Thursday, Aparna Ramaswamy dances at the Joyce Theater, and on Thursday and Friday, Nrityagram (whose many visits to New York and consistent beauty have made it the city’s most beloved Indian dance troupe) performs at Fall For Dance. Ms. Ramaswamy is a very fine exponent of the Bharatanatyam idiom of southeastern India; on this occasion she delivers her “They Rose at Dawn.” Nrityagram, which on tour usually consists of just the superlative dance duo of Surupa Sen and Bijayini Satpathy, exemplifies the Odissi idiom of the eastern state of Odisha, formerly known as Orissa; the ensemble performs the American premiere of “Shivashtakam (An Ode to Shiva),” choreographed by Ms. Sen. Each production has live music; the Carnatic ensemble that accompanies Ms. Ramaswamy has an especially strong reputation.AdvertisementJennie SomogyiOn Sunday afternoon at City Ballet, the Balanchine ballets “Tschaikovsky Suite No 3” and “Liebeslieder Walzer” are to be presented in reverse order from how they were earlier this season. That is so Sunday’s program can end with the farewell performance of Jennie Somogyi in “Liebeslieder” after 21 years as a company member. Although she’s the company’s longest-serving current member and one of its most redoubtable technicians, too few of today’s dancegoers are familiar with her artistry: her career has been interrupted by injuries that sidelined her for long periods. Even so, nobody at City Ballet today has approached her standard in, to name only one role, Sanguinic in “The Four Temperaments.” Many of her finest roles were ones in which she succeeded the sublime Kyra Nichols; her poignantly romantic part in “Liebeslieder” (originating with Violette Verdy) is among them.Michelle DorranceLast week there were many smiles of happy surprise when it was announced that the tap dancer and choreographer Michelle Dorrance had been named a MacArthur Fellow, a recipient of the so-called genius grant for “breathing new life into a uniquely American art form.” This week (Thursday and Friday), she presents a world premiere at Fall for Dance. Ms. Dorrance is only 36, but her work has been making people happy for years, and “new life” is a very fair description of her influence on the genre. The new piece, called “Myelination,” is a Fall For Dance commission; the timing neatly demonstrates just how central to the nation’s dance life this annual program has become.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.PremieresThe sheer quantity of dance premieres at this time of year is staggering. Ms. Dorrance’s premiere on Thursday coincides with one at City Ballet by the Danish (and British-based) choreographer Kim Brandstrup, who first emerged in the 1980s. This work, set to Debussy’s “Jeux,” joins a program of four other works that had their world premieres at last week’s fall gala (Mr. Thatcher’s “Polaris,” Robert Binet’s “The Blue of Distance,” Troy Schumacher’s “Common Ground” and Justin Peck’s “New Blood – all pieces of real merit). The same night brings the world premiere of Jonah Bokaer’s site-specific “Triple Echo” at the Onassis Cultural Center, set to live original music by the Greek composer Stavros Gasparatos.On Friday at the Richard B. Fisher Center at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., American Ballet Theater gives the world premiere of “After You,” the latest creation for this company by Mark Morris, who first choreographed for the company in 1988; it’s to Hummel’s Piano Septet No 2 in C (“Military”) and comes to New York City later in the month.Saturday brings the New York premiere of “Easy Win” in Dance Heginbotham’s two-day season at the Joyce Theater. This dance, whose world premiere I much enjoyed in August at the Vail Festival, is to a commissioned score by pianist Ethan Iverson, who is literally central to the live performance.A Balanchine Quintuple BillCity Ballet, with its singularly large treasury of Balanchine ballets as well as almost invariably the greatest number of world premieres of any ballet troupe, has the world’s richest repertory. Two of this week’s programs are all-Balanchine; and five enter the company’s repertory for the first time in Saturday’s bounteous program (matinee and evening). They range from two 1940s classics, “Concerto Barocco” and “The Four Temperaments,” to two 1960s ballets set to Stravinsky, “Monumentum pro Gesualdo” and “Movements for Piano and Orchestra,” with the 1959 Webern “Episodes,” choreographed with Martha Graham, rounding off the program.The evening includes some of City Ballet’s most striking current performances: “Barocco” is led by Teresa Reichlen, Sara Mearns and Russell Janzen; the lustrous Ms. Mearns (often in two ballets a night this season) also dances the “Ricercare” section of “Episodes.” In April, a different section of “Episodes” was the vehicle for Ms. Somogyi’s return to City Ballet after a two-year injury; the authority of her dancing made it seem that all the others had been the absentees, so it’s good to report that she reprises this role at these Saturday performances.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.