AdvertisementSupported byThe Walking DeadBy Jeremy EgnerSignificant spoilers follow for Sunday’s episode of “The Walking Dead.”“The Walking Dead” dispensed with the defining mystery of Season 6 (so far) on Sunday, revealing that the fan favorite Glenn Rhee, last seen roughly a month ago surrounded by zombies and apparently being eaten, did in fact survive. On Sunday, viewers learned that Glenn’s body had been covered by that of Nicholas, another character, and he was able to scoot to safety under a Dumpster.[Related: ‘The Walking Dead’ Reveals Glenn’s Fate]The revelation put to rest thousands of words of online speculation, which ran the gamut from avowing Glenn’s demise, to explaining all the reasons it couldn’t be true to actually crawling under a Dumpster to prove it could be done.So what did the Internet think of his survival? It depends on the source.Soon after the big reveal, which came in the opening moments of Sunday’s episode, Twitter lit up with fans celebrating Glenn’s re-emergence with hosannas, photo tributes and the occasional GIF:Among the tweeters was Steven Yeun, the actor who plays Glenn, and who has been keeping a low profile since the character’s apparent death. “A much delayed thank you for all the Glenn love,” he wrote. He also thanked the show’s fans in an interstitial segment during AMC’s “Into the Badlands.” The cable channel added the new martial arts series to its Sunday schedule earlier this month, placing it between “The Walking Dead” and “Talking Dead” and clearly hoping to draft off the franchise’s tremendous popularity.Critics and writers, however, were less charmed by Glenn’s emergence from beneath the Dumpster. (Including this one.) For many, the contrivance of the is-he-or-isn’t-he plot device insulted fans and subverted the show’s life-or-death stakes. Among the disenchanted:“In creating false suspense and undermining the life-or-death stakes it thrives on, ‘The Walking Dead’ just lost at its own game.” — The Daily Beast“How did ‘The Walking Dead’ ’s attempted plot twist go so wrong?” — Vanity Fair“The revelation is, perhaps, the dumbest thing the show has ever done.” — Cleveland.com“Glenn under the Dumpster will join Bobby in the shower, the cork on the island of ‘Lost,’ and the ‘St. Elsewhere’ snow globe in slide shows of far-fetched TV plot twists.” — The Wall Street JournalMr. Yeun and Scott M. Gimple, the “Walking Dead” show runner, appeared on “Talking Dead” to discuss Glenn’s return. Mr. Gimple described the twist as a way to place viewers more deeply inside the heads and hearts of the show’s characters.“I think it was important to do a story this year about uncertainty and that the audience would share that uncertainty that the characters had in Episode 5,” Mr. Gimple said. “Maggie didn’t know what happened to Glenn and I wanted the audience to be exactly where she was, to feel the exact same way.”Whatever your feelings about the dramatic value of the Glenn twist, the hoopla surrounding it suggests that Mr. Gimple inarguably met at least one of his goals for the move.“It’s a dream come true to provide a collective experience,” he said Sunday night. “To provide something that was around when I was a kid, which is you could talk to a stranger about TV.”So now that Glenn’s settled, let’s briefly survey where things stand going into the midseason finale:• The good news about the walker swarm promised at the end of Sunday’s episode, when a collapsing bell tower took down Alexandria’s wall, is it should create enough space for Glenn to make a heroic return. The bad news is, well, the walker swarm. Also, I suppose technically it’s possible that Glenn did get bitten and is just trying to make it back to Maggie one last time. But it seems unlikely.• Daryl, Sasha and Abraham are returning with a big fuel truck and a rocket launcher, one or both of which should be useful in the Battle of Alexandria. I’m guessing the “Help” we heard on the walkie-talkie last week is coming from someone inside, mid-attack.• Ron is stalking Carl with his newfound shooting skills and pilfered ammo, an act that has seemed probable for a while and then inevitable after Carl’s patronizing advice during Sunday night’s shooting lesson. While I don’t think anything will happen to Carl — and don’t necessarily want it to — I wouldn’t mind if Ron were to cartoonishly shoot that hat off his head the way someone might in an old western. Related: How many surreptitious raids on the armory are going to happen before someone moves Olivia into a different job?• Morgan is likely to have a choice to make: toe his “all life is precious” line or get his hands bloody, perhaps at the expense of his adopted Wolf. If you don’t, Morgan, Carol will. Someone’s going to have to take that guy out, lest he become a murderous free radical during the walker frenzy. Denise, the shaky medic Morgan brought in to help his patient, seems like she could be collateral damage.• Rosita the machete instructor is ready to slice and dice all comers, but her students are somewhat less so, especially Eugene, who had the line of the night on Sunday: “I’m a weapons novice holding a significant blade here, and there are people in my vicinity with open-toed shoes.”• Jessie already showed some moxie a couple weeks ago, and now delicate little Sam may have to follow suit. “The only thing that keeps you from becoming a monster is killing,” Carol said. Forget “Fear the Walking Dead” — I wish AMC would make a spinoff that consisted solely of Carol messing with Sam’s head for 45 minutes each week.• Maggie is pregnant, and Aaron seems to have signed on as her protector. He’s fine but is only one man — Maggie is definitely vulnerable. The show wouldn’t kill off a pregnant woman would it?• That said, you have to expect someone notable to get it next week. Any predictions?Advertisement