Despite having to cancel the remainder of its European tour because of the terror attacks in Paris, the Foo Fighters have released a new five-song EP on schedule. A countdown clock on the band’s website hit zero at midnight on Monday, revealing a free download of “Saint Cecilia,” along with a link to donate to victims of the violence in Paris. “Let me begin with a preface to a letter I wrote a few weeks ago from my hotel room in Berlin,” Dave Grohl, the Foo Fighters’ frontman, wrote in an accompanying note. “I felt the need to write this foreword in light of the heartbreaking tragedies of Nov. 13th, as this project has now taken on an entirely different tone. As has everything, it seems…”“Now, there is a new, hopeful intention that, even in the smallest way, perhaps these songs can bring a little light into this sometimes dark world,” he continued. “To remind us that music is life, and that hope and healing go hand in hand with song. That much can never be taken away.”He added: “To all who were affected by the atrocities in Paris, loved ones and friends, our hearts go out to you and your families. We will return and celebrate life and love with you once again someday with our music. As it should be done.”In the open letter, Mr. Grohl detailed the band’s process for its 2014 album and HBO show, “Sonic Highways” — “our rag-tag crew of ne’er-do-wells was stumbling from city to city, coast to coast, taking in every drop (!) of 100 proof American culture we could squeeze,” he wrote — and added that the final performances of that tour inspired the Foo Fighters to record a few more songs.“Saint Cecilia” was made on a whim in the St. Cecilia Hotel (“named after the patroness saint of music”) in Austin, Tex., where the band stayed this fall while headlining the Austin City Limits festival. The EP marks what may be an extended break for the band, whose shows in Italy and France were canceled this month. “In light of this senseless violence, the closing of borders, and international mourning, we can’t continue right now,” the band said in a statement on Nov. 14.In his letter to fans about the “Saint Cecilia” EP, Mr. Grohl was more hopeful. “Maybe these songs are the breadcrumbs that will help us find our way back when it’s time,” he wrote. “We could use a nice wander through the woods right about now.”