AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckMonday’s grab bag features the funny and the not so, with Eddie Murphy skewering Bill Cosby and corporate public relations firms diluting science with spin. And another intriguing British whodunit is available to stream.What to Watch on TVEDDIE MURPHY: THE MARK TWAIN PRIZE 9 p.m. on PBS. He said what? Last month Mr. Murphy, the 18th recipient of the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor, was honored at the Kennedy Center in Washington with this annual award named for “a fearless observer of society.” So he boldly dusted off an impression from his “Saturday Night Live” days and riffed on Bill Cosby, a previous recipient, in his acceptance speech. Tracy Morgan, Chris Rock, Trevor Noah, Dave Chappelle, Kathy Griffin and Arsenio Hall paid their respects. (Image: Mr. Murphy, center)HOME ALONE (1990) 7 p.m. on AMC. Kevin! The network celebrates this comedy’s 25th anniversary with back-to-back screenings. (Image: Macaulay Culkin, the film’s star)CRAZY EX-GIRLFRIEND 8 p.m. on CW. Dr. Phil helps Rebecca cope with news about Josh. In “Jane the Virgin,” at 9, Jane and Rafael interview babysitters, but their requirements are many. Maybe they should hire …SUPERGIRL 8 p.m. on CBS. … who in this episode protects National City from a string of bombings while babysitting Cat’s son.MERCHANTS OF DOUBT (2015) 8:20 p.m. on Starz Cinema. The director Robert Kenner adapts Naomi Oreskes and Erik M. Conway’s book, examining the history of corporate-financed public relations efforts to sow confusion and skepticism about scientific research, particularly climate change. Writing in The New York Times, A. O. Scott called the documentary “informative and infuriating,” adding that it “ought to remind us that the denial of climate change is hardly a joke.”3½ MINUTES, TEN BULLETS (2015) 9 p.m. on HBO. In November 2012, Michael Dunn, a white man, argued with Jordan Davis, a black teenager, about the loud music coming from his car at a Florida gas station. Then he fired 10 bullets, killing Mr. Davis, who was unarmed. The director Marc Silver unravels the case, for which Mr. Dunn is now serving a life sentence without the possibility of parole. “At the time of a fervent national debate on race and justice, part of what is impressive about ‘3½ Minutes,’” wrote Ben Kenigsberg in The Times, “is the cool temperature at which it is often served.” (Image: Lucia McBath, Mr. Davis’s mother)BLINDSPOT 10 p.m. on NBC. Get ready for a midseason cliffhanger as the team goes after some newly activated sleeper spies about to embark on an assassination spree.CASTLE 10 p.m. on ABC. It’s danger on the high seas when Castle and Beckett investigate the murder of a cruise ship entertainer.What’s StreamingMAYDAY on Acorn TV. A 14-year-old girl goes missing on her way to be a holiday queen, and suddenly a peaceful village is quaking at the evil that lurks within. Aidan Gillen, Sophie Okonedo, Peter Firth and Lesley Manville star in this British series likened to a supernatural “Broadchurch.”Advertisement