By BRIAN SEIBERTNOV. 22, 2015
The Paco Peña dance troupe, based in London, passes through New York about once every two years, usually for a one-night-only concert. For anyone with a taste for flamenco at its most exciting, that isn’t nearly enough.The show at Town Hall on Friday was typically extraordinary. As usual, Mr. Peña played a guitar solo early on, a fascinating amble through a musical garden of forking paths. At 73, he is still a great virtuoso, and the opposite of showy. For much of the program, he blended into the warm fellowship of his small ensemble of musicians and dancers, but his presence could always be felt.The dancer Yolanda Osuna Linares was new to me. She has drama and plasticity. With her formidable eyebrows, high-definition arms and especially her bladelike fingers, she draws you in. In a long-trained dress for her “Alegrías,” she whipped a fringed shawl into a whirling vortex.Male-female duets are rarely a strong suit of flamenco dance. The solo nature of the idiom seems to thwart romantic union. But the “Petenera” duet between Ms. Linares and Angel Muñoz used the play of attraction and repulsion to its advantage. The number was a kind of flamenco cousin to Roland Petit’s “Le Jeune Homme et la Mort” (“The Young Man and Death”), with Ms. Linares eventually pulling her black veil tightly over Mr. Muñoz’s head.The most absorbing duet of the night, though, was the “Farruca” between Mr. Muñoz and Mr. Peña. Their rapport was amazingly close, as Mr. Muñoz’s feet precisely matched the strumming of Mr. Peña’s fingers or one answered the other in quick conversation. Their playful exchange gained intensity by growing quieter and quieter, until it seemed that the entire audience was holding its breath.Mr. Muñoz’s solo “Solea” topped even that. Here was spontaneity and invention and surprise. At his most loose and casual, Mr. Muñoz would suddenly plunge into his fiercest and most complex dancing, nearly tripping over himself. Popping a shoulder or flexing his pectoral muscles on a musical accent, he made a spellbound crowd erupt in giggles. He went from one musician to the next, dancing for each in turn, celebrating each with his talent. May they all return soon.A version of this review appears in print on November 23, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Feet and Fingers in a Fiery Conversation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.