AdvertisementSupported byBy Siobhan BurkeA solar eclipse and a torrential downpour descended on the stage of the Howard Gilman Opera House at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Friday night. Those were among the natural phenomena digitally conjured in “Beyond Time,” a production by the Taiwanese dance and drumming company U-Theater that was having its American debut.The company’s 15 disciplined members are consummate multitaskers: dancers who drum and drummers who dance, creating music as they move. In their synchronized action, much of it rooted in Chinese martial arts, and their resounding percussion, with instruments ranging from delicate cymbals to thunderous taiko drums, their focus and precision run deep. According to the troupe’s website, the pronunciation of “U” echoes the Chinese word for excellence, and in clarity and uniformity, they undeniably excel.Yet “Beyond Time,” created by the group’s artistic director and founder Liu Ruo-yu and the music director Huang Chih-chun, suffers from that same uniformity, anodyne even at its most roiling, both choreographically and technologically. The seven sections, meant to explore “the relationship between ‘man’ and ‘universe,’” as a lofty program note explains, feature sleek video projections of the elements: hovering mist, aquatic ripples, a blinding white sun. Recorded chants and naturalistic sounds, like lapping waves, mingle with the tones and timbres of the live percussion. The directors seem intent on putting the audience in a meditative state, something not so easily induced.We can, however, observe the performers in what must be meditative for them, like the rapid spinning that opens and closes the show. At the beginning, a lone performer turns in place against a backdrop of pelting rain, ushering in the first of several rhythmic spectacles. In the final scene, after heavy golden gongs have lowered from the ceiling, the dancers escalate from slowly, deliberately striking them into a collective whirl, fueled by drummers along one side of the stage.The intermittent scenes bring small dramas and a medley of relationships between body and instrument. In one section, a clan of dancer-drummers in black taunt a warriorlike figure in white, who wields a wooden staff overhead. In another, rows of percussionists interweave like a drill team, with cylindrical drums cradled under their arms or hoisted onto their shoulders.“Beyond Time” delivers this all in a neat package, hardly fostering a sense of connection with anything larger than itself. For that, you needed only to step out of the theater and into the city at night.Advertisement