By ALASTAIR MACAULAYNOV. 22, 2015
When did dance audiences last see and hear a composer perform his own works with the revelatory mastery shown by Thomas Adès? Because the quadruple bill of his works “Thomas Adès: Concentric Paths — Movements in Music” came over the weekend to New York City Center, the mind flew to Stravinsky.It was at that same theater that Stravinsky conducted the historic world premiere of his “Orpheus” (1948) and other ballets of his. Mr. Adès’s music abounds in challenging constructions that make it (as Stravinsky’s can still be) hard on the unaccustomed ear. In Adès’s music, different parts of the orchestra often play in drastically dissimilar phrases and speeds. His performing, however, has a communicative force that immediately renders his scores exciting, fascinating, persuasive, sensuous.The Adès program — an exceptional venture — visited New York as part of the White Light Festival, from the Sadler’s Wells theater in London, where it was performed in 2014. Each of four Adès scores was accompanied by a dance by a different choreographer.The title “Concentric Paths” is the subtitle of Mr. Adès’s 2005 Violin Concerto, which here is the score for Wayne McGregor’s “Outlier” (2010), originally made for New York City Ballet. (That company’s women danced it on point. Here it was danced by the McGregor company Random Dance, whose women don’t; the difference, however, is unimportant.) Even though I admired the violin concerto in those earlier City Ballet performances, Mr. Adès’s effect on Friday — he conducted the Orchestra of St. Luke’s, with Thomas Gould playing solo violin beautifully — was transformative: more romantic, more modernist, more intense.That opened the program. It was followed by Karole Armitage’s “Life Story” (1999) (set to Mr. Adès’s cabaret-style cantata of that name, which employs a 1955 poem by Tennessee Williams); Alexander Whitley’s “The Grit in the Oyster” (using Mr. Adès’s 2001 piano quintet); and finally, Crystal Pite’s “Polaris” (taking its name from Mr. Adès’s 2010 music). Both “The Grit in the Oyster” and “Polaris,” new in 2014, were Sadler’s Wells commissions; on Friday, Ms. Armitage, Mr. Whitley and Ms. Pite joined the dancers onstage after their respective works.AdvertisementThe program was a superb tribute to Mr. Adès’s importance as a composer. Surely these four scores prove that far better than his opera “The Tempest” (2004), which is crippled by Meredith Oakes’s foolish libretto.AdvertisementYet do they suit dance? My answer is a tentative yes. They call, however, for choreographic musicality of a complexity far beyond anything shown in these four dances.The audience gave ovations to “Polaris” and Ms. Pite; anyone can see why. Beginning with a long sequence performed without music, this Canadian choreographer used massed forces (over 60 dancers, dressed in uniform black) and geometric formations that suggested now spiders, now constellations. We saw both running and interrupted running, with rushes suddenly stopping in place; we saw sculptural group formations that changed sequentially, as if it were movement passing along rows of dominoes. In some groupings the many performers presented their faces emphatically one way or another — an Expressionistic effect — as if trying to read a sign in the sky or asking the audience a question. Another recurrent image was that of the arms aiming downward and vibrating, like quivering pincers.This was strong if limited stuff. (The wave device was dreadfully overdone.) But, as the silent start led you to guess, it was seldom well coordinated with Mr. Adès’s music. This is intensely sensuous music. Its tranquil opening, for piano and harps, is ravishing in ways wholly at odds with Ms. Pite’s tense patterns. Later, with a brilliant obsessiveness that sometimes recalled Beethoven, it developed urgent two-note patterns (as had the piano quintet earlier in the evening). The more you listened, the less you saw reflected in the choreography.Still, the Pite dance was, relatively, the evening’s choreographic highlight. In “Life Story,” Anna Dennis (soprano) and Mr. Adès (piano) completely upstaged Ms. Armitage’s dull mock-Balanchine pas de deux, which was danced — none too impressively — by Ruka Hatua-Saar and Emily Wagner. The dramatic suspense of Ms. Dennis’s diction (calmly delivered over a very wide vocal span) and the alert drama of Mr. Adès’s playing became the sole events. “The Grit in the Oyster,” Mr. Whitley’s politely tepid dance trio, was no match for the marvelous difficulty of Mr. Adès’s writing — in which piano and strings are often on vividly different wavelengths, and in which the four string instruments alone maintain a wonderful density of interplay beyond anything in these dances.If only Mr. McGregor were gifted at the choreographer’s central task of sustaining movement for dancers, “Outlier” would be an impressive piece of dance theater. The various color schemes along the backdrop (by Mr. McGregor and Lucy Carter), lighting schemes (by Ms. Carter) and the general format of who dances when with whom are smartly picturesque (though seldom with any serious connection to the music’s dynamics or texture).A long quartet for one woman and three men changed its internal structure again and again. This would have been impressive — if only the dance consisted of much more than showy gimmickry. The use of hyperextension and head isolations soon palled. The Random dancers, poor substitutes for the City Ballet originals, seemed to be compensating with exaggeratedly Balanchine-type mannerisms (in particular, over-flourished hands).Some of Mr. Adès’s writing features a multiplicity of action that recalls some of the more intricate ensembles of Merce Cunningham. I doubt that even the most sophisticated and musical of today’s choreographers could equal it — but I’d certainly like to see them try. Music like this might shake the witty Mark Morris, for example, out of his penchant for excessive neatness. There is a theatricality in Mr. Adès’s music that calls for stage action. In this program, that theatricality was only to be seen in the movements of the composer and his fellow musicians.A version of this review appears in print on November 23, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Four Choreographers Answer Composer’s Call for Complexity.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.