AdvertisementSupported byBy Vivien SchweitzerHow a singer conveys the text is usually an integral part of a vocal performance, assuming the listener understands the words and story or can rely on subtitles. Deciphering unfamiliar lyrics when syllables are elongated and ornamented can be a challenge in any language: Subtitles are often provided even for English librettos.Since there were no program notes or translations for any of the obscure baroque arias sung in Italian by the countertenor Max Emanuel Cencic on Friday at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, discerning how he conveyed a particular mood or shaded a certain word with meaning became secondary to simply enjoying the sound of his gorgeous voice.Accompanied by the fresh-faced and dynamic period instrument ensemble Il Pomo D’Oro, led by Maxim Emelyanychev on harpsichord, Mr. Cencic offered selections by composers associated with Naples, including Domenico Sarro, Nicola Porpora, Leonardo Leo, Leonardo Vinci and Alessandro Scarlatti. (Some are featured on “Arie Napoletane,” Mr. Cencic’s recent CD.)Mr. Emelyanychev demonstrated his chops on Domenico Auletta’s Concerto in D for harpsichord and strings; the ensemble played with crisp, buoyant pulse throughout the evening. After the spirited performance of Scarlatti’s Sinfonia No. 7 in C that opened the concert, Mr. Cencic joined the group for “In questa mia tempesta” from Vinci’s “Eraclea,” a vehicle for his impressively clean coloratura, as was “Su la pendice” from Sarro’s “Didone abbandonata.”The honeyed timbre of his voice proved alluring throughout his wide range, as did his liquid, expressive phrasing. The descending trills unfolded elegantly in “Qual turbine che scende” from Porpora’s “Germanico in Germania,” although his delivery seemed to lack the fiery edge necessary for a vengeance aria whose title translates to “Like a storm that descends.” But Mr. Cencic imbued the second of his two encores — Johann Adolph Hasse’s “Vo disperato a morte” — with plenty of dramatic flair.Advertisement