By KATHRYN SHATTUCKOCT. 6, 2015
1:50 P.M. (Cinemax) LOVE & BASKETBALL (2000) Gina Prince-Bythewood (“Beyond the Lights”) made her directorial debut with this tale about Monica (Kyla Pratt as a girl and Sanaa Lathan as a teenager) and Quincy (Glenndon Chatman and Omar Epps), next-door neighbors and aspiring basketball players who let the game get in the way of their love. “There are moments in ‘Love and Basketball’ that are as evocative as a Sports Illustrated photo from a few years ago, of a boy standing next to his date, the homecoming queen, who is also the team’s place-kicker,” Elvis Mitchell wrote in The New York Times. “The edge between Monica and Quincy in their one-on-one games gives Mr. Epps something to play off.” But Ms. Lathan’s watchable no-nonsense turn — at once petulant and winsome — makes it her movie, he added, “and she shines.” (Image: Ms. Lathan and Mr. Epps.)8 P.M. (CUNY) SCIENCE & U! This women’s health episode presents new information on heart attacks, strokes, cancer, preventing hair loss during chemotherapy, and the harm of too much makeup.8 P.M. (Fox) GRANDFATHERED Gerald (Josh Peck) takes the family to the beach, but Jimmy (John Stamos) can’t resist the pool party nearby. In “The Grinder,” at 8:30, Dean (Rob Lowe) insists on following the Krantz victory with another big case, leading Stewart (Fred Savage) to use reverse psychology to stop him. Which backfires. And in “Scream Queens,” at 9, Chanel (Emma Roberts) devises yet another diabolical plan as Halloween approaches.8 P.M. (ABC) THE MUPPETS Nick Offerman mediates when Kermit can’t find it in his heart to tell Fozzie the truth. Christina Applegate is the guest on “Up Late With Miss Piggy.” And Liam Hemsworth gives Gonzo some online dating advice. In “Fresh Off the Boat,” at 8:30, Louis (Randall Park) plans a romantic anniversary celebration for Jessica (Constance Wu) — at a car dealership. Shaquille O’Neal appears here and in “Best Time Ever With Neil Patrick Harris,” at 10 on NBC.Advertisement8 P.M. (CW) THE FLASH Months after the Singularity attack, a guilt-racked Barry (Grant Gustin) decides to protect Central City on his own. Then the Atom Smasher (Adam Copeland) arrives. In “iZombie,” at 9, Liv (Rose McIver) munches on the brains of an old crank to glean some insight into her death and becomes none too likable herself.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (CBS) LIMITLESS Their romance fizzled when “Manhattan Love Story” became the first casualty of the 2014 fall season. So Jake McDorman and Analeigh Tipton are trying it again in this episode, in which Brian reconnects with an ex but worries that she might prefer his new self to his old.Advertisement11:15 P.M. (Encore) DELIVERANCE (1972) “Dueling Banjos” has rarely sounded so ominous. Four Atlanta businessmen (Jon Voight, Burt Reynolds, Ned Beatty and Ronny Cox) get in over their heads during an outdoor adventure in Georgia hill country in James Dickey’s screen adaptation of his novel, with lines like, “Sometimes you gotta lose yourself to find something.” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times, “If anybody said that to me — seriously — in the course of a canoe trip I think I’d get out and wade.”11:35 P.M. (NBC) THE TONIGHT SHOW STARRING JIMMY FALLON Lady Gaga is a guest, but Hailee Steinfeld is performing.What’s Streaming NowBEYOND THE LIGHTS (2014) To prepare for the role of Noni, a hip-hop vixen teetering on the divide between superstardom and destruction, Gugu Mbatha-Raw researched Rihanna and Beyoncé, went backstage at the Grammys, recorded with the producer The-Dream and learned to grind at Greystone Manor, the Los Angeles nightclub. So when it came time to dance, sing and swagger in this Gina Prince-Bythewood musical melodrama, Ms. Mbatha-Raw was ready. Nate Parker plays Kaz, the quietly debonair police officer and aspiring politician who helps her escape the manipulations of her “momager” (Minnie Driver), snip out her weave and trade explicit lyrics for the aching melodies of Nina Simone. “ ‘Beyond the Lights’ may be a fantasy — movies about love, like songs about love, tend to fall into that category — but it is an uncommonly smart and honest fantasy,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. (amazon.com, iTunes, netflix.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 6, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.