By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMNOV. 22, 2015
“The Wind in High Places” is a string quartet by John Luther Adams that uses only open strings and natural harmonics. Written in 2011 in memory of a friend and hiking companion, it evokes the glassy stillness of the Alaskan wilderness that for decades was Mr. Adams’s home and inspiration.I had heard, and admired, the work on a recording that the JACK Quartet released this year. But when I saw the same ensemble perform it live at Roulette in Brooklyn on Friday, another dimension revealed itself. Seeing the players produce a multitude of floating sounds merely by grazing the skin of a string so that given overtones rang out, it occurred to me that Mr. Adams had quietly slipped in an environmentalist message. At a time when so much is written about the importance of reducing our footprint on the earth, he had managed to compose a zero-fingerprint string quartet of startling complexity and beauty.Mr. Adams’s quartet was part of a fascinating concert presented by the American Music Project, a new nonprofit that was making its New York debut. The organization seeks to bolster the presence of American classical music on concert programs and commissions works, like the darkly seductive Clarinet Quintet by Geoffrey Gordon, which received its world premiere with the wonderful clarinetist Anthony McGill joining the JACK players. The program also included two very different mid-20th-century string quartets by John Cage and Earle Brown.Cage’s limpid “String Quartet in Four Parts,” written in 1950 before he turned to chance as a compositional process, formed the nexus of this wide-reaching program. With its feathery chords and tremulous close harmonies played without vibrato, it evokes both Renaissance music and folk songs even as it seems to point ahead to Minimalism and the politically charged Arte Povera movement of the 1960s.AdvertisementCage’s quartet is the product of tightly controlled compositional processes, yet came across as spacious and free in the JACK’s sensitive performance. Brown’s “String Quartet” from 1965, which includes elements of chance, sounded dense and coiled with tension. The players commanded an expressive arsenal of sounds, from the hoarse sustained drones that open and end the work’s single movement to thumping rubbery plucked notes and piercing bowed accents.Mr. Gordon’s Clarinet Quintet combines a similar zest for sonic experimentation with a four-movement structure built around thematic signposts — reiterations of an opening motif — that guide the listener through a colorful and atmospheric journey. That motif is built on accordionlike layered string chords from which the clarinet emerges almost coyly, with a veiled sound and sinewy flutter.AdvertisementAcross four movements, the interaction between clarinet and strings changes, with moments of bright commonality and others in which the warm, musky clarinet tone contrasts with the sharper and glossier one of the string quartet. In the second movement, small cells of players break away for a series of arresting duos and a trio that chart different interpersonal dynamics. The work ends softly on a languid low clarinet trill, which Mr. McGill played so quietly that the final notes were not so much heard as felt as gently pulsating airwaves.A version of this review appears in print on November 23, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Floating Freely in a Sublime Landscape.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.