By ALASTAIR MACAULAYNOV. 22, 2015
PHILADELPHIA — There are many dance styles around America that aren’t to be found in New York, from local brands of hip-hop to individual subsections of ballet — and this is good for the dance health of the whole nation. Recently, when Ballet Memphis came to the Joyce Theater in New York, the sheer non-New-York-ness of its choreography and dancing struck many observers. I like to think that around the country there are many other such companies that New York audiences never see.On Wednesday, the Philadelphia company BalletX celebrated its 10th anniversary with the world premiere of Nicolo Fonte’s “Beasts.” This company (which also recently visited the Joyce) is entirely committed to contemporary choreography. Though it’s Philadelphia’s second ballet company, it coexists usefully with the city’s older and more prestigious Pennsylvania Ballet: Matthew Neenan, who founded BalletX with Christine Cox, has also been resident choreographer of the senior company since 2007. Most of the Pennsylvania Ballet’s performances are on one side of Broad Street here; BalletX performs at the modern Wilma Theater across the street.Before curtain-rise, there was a short, funny and proud speech by Ms. Cox, who is artistic and executive director. (The audience included both Angel Corella, artistic director of Pennsylvania Ballet, and Mr. Neenan.) Ms. Cox has good grounds for pride: In 10 years, BalletX has presented more than 50 world premieres, many other works by living choreographers, and collaborated with more than 200 artists (including dancers, choreographers, designers and artistic collaborators).Few companies can match such a record; and all the pieces I’ve seen by Mr. Neenan for BalletX exemplify the individuality and imagination that make this a valuable troupe. His pieces often have a quasi-narrative flair for evoking characters and societies, and are always keenly alive in their response to a wide range of music. The company’s 2016 productions will include an East Coast premiere of one Neenan piece, and world premieres by both him and Trey McIntyre; to me, these two men seem the finest American choreographers based outside New York.AdvertisementI’m sorry that “Beasts,” set to a collage of taped music ranging from Pete Townshend to Debussy, wasn’t up to much. It was, or tried to be, its own debate about nature (Part 1) and nurture (Part 2). The 10 dancers were primitive, naïve and sexual in the first half; sophisticated, worldly and murderous in the second. Alas, those sections connected to killings proved much more appealing than those about the joy of sex.“Beasts” nonetheless gave pleasure because of those 10 performers, who move with commitment and rich texture; theirs is fully three-dimensional dancing that you feel as you watch, and each had solo opportunities. Richard Villaverde had a solo in a black tutu that went on just long enough to stop any initial titters, and that showed just enough of his luscious fullness of motion to compel attention. Chloe Felesina, on point, had a femme-fatale number that ended with her calmly stifling two men to death: It could have been a mere cliché, but she swept through it with an easy power that made it a highlight.AdvertisementA male quintet about fluently conflicting impulses for camaraderie and killing recalled, in good ways, both the animals-in-white-tie male quartet in Paul Taylor’s “Cloven Kingdom” and the endearingly fatuous, self-contradictory dance for 12 men in Mark Morris’s “L’Allegro, il Penseroso ed il Moderato.” Zachary Kapeluck, the finest dancer in a fine ensemble, began and led the closing number with a quietly theatrical assurance that enchanted.A version of this review appears in print on November 23, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Offering New Steps and Stories With Pride.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.