By MARGALIT FOXNOV. 19, 2015
Seymour Lipkin, a pianist and conductor widely admired in both roles for his acute, deliberately unflashy musicianship, died on Nov. 16 in Blue Hill, Me. He was 88.His wife, Ellen Werner, confirmed his death.Mr. Lipkin came to wide public attention in 1948 when, at 20, he won first prize in the Rachmaninoff Fund Piano Contest, a nationwide competition held in New York. He went on to play on the world’s foremost recital stages and with the world’s most eminent orchestras.He interrupted that career for a life of conducting in the 1970s and ’80s, returning to the piano in the ’90s for a critically acclaimed second act. He was also a longtime faculty member of the Juilliard School in New York and the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia.As both pianist and conductor, reviewers agreed, Mr. Lipkin made music with a conspicuous absence of the dazzle, bathos and schmaltz that are the stock in trade of many instrumentalists.Advertisement“There is no blurring in Lipkin’s approach,” The Boston Globe wrote in 1996, reviewing a Beethoven recital. “The pianist plays with the structural clarity of an architect’s drawing; the drama comes from the interplay of musical ideas, not from emotional displays.”Throughout his work, Mr. Lipkin was praised by critics for his keen sensitivity — a “moral responsibility,” he called it — to the composer’s intent; his sculptural finesse in shaping a musical line; and his vast knowledge of the musical literature. He was often described as a Beethoven specialist, but his pianistic compass ranged from the Baroque era to the present day.Underpinning Mr. Lipkin’s music-making was his intense sense of communion with the works he performed. That communion was often rooted in deeply personal dialogues he held with the composers — exchanges that required only Mr. Lipkin to be present.In an interview with The Philadelphia Inquirer in 2012, he recounted one especially productive conversation:Beethoven: Lipkin! Make a sforzando here! [A sforzando — the word is cognate with “force” — entails playing a note with particular emphasis, no paltry request on the composer’s part.]Lipkin: Ludwig, I don’t feel like it!Beethoven: Shut up and do what I tell you!To his credit, and to the plaudits of critics, Mr. Lipkin generally did.AdvertisementSeymour Austen Lipkin was born in Detroit on May 14, 1927. His heart’s desire was to be a conductor, but he happened to labor under the onus of being a piano prodigy.At 11 he moved to Philadelphia to attend the Curtis Institute, boarding with a local family. In 1947 he earned a bachelor’s degree from Curtis, where his teachers included the renowned pianists Rudolf Serkin and Mieczyslaw Horszowski.“I always wanted to be a conductor rather than a pianist, ever since I was a small boy,” Mr. Lipkin told The New York Times in 1974. “But when I graduated, at about 20 or so, it wasn’t yet the day of the wunderkind conductor.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After winning the Rachmaninoff competition, where he bested the 19-year-old Gary Graffman, he appeared as a soloist with the Boston Symphony and the New York Philharmonic, and as a recitalist at Town Hall in Manhattan.Mr. Lipkin, who also studied conducting with Serge Koussevitzky at Tanglewood, served as an apprentice conductor to George Szell of the Cleveland Orchestra in the late 1940s. In the late ’50s he was an assistant conductor of the New York Philharmonic under Leonard Bernstein.In 1958, at the suitably advanced age of 30, Mr. Lipkin made his conducting debut, leading the New York City Opera in Bernstein’s “Trouble in Tahiti.”Reviewing the performance, The Times said, “It is not surprising that Mr. Lipkin displayed the utmost poise.”He was the music director of the Joffrey Ballet in the 1960s, and of the Long Island Symphony in the ’60s and ’70s, before returning to the piano.At his death he was artistic director of the Kneisel Hall Chamber Music Festival in Blue Hill, where he had a home. Mr. Lipkin, who also resided in Manhattan, taught over the years at the Manhattan School of Music, the New England Conservatory in Boston and Marymount College in Tarrytown, N.Y.AdvertisementMr. Lipkin’s first marriage, to Catherine Bing, ended in divorce. Besides Ms. Werner, whom he married in 2003, his survivors include a son, Jonathan, from his first marriage; three stepchildren, Daniel Walker, Benjamin Walker and Sarah Hodges; and five grandchildren and step-grandchildren.His recordings as a pianist include a widely admired set of the complete Beethoven sonatas, the complete sonatas and other works of Schubert, and Bernstein’s Symphony No. 2 (“The Age of Anxiety”) for piano and orchestra, with the composer conducting.Whether at the keyboard or on the podium, Mr. Lipkin’s career path seemed almost foreordained, as he described it in a 2011 interview with The Juilliard Journal, a publication of the conservatory.“I never considered anything else,” he said. “There was never any question about it, or thought that I would be, say, an economist, God forbid.”He added, “It’s probably very lucky for society that I didn’t become an economist.”A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2015, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Seymour Lipkin, 88, Pianist and Conductor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.