AdvertisementSupported byAsk a ShowrunnerBy Jen ChaneyOnce mostly anonymous, the producers who oversee top television series have sometimes become as well known as the actors who star in them. On occasion, The Times will pose questions from readers (and pose some of our own) to notable show runners, and post their responses.This week, Sarah Treem of Showtime’s “The Affair” discusses the show’s expansion from two to four points of view, Noah’s likability and his and Alison’s occasionally disturbing sex scenes. Previously: Noah Hawley of “Fargo.” Coming soon: Damon Lindelof of “The Leftovers.”Q. As prep began for season two, what steps did you take creatively to make sure the addition of two more perspectives remained fluid and did not become confusing or convoluted? — Jennifer Elmore, AtlantaA. Story-wise, it was the intention from the very beginning of season two. We had a big white board and we had columns going down. We had Alison, Noah, Helen, Cole and what we call the future present, which is the detective/lawyer story line. Then we had going across: episode one, episode two, episode three, all the way through 12. We looked at the season as kind of a whole puzzle, and we looked at the characters as individual pieces of the puzzle at any given time. So we basically broke the entire story, and then we figured out who was telling which part of it when, if that makes sense.In terms of production, it actually made our lives a little easier. Not every actor was in every location all the time. In season one it was all on Ruth [Wilson] and Dominic [West] the entire season. This year, because we divided it into four points of view, the actors got a chance to rest, which was good for everybody. It was good for them because they could prepare for upcoming episodes with more time, and it was good for us because we didn’t need to have everybody in the same location all the time.Q. When did you decide to expand to four points of view?A. Somewhere in the latter half of the first season, it just started to feel kind of organic. Maura [Tierney] and Josh [Jackson] were so good even in the limited points of view within which they operated in season one, and I felt, as a writer, kind of hungry to know more of their story. It just seemed right. After a full season in these two characters’ heads, we felt that we had kind of done it. When we came back to season two, we wanted to do something new.Television audiences have become so savvy and there’s so much out there to choose from that I, at least, am quite aware that you have to give your audience something new to come back to, season after season, in order to keep their interest. They expect to be challenged. So that’s how we thought of season two, as a new season with a new structure. We’re going to think of season three in the same way. (A third season has not been confirmed.)Q. So you might expand the points of view even further?A. No, not necessarily. But we might change some stuff up again.Q. Did you know from the beginning that you would tell the story in a nonlinear form? If not, at what point did you make that choice? What specific stories (books, movies, TV shows) that used nonlinear storytelling have impacted or interested you in some way? — Yolanda, MexicoA. Yes, I did know from the beginning that we were going to tell the story in a nonlinear form. In terms of storytelling that was influential, I mean obviously “Rashomon,” the movie, was influential. There are other books and movies that were highly influential but don’t necessarily employ a nonlinear storytelling device.I’ve been particularly influenced this year by the Elena Ferrante novels, the Neapolitan cycle. What I think is really fascinating about those novels is you’re highly aware as you’re reading them that you’re seeing the stories through the P.O.V. of Lenu, and that Lila has her own story that you’re kind of privy to, but also not. You become aware as you go further in the novels that Lenu’s perspective is deeply biased and heavily influenced by her insecurities. That’s always been the idea behind this kind of storytelling. That it’s not objective, and we don’t remember our lives as linear narratives. We remember pieces. We remember images.Q. Did you think that the audience would grow to care about Helen and Cole as much as they do? Especially Helen? I am thinking she was developed as this bratty trust fund baby but she is actually the most sympathetic character to me, with Cole a close second. What I find comedic is that Noah is pretty much the worst in all of the P.O.V.s presented. — Dcet, Baltimore A. The idea from the very beginning was that Helen and Cole were not to blame for the reasons that the two marriages had fallen apart.Those characters, as they were first written, were kind of archetypes. They were ideas in the heads of our main characters, so they saw their spouses a certain way and that’s how we began to treat their spouses. But then as I got to know them as a writer, I realized, of course, they aren’t perfect. It couldn’t be that Helen was just a perfect wife, and Cole was just a perfect husband. We had to end up messing them up as characters and I think part of what people respond to with Helen, and the reason she’s becoming more and more sympathetic, is because she has become more and more human as the series has gone on.Q. Do you look at what people are saying about the show online, in recaps or on social media, and gauge how they’re responding to the characters? Or do you purposely ignore that?A. No, of course I do. I’m actually really interested in the social media feedback because I feel like it’s coming directly from the viewers, and I’m less interested, honestly, in the critical feedback because I feel like critics have their own agendas and voices and that is their job. But I feel like the social media response is immediate, honest, emotional output that directly follows the viewing of the episodes. I really enjoy it and I learn from it.I think what’s really interesting about the way that people respond to characters on the show, and especially Noah — which I don’t think anybody’s necessarily talked about yet — is that with Alison, Helen and Cole there are external factors that help you understand their character choices. They have obstacles they are wrestling with that are outside of themselves. Alison is wrestling with her grief and that’s always going to contextualize the way that she sees the situation. Cole, you will find out, has also been wrestling with his grief. But more so, at least at this point, he’s been wrestling with the fact that he’s been left, and wrestling with his family. That is a big part of his life and how he responds to situations. Helen has the clearest external obstacles. She has her parents, she has her children, she has the fact that she’s been left. So her choices are very easy to understand because you understand what she’s reacting against.But Noah’s actually the only character, and this was purposeful, whose biggest conflict is internal. What I find interesting about that is that people are less forgiving of him and his choices. I think they can’t figure out why he’s doing what he’s doing. They can’t point to something outside the character that explains his actions. I find that really fascinating in terms of the way we think and understand ourselves. I think, for me as a writer, a lot of how I understand my own narrative has to do with what I’m wrestling with internally, and that’s probably why I write. But then, I think sometimes, for people who don’t spend their entire lives locked in their heads, the way they understand their own choices actually has more to do with external factors. People are always like, “You must hate Noah.” And I’m like, are you kidding? Noah is me. I love Noah. And, actually, I think the whole writers’ room feels that way. We are Noah’s biggest fans because he’s the character we most identify with.Q. This is an incredible show, but I am increasingly troubled by the sex scenes between Noah and Alison. It’s clear that the two of them don’t really connect deeply on this level and Noah seems to be oblivious to that fact. But the recent sex scene at the yoga retreat, when Noah clearly used sex as a tool for dominance, was awful. Alison didn’t say “no” but the ambivalence of the scene with respect to rape was disturbing. Do you see this as an issue and plan to address it somehow? — New territory, New YorkA. Was that sex scene about love? No. Was that sex scene about control? Yes.I think that basically one of the big issues in this season is Noah’s inability to separate his fantasy of Alison from the actual person that he’s in a relationship with. She has been so inextricably linked to his book, and she has been the “muse” for him. He said that really early on in the season: “You’ll stay here and you’ll be my muse.” He wasn’t even able to write this best-selling book until he met her and she unleashed this side of him. So he’s so deeply dependent on this idea, this fantasy of her, that he needs to control in order to keep producing, and to keep being this person that he’s always wanted to be. Is that going to be sustainable? No, of course not. Is their relationship going to suffer the impact of that fantasy versus the reality? Yes, and that’s something that we have been planning since the very beginning.We were very excited about that sex scene when we created it because we did think that it was incredibly disturbing. And we wanted it to be. We wanted it to be something that people would talk about. We also thought it was the kind of sex that does happen in couples sometimes. Not all sex in couples is loving sex. Sometimes sex in couples is dominant and angry sex. It depends on the couple, of course. But this is a couple that has always, from the very beginning, been turned on by transgressive behavior and somewhat violent sex. So that’s part of their D.N.A.Q. When you were talking about that scene in the writers’ room, did you think of it as a rape or just dominant sex, as you described it?A. We didn’t think of it as a rape. We meant for Alison to be complicit in it, and turned on by it. In the way that the sex scene ended up getting shot, I think that her complicity is less obvious and that she herself is more ambivalent about what’s happening, and doesn’t necessarily want it to be happening. So honestly, it did turn into something that looked more like a rape. I guess, I, as the creator, thought that was interesting and thought that we should go with it.Q. I would love to see perceptions from the kids’ points of view. Kids are affected by affairs as much as those involved, and what they do to cope and in response should not be ignored. I know this because as a teenager I experienced it, and I have no happy tales to tell regarding it. Would you consider adding their point of view? Especially Whitney because her involvement with Scotty is a key factor in Noah’s situation. — Cara C., Long Island, N.Y.A. Yes, of course, but there’s no immediate plan for it. I think the children’s P.O.V. of what went down between their parents is fascinating. Perhaps in subsequent seasons, it will feel like a natural outgrowth of what we’ve done so far. But it was always supposed to be about these four characters so we don’t have any immediate plans for bringing in the kids. They’re really good actors, though.Q. What’s your favorite show on TV now, and why?A. That is such a hard question because I don’t watch any television. In this job you spend so much time looking at screens and monitors, I don’t really want to come home at night and look at another one. I assume I’ll get really caught up after everything is done, after the show is over. Then I’ll catch up on ten years of culture.I really like John Oliver’s show. That’s the only show I watch: “Let’s watch John Oliver and see what’s happening in the world and what we should be irate about.”Advertisement