Compiled by JON PARELESNOV. 24, 2015
Adele’s “25” is easily shaping up to be the best-selling album of 2015: Billboard reports that Adele Adkins’s third album has broken the record for single-week sales set by  ‘N Sync’s “No Strings Attached” in March 2000. With at least 2,433,000 copies of the album sold in just over three days, “25” is also set to more than double the first-week sales of some of the biggest albums of the past 15 years, including Taylor Swift’s “1989,” the Beatles’ “1” and Eminem’s “The Eminem Show.”“It sounds really cheesy,” Adele told The New York Times chief pop music critic Jon Pareles when he visited her in London for an in-depth interview. “But if my music can comfort anyone and make them feel like, ‘I’m not the only one, someone else feels how I feel,’ then that’s my job done.” She also offered details about seven of the songs on “25.” These are edited excerpts from that conversation.“Hello”“That’s reaching out to who I used to be when I was younger. And I’m curious to know if our 7-year-old selves, if they met us when we were adults, and we were like, ‘Well this is what we ended up doing,’ if we’d be satisfied. I love what I do, and I feel really, really lucky, but maybe our 7-year-old selves wouldn’t. Maybe they’d be, ‘That sounds boring. I want to be a nurse.’“It’s a hello to myself, hello to all my friends, hello to my ex-boyfriend, hello to who I’m going to be in 10 years, hello to my kid in 10 years, hello to my boyfriend in 10 years — to my fans, to everyone.Advertisement“That line, ‘It’s so typical of me to talk about myself, I’m sorry’ — that’s my favorite lyric I’ve ever written.”“Send My Love (to Your New Lover)” “I’ve had that guitar bass line since I was, like, 15. I used to cover ‘Wonderful World’ doing that riff. It sings over it really well. With [the producers] Max Martin and Shellback, we knocked that out in a day.”Advertisement“I Miss You”“Whenever it’s on, I always get hypnotized by the beat. That’s just about the general intimacy of a relationship. It sounds very sexual, but it’s not only sexual. It’s about every aspect of intimacy in a relationship. It’s just wanting everything! I want the good, the bad, the warts and all. I want the amazing.”“When We Were Young”“At rehearsal, when I was singing ‘When We Were Young,’ I suddenly had a vision of my best friend putting makeup on me for the first time when I was 17. I had never had that vision when I wrote the song. Every time a new memory comes back in one of my songs for myself, I love it. It’s like remembering your life through song.”“Water Under the Bridge”“It’s about making a relationship work, about wanting to make a relationship work. All relationships are up and down, and that’s part of a relationship — the tapestry of it and the muddiness of it. That’s part of it, and that’s as thrilling for me as the kicks I used to get out of a relationship falling apart. Overcoming those things — I think they make me feel powerful. They make me feel loved by him and make me love him more when we overcome stuff. I would much rather do that than just sit in the dark.”“River Lea”“River Lea is a river that runs by where I grew up in Tottenham in North London. I have very fond memories of Tottenham. There’s a saying, you can take a girl out of Tottenham but you can’t take Tottenham out of the girl. There’s nothing wrong with being sent back to Tottenham, but sometimes it’s quite unlikely that anything like this would happen to someone who comes from my background. And sometimes I get frightened that everyone’s going to realize that this is the biggest blag of all time, and I’m going to be sent back to Tottenham.“Sometimes I feel a bit bad as well. I feel a bit guilty about how well I’ve done. And even though I don’t feel like I’ve changed, I don’t have anything in common with who I was when I lived in Tottenham any more, other than that I’m the same person, and I feel bad about that sometimes. But I also know that anyone who is from the Tottenham that I’m from, if they had the opportunity to get out, they would.” [Laughs.]“All I Ask”“It’s, ‘Let’s not go out on a bad note.’ That’s not about my relationship now. It’s not about any specific relationships that I’ve had. I wrote that with Bruno Mars, and we were, like, ‘Let’s just [expletive] go for it.’ We’re both a bit [expletive] soppy, let’s just [expletive] write the soppiest ballad that we could possibly write together. And it’s a lovely song.“And I think that line — ‘It matters how it ends’ — is obviously for me and all of my friends. That’s what we always say when something’s about to happen. It matters how this ends, how we get out of this one — whether it be a relationship, a night out, watching a film, whatever. It matters how everything ends because that’s how you remember it.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.