“Sesame Street” will make its debut on HBO on Saturday, Jan. 16 at 9 a.m., the premium cable network announced on Tuesday. HBO will run two consecutive 30-minute episodes that day, a departure from the traditional one-hour episodes for “Sesame Street.” New 30-minute episodes will debut each Saturday.HBO said that the new season of “Sesame Street” would feature a new set, a new opening and at least one new segment (“Smart Cookies,” starring — who else? — Cookie Monster). Elmo will move into a brownstone at 123 Sesame Street; Cookie Monster will move into an apartment above Hooper’s Store; Big Bird will settle into a new nest; Oscar will be in a new garbage can. “We’re excited to bring the timeless lessons of ‘Sesame Street’ to HBO viewers, like learning numbers from the Count, inner strength from Elmo and kindness from Abby,” said Brown Johnson, the creative director of Sesame Workshop, the nonprofit group that produces the show..As always, there will be a regular dose of celebrities; the new season will include Gwen Stefani, Pharrell, Nick Jonas and Sara Bareilles, among others.In August, HBO struck a five-year deal to run new “Sesame Street” episodes. PBS, the home for the show for the last 45 seasons, will be able to air reruns of the episodes nine months after they are shown on HBO.When the deal was announced, it was seen as a boon for cash-strapped Sesame Workshop but also set off an uproar among some education advocates who said that new episodes of “Sesame Street” would be removed from public television and turned over to a premium service known for its explicit content.HBO’s deal with the illustrious children’s show was one of a series of moves its made to fuel sales for its standalone app, HBO Now, which sells for $15 a month. This year, the premium cable channel signed the sports writer Bill Simmons to host a talk show; made a deal with Vice to produce a daily newscast; and signed a production deal with Jon Stewart to develop digital shorts. The “Sesame Street” deal also gives HBO a foot in children’s television programming, an area where the rival Netflix has heavily invested. 