AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RatliffPartway through the Modern Sky Festival on Sunday afternoon at Central Park SummerStage, a stocky young man in a flannel shirt and jeans with short hair, a chin-beard and a tamped-down expression stood at stage right. A roadie? A light-crew guy? A few of the Chinese student types in the audience recognized him, pointed, raised their voices. Hey! That’s Song Dongye!Song Dongye is barely known to American audiences. After signing to the Beijing-based Modern Sky record label, he became recognizable in China in 2013 when one of his songs, “Ms. Dong,” was performed by a contestant on a television talent show called “Super Boy.” It is a bummed-out, soothing, voice-and-acoustic-guitar love ballad about a complex and guarded young woman — “like me, eager to get old.” (I am indebted to the website chinasmack.com for this translation.) It is not written at the moment of infatuation, but hours and days later, at a point when their relationship may still not have made much progress. The narrator has no appetite for getting burned — “I’ve said enough goodbyes” — but is starting to connect with her in his head. “I, too, am a complicated animal,” he sings. He wants, at least, to start by cheering her up.Song Dongye walked out to the middle of the stage and sound-checked for a while, receiving applause, then returned to the side while the interim advertising, for M Now, Modern Sky’s live video-streaming platform, finished playing out on the screen behind the stage. Soon he returned to center stage for his first American performance. There wasn’t much ceremony here — he seemed to be on equal billing with the M Now ad, and Song Dongye is not a ceremonial type — but for 40 minutes he beamed out the same convincing underdog stolidity of his famous song. The Chinese listeners got him entirely, laughing and gasping when he sang a pointed or risqué line. Anyone else was left guessing, in the absence of subtitles or explanatory literature.This was the second annual New York edition of the Modern Sky festival: a matter-of-fact event, essentially a promotional venture to bring Chinese youth culture to American audiences — although there weren’t very many non-Chinese speakers in attendance, and some of these bands aren’t exactly young. (There will be a similar concert in Seattle on Sunday, with the same Chinese bands and some different American ones.) Both New Pants and Miserable Faith — Beijing bands with roots in punk and metal that later moved on to synth-pop and reggae — have been around since the late 1990s.English-speaking and Chinese bands alternated through the afternoon and evening. Saturday’s lineup also included Lower, the young Danish postpunk group; Mark Sultan, the scrappy, surfy one-man band from Montreal; the current, one-original-member incarnation of the English postpunk band Gang of Four; and Yoko Ono, with an all-star version of the conceptual group she calls Plastic Ono Band. Most of the performances felt a bit utilitarian, a bit trade show. Different kinds of people were there for different reasons. The day couldn’t conjure a shared mind-set.For nearly 20 years, Modern Sky has been an independent-music factotum in China: its holdings include a record label, a concert and festival-production business, a management company and a magazine. Among its accomplishments, against the uphill battles of piracy and government censorship, are the licensing of Radiohead’s album “Kid A,” and the Strawberry Music Festival, which is held in multiple cities around China and attracts crowds in the hundred of thousands.New Pants, cheeky and new-wavey, is one of the bands given exposure through those festivals, and this is a band that knows what to do with a 45-minute slot. It divided itself among three voices and states of mind: the guitarist Peng Lei’s cool, introverted romanticism; the keyboardist Zhao Meng’s touching sentimentality; and the hyperactive transgressions of the keyboardist Pang Kuan, who ran around the stage in a warm-up suit and led chants in songs like “Sex Drugs Internet.”There are politics in a song like that, if buried under layers of sweet, acceptable humor and parody. Ms. Ono’s politics were broad and personal, but still provocative. Her backing band, unannounced before the concert, grew to seven or eight pieces at times; it included Ira Kaplan, James McNew and Georgia Hubley of Yo La Tengo, as well as the guitarist Thurston Moore, the drummer Denardo Coleman, the tabla player Nitin Mitta, the cellist Chris Hoffman, the singer Julianna Barwick, the keyboardist Jared Samuel, and her Ms. Ono’s son, Sean Lennon, also on keyboards.She sang in improvised kennings, recited emphatic lyrics in English and Japanese, and moved between extremes of sound. She performed the quiet “Higa Noboru” (“The Sun Rises”), with cello and piano; with Mr. Moore’s and Mr. Kaplan’s electric guitars in a scrum on “Woman Power,” “Why” and “Don’t Worry Kyoko,” she performed the repetitive, free-form blues-noise of the early-70s records she made on her own and with John Lennon, a sound that still hasn’t settled comfortably into this culture or any other.Advertisement