AdvertisementSupported byJessica JonesBy Simon AbramsLike Netflix’s “Daredevil” before it, “Jessica Jones” sets itself apart from other Marvel movies and TV shows by offering a view at a psychologically complex character. Jessica goes down various roads you probably would never expect a superhero — specifically one who may very well bump into Captain America or Iron Man at some point — to go down. And the show has, by and large, done a better job than “Daredevil” of laying out the tortured, masochistic logic that compels its characters to agonize over roads they didn’t take and commitments they can’t keep. The same is true of “AKA The Sandwich Saved Me,” the show’s fifth episode, and the one that best explains why Jones is one of the most nuanced contemporary superheroes.It begins with a superfluous flashback that illustrates Jones’s difficult, but manageable pre-Kilgrave life. After that, she plans to take Kilgrave out with the help of her best friend and stepsister Trish Walker and Trish’s new beau, Mike Simpson.The tension between Jones and Simpson leads to one of the best scenes in the show so far. Simpson, an ex-military man, clearly has good intentions, which takes the edge off his repressed sexism. He eats crow with a lusty appetite, like when he smiles at Jones and repeats after her: “I know nothing about Kilgrave.” But Simpson speaks his mind when he shows Jones a decommissioned CDC facility that he suggests Jones use to detain Kilgrave.Simpson argues that the facility, which features a “hermetically-sealed” room, would be an ideal holding cell for Kilgrave since it’s soundproof. He demonstrates by bad-mouthing Jones while she, unaware of what he’s saying, talks trash about him. Jones’s complaints sting less because they’re blackly funny: she suggests that Simpson was probably kicked out of the military for gunning down a village of innocents. But Simpson privately gives voice to his sincere resentment: “So, what, you think because you have these abilities you’re a hero? I’ve seen heroes. You’re not even close.” Simpson almost certainly wouldn’t be thinking, let alone saying this, about a male antihero.Worse still: Simpson inadvertently validates Jones’s fatalism just by being relatively ineffective. Once Kilgrave escapes with the help of a gang of hired, Taser-wielding thugs, Simpson tries to bully his way to Kilgrave’s whereabouts by threatening to mess up a captured baddie’s kneecap. Jones knows that torture won’t work since Kilgrave’s arrangement with his rescuers is similar to his deal with Malcolm: Kilgrave works through a middleman, thereby preventing his lackeys from knowing enough to endanger him. Once again, Jones’s cynicism is borne out, in this case because Kilgrave is smart enough to anticipate human choice and error, and eliminate it.By contrast, Jones’s obligation to Kilgrave victims like Hope is treated like a liability. Jones gives in to Kilgrave’s request for selfies because she wants to help Hope. Jones’s compliance is a choice, not just an action that she makes while under Kilgrave’s control because she resists him at first. She puts her phone aside even after he impatiently texts her to let him know that he’s waiting. The fact that Jones can’t blame Kilgrave for her actions makes this conclusion to the episode that much more grim.Thankfully, the conclusion of Malcolm’s subplot reminds viewers that characters can control their destiny, and that trying to do good by other people isn’t always a matter of relying on or obsessing over other people. In an uncomfortable sequence, Jones lectures Malcolm while he’s handcuffed to a steam pipe in his bathroom, reminding him that he’s just being used to get at her: “[Kilgrave] did this to you to get at me. To isolate me.” Jones then gives Malcolm a choice, presenting the twitchy junkie with a syringe and a few hits of heroin.Malcolm does the right thing and doesn’t shoot up, a choice that offsets his self-loathing response to Jones’s refusal to “help you kill yourself.”“Why not?” he countered. “I’m useless to you. To anybody.” Malcolm’s fixation on being “useful” to people — not about getting better — is the kind of half-baked, self-flagellating confession that a real junkie would probably say. So the fact that Malcolm is able to power through those feelings, and take care of himself is that much more admirable. It’s not the high note that Episode 5 could have ended on, but it does considerably leaven its bleak finale.Advertisement