By ALASTAIR MACAULAYNOV. 24, 2015
Balanchine Nutcrackers At some point in the 1990s, the Balanchine Trust gave the classic previously known as “The Nutcracker” a much clunkier appellation: “George Balanchine’s ‘The Nutcracker.’ ”This notwithstanding, there will be no fewer than eight productions of the Balanchine versionto be seen this season: New York City Ballet (the parent company, Nov. 27 to Jan. 3); Alabama Ballet (Dec. 11-20); Central Pennsylvania Youth Ballet (Dec. 11-20); Miami City Ballet (Dec. 5-29); Oregon Ballet Theater (Dec. 11-26); Pacific Northwest Ballet (dancing Balanchine’s version for the first time, Nov. 27-Dec, 28); Pennsylvania Ballet (Dec. 11-31); and the Royal Danish Ballet (Dec. 4-30). From Copenhagen to Seattle, from Miami to Portland, Oregon: quite a domain.The YouTube Tango Tango is an art form in which last night’s star performance often arrives on YouTube the next day. So it was last weekend. On Saturday, at the Clemente Soto Veléz Center for Arts and Education in SoHo, Gabriel Missé danced for the first time with Guillermina Quiroga — improvising. On Sunday, here they were again on our home screens.The three duets were “Esta Noche de Luna”:“Relíquias Porteñas,” in which their footwork takes off:And “La Bruja,” in which a lock of her hair comes loose (as Ginger Rogers’s does in the great one-take “I’ll Be Hard to Handle” in the Astaire-Rogers film “Roberta”), whereupon she soon does an astoundingly brisk plunge into a near-kneel without breaking the phrase:Nobody knows if this partnership will recur; everybody who saw it hopes it will.I have been revisiting the YouTube clips of Mr. Missé’s 2008-10 partnership with Natalia Hills. If you don’t know it or have been missing it, start here:and here:At the time, I called them “the greatest partnership in dance today.” Watching them again, I’m inclined to say they were the greatest dance partnership of our century so far.AdvertisementTransatlantic Dance Via DVDThe perception of American ballet could be transformed if only money were invested in broadcasting its greatest live performances in HD to local cinemas and then transferring them to DVD, as the Royal Ballet in London and the Metropolitan Opera do. In this age, why should only a few thousand people have seen Ashley Bouder in “Donizetti Variations,” Herman Cornejo in “Sinatra Suite,” Jeanette Delgado in “Square Dance,” Sterling Hyltin and Robert Fairchild in “Duo Concertant,” Sara Mearns in “Walpurgisnacht Ballet,” Gillian Murphy in “Sylvia,” Tiler Peck in the “Tschaikovsky Pas de Deux” or Teresa Reichlen in “Tschaikovsky Piano Concerto No. 2”?This spring in London, Natalia Osipova and Steven McRae led the Royal Ballet in a performance of Frederick Ashton’s “La Fille Mal Gardée” that was shown around the world. That ballet touches zones of joy in ways rare in any art; and the many New Yorkers who watched it one morning at Symphony Space were further elated by that remarkable cast. The good news is that DVD and Blu-ray copies (Opus Arte) are now available.AdvertisementThere has been a whole series of broadcasts and DVDs from the Royal Ballet, recording dance works old and new. Members of my family in England now watch London theater, opera and ballet on a regular basis on screen in the rural town where I went to my first school. And friends all around America watch them too. It’s impossible not to wish that the glories of American ballet today were reaching these and other audiences on both sides of the AtlanticWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.