By ZACHARY WOOLFENOV. 24, 2015
Happy Thanksgiving week, classical music lovers! There aren’t so many concerts this week (all the better to spend some time with recordings), but a few are choice.After hearing Daniil Trifonov master Rachmaninoff’s Fourth Piano Concerto with the New York Philharmonic last week, I can heartily recommend this week’s final program in the orchestra’s Rachmaninoff festival: Ludovic Morlot leading Mr. Trifonov in the Third Concerto.On Tuesday the Pittsburgh new-music ensemble Music on the Edge comes to SubCulture.Berlin Plays BeethovenSimon Rattle and the Berlin Philharmonic came to Carnegie Hall last week for a Beethoven symphony cycle: five consecutive nights of concerts. David Allen was there for the whole marathon, and he wrote in The New York Times  that the musicians’ “commitment was palpable, their energy persuasive, their ability to communicate with one another superior.”But, he added: “the cycle as a whole was not the last word in subtlety or structural command, let alone philosophical vision.” I would concur from the one concert in the cycle I was able to attend, featuring the Second and Fifth Symphonies as well as the seldom-played “Leonore No. 1” overture. While the Berliners’ virtuosity is dizzying, the Second came across as vague, more splotches of color than a reasoned argument. The Fifth was arrestingly strong and energetic, but even in that work, there was a sense that Mr. Rattle was interested in revealing moments, details, rather than broader structures.AdvertisementFor those who want to keep their Berlin experience going just a bit longer, one of the orchestra’s concertmasters, the young violinist Noah Bendix-Balgley, joins the pianist Orion Weiss on Friday at Bargemusic for works by Janacek, Brahms and Strauss.AdvertisementA Day with LissnerRead Roslyn Sulcas’ account in The Times of a day following around (and around, and around) the always-on-the-move director of the Paris Opera, Stéphane Lissner.Around the InternetCatching up on the past couple of weeks, I recommend:Jeremy Eichler, in The Boston Globe, on the poignant story of Alban Berg’s Violin Concerto.Alex Ross, in The New Yorker, on the Metropolitan Opera’s new “Lulu” production (“an unstable dream world where identity is in constant flux”) and the Industry’s “Hopscotch” in Los Angeles (“a combination of road trip, architecture tour, contemporary-music festival, and waking dream”).Thoughts from the composers Annie Gosfield and Eve Beglarian, in New Music Box, on their participation in Anthony de Mare’s sprawling project “Liaisons: Re-Imagining Sondheim from the Piano.” (Anthony Tommasini wrote in The Times about the project this past weekend.)Birthday WishesIt’s a rich week for birthdays! The pianist Wilhelm Kempff (born Nov. 25, 1895) here brings his long-phrased lyricism to a Schubert impromptu.Jean-Baptiste Lully, the composer who ruled at Louis XIV’s court and the creator of the “tragédie en musique,” was born on Nov. 28, 1632. Do yourself a favor, take three hours and listen to (and watch) his sublime “Atys,” here in the classic 1987 production, with William Christie conducting Les Arts Florissants, that reintroduced the French Baroque to the modern world.For pure vocal sunshine, I always look to Luciano Pavarotti’s 1970 recording of “L’Elisir d’Amore” by Gaetano Donizetti (born Nov. 29, 1797), and particularly to his duet, as the country bumpkin Nemorino, with the army sergeant (here the baritone Dominic Cossa) who’s both his rival in love and the man trying to enlist him.Any other favorite recordings? Let me know in the comments, by email at zach.woolfe@nytimes.com, or tweet @zwoolfe.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.