AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckYou can’t escape Thanksgiving: Ric Burns parses the myths of the first Thanksgiving for PBS, and Fox serves up back-to-back holiday dinners. On Fandor, there’s “Le Week-End,” the critically lauded film about an aging couple trying to rekindle their love in Paris.AMERICAN EXPERIENCE: THE PILGRIMS 8 p.m. on PBS. Ric Burns chronicles the voyage of the Mayflower and the small group of religious radicals who planted the seeds for the American colonies. “It’s also only partly about the Pilgrims and the American Indians they encountered,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The New York Times. “Mr. Burns wants us to contemplate the way a nation constructs its foundational stories, mixing fact and myth into a concoction that gives future generations something they can live with.” (Image: A scene from “The Pilgrims”)PRETTY LITTLE LIARS: 5 YEARS FORWARD 8 p.m. ABC Family. It will be a brave new world when the series returns on Jan. 12, not least because the channel will have been renamed Freeform. Here, a look at cast and crew members behind the scenes, before they time-travel ahead five years.JUMANJI (1995) 8 p.m. on AMC. The network notes the 20th anniversary of this fantasy about a boy who is stuck in a board game (and grows up to become Robin Williams). (Image: Mr. Williams)GRANDFATHERED 8 p.m. on Fox. Jimmy gives up his Thanksgiving with a stomach model to spend the holiday with Sara and her ex-boyfriend, who’s back. In “The Grinder,” at 8:30 p.m., Dean blows his first holiday with his family in years by uncovering a deep, dark secret. Jason Alexander and Timothy Olyphant star in his flashbacks. And in “Scream Queens,” at 9 p.m., Chad takes Chanel home for some turkey and terror.MANHATTAN 9 p.m. on WGN America. Col. Darrow discovers that an American Indian boy might know who has been spying for the Soviets.BEING MARY JANE 10 p.m. on BET. So much for this year’s wish. Mary Jane’s birthday is overshadowed by some family drama.LE WEEK-END (2014) on Fandor. Jim Broadbent and Lindsay Duncan play Nick and Meg, an aging British couple who visit Paris for the first time since their honeymoon to revive their marriage. “You can’t not love and hate the same person,” Nick tells Meg. But don’t be fooled by the genial sarcasm in this bittersweet romance from the screenwriter Hanif Kureishi and the director Roger Michell. “This is not a movie about the gentle aging of lovable codgers — ‘The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel’ in the shadow of the Eiffel Tower,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “Underneath Nick and Meg’s banter is a half-buried spring of rage and regret, and before the trip is over, it will flood into the open.” (Image: Mr. Broadbent and Ms. Duncan)Advertisement