AdvertisementSupported byBy James PoniewozikFor years now, people have called TV “the new film.” But only recently, with directors like Lena Dunham (“Girls”), Mike White (“Enlightened”) and Lisa Cholodenko (“The Slap”) producing series, has it also become the new indie film. One side effect of this shift has been a boomlet in shows, like Amazon’s “Transparent” (Jill Soloway) and HBO’s “Togetherness” (Jay and Mark Duplass), about a particular niche of white-collar professionals who populate bourgeois areas of Los Angeles. It’s not only the Golden Age of TV, it’s the Silver Lake Age of TV.Hulu’s new comedy “Casual” falls solidly within that well-interior-decorated genre. It’s created by a relative newcomer, Zander Lehmann, and produced by Jason Reitman (“Juno”), who also directs the first two episodes. (Both of those debut on Wednesday; the eight remaining episodes will have premieres weekly.) It’s the idiosyncratic story of an idiosyncratic Los Angeles family that shows how idiosyncrasy has become a formula itself. But this is a well-executed version, which becomes more than the sum of its quirks.Valerie (Michaela Watkins), a therapist going through a nasty divorce, has moved in with her younger, single brother, Alex (Tommy Dewey), who offers her not just a place to crash but a means to rebound. He’s a programmer who created a dating site, Snooger.com — he cheats its algorithm to hook himself up with dates — and he becomes his sister’s cynical-but-supportive cyber-wingman. Rounding out the improvised family is Laura (Tara Lynne Barr), Valerie’s sexually precocious 16-year-old daughter. (“I’ve had her on the pill since she was 12,” Valerie says.)For Alex, sex is an easily gamed matter of the old input-and-output. For Valerie, it’s more fraught — partly because the market is not as blissful for a 39-year-old woman like her as for a 35-year-old man like Alex. “Here you are, aging naturally and embracing it,” her first date smarmily tells her. “It’s so refreshing.”There’s all manner of sex in “Casual” — teenage and middle-aged hookups, open relationships and foursomes — but the series is less sex farce than family dramedy. It’s about sex as a means toward or escape from connection. (The title sequence is a drop-down menu on a dating app, on which the highlight bar hovers over “Monogamous” before fleeing to “Casual.”)Like many grown children, Valerie and Alex are trying to sleep their way out of their parents’ shadows. Mom and Pop — Dawn (Frances Conroy) and Charles (Fred Melamed) — are free spirits (she left Portland, Ore., because it was “too conservative”) whose self-absorption embittered their kids. In turn, Valerie, torn between permissiveness and control as a mother, finds herself clashing with Laura, especially when they each develop a thing for Laura’s high-school photography teacher.There are a lot of feelings here, but little melodrama. “Casual” is the kind of alternative-family comedy you’ll find on broadcast or basic cable, just more closely observed, sexually frank and emotionally raw. When Valerie dates a much younger man, in fact, it echoes a story line from TV Land’s “Younger” — right down to her rude awakening to a new generation’s expectations regarding waxing. (“We live in a sick, youth-obsessed culture,” Alex informs her. “Five-year-old vagina is the gold standard.”)“Casual,” like the better indie films it resembles, is distinguished by the little things, especially the trench-warrior camaraderie between the siblings. Ms. Watkins is outstanding, playing Valerie tense and fallible and sympathetic. Mr. Dewey comes off glib and sitcomy at first, but he finds the complex person under Alex’s cynical interface. (Like many multigenerational shows, “Casual” struggles to give the teenage story line the same weight as the adults’.)“Casual” is in many ways an anthology of first-world problems; there’s even a fight between Valerie and Laura over getting Starbucks vs. Pinkberry. But like a good therapist, this show knows that among family, even a squabble over takeout carries the weight of history. And when two people hop into bed, they bring a lifetime’s worth of partners — and often a parent or two — along with them.Advertisement