AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Anthony TommasiniPassing on experience from one generation to another, not just by formal teaching but through mentoring and coaching, is crucial to endeavors as unalike as medicine and baseball, and certainly to classical music. There are some things about this art that can only be learned by decades of doing it.You could see this tradition in action in two quite different performances on Sunday. The New York Youth Symphony opened its 53rd season with a concert at Carnegie Hall conducted by Joshua Gersen, the ensemble’s energetic music director. The program offered inspiring performances of works by Richard Strauss, Ravel and Gershwin, and the premiere of Gabriella Smith’s “Lost Coast.” As usual, the unseen heroes of the concert were the teachers who work individually with these dedicated students.A few hours later, at Alice Tully Hall, the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center offered “Nights in Vienna,” a program with a roster of performers that included the veteran pianist Gilbert Kalish. In a way, Mr. Kalish was just one player among others in performances of works by Haydn, Schoenberg and Brahms. Still, Mr. Kalish, 80, who has been an important teacher for decades, was the featured artist. His colleagues on this occasion included some outstanding younger musicians, like the cellist Nicholas Canellakis and the violinist Kristin Lee.The Youth Symphony gave a confident and colorful account of Strauss’s tone poem “Till Eulenspiegel’s Merry Pranks,” and brought sensitivity to Ravel’s “Mother Goose” Suite and feistiness to Gershwin’s “An American in Paris.” Ms. Smith’s “Lost Coast,” commissioned through the orchestra’s First Music program, is a 20-minute work featuring solo cello (here, the accomplished Gabriel Cabezas), inspired by a five-day backpacking trip the composer took on the remote Lost Coast Trail in Northern California.The score is like a landscape in sound, unfolding in a shimmering haze with earthy string sounds, flecks of woodwinds, swelling brass bursts and thematic fragments that never quite coalesce into themes. The solo cello has long, demanding stretches of scratching sounds, slides and rhythmic bursts hand-tapped on the body of the instrument, and Mr. Cabezas dispatched his part vividly. But for all the captivating orchestral effects and colors, the piece seemed a little thin on first hearing.Later at Tully Hall, the “Nights in Vienna” program opened with a refined, elegant performance of Haydn’s Trio in E minor (Hob. XV12), played by Mr. Kalish, the violinist Nicolas Dautricourt and the cellist Torleif Thedeen. These artists, joined by the violist Paul Neubauer, also offered Brahms’s Piano Quartet No. 3 in C minor (Op. 60), a performance that conveyed the breadth, somber beauty and touches of wildness in this moody piece. The highlight was an arresting performance of Schoenberg’s breathless Kammersymphonie No. 1, performed here in Anton Webern’s ingeniously effective arrangement for flute, clarinet, violin, cello and piano.Before the concert began, Wu Han, a co-director of the Chamber Music Society, announced that the esteemed violinist and conductor Joseph Silverstein had died of a heart attack at 83. Associated with the society for years, he was best known as a longtime concertmaster of the Boston Symphony. So the program became a tribute to yet another master.Advertisement