AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Siobhan BurkeThe protagonist in “Shadowland,” the latest evening-length work from the athlete-illusionists of Pilobolus, is really down on her luck. A teenage girl lost in a dark dream, she’s at the mercy of a mysterious giant who, with the rustle of one imposing hand, turns her into a dog from the waist up. Both before and after this transformation, she is chased, threatened, prodded, eaten, humiliated, even tied up and whipped. Who’s the target demographic here?I found myself wondering that on Sunday afternoon at the Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, where this 75-minute production, a hybrid of high-tech shadow puppetry and tacky dance-theater, is having its American premiere. Preteen patrons and their parents made up much of the audience, perhaps drawn because of one of the chief collaborators, the “SpongeBob SquarePants” writer Steven Banks. But as coming-of-age stories go, this one is dishearteningly regressive, especially in how it imagines a young woman imagining her own sexuality, through the most conventional lens. As with other Pilobolus projects, the execution is impressive but the content immature, glamorizing violence and commercial ideals of what’s sexy.We begin in the murky bedroom of the nameless main character, danced by the sprightly and strong Heather Jeane Favretto in a white nightgown and bloomers. When her parents walk in to find her trying on makeup and mugging in the mirror, she’s thrown into a fit of shame, haunted by cackling shadows on the wall.That shadow world — an elaborate confluence of props and screens and eight creaturely dancers in sporty underwear (Pilobolus uniform) — swallows her up. And so begins her journey, in which obstacles encroach on her from all sides, relentlessly boxing her in, from creepily wiggling fingers to a hatchet-wielding tribe.The screens rise for some nonshadow episodes, as when she’s kidnapped into a kinky circus and forced to jump through hoops, and when she falls in love with a strapping centaur and throws off her dress for an ecstatic trio with two guys in G-strings (another Pilobolus uniform). Eventually her enemies converge into one massive beast, which she manages to slay — a rare break from powerlessness — before waking up at home, safe with her nuclear family. What’s the message here? David Poe’s original pop songs help tell this meandering tale, including a coda with a New York City theme.Visually and mechanically, “Shadowland” is deft, teeming with clever tricks of the body, scenery and light. If only the company’s vast creative team could bring that inventiveness to story and character.“Shadowland” continues through Dec. 6 at Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, 566 La Guardia Place, Manhattan; 866-811-4111, nyuskirball­.org.Advertisement