By NEIL GENZLINGERNOV. 23, 2015
First there was “Saints & Strangers,” a pretty good dramatization of the Pilgrims’ story on the National Geographic Channel. Now comes the PBS take on the same subject, “The Pilgrims,” an episode of “American Experience” on Tuesday night.With the documentarian Ric Burns at the helm it goes deeper, as you might expect. But it’s also only partly about the Pilgrims and the American Indians they encountered. Mr. Burns wants us to contemplate the way a nation constructs its foundational stories, mixing fact and myth into a concoction that gives future generations something they can live with.The two-hour program spends considerably more time than National Geographic did on the genesis of the trip; it’s near the halfway point before anyone even steps off the Mayflower. That gives us a clearer picture of who the religious separatists on the voyage were, and their fundamentalist interpretation of their faith and desire to create a community based on it might put you in mind of a far different group that has been in the news.The Pilgrims and their fellow travelers weren’t terrorists, of course (despite an instance of putting the severed head of a perceived enemy on a pole), but they and those who followed certainly did effect a cultural conquest. Some versions of their story play that down, partly because a plague resulting from earlier contact with Westerners brought widespread death to coastal Indians in the Northeast just before the Mayflower arrived. God, it seemed to some, killed off the Indians to make way for the whites, a view this program corrects.Advertisement“It’s very convenient for the telling of American history to start with the plague, to start with this massive death,” the anthropologist Margaret M. Bruchac says. “But when those plagues happen, they are not as total as they appear. There are some areas that were virtually untouched by the plague. It was not so empty that it was ready to be reoccupied by someone from across the ocean.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The program details the awful first winter, the crucial alliance with the Indian leader Massasoit, and the colony’s eventual arrival at stability. In classic documentary style, writings from the time are read to accompany the narrative, most of them from the journal of William Bradford, who became the colony’s governor. The actor Roger Rees renders Bradford beautifully; it was among his last performances before his death in July.Mr. Burns’s most inspired touch is to end not in the 1600s, but two centuries later, by following what happened to Bradford’s journal. It disappeared during the Revolutionary War, then was rediscovered in the mid-1800s, just when a divided United States was in need of some feel-good, unifying core stories. The Mayflower passengers suffered terrible hardships, and from the Indians’ point of view their arrival was ultimately a dark day. But not on Thanksgiving.Advertisement“There’s been a tremendous amount of memory produced around the Pilgrims, but there’s also been a lot of forgetting,” the literary critic Kathleen Donegan notes, adding later: “We don’t think about the loss. We think about the abundance.”A version of this review appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: How Myth and Fact Mix Like Turkey and Stuffing  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.