AdvertisementSupported byBy Caryn GanzEagles of Death Metal, the California band that was performing at the Bataclan concert hall in Paris on Nov. 13, has given its first interview since assailants killed 89 people and held hundreds of hostages there. Speaking to Vice in a video interview, the band’s singer, Jesse Hughes, broke down in tears several times while describing coming face to face with one of the gunmen and the horrors that audience members endured. But he vowed the band would return to France.“I cannot wait to get back to Paris,” he said. “I cannot wait to play. I want to come back. I want to be the first band to play in the Bataclan when it comes back up. Because I was there when it went silent for a minute. Our friends went there to see rock ’n’ roll and died. I want to go back there and live.”The band members recounted the moments, roughly one hour into their set, when they realized something was wrong and scrambled to escape, seizing opportunities to flee the stage when the gunmen paused to reload. The bassist Matt McJunkins said that he escaped to a room backstage where people barricaded the door with chairs and had only a bottle of Champagne as a weapon. Mr. Hughes said that one fan survived in a dressing room because he was hiding under the singer’s leather jacket.Julian Dorio, the band’s drummer, said he hit the floor as soon as he heard gunshots, and peered through his drums: “I saw two guys out front, and that might be just the most awful thing ever, them just relentlessly shooting into the audience.”Shawn London, the band’s sound engineer, was stationed near the hall’s front doors, near where the gunmen burst in. “People started dropping to the ground,” he said. “Injuries, death.” Mr. London said one of the gunmen looked directly at him and fired a shot that hit his mixing console; he dropped to the ground and tried to calm a woman nearby who had been struck, to avoid drawing the shooter’s attention.Mr. Hughes and Josh Homme, one of the band’s founders who does not tour with the group and who wasn’t present in Paris, spoke about Nick Alexander, the band’s merchandise manager, who was killed in the attack. Through tears, Mr. Hughes said that Mr. Alexander behaved valiantly, “and never called for help until he bled out because he didn’t want anybody else to get hurt.”Surveying a list of names of those who lost their lives there, Mr. Homme said he wished he could address the parents of the victims. “I sort of want to just get down on my knees, and just say ‘whatever you need,’ because there’s nothing I can really say, because words fail to grasp the thing.”Advertisement