BEETHOVEN: Symphonies No. 5 and 7
Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra; Manfred Honeck, conductor
(Reference Recordings)
Ninety seconds is all it takes to understand that Manfred Honeck’s is no sanitized Beethoven: the plethora of colorations, articulations and moods through which he forces the Fifth’s famous motto sees to that. Every phrase, every balance has been thought through in interventionist readings that are idiosyncratic but fully attuned to the spirit, if not the letter, of the scores. Despite superb playing and audio quality, Beethoven so Romantic won’t convince everybody. Still, this partnership seems incapable of laying down an ordinary recording. (David Allen)HANDEL: Early Italian Works
Julia Lezhneva, soprano; Il Giardino Armonico; Giovanni Antonini, conductor
(Decca)
Baroque arias are full of them: duels between a singer and a solo instrumentalist, each trying to echo and outdo the other in performing the same virtuosic line. Oboists often win these sorts of contests, their instruments being so much more nimble and precise than the human voice. But in “Disserratevi, o porte d’Averno,” the opening track of this impressive but curiously aloof recording, the young Russian soprano Julia Lezhneva runs circles around the instrumentalist with her pert and fleet coloratura. She is best in this sort of quick and dazzling aria; simple ones like “Lascia la spina” from “Il Trionfo del Tempo e del Disinganno” can feel disappointingly noncommittal. The period-instrument ensemble Il Giardino Armonico comes to the rescue with fresh and expressive playing. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)BACH: ‘Goldberg’ Variations
Alexandre Tharaud, piano
(Erato)
In his captivating new recording of Bach’s formidable “Goldberg” Variations, the French pianist Alexandre Tharaud deftly balances spontaneity and probing insight. He has striking ideas about every phrase. When sections repeat he varies not just ornamentation but the weight and articulation of the contrapuntal voices. Overall this is a lyrical and elegant performance. Yet, in the manner of the Baroque style, Mr. Tharaud vividly conveys the swinging rhythmic sweep of the dancing variations: the 21st is a heady burst of spiraling runs. For all the detailed intricacy of his account, he plays this towering work with in-the-moment freshness. (Anthony Tommasini) SPOTIFY PLAYLISTTracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)