
Jessica Jones By                     
SIMON ABRAMS

NOV. 25, 2015
There have been hints seeded throughout Episodes 2-5 about why Jessica Jones was essentially stalking Luke Cage. But watching her finally tell Cage what we already know — that she killed his wife Reva — is heartbreaking, and not just intentionally.To give credit where it’s due: it’s refreshing to see Jones’s confession as an extension of the themes of guilt and responsibility that the show’s writers have been hammering home throughout blunt, but effective dialogue. So much of this episode — a disappointing one whose pedestrian detective story climaxes with a bathetic confrontation — boiled down to waiting to see if and how Jones would handle breaking the difficult news to Cage. You can see how thoughtfully constructed Episode 6 is if you rewatch it knowing that Cage is searching for Antoine Greer, a loan shark debtor who borrowed money from Cage’s sister, because he’s hoping to get more information on Reva’s killer.We may not have Cage’s secret objective in mind when he wakes up with Jones. But the show almost immediately diminishes Jones’s little oasis of good feeling by having Cage reveal to her his real motives for tracking Antoine down. Immediately after that, we are reminded that Jones’s life isn’t her own right now. It’s implied that Jones is acting of her own free will when she sends Kilgrave a selfie since she doesn’t deliver the photo at exactly 10 a.m. That moment of hesitation sets up a contrast between Jones’s current actions, and her behavior during her time with Kilgrave. After all, the biggest and most tantalizing part of Jones’s confession to Cage is that she was being mind-controlled when she killed Reva.Knowing that Jones wasn’t in control of her actions is a major cop-out. If Jones was responsible for killing Reva (not because Kilgrave made her do it, in other words), she would not be able to shake off her responsibility by wondering, like Malcolm does, if Kilgrave only brought out a side of her personality that was already there. As smarmy as he sounds, Kilgrave might be on to something when he tells Jones that he didn’t make Malcolm do anything he didn’t want to do. But if Jessica is going to turn out to be a murderer, she should not be allowed to hide behind the excuse of brainwashing. At the very least, the guilt should weigh on her since she was the inhabiting the body that murdered Reva. There’s a big difference between “I did it” and “I was made to do it.”The fact that Jones was being controlled takes a big weight off viewers’ minds. We know what Kilgrave can do, and therefore don’t doubt that he, and not she, is responsible for Reva’s death. That instant absolution shifts the focus of Cage’s fight with Jones, and dilutes the power of his righteous anger significantly. Cage is sensitive enough to accept that Jones wasn’t in control when she killed Reva, so he yells at her for choosing to sleep with him, not for making him a widow. Jones is shown to feel guilty, and messed up by the knowledge that she got involved with Cage. But when she’s faced with these accusations, Jones is prematurely let off the hook. By shifting the focus from killing Reva to Cage’s anger that she slept with him the show allows us to feel comfortable enough with Jones that we want to comfort her rather than hold her accountable for her actions.On the other hand, while Cage’s anger is justified, having him change his mind, and curse out Jones at episode’s end feels overly spiteful. It makes Krysten Ritter’s admirably complex antiheroine look like Charlie Brown. It seems that Jones will never be able to find happiness because somehow, some way, that stupid little football will always be yanked away from her at the last minute.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »