AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesNeed to break out of a cultural rut?The writers and critics of The New York Times can help.Here’s a handful of things worth checking out this week.‘Goodnight Mommy’Unspooling with virtually no music and a seriously unsettling sound design, this richly photographed and carefully controlled creep-out (from the Austrian directors Veronika Franz and Severin Fiala) centers on the escalating cruelty of twin boys who come to believe that their mother is an impostor. Jeannette Catsoulis(R, 1:40. Read the full review or find a showtime.)‘The Absolute Brightness of Leonard Pelkey’ In James Lecesne’s enchanting solo show, the friends of a happily flamboyant 14-year-old New Jersey boy turn to the police after he disappears. With great heart and humor, Mr. Lecesne portrays more than a dozen characters in this sweet, sad, Dickensian show that returns to the stage after a run at Dixon Place earlier this year. Charles Isherwood(Read the full review or find more at absolutebrightness.com.)Bo Burnham Over the last decade, Mr. Burnham has evolved from a cutesy musical comic into one of the most creatively adventurous comedians in the country, blending original music, storytelling and poetry in elaborately theatrical shows. These performances are part of his “Make Happy” tour. Elise Czajkowski (Monday, Wednesday and Thursday at 8 p.m., Best Buy Theater, Manhattan, bestbuytheater.com.)Tom Harrell Mr. Harrell, a trumpeter and fluegelhorn player of prominence since the 1970s, has also been a beacon of small-group bandleading in recent years, working with a regular stable of sidemen. A few of them — the saxophonist Wayne Escoffery, the bassist Ugonna Okegwo and the pianist Danny Grissett — join him for both of his coming weeks at the Village Vanguard, starting with a celebration of his thoughtful new chamber-jazz album, “First Impressions.” Nate Chinen(Tuesday through Oct. 18, except Oct. 12, at 8:30 and 10:30 p.m., villagevanguard.com.)Advertisement