By KATHRYN SHATTUCKNOV. 25, 2015
Jonathan and Drew Scott, a. k. a. the Property Brothers, go a little bit country with a soundtrack to match; Bryan Cranston reveals Walter White’s ultimate truth; and Alicia Keys is in an “Empire” state of mind.What’s on TVPROPERTY BROTHERS AT HOME ON THE RANCH 9 p.m. on HGTV. Jonathan and Drew Scott, those renovation twins, head back to their Canadian roots to spruce up a family friend’s Alberta ranch — and show off their cowboy skills — in the foothills of the Rockies. Perhaps in a bid for another kind of career, they’ll also display their vocal chops in a couple of country songs they recorded for the show. (Image: Drew, left, and Jonathan Scott)INSIDE THE ACTORS STUDIO  8 p.m. on Bravo. Bryan Cranston talks with James Lipton about playing the blacklisted Hollywood screenwriter Dalton Trumbo in his latest film, “Trumbo.” He also reminisces about his transformation when his father left his family and what he believes to be the ultimate truth of Walter White on “Breaking Bad.” (Image: Mr. Cranston as Trumbo)THE MAKING OF THE WIZ LIVE! 8 p.m. on NBC. Peek behind the curtain on “The Wiz Live!,” to be broadcast on Dec. 3 with Shanice Williams as Dorothy, Mary J. Blige as the Wicked Witch of the West, Queen Latifah as the Wiz and Stephanie Mills as Auntie Em.THROWBACK THANKSGIVING 8 p.m. on VH1. This five-day ’80s movie marathon serves up a heap of nostalgia, starting with a John Hughes double bill of “Sixteen Candles” and “The Breakfast Club.” (Image: Molly Ringwald and Michael Schoeffling in “Sixteen Candles”)AdvertisementEMPIRE 9 p.m. on Fox. Alicia Keys plays Skye Summers, a pop diva who discovers a deep connection with Jamal. Rosie O’Donnell plays a former prison inmate who helps Cookie and Candice rescue their sister Carol. And Lee Daniels, the series’s co-creator, plays himself.INSIDE EINSTEIN’S MIND 9 p.m. on PBS. “Nova” connects the dots between Albert Einstein’s thought experiments and our understanding of gravity. “Einstein’s Big Idea,” at 10, dramatizes the story behind E=mc2.CHRISTMAS THROUGH THE DECADES 10 p.m. on History. This four-part special blasts off in the 1960s with a Christmas Eve broadcast from the Apollo 8 astronauts.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowCASUAL on Hulu. And you thought your family was nuts. Check out last week’s Thanksgiving episode if you haven’t already and then hang around for the latest mayhem in this Zander Lehmann creation, which James Poniewozik of The New York Times said “becomes more than the sum of its quirks.” (Image: From left, Tara Lynne Barr, Nyasha Hatendi, Tommy Dewey and Michaela Watkins)A version of this schedule appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page C8 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.