By DANIEL E. SLOTNIKNOV. 24, 2015
Jim Perry, the genial host of the popular NBC game shows “Card Sharks” and “$ale of the Century” in the 1970s and ’80s, died on Friday at his home in Ashland, Ore. He was 82.The cause was cancer, his family said.Mr. Perry led both shows with wholesome wisecracks. He hosted “Card Sharks” from 1978 until 1981, its first run (later versions were hosted by Bob Eubanks and Pat Bullard); and the 1983 reboot of “$ale of the Century” until its final episode in 1989.“Card Sharks” was based on the idea of an over-under bet: contestants tried to guess whether the next card would be higher or lower than one currently visible.“$ale of the Century” was a more conventional trivia show in which contestants answered questions to amass money and other prizes.AdvertisementMr. Perry also hosted game shows in Canada. He sometimes worked on three at a time, the Canadian shows “Headline Hunters” and “Definition” while also shooting “Card Sharks” or “$ale of the Century” in the United States.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Born on Nov. 9, 1933, in Camden, N.J., Mr. Perry grew up in Chester, Pa. He attended the University of Pennsylvania and worked for Armed Forces Radio during the Korean War.After the war he became a singer at Grossinger’s resort in the Catskills and spent some years working as the comedian Sid Caesar’s straight man. He broke into game shows in the late 1960s.AdvertisementHe married the former June Wiatrak in 1959. She survives him, as do a daughter, Erin; a son, Sean; two sisters, Janice Campbell and Patti Castillo; and three grandchildren.A version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Jim Perry, 82, Bustling Host of a Range of Game Shows.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.