By NEIL GENZLINGERNOV. 24, 2015
One channel hopes your most fervent Thanksgiving wish is to be bored to death. Another is convinced there’s nothing people want more than to rewatch movies they’ve already seen a zillion times.Yes, it’s Thanksgiving week, so stunt programming is popping up all across the television landscape. You might think TV executives would operate on the assumption that lots of people will be home for Thanksgiving and idle, and that therefore it’s a good time to put the best programming foot forward. But more often it seems as if the driving philosophy is, “Let’s toss any old prepackaged junk up there so that our employees can have a few days off.”You be the judge. Here’s a sampling of what’s coming. Much of it is indeed filler. In one case, though, a marathon of old episodes is also likely to have quite a lot of poignancy.Destination America: ‘Railroad Alaska: Real Time Train Ride’  The channel that at Halloween brought us a live exorcism in a house related to the “Exorcist” story is chilling things down for Thanksgiving. Way down. It’s removing the people from its “Railroad Alaska” workplace reality series and showing nothing but the train ride, five hours of it. It’s a view from a camera mounted on the front of the train: endless snowy landscape and nothing more. “Now Bored-ing!,” the channel’s press material says, then it goes on to brag that the experience will be less exciting than the famed TV yule log. Lest you think they’ve lost their marbles over at Destination America, this is actually a thing in Scandinavia — “slow TV,” it’s called. And you know that all the best American television is imported from Europe.AdvertisementHistory: ‘Christmas Through the Decades’ The aforementioned yule log turns up on Wednesday night in the opening installment of this series, where we’re reminded that the practice of putting a roaring fireplace on TV was invented in 1966 by WPIX in New York. Thanksgiving is, above all, a time when television starts looking toward Christmas, and this four-parter milks seasonal nostalgia a decade at a time, beginning in the 1960s. It’s full of incongruous combinations of anecdotes and talking heads. Boomer Esiason for some reason comments on the import of Bob Hope’s Christmas specials. Barbara Eden does the same for the Apollo 8 mission. Also, the most popular gifts of each decade are revisited. Still have your 1963 Easy-Bake Oven? You wish.AMC: ‘Gone With the Wednesday’ and ‘Thanksgiving With Your Godfather’ If you have never contemplated the similarities between “Gone With the Wind” and the “Godfather” movies, perhaps that’s because there aren’t any, but AMC is at least giving you the chance to look for some with this package. On Wednesday beginning at 9 a.m. it offers repeated showings of “Gone With the Wind,” the 1939 classic. Then, on Thanksgiving, the first two “Godfather” films fill up most of the day, with the third showing in the wee hours of Friday. Frankly, my dear, I’m going to make him an offer he can’t refuse?AdvertisementNat Geo Wild: Disneynature Marathon and Big Cat Week It’s possible that a moose will turn up on Destination America’s train-cam, but if you really want to see wildlife, this is the place to go. On Thanksgiving Nat Geo Wild shows four glossily photographed, sometimes annoyingly narrated films from Disneynature: “Deep Blue,” “Chimpanzee,” “The Crimson Wing: Mystery of the Flamingos” and “Wings of Life.” Then, on Friday night, “Cougars Undercover” scrutinizes two cougar families in Jackson Hole, Wyo., kicking off a week of big-cat programming.RFD-TV: ‘Joey+Rory’ Marathon The back story of this Thanksgiving Day marathon will touch you whether or not you’ve heard of RFD-TV and “The Joey+Rory Show.” Joey Feek and her husband, Rory, have become a crowd-pleasing country duo since winning acclaim on CMT’s “Can You Duet” in 2008, and their TV series has documented their lives. A daughter born in 2014 has Down syndrome. Not long after, Ms. Feek was found to have cervical cancer. The couple announced last month that she was stopping treatments, and she recently entered hospice care. At 7:30 p.m. the channel plans to broadcast messages to the couple submitted by fans and by other country artists.A version of this review appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Stuffed? Then Belly on Up to the TV.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.