By ALASTAIR MACAULAYNOV. 24, 2015
Tango people keep late hours; I’ve been at gatherings where the best dancers arrive at midnight. For this reason, my tango-watching is limited; I seldom have the stamina. On Saturday, however, I was ready at 11 p.m. at the Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural and Educational Center in SoHo to watch an event in tango history: Gabriel Missé performing with Guillermina Quiroga for the first time. Excitement among the audience in the packed ground-floor room was intense. The stars did not disappoint; people were calling for more.In the tango world of Buenos Aires, the pair’s home, Ms. Quiroga is at least as big a name as Mr. Missé has become elsewhere. Each one danced on the same New York program in 2008 (at Symphony Space), but with different partners. She has a marvelously composed persona and memorably elegant posture, especially in the beautiful carriage of her head; it was regrettable that at that 2008 concert she and her partner, Cesar Coelho, used far too many overhead lifts — sensationalism that doesn’t really suit her.On that occasion, Mr. Missé seemed wholly unlike her. He has famously brilliant footwork; and, though he sometimes lifts his partner so that she can flourish her legs in the air, he almost invariably avoids lifts of any great height. They are both dramatic dancers, but his character has always seemed full of high-comedy wit, whereas hers, in 2008, seemed inclined to Romantic expansiveness.They performed three numbers on Saturday; all were, we were told, improvised. I have been amazed by improvisations between Mr. Missé and his earlier partners Natalia Hills (2008-10) and Analía Centurión (2012-14), even though they were experienced partnerships. On Saturday, the fluency and speed of give-and-take between Mr. Missé and Ms. Quiroga was wholly astounding.AdvertisementPerhaps we should call them the Fonteyn and Nureyev of tango. Ms. Quiroga, the older of the pair, has the seemingly more quiet character (her face is masklike even when she’s smiling); Mr. Missé is not only younger but also more outgoing. Nonetheless, the happy revelation of their performance was that she can match his virtuosity point for point, and that he likes that.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In their second number, “Relíquias Porteñas,” he did one of those rapidly skipping pounces, like a thunderbolt from a clear sky, that are among his specialties. She at once replied with one of her own, kicking both heels in the air in a trice. (I remembered how a New York friend of Fonteyn’s went backstage after the first local Fonteyn-Nureyev performance of the pas de deux from “Le Corsaire.” Fonteyn, after joining in the praise for Nureyev’s pyrotechnics, remarked dryly, “I think I held my own, don’t you?”) In their third number, “La Bruja” — a lock of her hair had come loose — she suddenly plunged close to the floor with one knee and rose again, a sudden coup that had people gasping.They are well matched in both height and physical style. He’s on the short side; she’s petite. Both seem much taller; their dancing projects effortlessly. He wore a black suit and white shirt, black necktie and black shoes; her all-black dress, revealing plenty of thigh at the front, descended to calf length at the back, with silver-white shoes. It was a special pleasure to watch how much of her weight is placed on the extreme front of the foot, to see the clean, swift, cut and thrust of her thigh action, and to feel the easy legato length of phrasing.AdvertisementHe is a coloratura dancer; so, it emerges, is she. The string-of-pearls trills of her traveling footwork — sometimes with feet crossed and ankles tightly dovetailed — sparkled gloriously; and when she brandished a leg in the air and brought it back down, the movement was both glamorous and whiplike. He, earlier, had snapped a foot around his other leg’s shin in a bewildering figure-eight flourish. This was a one-off coupling. Hopes are already high it will not be a once-only.A version of this review appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Mesmerizing Tango Stars,  Together for the First Time   .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.