By JAMES R. OESTREICHOCT. 4, 2015
As the concert and lecture series Met Museum Presents enters its fourth season under the direction of Limor Tomer, its goals become ever clearer. Two concerts over the weekend gazed simultaneously backward and forward, looking for the new in the old and the old in the new.On Friday evening, the Chiara String Quartet, this season’s quartet in residence, extended a long history of chamber music in the museum’s Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium with a program of Brahms. But it did so with a difference, joining other groups that in their various ways raise a question whether the technical mastery of today’s string quartets has outstripped traditional challenges.At the Miller Theater recently, the Jack Quartet performed Simon Steen-Andersen’s “Run Time Error,” which sets parts of a Schumann quartet in a sort of obstacle course. As Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim wrote in The New York Times, the players were “encumbered by gallon or half-gallon milk jugs, partly full, attached to their bow arms.”At the Brooklyn Academy of Music next month, the Debussy String Quartet will play three Shostakovich works in “Opus,” a collaboration with the Australian acrobatic troupe Circa. According to a news release, the musicians will perform “blindfolded and with 14 acrobats jumping, romping and somersaulting all around” them.AdvertisementBy comparison, the Chiara program, “Brahms by Heart,” was less radical but still remarkable. The players — Rebecca Fischer and Hyeyung Yoon, violinists; Jonah Sirota, violist; and Gregory Beaver, cellist — have started to perform much of their repertory from memory, a practice rare these days (unless the players are, say, blindfolded or performing in the dark).AdvertisementHere the Chiara musicians performed Brahms’s three quartets and, as encore, the Andante from Mozart’s “Dissonance” Quartet (K. 465) scoreless. They have memorized another dozen works, some scheduled for later this season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They began the practice while preparing to record the Brahms quartets for Azica Records and found, Mr. Sirota writes in a program note, that it “somehow freed our minds to express and share with each other the characters that the music brought to life in our imaginations.” However that may be, the performances here were fresh and vital, and those on the recording, released in March, sometimes sound even more spontaneous.On Saturday, the museum offered “Musical Portraits,” another of the free-floating programs that have increasingly come to characterize Ms. Tomer’s tenure, this one in the Vélez Blanco Patio. Featuring the chamber ensemble Decoda, it was tied to an exhibition of paintings by John Singer Sargent, “Sargent: Portraits of Artists and Friends,” which closed on Sunday.The Decoda players, with Elizabeth Joy Roe as excellent piano soloist, made fine work of modest pieces by David Lang, Ned Rorem, Paul Moravec, Aaron Jay Kernis and composers past. Some Sargent paintings were projected on a wall beforehand, and details, hugely magnified, were shown in moving projections during the performances.With one glorious exception, they did not represent figures memorialized in the music. But it was delightful to see Fauré’s proud mustache pass in review as Ms. Roe and Anna Elashvili, a similarly excellent violinist, played Ravel’s “Berceuse sur le Nom de Gabriel Fauré.”The Chiara String Quartet plays quintets by Brahms and Jefferson Friedman with the pianist Simone Dinnerstein on Nov. 13 at the Metropolitan Museum; 212-570-3949, metmuseum.org.A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Chamber Music With a Challenge: Playing From Memory.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.