By BRIAN SEIBERTNOV. 24, 2015
A man returns to his apartment after a hard day. He slumps into a chair by a table and turns on a hanging lamp. After a while, the light flickers and the man looks startled. Was that a ghost he just saw? Or was it merely his reflection in the mirrored wall behind him?Such was the scene at the Apollo Theater over the weekend, as Ballet Hispanico presented the premiere of Fernando Melo’s “If Walls Could Speak.” The mirrored wall onstage (set design by Elle Kunnos de Voss) is constructed so that, with a shift in the deft lighting (by Joshua Preston), the space behind it becomes visible: a parallel realm that is often furnished the same but populated differently.Are the people on the other side spirits? Fantasies? Memories? The folks in the neighboring apartment? Any or every answer might be correct.Lasting 90 minutes without an intermission, “If Walls Could Speak” is long and frustrating, a collection of initially impressive effects that eventually pall. Mr. Melo is a Brazilian-born choreographer whose career has transpired in Europe. This is the first work of his to appear in New York.AdvertisementThe structure is a series of vignettes. Some are table-centered domestic scenes: silent intimacies, fights over a portentous envelope. In others, someone keeps rearranging cups and plates while more people emerge from underneath the table, as from a clown car, to join in this shell-game activity. The overlapping bodies resemble a multiple-exposure film.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Presumably, Mr. Melo’s aim is to express the stress and loneliness and soul-crushing repetitiveness of big city life. But he makes the mistake of representing life’s repetitions in a repetitive fashion. Hints of a scrambled narrative that we might reassemble prove misleading, and the work itself is dulling.AdvertisementLater, we see flashes of action behind the wall, each a second or two long. Revealed at first in pieces, they coalesce into an intricately choreographed sequence of urban street collisions. Here the Ballet Hispanico dancers show off their sleek precision, yet this cool effect also grows tedious.At least that section is accompanied by the live musicians on hand, Brazilian percussionists led by Adriano Santos. Much of the rest of the work becomes submerged in melancholy ambient recordings by Dustin O’Halloran and Adam Wiltzie and creepy recordings of deserted rooms by Jacob Kirkegaard. The percussionists and their rousing rhythms too often go wasted.Mr. Melo is fond of accumulation, but “If Walls Could Speak” doesn’t add up. Reflective or transparent, these walls aren’t the most thrilling conversationalists.A version of this review appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Vignettes of Urban Life in All Its Repetitive Fashion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.