By ZACHARY WOOLFENOV. 24, 2015
Bittersweetness tinged the Juilliard String Quartet’s first Lincoln Center performance this season, an exhilarating, penetrating, often splendidly harrowing concert on Monday at Alice Tully Hall. Joel Krosnick, the quartet’s cellist since 1974 and its longest-serving member by far, announced in May that he would leave the group at the end of this season. With no musician remaining on the roster who played with any of the Juilliard’s founding artists, a new era for a hallowed institution awaits.The cello, first grand, then ruminative, plays alone at the start of Elliott Carter’s Quartet No. 1, written during a period in the Arizona desert in 1950-51. Mr. Krosnick rendered this solo with craggy glory, later plucking with gruff majesty as the violist Roger Tapping unspooled a velvety, elegiac line.The group was endlessly agile in the twists of Carter’s quartet, defined by its myriad, complex shifts of tempo. Lively dances suddenly opened into rhapsodic yearning; a moody dialogue between cello and viola was interrupted by hovering, glassy high tones in the violins (Joseph Lin and Ronald Copes). Sudden floods of spidery runs and bursts of quivering energy were like sparks popping from a fire in a desert night.Now largely characterized by the sleekly intense sound of Mr. Lin, its first violinist since 2011, the ensemble can beef up, too, broadening into the Carter quartet’s passages of sunset richness. Schubert’s “Quartettsatz” in C minor (D. 703) was a passing introduction, but Debussy’s Quartet in G minor, played with seething drama after intermission, was an essential pairing, making the classic lineage of Carter’s masterpiece entirely clear.The Juilliard quartet has an elegant way of passing musical torches. In 2013, Mr. Tapping played alongside the violist he was replacing, Samuel Rhodes, in quintets by Mr. Rhodes and Mozart. And on Feb. 22, the new cellist, Astrid Schween, will join the current members for Schubert’s String Quintet in C (D. 956) during Mr. Krosnick’s final appearance with the group at Tully Hall.A version of this review appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Staying Agile and Intense as a New Era Nears.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.