
Empire By                     
CRAIG JENKINS

NOV. 26, 2015
Cookie and Laz Delgado’s whirlwind romance reached its logical conclusion this week as a chance meeting with Lucious finally inspired someone to hit Google and figure out that he’s aligned with his girlfriend’s enemies and coolly playing Big Heavy’s goons against Lyon Dynasty. Kicking him out may do more harm than good, though, as no one knows how hard Laz has advocated for the dynasty or how anxious the neighborhood guys are for a bigger bite of their profits. Without a sympathetic party talking the gang out of terser negotiations, business is bound to get prickly. With Cookie’s Cookout looming on the horizon, one wonders how long Lyon Dynasty really is for the earth. The independence from Lucious that Cookie and Hakeem have gone to desperate extremes to cultivate finally feels perfectly unsustainable.As Cookie’s love and work lives fell fallow, her family struggled as well. The sibling strife brewing since last week’s introduction of Vivica A. Fox as sister Candace ballooned into a road trip drama this week, as Cookie and Candace hoof it to Philly in search of Carol, who’s run off and abandoned her children on a drug relapse. The three sisters’ quick dialogue and interlocking drama is a welcome break from all the brotherly sparring at the root of the Lyon family story. What’s more, it’s compelling seeing Cookie in her proper system of familial checks and balances, currying favor with Carol and butting heads with Candace. Around Candace, who hilariously refuses to call Cookie anything but her born name Laretha, our matriarch’s slick tongue and boundless resourcefulness appear to be coping mechanisms, skills won leveraging Carol’s flawed free spirit and Candace’s materialistic careerism.Hakeem doesn’t share as much of his mother’s magnetism as he thinks he does, though he continues to barrel through women’s lives leaving them to clean up his messes. He swears he’s in love with Laura, although Anika is still very attached, suddenly pregnant — was it that ridiculous post-kidnapping tryst? — and very determined to keep the baby. Hakeem’s dueling relationship woes are fusing into a suspense thriller subplot with Anika as predatory jilted ex losing touch with reality and Laura as unwitting mark. I have clamored for a story for Anika in this space before, but her character’s path from fearless, educated businesswoman to psychotic, vengeful baby mama with a secret Hakeem shrine in her home is disheartening. Even in defeat, Empire’s male villains get to keep their self-respect. Can we have the same for the women?Our arch male villain Lucious continued his drive to reunite the family this week. He’s entrusted Andre, the son he long neglected as a powerless pawn, with handling the particulars in the thrust to push Empire into the streaming music business on a whim, as he assisted Jamal in pulling together his Pepsi ad campaign. Before long the eldest Lyon will come calling on Hakeem to return to the fold, too, and it’s getting increasingly tricky to discern whether the patriarch is acting as a hip-hop King Lear looking to cede the reins of the kingdom to worthy successors or a tyrant taking stock of his puppets. Chances are, with Lucious, it’s a bit of both.AdvertisementHere are three guest stars of interest from episode 9:• “Empire” creator Lee Daniels appeared on his own show this week, as himself of course. He shows up briefly as the director of Jamal’s Pepsi commercial and an inspiration for Lucious charging full bore into the streaming music biz. Daniels didn’t need to establish himself as a force larger than his own characters in his appearance here. Imagine Shonda Rhimes popping in on “Scandal” as royalty for a sense of how absurd it was.• Rosie O’Donnell appeared as Cookie’s jail buddy Pepper, a smart, tough chef who parlays a penitentiary cook position into a lucrative Philadelphia pastry business. Pepper is instrumental in helping Cookie and Candace locate a strung out Carol, and there is the sense that she is selling more than cupcakes and pies, as Cookie peeks into her kitchen and sees a towering goon without the slightest predilection for the sugary arts. It’s not clear what role Pepper might have in the show beyond the cameo, as most of this season’s action takes place in New York, not Philly, but Rosie’s quick turn already ranks among season two’s better guest spots.Advertisement• Alicia Keys starred this week as Skye Summers, a pop star grown weary of her own propensity for “girl power” anthems who has come to Lucious and Jamal to dirty up her sound. Jamal, a self-professed “superfan” feels he has just the song for her, and throughout the episode they craft a duet called “Powerful,” which, hilariously, scans at surface level as more of the same sound she’s eager to escape. Regardless, it’s clear there’s a creative chemistry present between Jamal and Skye, but the episode ends by complicating that with a passionate kiss. Jamal identifies as gay, but it’s fine for him to be more fluid than advertised. Sexuality is capricious and often surprising. But “Empire” has played mad scientist with Jamal’s love life all season with very little to show for it. He, and we, deserve better.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »