Season 2, Episode 3, “Fires of Heaven”This post contains spoilers for Wednesday’s episode of “Empire.”Jamal and Lucious’s Empire went to war with Cookie and Hakeem’s Lyon Dynasty on Wednesday night, and the members of our fractured first family proved willing to go to any length to gain the upper hand. Jamal and Hakeem’s brotherly rivalry evolved from the withering board- and dining-room tête-à-têtes of the first two episodes into a good old-fashioned rap feud. Lil’ bro hijacked the stage during Jamal’s performance with Pitbull at Lucious’s coming-home party and debuted a scathing, Timbaland-assisted diss track for his father and brother. It was a brash move, but it offered relief from the vacuous world-pop of the new Jamal song; his struggle to find a producer who fits his temperament was depicted a little too literally there. Wednesday was perhaps the first time we’ve seen Hakeem’s artistry eclipse Jamal’s on “Empire.” In the past it’s seemed as if Bryshere “Yazz” Gray, a rapper long before he ever acted, was intentionally depicting the sort of faceless M.C. you snooze through on the way to a breezy radio song’s uplifting chorus. (Try to remember anything between the drops dripping on “Drip Drop” or the spirited Jamal hooks on “No Apologies” and “You’re So Beautiful.”) But this time was different, perhaps because it was Gray, rather than the series’s musical directors, who wrote the lyrics he performed in the episode.Hakeem’s fire is on display in more than just his music — he’s become Cookie’s little monster, reveling in the increased executive control Mom has to parcel out in order to make Lyon Dynasty a viable Empire alternative. Exhibit A: garishly naming his Latina girl group “Mirage à  Trois” and insisting on acting as its producer, albeit fruitlessly.Hakeem’s real power play this week is to make Empire look outdated and less “street” than Lyon Dynasty via public provocation. It begins to work, because his father immediately tries to track down Frank Gathers’s daughter, Freda Gatz (the Delaware rapper Bre-Z), touting her as the future of the company. It seems absurd to show Lucious coveting street cred days after securing bail for a murder charge, but Gatz brings the spark and danger he’s looking for, at any rate. Perhaps to a fault — Lucious trails her to Brooklyn to ink a deal but instead finds himself preventing her from killing a rival who joked in a rap battle about her father’s death. Gatz is the best pure rapper on “Empire,” a wordsmith of commendable character and grace. But more important to the plot, the character is volatile and unpredictable. Lucious’s power is sustained by his ability to read people, but even he was surprised when Freda pulled out the gun.Lucious ultimately has his revenge for Hakeem’s homecoming party betrayal, recruiting Andre to help him scuttle Lyon Dynasty. (For Andre, the prospect of his father’s renewed trust proved to be irresistible.) A newly motivated Andre secures control of Apex Radio, the Clear Channel-inspired conglomerate Empire considered partnering with last season, and poaches Valentina, the talented, troublesome lead singer of Mirage à Trois, devastating Dynasty’s roster and airplay prospects. (It’s unclear why anyone at Dynasty continues to trust Andre with inside information after he publicly swore allegiance to the rival company.) Lucious sees Andre’s passion and business acumen as powerful assets, but he extracts what he needs through calculated distance, a cold measure rendered prudent by Dynasty’s betrayal.We were given another exasperating full family powwow this week — they’re becoming a tradition — as Lucious gathers the Lyons early in the episode for a homecoming dinner and a final offer to forgive the Lyon Dynasty uprising. Cookie’s spiteful refusal to cooperate is shocking, since Lucious risked his life to save hers just days before the meeting. The upshot: Both Lucious and Cookie are losing their invincibility, step by ill-advised step.Five excellent quips from an episode chock-full of them:Lucious, as a reporter questions how he’ll run Empire after the prosecutor Roxanne Ford requested that he be barred from the company premises: “Well, that’s just a building. I am the Empire.”Cookie, on finding out that Hakeem has been sleeping with Valentina: “Hooking up with the lead singer in your all-female group? That is just an ‘Unsung’ episode waiting to happen, stupid.”Lucious, as Jamal asserts that Roxanne’s bail stipulation “can’t stop a king from speaking to his subjects”: “Blasphemy. I’m a god.”Cookie, in response to Lucious’s offer for a truce: “I doubt if Jesus Christ himself could save you without burning his hands.”Valentina, chiding her Mirage à Trois bandmate at practice: “You couldn’t find a C major if it was right in between your legs, which it ain’t.”