By ANTHONY TOMMASININOV. 25, 2015
You might think that being the music director of a major orchestra provides sufficient challenges and opportunities for any conductor. Yet for many, one such post is not enough. Not long after Andris Nelsons finished his first season as music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra earlier this year, he was also appointed to the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra in Germany.To his credit, while Alan Gilbert, the music director of the New York Philharmonic, who will step down from that role in 2017, regularly makes important guest appearances, he has made teaching his other main activity. For the most part, when he is not working with the Philharmonic at David Geffen Hall, Mr. Gilbert can be found just across the street at the Juilliard School, where he is director of conducting and orchestral studies.That the students are grateful for his dedication came through on Tuesday evening at Carnegie Hall in an exciting concert by the Juilliard Orchestra. Mr. Gilbert led the ensemble in vibrant and accomplished performances of Schumann’s “Manfred” Overture, Berg’s Three Pieces for Orchestra and “A Ring Synthesis,” a 40-minute compilation of excerpts from Wagner’s “Ring” cycle, arranged by Mr. Gilbert.In the Schumann overture, rather than milking the music for melodrama, Mr. Gilbert drew out its rhapsodic and searching qualities. Berg’s Three Pieces, completed in 1915, can be heard as his attempt at a three-movement symphony, or as character pieces by a composer on the path to becoming a major force in opera.AdvertisementMr. Gilbert and his players conveyed the dramatic conflicts and complexities of the music, especially in the opening Präludium, in which a mass of quivering figures and hazy textures crest into tortuous outbursts, and the final movement, a hurtling march — though here it sounded like Berg’s deconstruction of the march idiom. The piece culminates with pummeling percussive hammer strokes that surely nod to Mahler’s Sixth Symphony. The performance was at once raw and radiant.Mr. Gilbert modeled his synthesis of excerpts from the “Ring” on a similar arrangement by the conductor Erich Leinsdorf. Though students at Juilliard get to play varied repertory, they don’t get many cracks at Wagner’s “Ride of the Valkyries,” or his music depicting Siegfried’s Rhine journey or funeral march. This arrangement folds such excerpts into a continuous flow that includes Wotan’s transfigured farewell to Brünnhilde and the wondrous dawn awakening from “Götterdämmerung.” Tuesday’s performance, though not flawless, offered velvety string playing, urgency, brassy climaxes galore and alluring tenderness during ruminative passages.AdvertisementThe hall was packed; the final ovation was tremendous and deserved.A version of this review appears in print on November 26, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Philharmonic’s Music Director Shows Off the Results of His Other Job.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.