By NATE CHINENNOV. 25, 2015
“Silver”(Heads Up)When you pause to celebrate a milestone for a beloved band or album, you’re also potentially peering back toward an earlier version of yourself. Smooth jazz doesn’t encourage such reflection, not because the music isn’t cherished but because the genre has changed so little over time, despite a series of disruptions for its industry. There’s something to admire in this steadiness, even if it suggests complacency, or a form of stasis.Fourplay first took shape in 1990, after its members worked on an album by the pianist Bob James. A highly proficient collective originally with Mr. James on keyboards, Nathan East on electric bass, Harvey Mason on drums and Lee Ritenour on guitar, the group found instant success in a propitious era for crisply articulated instrumental pop. Its self-titled debut album sold more than half a million copies, becoming something like a classic in the style.“Silver” commemorates Fourplay’s 25th anniversary by adhering to form. It’s a sleek but relaxed album that highlights the band’s strengths as a rhythm section. So a track like “Sterling” involves a billowing pulse and an aerated melody, while “Aniversario,” by Mr. East, deftly flirts with Brazilian funk. “Quicksilver,” by Chuck Loeb, the group’s current guitarist, features a springy melodic hook over a four-on-the-floor beat.Beyond the on-the-nose song titles, the album acknowledges band history by way of inclusion: Mr. Ritenour resurfaces on one track, and his initial successor, Larry Carlton, appears on a lite-funk tune called “Silverado.” Notwithstanding the faint distortion on a tune called “Silver Streak,” the album steers clear of rough textures and dynamic tension.But those were never part of the bargain, anyway. Fourplay’s members may delve into other areas — Mr. James and Mr. East just released “The New Cool” (Yamaha Entertainment Group), a mostly acoustic affair — but its style is clearly delineated. The band, which appears at the Blue Note from Tuesday through Dec. 6, didn’t get this far by reinventing the wheel.A version of this review appears in print on November 26, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: With ‘Silver,’ Fourplay Celebrates 25 Years of Smooth Jazz Stylings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.