AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben Ratliff“Mutant”(Mute)For the Venezuelan electronic-music producer Arca, a note is a living cell, and rhythm, pitch and tone are organic processes. He creates blooms and warps in his own arrangements of beats or melodies, and likewise he finds the bloom and warp in a sample of any outside sound, human-made or not. Then he’ll make it supersized and dissipated and unrecognizable. Depending on your hearing, any small segment of his music is moving toward something beautiful or ugly, but it’s always moving purposefully, letting you know that it’s not finished.That constant now-ness must be part of Arca’s appeal to the artists who have sought his collaboration in the last few years, like FKA twigs, Björk and Kanye West: He erases old boundaries and forces you to hear as if other kinds of music don’t exist. (He didn’t drop out of the sky, of course: He has spoken about learning aesthetics from Aphex Twin albums and the live D.J.ing of Venus X, Shayne Oliver and Total Freedom, among other sources.) His sounds make you feel like you’re walking into the future, but of course they’re not the future — they’re just the microscopic present rendered in bold and aggressive gestures, aided by software.Increasingly, his own work doesn’t really propose variants on hip-hop or house or dark-ambient — it’s both more stretchy and more obdurate than any of those definitions. His new album, “Mutant” — his second full-length, after last year’s “Xen” — comes from a wordless, abstract, deep-inside-the-head place. It contains tunefulness and noise in 20 shortish tracks and doesn’t really put a wall between one state and the other.And so in “Sever” and “Gratitud,” tracks with more harmonic movement than most here, he uses a glassy, zither-like strumming sound with heavy reverb. “Else” features a sound like a koto. (Presumably he’s using a keyboard, but those three pieces sound like they could have been played by Pat Metheny on his 42-string Pikasso guitar.) “Sinner” is mostly metallic, machine-like clangor; “Extent” sounds like the bowings of an imaginary string orchestra, punctuated by open space. He starts from sounds that exist in the world and moves into many more that don’t.There’s plenty of drama here: All of Arca’s gestures have drama. But the downside of the now-ness, the resistance against static definition, is lack of resolution. “Mutant” is hard to listen to, sometimes in a salutary way and sometimes not. Much of it feels like magnificent research, or a series of proposals: ways to think about sound rather than a finished work. That might even be the point, though I doubt there’s only one.Advertisement