AdvertisementSupported byBy David Allen“Are you still working on that?” It’s a line that’s instantly familiar, a refrain chanted out by harried, underpaid restaurant servers. There’s a ritual to eating out, and a liturgy that goes with it, meant to move the diner from hunger to satisfaction (or not) and out of the door.Just like a concert program, according to the composer Eric Moe. In his “Let Me Tell U About R Specials” (2005), live and prerecorded flute lines chatter like customers at a table, trying to talk as a waiter’s sampled monologue interrupts. Food culture and musical life, the piece suggests, both use scripts that have become irritatingly predictable.The New York debut of Music on the Edge, on Tuesday, wasn’t predictable at all. This ensemble is based in Pittsburgh and directed by Mathew Rosenblum and Mr. Moe, whose morsel was played with conviction by Lindsey Goodman. The group was celebrating its 25th anniversary season with a filling spread at SubCulture, where, despite reported troubles, beer still helps the music go down.The entree was Burr Van Nostrand’s “Fantasy Manual for Urban Survival” (1972), an underappreciated trio for alto flute (Ms. Goodman), cello (Dave Eggar) and prepared piano (Mr. Moe). In six movements, including one that has the flutist and cellist intone a Hölderlin poem (“Hälfte des Lebens”) in Sprechstimme over evocative, wintry tones, Mr. Van Nostrand’s distinctive voice pushes each instrument’s sonic boundaries to the breaking point.The mood is predominantly violent, an allusion to campus violence during the Vietnam War. The composer allows the flute and cello to arrive at havens — single notes in which their timbres seem to merge — but these oases don’t last long before carnage intrudes. Yet it’s the sadness of these moments that seems to be the piece’s essence, particularly in three movements marked “Schwangesang” (“Swan Song”).Five more pieces acted as amuse-bouches, rather than full courses. Roger Zahab contributed two for percussion (Lisa Pegher, tremendous): “A Spunky Twenty-Eight” (1998), a fanfare for snare drum and tom-toms, and the alluring “Deceived by Starlight” (1996) for vibraphone. Mr. Rosenblum’s “Northern Flicker” (2012) is a more ambitious percussion work, a pounding showpiece of rhythmic flair.Mr. Moe played a piano dance dedicated to him by Lee Hyla, “One Moe Time (Waltz for Eric),” its rhythms distorted by abrasive runs. And Amy Williams’s “First Lines” (2006), with the composer at the piano, created satisfying miniatures from the opening lines of several poems. “Shhhh, my grandmother is sleeping,” from verse by Marilyn Chin, prompted snores from Ms. Goodman’s flute — just like those that follow a hearty meal.Advertisement