AdvertisementSupported byCritic's NotebookBy Gia Kourlas“Did you see that?” the parent asks.“What?” the child says. “Where?”“The cannon fired cheese!”“I don’t understand!”It’s “Nutcracker” season, and parents are excited for good reason. But what I’ve found over the years is that the biggest disrupters at performances aren’t usually their children but them. (Not to mention aunts and uncles, whether real or default.) Fearful that a child may be confused, they narrate along with the dancing. Worse, they quiz their charges during the show, which only brings on unnecessary panic for the kids. Believe me, young friends, there’s always something I don’t understand during a dance performance.This is part of the point: It takes practice to watch dance, and excursions to the theater shouldn’t be treated like school. The idea is to get them to like it, right?For many children, “The Nutcracker” will be their first experience of live theater. If you don’t want your child to talk during a performance, do what I do: Pour a handful of M&M’s — or any pellet-size candy — into his or her lap. (Skirts are ideally shaped; for pants, add a napkin.) Explain the candy rules: Stay calm; eat one at a time. This way, there are no crinkly wrappers and no chatter: just a stress-free task that frees them up to pay attention.To optimize the viewing experience, here is a guide — in order of calendar appearance and including some options for older audiences — to help you decide on the right “Nutcracker.” I was a pretty good camp counselor, but I don’t know your child. Would she rather wear a tutu herself than watch dancers perform in them? Can he sit for longer than 10 minutes without squirming? There’s always the easy solution of a family-friendly show, in which quality may suffer but brevity counts. And there’s another option for the truly antsy: Maybe she shouldn’t be watching dances but actually dancing. The new term  starts soon at Mark Morris Dance Center.This “Nutcracker” is not for children but for adults who want to get away from them. The director and choreographer Austin McCormick revives his naughty version — a blend of burlesque and baroque — in which Cherries strip down to pasties and the Arabian dance takes place on a pole, and not the kind found in the North. Open to those 16 and older.Nov. 25-Jan. 17; Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, West Village; 800-745-3000, companyxiv.com. Experiencing this 1954 classic is more than addictive; it’s nourishing, from the opening party scene to the magnificent tree, which grows to 40 feet, from 12. No matter how old you are, it still feels like magic. The second act, devoted to dancing, culminates in one of Balanchine’s most exalting pas de deux. The production features children from the School of American Ballet and is wonderful for kids. But even though you might be tempted, try not to dazzle them when they’re too young to appreciate it. Recommended for ages 5 and up.Nov. 27-Jan. 3; David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, nycballet.org. At just over an hour, this abbreviated production, featuring dancers from Ms. Kozlova’s Dance Conservatory of New York, keeps it simple. In this suite of dances, beginning with the snow scene and continuing with the divertissements, there’s no party, no Clara and no story. An annual showcase, “Nutcracker Winter Suite,” was staged by Ms. Kozlova, a former member of the Bolshoi Ballet as well as New York City Ballet, and Margo Sappington, who helped to arrange the program. Recommended for ages 4 and up.Dec. 5; Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway at 95th Street; 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org. When Russians are involved, there are bound to be certain advantages: a magnetic sense of theater, along with decent costumes and sets. This  “Nutcracker” unfolds at Mayor Stahlbaum’s annual Christmas Eve Ball — a hot ticket, apparently — and features the dancers Ekaterina Bortiakova and Akzhol Mussakhanov in the leads, as well as new set designs by Carl Sprague, who is known for his work in films like “The Grand Budapest Hotel.” His Waltz of the Flowers scene is inspired by the gardens in the Grand Palace of Peterhof in St. Petersburg. Recommended for ages 5 and up.Dec. 5; Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn; 800-745-3000, moscowballet.com.Ms. Kirkland, along with Michael Chernov, presents a version of “The Nutcracker” that doesn’t shy away from drama. For Ms. Kirkland, a former ballerina with New York City Ballet and American Ballet Theater, “The Nutcracker” is about a rite of passage — a journey from fear to love. The opulent sets and costumes, purchased at a 2012 auction from New York City Opera, are reasons to see this production. And another is the opportunity to check out Ms. Kirkland’s new digs: Her company and school recently relocated to Dumbo, Brooklyn, from TriBeCa. Recommended for ages 5 and up.Dec. 10-20. GK Arts Center, 29 Jay Street, Brooklyn; gelseykirklandacademyofclassicalballet.org.Francis Patrelle celebrates the 20th anniversary of “The Yorkville Nutcracker,” which is set in 1895 and includes a party scene at Gracie Mansion and a snowflake-skating scene in Central Park. Here, the Sugar Plum Fairy is Abi Stafford, and her Cavalier is Adrian Danchig-Waring; both are from New York City Ballet. Other cast members of note? Matthew Dibble, who dances with Twyla Tharp, and Justin Peck of “The Phantom of the Opera” alternate in the role of the Snow King. Recommended for ages 4 and up.Dec. 10-13; Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College, 695 Park Avenue; 212-772-4448; www.dancespatrelle.org. This 70-minute ballet, produced by Rose Caiola and set in present-day New York, is choreographed by a collective: Brian Reeder, Deborah Wingert, Daniel Ulbricht, Marina Stavitskaya and Natalia Boesch. “The Knickerbocker Suite” showcases New York City landmarks, while the Snowflakes are reimagined as frantic, last-minute shoppers. As for Mother Ginger? She is the Statue of Liberty; her Polichinelles are immigrants. Recommended for ages 5 and up, but since there’s no intermission, you could probably push it to 4.Dec. 11-13 and 18-20; Manhattan Movement & Arts Center, 248 West 60th Street; 212-787-1178, manhattanmovement.com. Diana Byer’s New York Theater Ballet returns with this “Nutcracker,” set in the Art Nouveau style of 1907 and featuring set designs by Gillian Bradshaw-Smith and costumes by Sylvia Taalsohn Nolan, the Metropolitan Opera’s resident costume designer. The show is especially designed for children from 2 to 8 years old, so if you’re skeptical about the candy-in-the-lap routine, but still want the “Nutcracker” experience, this is a safe bet. It’s only an hour. Bring earplugs — it won’t be just your child talking.Dec. 11-13; Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street; 212-355-6160, nytb.org.If you’re in the mood for something different yet still scrupulous, that’s both musical and a visual feast — the production is based on the designs of the cartoonist Charles Burns — head to Brooklyn for “The Hard Nut,” Mark Morris’s version set in the 1970s. The party scene is a raucous delight, but there are moments of incandescent beauty, too, including the snow scene, in which dancers throw glittery stuff; and the tender, romantic pas de deux. Recommended for ages 4 and up. But as with Balanchine’s version, you don’t need the excuse of having a child to go.Dec. 12, 13, 16-20; Brooklyn Academy of Music Howard Gilman Opera House, 30 Lafayette Avenue at Ashland Place; 718-636-4100, bam.org. Decidedly choreographed for families — the recommended age range is 5 to 10 — this two-hour production, by Rose Menes, is set in colonial Yorktown and features narration. Is that a good thing or a bad thing? (I don’t love it.) In any case, you have been warned.Dec. 13; Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Walt Whitman Theater at Brooklyn College; 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org.This company, led by its founder and director, Ellen Tharp, offers a “Nutcracker” set in 1915 New York that emphasizes diversity. Clara’s father, played by James Washington, a former member of Dance Theater of Harlem, is an African-American ambassador to Liberia; Clara’s mother is white. The ballet opens with homeless children and adults huddled around a fire at the gates of the family mansion. Clara invites them inside. (This spirit goes beyond the show: The company offers a free performance for homeless families, children with special needs and the elderly.) And as for the Land of the Sweets? It’s been relocated: Drosselmeyer’s secret workshop is hidden in Grand Central Terminal. Recommended for ages 3 and up.Dec. 19-20; Center for the Arts, College of Staten Island, 2800 Victory Boulevard; 718-980-0500, siballet.org. Advertisement