The Spanish singer Julio Iglesias, one of the highest-selling international artists ever, has once again topped Billboard’s Latin pop chart with his new album, “Mexico,” and is currently touring that country, from Guadalajara to Monterrey. So it’s only natural, given his recent focus — the album, which Mr. Iglesias has said will be his final studio release, honors classic Mexican songwriters — that the topic of Donald Trump has been unavoidable.When asked by journalists about Mr. Trump’s comments that Mexican immigrants to the United States are “rapists” well-versed in drugs and crime, Mr. Iglesias has hit back, calling the Republican presidential candidate “a clown” — before apologizing to clowns.In an interview on Wednesday from his tour in Mexico, Mr. Iglesias reiterated comments he made to the Spanish newspaper La Vanguardia, and promised to no longer perform in venues bearing Mr. Trump’s name. “I’ve met Trump three or four times because I’ve played his places,” Mr. Iglesias said. “I think his brain and his heart are not connected right now. It’s not correct, his position.”He continued: “I will never again play in his casinos. I don’t want to hurt the immigrants all over the world, and there are many casinos I can play that aren’t owned by Mr. Trump.” (Mr. Iglesias joins Univision, Macy’s, NBC and more in severing business ties with the freewheeling candidate.) Through a spokesperson, Mr. Trump responded, “Good, I don’t like his voice or his performances anymore, anyhow!” Mr. Iglesias said he believes Mr. Trump is using nationalism “to go on television.” He added, “I think he likes the light in his eyes and he’s found a way to have a lot of light now.” However, “Donald Trump should not exercise his strength in politics to put down the people who built the country,” he said.But Mr. Iglesias also emphatically, and preemptively, dismissed the notion that he was using current events as promotion. “When I started this album two years ago, I was not thinking I would have something to do with Mr. Trump,” he said. “I’m 72 years old and I’m maybe the biggest Latino artist in history. If you think that I need that now, that’s wrong. At my age it’s too late to embrace situations just to gain something.”