 JON CARAMANICA, JON PARELES, BEN RATLIFF and NATE CHINENDEC. 21, 2015
THE mythology of a boxed set is often one of completion — it provides framework and boundaries to an artist, or a scene, or a sound. And these days compilations of this sort tend toward two directions — omnibus releases of an artist’s full catalog or ever-more-obscure digs into regional subcultures and other short-lived styles lost to time. In both cases, what seems like a full picture is often just a steppingstone to broader inquiry. A great boxed set doesn’t end conversations; it begins them. Here, the pop and jazz critics of The New York Times spotlight the most provocative and curiosity-inducing collections from this year. More detailed information is at nytimes.com/giftguide. JON CARAMANICADavid Bowie “Five Years: 1969-1973”; Parlophone; 12 CDs; vinyl setThe first in a series of comprehensive Bowie boxes, this set skips his early missteps and instead dives in where the Bowie mythos begins: “Space Oddity,” which showed his comfort with baroque (and also oddball) character and narrative. Featured here are the six studio albums from this period, spanning the first flickers of glam rock on “The Man Who Sold the World” to the spectacle in full flower on “The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders From Mars.” (The inessential covers album “Pin Ups” is here as well.) Rounding it all out are two live albums, a stereo version of “Ziggy Stardust” and “Re: Call 1,” which includes odds and ends: mono editions, single edits and “Ragazzo Solo, Ragazza Sola,” a version of “Space Oddity” with new lyrics in Italian. JON CARAMANICAJoe Castro “Lush Life: A Musical Journey”; Sunnyside Records; six CDsJoe Castro was a good jazz pianist in the mid-1950s — concise, cool, swinging. He was also dating the tobacco heiress Doris Duke, among the richest women in the world. One of the ways that his romantic life changed his jazz life was that he could invite his friends over to play in a nice studio over the garage. The tapes from those sessions are released here for the first time. Mostly they come from the house in Beverly Hills, once owned by Rudolph Valentino, where Castro lived with Duke; or from the Duke family’s New Jersey estate. They involve some of the great and inveterate jammers of the day. On the West Coast: Buddy Collette, Chico Hamilton, Teddy Edwards, Billy Higgins and Leroy Vinnegar. On the East Coast: Zoot Sims and Oscar Pettiford and Lucky Thompson. You should be excited reading the name Lucky Thompson — in 1956 he was stealthy and brilliant, even in casual circumstances like these — but in general this is a set of solid, genial work organized by one of the few jazz musicians who didn’t have to hustle. BEN RATLIFF‘The Complete Bee Hive Sessions’ Mosaic Records; 12 CDsJazz’s position looked shaky in the 1970s. What would take it forward? Super-technical fusion? Brazilianish light funk? Post-free experimental rawness? Jim and Susan Neumann, the mom and pop of Bee Hive, weren’t buying any of that. They wanted to make casual, soulful, small-group records by postbebop-generation musicians in their 40s and 50s who’d never made it big as bandleaders — the pianists Junior Mance and Roland Hanna, the baritone saxophonist Nick Brignola, the tenor saxophonist Clifford Jordan, the trumpeter Dizzy Reece — as well as the great baritone singer Johnny Hartman, who’d grown obscure but retained his chops. This box set — 16 albums from 1977 to 1984 — is the label’s entire run. The music here, full of standards and mostly out of print, can feel workmanlike. But it can also be stylish and seriously poignant, including Jordan’s “Hyde Park After Dark,” Curtis Fuller’s “Fire and Filigree” and Hartman’s “Once in Every Life.” BEN RATLIFFAdvertisementMiles Davis “At Newport 1955-1975: The Bootleg Series Vol. 4”; Columbia/Legacy; four CDsMiles Davis effectively began his major-label career at the Newport Jazz Festival: It was his graceful turn at the 1955 festival that led to his being signed by Columbia. That performance appears here alongside recordings from subsequent Newport sets, spanning 20 years. The material, almost four hours of which was never previously released, moves through Davis’s storied evolution like a series of progress reports: Both of his celebrated quintets make strong showings, as do several exploratory fusion bands. The only catch is in the title. Because the Newport Jazz Festival became a global brand, a few of these concerts happened not in Newport, R.I., but in places like New York City or (in a combustible highlight) West Berlin. NATE CHINENAdvertisementBob Dylan “The Cutting Edge 1965-1966: The Bootleg Series Vol. 12”; Columbia/Legacy; 18-CD Collector’s Edition; six-CD Deluxe Edition; two-CD Best of Edition; and additional formatsIn 13 whirlwind months, from January 1965 to February 1966, Bob Dylan recorded “Bringing It All Back Home,” “Highway 61 Revisited” and “Blonde on Blonde,” transforming himself from folkie to rocker and showing a generation how much more ambition a song could hold. He was reinventing the sound and meaning of rock, and doing it impulse by impulse. The process is revealed on “The Cutting Edge,” collections of studio outtakes from those albums: two nicely culled discs, “The Best of the Cutting Edge,” for the curious; six discs, the Deluxe Edition, for devotees; and the Collector’s Edition, 18 discs — every recorded moment — for the fanatical. Even the two-disc version includes song fragments known only from bootlegs, like “Lunatic Princess” and “You Don’t Have to Do That.”For the three days of sessions that yielded “Bringing It All Back Home,” it’s clear Mr. Dylan came to the studio with lyrics and melodies solidly worked out, ready to be accompanied by a band or left alone; he tries “Mr. Tambourine Man” with a drummer, then decides against it. Six months later, for “Highway 61 Revisited,” he’s thinking like a bandleader, testing out tempos, keys and approaches: “Like a Rolling Stone” as a waltz? “It Takes a Lot to Laugh, It Takes a Train to Cry” hurtling down the track like “Subterranean Homesick Blues”? And by the time he records songs for “Blonde on Blonde,” after a year of booing folkies and rock-star adulation on the road, everything is free to change. “Visions of Johanna” starts out as a fast rocker and slows down, a dozen takes later, to its sullenly knowing tempo; “One of Us Must Know (Sooner or Later)” gradually throttles up; “Just Like a Woman” briefly flirts with honky-tonk. In the six-CD set, a full disc devoted to takes of “Like a Rolling Stone” shows the musicians hitting the pinnacle early — Take 4 — and then fruitlessly trying to better it. None of the outtakes outshine the album versions, but they reveal how much Mr. Dylan was following brilliant instinct, not a master plan. JON PARELES‘Folksongs of Another America: Field Recordings From the Upper Midwest, 1937-1946’ Dust-to-Digital/University of Wisconsin Press; book, five CDs and DVDMost celebrated field recordings of American folk music are documents of the rural South, but this absorbing collection makes the case for a different milieu entirely — “a territory of deep woods, inland seas, mines, mills, and hardscrabble farms,” as its producer, James P. Leary, observes in the accompanying 456-page book. A mind-boggling swath of material, variously recorded in the upper Midwest by Alan Lomax, Sidney Robertson and Helene Stratman-Thomas, it encompasses jigs and chanteys, lumberyard chants and lullabies, two-steps and drinking songs. There’s a Finnish chant said to cure hiccups; there are Serbian folk tunes, Swedish yodels and a ritual song by the Ojibwe fiddler Joe Cloud. A supplemental DVD contains “The Most Fertile Source: Alan Lomax Goes North,” a new documentary with previously unseen footage from a trip to the Upper Peninsula of Michigan in 1938. NATE CHINENTennessee Ernie Ford “Portrait of an American Singer”; Bear Family Records; five CDs with a 120-page bookTennessee Ernie Ford started not by singing in bars but as a radio announcer out West, switching between sober news reports and a hillbilly show called “Bar Nothin’ Ranch Time.” Crossing over became his normal mode. Once discovered, he became a national bard with a killer bass-baritone voice: refined, stentorian, corny around the edges. (It could be all that in one song, as in the sublime “Chicken Road.”) Early on he sang crisp and teasing hillbilly boogie, but eventually grew elsewhere: into folk, gospel, heavy-drapery pop, and semi-operatic songs about donkeys, cute dogs and Santa Claus. When country singers were suiting up in pastel colors and rhinestones, Ford took on the appearance of statesman, professor or gentleman farmer, presenting Americana cabaret with homestead values. He was a television presence, as host of the “Kollege of Musical Knowledge,” and eventually of his own popular half-hour variety program, “The Ford Show.” (That renown gave him an instant audience for “Sixteen Tons,” in 1955, his biggest hit.) Bear Family’s lavish and informed box set — full of rare photos and historical essays — stops in 1960, just before Ford lost his modicum of hipness and plunged into alcoholism and Bohemian Grove meetings. The music comes entirely from the archives of Capitol Records, which set him up with the sophisticated and slightly eccentric arrangements of Jack Fascinato — a Stravinsky-Kenton-easy-listening thicket of clarinets, oboes, jazz improvisers, electric guitars and strings. Consistent through it all is the voice: oh, the voice. Like Dorival Caymmi with goofiness, or Hank Snow with depth of feeling. BEN RATLIFFAdvertisementJackson C. Frank “The Complete Recordings”; Ba Da Bing!; three CDs; six LPs; and other formatsJackson C. Frank put out only one album before his death in 1999. His self-titled 1965 release, produced by Paul Simon, was a collection of pensive and unsentimental songs, with his kindly tenor voice accompanied by just an acoustic guitar or two. Frank’s life before and after 1965 was difficult; he was badly scarred during a fire at his elementary school, and in later years he was in and out of mental hospitals and sometimes homeless. He wrote and recorded songs when he could, and they were just as folky and approachable as his earlier ones,yet newly cryptic and even more haunted, particularly the half-dozen songs from the early 1970s that this collection has unearthed. His last recordings, solo in a kitchen in 1997, show a far more weathered singer, but not a bitter one. JON PARELES‘Hulaland: The Golden Age of Hawaiian Music’ S’more Entertainment/Rockbeat Records; four CDs, with hardcover bookLess a work of scholarship than the product of hobbyist enthusiasm, this collection revels in retro grass-skirt exoticism, celebrating not only the likes of the steel guitarist Sol Ho‘opi‘i but also Betty Boop and the “Hawaii Five-O” theme. Produced in consultation with the cartoonist Robert Armstrong, the set features his colorful illustrations; reproductions of vintage sheet music and memorabilia from his collection; and a handful of tracks he has recorded with Ken Emerson, as the slack-key guitar duo Ken and Bob. NATE CHINENThe Isley Brothers “The RCA Victor & T-Neck Album Masters (1959-1983)”; Legacy; 23 CDsEarly in their career, the Isley Brothers bounced from label to label, but only truly hit their stride with the founding of their own, T-Neck. This heavy box is an almost complete set of the group’s output right up until the time hip-hop became central to black pop (and which they would be a part of, through samples). The music is familiar and frisky: lustrous soul that omnivorously takes in gospel, rock and especially funk. Most notable here is the inclusion of “Wild at Woodstock,” a silky live studio recording that has never before been released in full. JON CARAMANICA‘King Jammy’s Roots, Reality & Sleng Teng’ 17 North Parade/VP; two CDs and one DVD‘Gussie Clarke: From the Foundation’ 17 North Parade/VP; two CDs and one DVDWhen reggae went fully electric in the mid-1980s, King Jammy was the plug, a producer of smooth reggae who instantly understood what he had on his hands with Wayne Smith’s “Under Me Sleng Teng,” the song that set the table for the genre’s digital dash. “Roots, Reality & Sleng Teng” shows his work before and after that moment, though its not-quite-secret secret is that, even as the genre was morphing, he remained partial to smooth singers like Frankie Paul (“I Know the Score”) and John Holt (“If I Were a Carpenter”). The producer Gussie Clarke also survived reggae’s great shift, but his transition, as captured on “From the Foundation,” was perhaps even more striking, moving from roots records with Big Youth to slick crossover with Shabba Ranks. JON CARAMANICALaddio Bolocko “Live and Unreleased: 1997-2000”; No Quarter; two CDs; three LPsCraw “1993-1997”; Northern Spy; six LPs; three CDsTwenty or 30 years ago box sets were often conceptual and, historically speaking, horizontal: They proposed a broad idea about a scene or a sound or an aesthetic. These days they tend to be more proprietary and vertical — the complete works of a single label or a single band. The results are thoughtless, if it’s a well-known band, or completely to the point, if it’s one that few people ever knew. Which is where Laddio Bolocko and Craw come in. Laddio Bolocko played dirty, aggressive, improvised, exacting and oblique instrumental music — with guitars, drums and the saxophonist Marcus DeGrazia — in Brooklyn during the mid-to-late-90s, when the rock scene there was unimpressive at best. (I never saw them. I only knew what became of them: Two members, Drew St. Ivany and Ben Armstrong, went on to found the excellent band the Psychic Paramount; the indefatigable drummer Blake Fleming helped start the Mars Volta.) During the band’s life it rehearsed where it lived, jamming for hours, collapsing the space between free jazz and prog-rock, and put out records in small pressings. Laddio Bolocko broke up in 2001, and two years later the label No Quarter released the band’s studio recordings posthumously. But now we get the tapes from its rehearsals and live sets, and perhaps that’s even better. This was almost a private band, and the box set provokes a kind of double-take: Did this even really happen? Before Laddio Bolocko, Mr. DeGrazia had been a member of Craw, a Cleveland band also doing something dirty and aggressive, but with more structure and less jamming, growing out of American postpunk sources like the Jesus Lizard. Craw’s first three albums, reissued in this box set, were organized explosions, increasingly complex and forecasting a strain of meticulous but heavy music that’s still developing around the world; they were recorded by Steve Albini, who likes dry vocals and powerful drums. Both sets are missing links from a strange dead zone in American underground rock — the six or seven years, let’s say, after Nirvana and before the reinvention of Brooklyn. BEN RATLIFFAdvertisementLead Belly “The Smithsonian Folkways Collection”; Smithsonian Folkways; large-format book, five CDsSomehow there had never been a comprehensive survey of recordings by Lead Belly — a.k.a. Huddie William Ledbetter, the Louisiana folk hero and bluesman, and a figure of great lasting influence — before this lavishly produced set. The music, including a rare radio broadcast from 1941, conveys deep, unshakable self-possession, no less in Lead Belly’s quavering holler than in his 12-string acoustic guitar playing. An accompanying coffee-table book is chock-full of striking photographs, reproduced handbills and letters, and insights. NATE CHINENArthur Lee & Love “Coming Through to You”; Rockbeat; four CDsMid-1960s Los Angeles psychedelia reached one of its peaks with Arthur Lee’s band, Love. His songs swiveled amid folk rock, blues rock, jazz, baroque pop and, now and then, flamenco; his voice and lyrics could be wild-eyed, enigmatic or disarmingly unguarded. But Lee, who died in 2006, toured sporadically, and the record company that released Love’s best album, “Forever Changes,” in 1967, didn’t leave behind high-quality live recordings. This anthology of Love in concert starts in 1970, with Love’s sinewy but less adventurous second lineup, still honoring the songs’ odd shapes. Two guitar acoustic shows from 1992 bare the vulnerability and waywardness in Lee’s songs, and triumphal early 2000s performances of “Forever Changes,” backed by strings and horns, prove how durable those psychedelic artifacts remain. JON PARELESLittle Richard “Directly From My Heart: The Best of the Specialty & Vee-Jay Years” Specialty/Concord; three CDsYou know the Little Richard story. For about a year and a half in the mid-1950s he was on an unmatchable tear, one that changed pop music history. “Tutti-Frutti,” “Long Tall Sally,” “Lucille,” “Keep a Knockin’,” “Jenny, Jenny”: They all flooded out in that stretch, before Little Richard announced that he was leaving pop for a life in the ministry. This set collects everything from that era, and adds some of the material he recorded in the 1960s after he returned to secular music — though its attempts to remain current with R&B’s changes only underscore how charmed his initial run was. JON CARAMANICAJohnny Mathis “The Singles”; Columbia/Legacy; four CDsThis aquatically soothing set collects everything Mr. Mathis released first as a single, which is to say his most craven and market-geared material, though to be fair, for a stretch from the mid-1950s to the mid-1960s, Mr. Mathis and the market were practically one and the same. A judicious singer who expressed excitement or passion with quick jumps in octaves or syrupy notes held for seconds, Mr. Mathis specialized in the gentle vocal gesture. When this set arrives at the late 1960s, he sounds out of sorts in his attempts at folk. That detour aside, early songs like “Let’s Love” and “Call Me” are whispered arguments for the beauty and resilience of restraint. JON CARAMANICA‘mu20: 20 Years of Planet Mu’ Planet Mu; three CDs, MP3 and one book; three LPs; two CDsIf there’s been a crisp, fractured, breakneck form of electronic music in the last two decades, Mike Paradinas has made it himself or released it. His label, Planet Mu, has been a consistent inspiration at the more frantic edges of electronic music, and also a hub of reinvention, moving from the IDM of the late 1990s through the less muscled stripes of dubstep into a flirtation with grime and, most recently, becoming the biggest international advocate for footwork, the frenetic Chicago dance-floor style. This sweat-inducing box is comprised almost wholly of unreleased material from the label’s long run — twisted, nervy experimentation by Hrvatski; rapid-fire video-game assaults by Datach’i; gut-punch chaos by Venetian Snares; R&B sped up and chopped into pieces by DJ Nate. In tempo and energy, these songs are car chases, but they’re unmistakably elegant. JON CARAMANICAPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The National “A Lot of Sorrow”; 4AD; nine LPsThere’s only one song on this sleek, expensive objet d’art by the National. That’s a selling point, in case you were wondering. “A Lot of Sorrow” is the byproduct of a durational performance, conceived with the Icelandic artist Ragnar Kjartansson, in the VW dome at MoMA PS1 in 2013. That piece featured the band playing its mopey anthem “Sorrow” for six hours straight — an experience you are now free to replicate with these nine LPs, made of translucent vinyl and stored in a screen-printed box. (Yes, it’s a lot, but don’t say they didn’t warn you.) NATE CHINEN‘Nu Yorica!: Culture Clash in New York City: Experiments in Latin Music 1970-77’ Soul Jazz Records; two CDs; two LPsAdvertisementTwenty years ago, the English label Soul Jazz released a valuable double-disc anthology of New York’s Latin music from the prime salsa era, “Nu Yorica!,” compiled by Stuart Baker, the label’s founder. It went beyond the popular records of the day for radio and dancers, looking instead toward longer jams with stronger Cuban and Puerto Rican roots or toward dense funk and electric jazz. Every track here is deep, rigorous and searching, taken from albums including those by Charlie Palmieri, Joe Bataan, Stone Alliance and others. It’s not a story of surefire hits, but a story of collective trances and intuitive musical expansion. The set’s been out of print for years — pick one up before it disappears again. BEN RATLIFF‘Ola Belle Reed and Southern Mountain Music on the Mason-Dixon Line’ Dust-to-Digital; two CDs and one bookThis box celebrating the life and influence of the mountain-music veteran Ola Belle Reed, who died in 2002, is really a tale of the passions of two folklorists. In the 1960s, Henry Glassie traveled to rural Pennsylvania and recorded Ms. Reed extensively. She has a commanding, slippery voice, conveying sadness and fortitude with equal intensity. By the time Mr. Glassie discovered her, she was practiced and formidable — these crisp recordings are practically acts of reverence. The Reed songs comprise the first disc here, and her shadow hovers over the second. Clifford Murphy returned to the region around four decades later to document the ways her influence persisted. A noble, worthy quest, but one that only reinforces just how vital Ms. Reed sounds, even with a half-century’s distance. JON CARAMANICA‘The One-Derful! Collection’ Secret Stash Records; one CD; two LPsRemember that irresistible 1960s dance craze called “The Sock,” in which “the feelin’ is a groove/ makes you wiggle when you move”? Few others do, either; it was a barely noticed 1966 song with a big backbeat and a yakety saxophone by the Sharpees, led by Benny Sharp from Mississippi on guitar. It’s one of the soul gems recorded by One-Derful!, a Chicago label that often looked toward the Southern soul of Stax Records rather than the suaver, jazzier style usually associated with Chicago soul. This opening volume of a six-part series includes the label’s most famous names: Otis Clay, Betty Everett, the Five Du-Tones (with their renowned precursor to twerking, “Shake a Tail Feather”). Others, like Liz Lands and McKinley Mitchell, have voices that still leap out and tear things up. JON PARELESRoy Orbison “The MGM Years, 1965-1973”; Roy’s Boys/Universal; 13 CDs; 14 LPsRoy Orbison “One of the Lonely Ones”; Roy’s Boys/Universal; one CD; one LPIn 1965, MGM Records signed Roy Orbison to a $1 million contract with grueling details; $25,000 a year for 20 years, three albums a year. Orbison was hugely productive. He wrote concise, unconventionally structured songs suffused with desperate yearning, and sang them in his long-breathed tenor, which rarely left melancholy behind, even in his soaring crescendos. But his career faltered — partly from record-company misfires, partly because the psychedelic era didn’t welcome an orchestra-loving rockabilly-era holdout in horn rims, no matter how startling his songs were below the surface. That makes “The MGM Years,” particularly the 1960s albums and singles, a trove of underappreciated material, especially suited to tearful moments. Mr. Orbison’s family also discovered, for separate release, an entire 1969 album that MGM had inexplicably rejected: “One of the Lonely Ones,” with Orbison in elegantly downhearted form. JON PARELES‘Punk 45: Extermination Nights in the Sixth City — Cleveland, Ohio: Punk and the Decline of the Mid-West 1975-82’ Soul Jazz; one CD; two LPs‘Punk 45: Burn Rubber City, Burn! — Akron, Ohio: Punk and the Decline of the Mid-West 1975-82’ Soul Jazz; one CD; two LPsAdvertisementIn the mid-1970s, manufacturing in the Midwest was collapsing, and punk was manifesting amid its ashes. These two compilations, part of a continuing series, are efficient digests of how the Midwest was molting in real time. Cleveland and Akron, while only about 40 miles apart, had decidedly different inspirations and paths of evolution. Cleveland had the slick Pagans, the exorbitantly strange Electric Eels and the foundational art-punks Pere Ubu. Akron, more directly affected by the 1970 shootings at Kent State, and also the vibrant assortment of artists, musicians and writers who taught there, spawned the pungent Rubber City Rebels and the highly evolved conceptual punks in Devo. JON CARAMANICAR.E.M. “REMTV”; MTV/Rhino Records; six DVDs“REMTV” spans 25 years of R.E.M.’s performing live, 1983-2008: on small stages and huge ones, calmly acoustic or loud and distorted, wearing T-shirts or suit and tie. The band was gawky at first, but Michael Stipe’s command as a frontman grew with R.E.M.’s audience. And from the beginning, R.E.M. was rightly confident that its musical boundaries — a mid-1960s spectrum of folk rock, garage rock and psychedelic pop, charged with a hint of punk recklessness and delineated by Peter Buck’s guitar picking — were capacious enough for decades of ideas. The set doesn’t include R.E.M.’s music videos — only its live shows, which often repeat obligatory hits like “Losing My Religion.” The sixth disc is a documentary built from MTV interviews through the years, showing a band determined to follow its own impulses. JON PARELESBobby Rush “Chicken Heads: A 50 Year History of Bobby Rush”; Omnivore Recordings; four CDsBobby Rush made his first singles in the late 1960s as a soul shouter; the funky “Chicken Heads,” in 1971, was the song that got him noticed. But he had been playing guitar and harmonica on the blues and R&B chitlin’ circuit for years before that, and he has spent most of his career where the chitlin’ circuit survives in the Deep South, where blues, soul and funk are all part of the mix. This collection demonstrates his tenacity, his adaptability from blues moans to nasal funk yowls to suave soul, and his stockpile of down-home, storytelling songs full of everyday situations and wry raunchiness, delivered with plenty of humor amid the grit. In “I Got 3 Problems,” he itemizes: “I got a problem with my woman, with my girlfriend and my wife.” JON PARELESFrank Sinatra “A Voice on Air (1935-1955)”; Legacy; four CDs and bookHe may have popularized the concept album, headlined television specials and enjoyed success on the silver screen, but Frank Sinatra had an especially charmed relationship with the medium of radio. This collection gathers broadcasts from the first 20 years of his career, opening with the Hoboken Four on “Major Bowes Amateur Hour.” The rest of the trove, culled from multiple archives, comes with the trappings of the given format: cigarette endorsements, cornball banter, callouts to the troops. In his pitches and preambles, Sinatra often sounds like the skinny kid that he was at the time — but as soon as his voice meets a melody, cushioned by Axel Stordahl’s gilded arrangements, a deep composure descends, pointing the way forward. NATE CHINENSly and the Family Stone “Live at the Fillmore East October 4th & 5th, 1968”; Epic/Legacy; four CDsThe ecstatic, kaleidoscopic glory of a concert by Sly and the Family Stone was no secret by the time the band appeared at Bill Graham’s Fillmore East in the fall of 1968. This previously unreleased material — four full sets, from a two-night stand — captures that funky transcendence in rich detail. Along with Sly Stone’s explosive magnetism, it’s a showcase for an unbeatable band dynamic, at once supertight and blazingly unhinged. NATE CHINENBruce Springsteen “The Ties That Bind: The River Collection”; Columbia; four CDs, three DVDs, 200-page bookBruce Springsteen’s 1980 album, “The River,” was expansive — two LPs interlaced with themes of fleeting time and tenuous human connections — even as it forged his newly succinct songwriting approach of character studies told as laconically as possible. Getting to that balance was torturous. Dozens of songs were recorded and set aside; a 10-song album was prepared for release, then withdrawn and reworked for a year. This boxed set expands the original album with the one-LP version and 22 finished but unused songs — half of them previously unreleased, including worthy ones like “Chain Lightning,” “Stray Bullet” and “Little White Lies.” The DVDs hold an hourlong documentary of Mr. Springsteen’s reminiscences about making “The River” and more than two hours of a 1980 concert in Arizona with Mr. Springsteen and the E Street Band in their wild-eyed, crazy-legged prime. JON PARELESAdvertisementThe Staple Singers “Faith and Grace: A Family Journey 1953-1976”; Stax/Concord, four CDs and one seven-inch singleThe Staple Singers “Freedom Highway Complete”; Epic/Legacy; one CD; two LPsThe Staple Singers celebrated the promise of heaven and called for better times on earth. Roebuck (Pops) Staples and his harmonizing children — Mavis, Cleotha and either Pervis or Yvonne — had a gloriously close-knit sound. Pops, born in Mississippi, defined the songs with his bluesy, twangy electric guitar and sang some gently devout lead vocals; Mavis stepped forward for the rest, with a deep voice that became even gutsier and sultrier as she grew up. In the 1960s the Staples joined the civil rights movement, singing alongside the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and infusing Bob Dylan songs with gospel; in the 1970s, they brought redemptive sentiments to the Top 10 with “I’ll Take You There.” The anthology “Faith and Grace” chooses judiciously from decades of material, while “Freedom Highway Complete” captures one charged moment: a service in a Chicago church in 1965, just weeks after King’s march from Selma to Montgomery, Ala. In a song Pops had just written, Mavis declared, “Made up my mind and I won’t turn around.” JON PARELES‘Ultra-High Frequencies: The Chicago Party’ Numero Group; CD and DVD; two LPs and DVDNow we have the Internet; three decades ago we had UHF, the off-brand TV channels that were home to all sorts of oddball programming, too much of it lost to time. Fortunately, “The Chicago Party” remains. A show designed to promote a nightclub, CopHerBox II, it ran for 23 Saturdays in 1982. There was music, sure — many almost-were Chicago acts of the day are assembled on this collection of spirited and sassy funk-soul and jumpy disco, including strong tracks from Jesus Wayne and Ken Allison. But the DVD here is where the real action takes place: live performances, grown folks dancing, on-the-fly fashion shows, variety-show humor, and the sort of arbitrary weirdness that happens when cameras are running and no one is watching. JON CARAMANICAUnwound “Empire”; Numero Group; MP3 or FLAC download; four LPs; four LPs and a bonus LPUnwound, a very postpunk band from Olympia, Wash., lasted just over a decade (1991-2002). It stayed rigorously alternative — as in writing unpop songs and touring only all-ages venues — while the world discovered grunge. Unwound’s songs were serious, dissonant and made for both visceral power and conceptual rigor, riffing hard and asymmetrically behind contentious, sardonic lyrics. Numero Group has been gradually reissuing Unwound’s albums, and “Empire” completes the job with the band’s last two albums, “Challenge for a Civilized Society” (1998) and the double album “Leaves Turn Inside You” (2001), along with demos. The songs churn and squall, make math-rock patterns and plow through them, drone and seethe, glower and persevere; even when the music turns low and slow, there’s a coiled tension. JON PARELESThe Velvet Underground “The Complete Matrix Tapes”; Polydor/Universal; four CDsThese CDs consist of 42 tracks of live recordings made by the Velvet Underground in a small San Francisco club called the Matrix on Nov. 26 and 27, 1969. Fifteen ended up on “1969: Velvet Underground Live,” which came out on LP in the mid-70s, after the group had ended; to some ears it’s the best thing the band ever did, even with its slightly amateurish four-track audio. What you have here is mostly not the obdurate noise and drones of their early work (though there is a little of that), but something different, joyful and delicate and intimate. Here was where the group did it all best, folding together Memphis R&B, Tin Pan Alley, Bob Dylan, Bo Diddley and the sensual aggression of the early New York minimalists. Lou Reed sounds as engaged as he could be, singing alternate verses to his story-songs, playing rhythm guitar with obsessive focus; Maureen Tucker’s drum beats were precise and calibrated, not just simple. This isn’t an art project — it’s a working band. Even better, the whole thing has been given a new mix, such that you can hear the music in all its particulars. BEN RATLIFFDavid S. Ware/Apogee “Birth of a Being”; Aum Fidelity; two CDsNo one exerted a more powerful center of gravity in avant-garde jazz over the last 35 years than the tenor saxophonist David S. Ware, who died in 2012. This two-disc set gathers his earliest studio recordings, made in 1977 with the fearless trio he called Apogee. The music is volatile, blazingly spiritual and fiercely in the moment, with the pianist Cooper-Moore and the drummer Marc Edwards straining to match Ware’s volcanic outflow. Disc 1 was originally issued on LP in Europe, and has been out of print for decades; Disc 2, from the same sessions, features music of equal fire and purpose, and has never been available in any form. NATE CHINENWeather Report “The Legendary Live Tapes 1978-1981”; Legacy; four CDsWeather Report formed in 1971, on the leading edge of jazz fusion, but its peak commercial success came later, after the addition of the electric bass virtuoso Jaco Pastorius. These concert recordings, from the same period that yielded the Grammy-winning live album “8:30,” capture a band in full, unabashed ascendancy. The keyboardist Joe Zawinul and the saxophonist Wayne Shorter, its joint leaders, walk the line between melodic focus and fanciful digression. Peter Erskine, the drummer (and one of this set’s producers), pushes just as hard, locking in tight with Pastorius on signature tunes like “Black Market” and “Birdland.” NATE CHINENMore details about each set are at nytimes.com/giftguide.A version of this article appears in print on November 27, 2015, on Page C15 of the New York edition with the headline: Bursting From a Box: Rockers, Wailers and More.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.