
The Knick By                     
 MIKE HALE
 
DEC. 3, 2015
Several significant things happened in Friday night’s episode of “The Knick,” titled “Williams and Walker.” Lucy Elkins and Henry Robertson finally had sex. Thackery separated the conjoined twins Nika and Zoya. Gallinger reached his lowest point yet, sabotaging Edwards’s surgery on D.W. Garrison Carr. The famous vaudeville duo of Bert Williams and George Walker entertained the swells at the gala benefit for the new uptown Knickerbocker Hospital.But the real stars were Steven Soderbergh and his camera. Mr. Soderbergh (serving as his own cinematographer) opened the gala sequence with a continuous two-and-a-half-minute shot through a series of grand spaces that was showy but undeniably impressive. The camera followed two couples — the Edwardses, Algernon and Opal, and Bertie Chickering and his date, Genevieve Everidge — across a foyer and through a door into a ballroom, where it rose fluidly to survey the dancers, then slowly backed away in a different direction, into a corridor where it picked up Herman Barrow and Captain Robertson.It changed direction again to follow them back to the foyer, where it rose and did a complete 360-degree circle around the clustered Robertsons and Showalters before once again slowly backing up, across the room, until Lucy and Henry walked in front of it, waving to the other Robertsons who were now in the distance. It was the kind of bravura moment Mr. Soderbergh indulges in every once in a while, as if to say, Yeah, it’s TV. So what? Planning and rehearsing that one shot must have taken as much time as some television shows devote to filming an entire episode.Back to those other things that happened. There were actually two initial sexual experiences depicted in the episode. Chickering and Everidge were first, and their coupling was as playful and jittery as the Elkins-Robertson pairing was calculated and practiced. Literally practiced — Lucy sat in on a session between Ping Wu and one of his prostitutes, even offering Wu her unstockinged foot as a sexual aid.AdvertisementThackery’s revolutionary surgery on the twins was a little anticlimactic — it was at best the third story line in the episode. Still unsure of himself, he snorted cocaine, swigged turpentine and made a late-night, pre-op visit to the grave of Sonya Smyslov, the little girl whose death haunts him (so much that he paid $65 for an imposing headstone). As the jangling metallic noises on the soundtrack grew louder, Thack reached into his pocket for a fix but then decided to call Abigail instead. The cure for addiction apparently isn’t lobotomy or hypnosis, it’s having the woman you love say she believes in you. Now riding high, he went into his showman mode and successfully separated the twins before a packed gallery, though not before summoning Henry Robertson to record the operation on his new motion-picture camera. Afterward the always curious Thackery asked about the mysterious substance used to record the images, and was told it was a new invention called celluloid.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cornelia Robertson finally got more than a few minutes onscreen, and her investigation of the health inspector Speight’s murder actually took an interesting turn — she determined that the skullduggery by which sick immigrants were snuck into the country (rather than sent back to Europe) was being initiated by her own family’s shipping company. Later her creepy father-in-law walked in on her when she was in her robe, but rather than make advances, he berated her for wasting her time on Speight when she should be doing her duty to the Showalter family by getting pregnant. Then things got worse: her husband, Phillip, told her that her father was in debt to his father, and that she needed to go along with his father’s wishes or see her father ruined.AdvertisementAnd then there was poor Algy Edwards, dumped on by everyone in sight. (1) Carr, with Opal’s support, forced Edwards’s hand and got himself admitted as the hospital’s first black patient (not counting those Edwards secretly treated in the basement). Thackery, who hadn’t yet asked the hospital’s board about admitting African-Americans, threw up his hands and said, “You fight this alone.” (2) After the gala, Opal confronted Captain Robertson about Edwards’s role at the new hospital, and it was clear from his non-answer that Algy might not have any role. (3) Edwards’s showcase, the hernia surgery on Carr, was ruined when Gallinger’s doctored curare caused Carr to stop breathing and lose his pulse. Gallinger then leaped to the rescue, correctly diagnosing the condition (which he had caused) and successfully blaming it on Edwards. The episode ended with Edwards trying to figure out what had happened — you suspect he will turn the tables on Gallinger before the season ends — and being comforted by Opal, who told him, in words freighted with meaning, “You’re going to have better days.”A quick note on Williams and Walker, whose blackface minstrel-show act didn’t appear to unduly offend even the proud Opal. They were the leading black performers of their day, popularizing the “cakewalk” dance and billing themselves as “Two Real Coons” — the phrase used by Herman Barrow’s wife when she introduced them — to distinguish themselves from the many white vaudevillians who wore blackface.Let us know your thoughts about “Williams and Walker.” A question for discussion: will Lucy Elkins’s bold strategy to win Henry Robertson prove effective, or will Cornelia’s warning about the difference in their stations — “I don’t want you to be crushed” — be prophetic?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »