Wheeldon/McGregor/Bausch
Palais Garnier.
Dec. 3-31.This performance combines the work of three modern choreographers: Christopher Wheeldon, Wayne McGregor and Pina Bausch. It is billed as a tribute to Pierre Boulez, the 90-year-old French composer and conductor known for his experiments in electronic music. Mr. McGregor will show the world premiere of “Alea Sands,” a work he created with the conceptual artist Haroon Mirza that has been set to music by Mr. Boulez. It will be bookended by Mr. Wheeldon’s technically complex “Polyphonia” and Bausch’s “The Rite of Spring.”Jean Paul Gaultier: From the Sidewalk to the Catwalk
Kunsthalle München.
Through Feb. 14.The clothing designer Jean Paul Gaultier was in his mid-20s when he released his first solo collection. He wasn’t formally trained, but he had already worked for the designers Pierre Cardin and Jean Patou. First shown in Montreal, this exhibition encompasses the nearly 40-year-career of Mr. Gaultier, the former creative director for Hermès. The show mixes pieces selected from his couture line and ready-to-wear collections, alongside costumes for the theater and cinema.Gilbert & George: The Art Exhibition
MONA.
Nov. 28-March 28.The artists Gilbert Prousch and George Passmore first met at Saint Martin’s School of Art in London in 1967. Almost 50 years later, the duo is inseparable, continuing to create bold and provocative graphics under the banner of Gilbert & George. In their first exhibition in Australasia, 97 pictures are on display. Spotlighted are works from the series “Jack Freak Pictures,” aptly titled for its use of the Union Jack.Jerusalem International Dance Week
Various venues.
Through Dec. 3.The Machol Shalem Dance House in the Musrara neighborhood hosts this weeklong festival, which unites local performers with international ones. On stage will be “Gender Bender,” a throwback to the culture of the 1980s by Idan Cohen, an Israeli choreographer, and “Object” by Ivgi & Greben, an experimental dance duo from Israel and the Netherlands. The International Choreography Competition also takes place during the week.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Marrakesh International Film Festival
Palais des Congrès.
Dec. 4-12.Now in its 15th year, the Marrakesh Film Festival focuses this year on masterpieces of Canadian cinema. The prize jury is to be led by the director Francis Ford Coppola. The festival also includes master classes by the directors Abbas Kiarostami, Park Chan-wook and Fatih Akin. Another anticipated spot on the program is the Cinécoles competition, with a prize given to the best short by a Moroccan film student.Asia Pacific Triennial of Contemporary Art
Queensland Art Gallery, Gallery of Modern Art.
Through April 10.The eighth Asia Pacific Triennial brings together more than 80 artists and groups from 36 countries. Highlights this year include “Yumi Danis (We Dance),” a multimedia installation that celebrates dance from six island nations in the region, and “Kalpa Vriksha,” a project focusing on indigenous and vernacular art across India. Works from the photo series “Blood Generation” by Taloi Havini and Stuart Miller are showing. The project takes a closer look at the people on the island of Bougainville, an autonomous region of Papua New Guinea, whose land is increasingly encroached on for the sake of mining.Nissan Art Award
BankART Studio NYK 2F.
Through Dec. 27.This year’s winner of the Nissan Art Award, dedicated to new and emerging talent, is Yuko Mohri, a conceptual artist from Kanagawa. She creates unique installations, often of a large scale, that put mundane objects next to machine parts and old tools. Tsuyoshi Hisakado received the Audience Award: He combines sound props with light fixtures to create sparse, clean installations. Ms. Mohri and Mr. Hisakado are among the seven finalists presenting works at the exhibition in Yokohama.International Festival of New Latin American Cinema
Various venues.
Dec. 3-13.Havana’s film festival is dedicated to cinema that engages with Latin American and Caribbean culture. More than 200 movies from 28 countries will be shown this year as part of the “Latin America in Perspective” program. The festival also awards prizes in the categories of fiction, documentary and animation, among others. The main prize, the Grand Coral for Best Film, was won last year by the Cuban director Ernesto Daranas for “Conducta,” about the relationship between a young student and his teacher.Worlds of Romanticism
Albertina Museum.
Through Feb. 21.Romanticism, an artistic movement that emerged in central Europe in the early 19th century, sought to capture the mystical relationship between man and nature, and allowed for the expression of an artist’s own emotions. At the Albertina, 160 works drawn from the Academy of Fine Arts in Vienna and international collections, deal with these themes. Joining the likes of Francisco Goya and Peter Birmann, one of the masters on display is Caspar David Friedrich.Picasso’s Passion for El Greco
Picasso Museum.
Through Jan. 17.When he was 16, Picasso moved from Barcelona to Madrid and enrolled in the Royal Academy of Fine Arts of San Fernando. He soon swapped his classes for free time at the Prado. Here he became enchanted by the work of El Greco, whose influence is particularly visible in Picasso’s Blue Period and the rise of Cubism. This exhibition puts on display “An Old Gentleman,” one of El Greco’s most admired paintings. The portrait is featured alongside more than 30 of Picasso’s works, all of which were inspired by the Greek master.