AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.‘La Bohème’ (Friday and Monday) Franco Zeffirelli’s colorful fairground ride of a production returns with a mild-mannered cast led by the affable soprano Barbara Frittoli and the efficient tenor Ramón Vargas as the ill-fated pair of lovers. A charismatic group of singers made up of Ana María Martínez, Levente Molnar, Alexey Lavrov and Christian Van Horn portrays their bohemian friends. The conductor Paolo Carignani is a steadfast guide through Puccini’s classic melodrama; the Met’s chorus and children’s chorus in fine form. Friday at 8 p.m., Monday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ ‘Lulu’ (Saturday and Thursday) William Kentridge’s new production of Alban Berg’s wrenching masterpiece is an instant Metropolitan Opera milestone. The South African artist’s gripping ink drawings and animations are projected onto sliding walls to evoke this staging’s German Expressionist setting. The cast is excellent, especially the stunning soprano Marlis Petersen in her signature role as Lulu, a young woman who emerges here as both temptress and victim. The conductor Derrick Inouye has taken over for the final performances in the run. Saturday at 7:30 and Thursday at 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)Opera Lafayette (Tuesday) Based in Washington, the ensemble Opera Lafayette has won consistent praise and loyal audiences for its historically informed productions of French Baroque operas using period instruments, appropriate costumes and elegant dancing. The troupe opens its season with its first Vivaldi opera, “Catone in Utica,” bringing the director Tazewell Thompson’s production to New York. The opera tells of the defiant Cato’s conflicts with the emperor Julius Caesar, come to crisis in the North African city of Utica. Ryan Brown, the company’s artistic director, conducts. At 8 p.m., Gerald W. Lynch Theater at John Jay College, 524 West 59th Street, Clinton, 202-546-9332, operalafayette.org. (Tommasini)★ ‘The Rape of Lucretia’ (Wednesday through Dec. 12) LoftOpera, the iconoclastic, increasingly popular company, presents Benjamin Britten’s 1946 chamber opera in the first of seven performances. Fully staged by Laine Rettmer, it’s conducted by Dean Buck. At 8 p.m., 501 Union, 501 Union Street, between Bond and Nevins Streets, Gowanus, Brooklyn, loftopera.com. (David Allen)‘Rigoletto’ (Wednesday) The dramatic baritone Zeljko Lucic takes on the title role as the soprano Nadine Sierra steps into the role of Gilda in this fresh and confident revival of Michael Mayer’s production, set in a Las Vegas casino. The ardent tenor Piotr Beczala returns to sing the Duke of Mantua; the bass Dimitry Ivashchenko and the mezzo Nancy Fabiola Herrera round out the cast as the assassin Sparafucile and his sister Maddalena. Roberto Abbado conducts. At 7.30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)‘Tosca’ (Saturday and Tuesday) After a rotating cast of principals the revival of Luc Bondy’s grim-louche production winds down with the conductor Joseph Colaneri at helm and the voluptuous-voiced Liudmyla Monastyrska in the title role, alongside the wonderful tenor Roberto Aronica as Cavaradossi and Marco Vratogna as Scarpia. Saturday at 12:30 p.m., Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)American Modern Ensemble (Thursday) This contemporary music group joins forces with the Claremont Trio for a lunar-themed program of works by Claude Baker, Robert Paterson, Judith Shatin and George Tsontakis. At 7 p.m., National Sawdust, 80 North Sixth Street, at Wythe Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)Noah Bendix-Balgley (Friday) The new first concertmaster of the Berlin Philharmonic, previously the principal violin of the Pittsburgh Symphony, makes an appearance at Brooklyn’s floating concert hall. With the pianist Orion Weiss, he plays Janacek, Brahms and Strauss. At 8 p.m., Bargemusic, Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org. (Allen)Philippe Cassard and Cédric Pescia (Sunday) The circular music room at the Frick Collection, an invitingly intimate space for chamber music and recitals, should be an ideal place to hear the New York debut of the four-hand piano duo Philippe Cassard and Cédric Pescia. They play works by Mozart, Debussy and Brahms, ending with Schubert’s great Fantasie in F minor. At 5 p.m., Frick Collection, 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, 212-288-0700, frick.org. (Tommasini)Ian Hobson (Tuesday) Mr. Hobson, the prizewinning British pianist who has won acclaim for his compelling performances of an enormous repertory, continues his series titled “Preludes, Etudes and Variations — Downtown/Uptown.” For the second program, he plays works by Chopin, Debussy, Rachmaninoff and Szymanowski. At 7:30 p.m., SubCulture, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 212-533-5470, subculturenewyork.com. (Tommasini)Juilliard Songfest (Thursday) Franz Liszt is in the spotlight for this Songfest. Brian Zeger, a prominent collaborative pianist, has assembled the songs, which will be performed by gifted Juilliard students under three headings that represent various elements of Liszt’s life: Landscapes, Looking Inward and Love. At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-799-5000, events.juilliard.edu. (Schweitzer)Evgeny Kissin (Thursday) This Russian virtuoso pianist performs chamber music infrequently in public, but as part of his ongoing Perspectives series at Carnegie Hall, he will join the violinist Itzhak Perlman and the cellist Mischa Maisky for Schubert’s Piano Trio No. 1 and Tchaikovsky’s Piano Trio in A Minor. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)New York Composers Circle (Tuesday) Advocating new music comes no better than a concert full of it. This important group plays work for strings and piano by Roger Blanc, Richard Brooks, John Eaton, Susan J. Fischer, Joe Gianono, Emiko Hayashi, Carl Kanter and Debra Kaye. At 7:30 p.m., St. Peter’s Lutheran Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street, nycomposerscircle.org. (Allen)New York Philharmonic (Friday, Saturday and Thursday) The energetic conductor Ludovic Morlot steers the orchestra into the final bend of its Rachmaninoff Festival with performances of the composer’s Third Piano Concerto, featuring the breathtaking pianist Daniil Trifonov, as well as the Symphonic Dances. Those dances also feature in Saturday’s matinee performance, which opens with the orchestra’s glittering brass section performing arrangements of music by Handel, Albinoni, Glinka and Bernstein. On Thursday, Alan Gilbert leads the Philharmonic as it partners with Lincoln Center for “Sinatra: Voice for a Century,” a star-studded gala tribute to Frank Sinatra; vocalists include Christina Aguilera, Fantasia and Sting. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Thursday at 7:30 p.m., David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Tristan Perich (Thursday) The music of this pianist-composer is inspired by physics, math and code. Mr. Perich creates simple electronic tones by sending pulses of electricity to a speaker, resulting in oscillations at a particular pitch, called one-bit tones. Here, he offers a program of solo improvisations on piano and 1-bit electronics. At 8 p.m., Roulette, 509 Atlantic Avenue, near Third Avenue, Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, 917-267-0363, roulette.org. (Schweitzer)Riverside Symphony (Wednesday) This orchestra has long presented ideally balanced programs, and here’s another: There is Grieg, Bartok and Delius, plus a Charles Avison arrangement of Domenico Scarlatti and, not least, the premiere of William Anderson’s “Djuna Barnes Settings,” sung by the contralto Elizabeth Farnum. At 8 p.m., Merkin Concert Hall, Goodman House, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, riversidesymphony.org. (Allen)★ ‘Steel Hammer’ (Wednesday through Dec. 6) Julia Wolfe’s “Steel Hammer,” the Pulitzer Prize-winning composer’s meditation on the John Henry folk myth, receives a staged reimagination from the director Anne Bogart and SITI Company, with new texts by four playwrights. The Bang on a Can All-Stars are joined by three singers and a battery of Appalachian instruments. At 7:30 p.m. (3 p.m. on Dec. 6), BAM Harvey Theater, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 651 Fulton Street, near Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Allen)Tropos Ensemble (Thursday) This contemporary duo, featuring the pianists Luca Chiantore and David Ortolà, filters well-known works through a contemporary prism. In a concert presented by Musikeon, they offer their adaptations of Chopin’s Prelude in C-sharp Minor (Op. 45) and Piano Sonata No. 2, and Mussorgsky’s “Pictures at an Exhibition.” At 8 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)Advertisement