NOV. 27, 2015
Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater (Wednesday through Jan. 3) For a New York holiday tradition without the Sugar Plum Fairy, get thee to City Center for Ailey’s monthlong winter season. After four years of shepherding the company into exciting artistic territory, the artistic director Robert Battle contributes a new work titled “Awakening” to the repertory. Also new this year are premieres from Rennie Harris, Ronald K. Brown and Kyle Abraham. A Paul Taylor work also joins the lineup, along with works by Talley Beatty, Hofesh Shechter and Christopher Wheeldon, among others. And, of course, “Revelations” will be on repeat. At various times, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, alvinailey.org. (Brian Schaefer)American Dance Guild Festival (Thursday through Dec. 6) This annual festival celebrates dance of the past, promotes dance of today and honors those making significant contributions to the field. This year, recognition goes to the choreographers Liz Lerman, known for her multigenerational work; Doug Varone, a long time staple of the New York dance scene; and Alice Teirstein, the founder of Young Dancemakers. Their work will be shown over four separate programs, accompanied by a number of other artists and companies, including work by Merce Cunningham. Thursday through Dec. 5 at 8 p.m., Dec. 6 at 7 p.m., Ailey Citigroup Theater, 405 West 55th Street, Clinton, 800-838-3006, americandanceguild.org. (Schaefer)Anneke Hansen Dance (Wednesday through Dec. 5) Ms. Hansen’s new work, “Hymn” looks at physical exertion from a place of reverence. It also attempts to question gender expectations by focusing on female strength and masculine sensuousness (in one section, the men don flowing dresses to illustrate the point). Costume plays a central role in another section as well when a voluminous black skirt consumes much of the performance space, representing the work’s broad ambition. Wednesday and Thursday at 8 p.m., next Friday and Dec. 5 and 7 and 9 p.m., Irondale Center, 85 South Oxford Street, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, annekehansendance.com. (Schaefer)Advertisement★ Soulemayne Badolo (Wednesday through Dec. 5) Many artists who hail from a place and culture different from the one in which they reside use that heritage in service of their work. This can be a powerful tool, but also confining. Soulemayne Badolo, a seductive performer from Burkina Faso who is now based in Brooklyn, grapples with that dichotomy in “Yimbégré” (“beginnings” in the Mooré language) where traditional Burkinabé dance is in dialogue with contemporary dance. The drummer Mamoudou Konat provides live music for Mr. Badolo and the dancer Sylvestre Koffitse Akakapo-Adzaku. At 7:30 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schaefer)AdvertisementLizt Alfonso Dance Cuba (Friday through Sunday) Dance exports from Cuba tend to portray the island in cheerful, apolitical terms, and Ms. Alfonso’s “Cuba Vibra,” performed by her company of two dozen musicians and dancers, is no exception. This energetic show at the family-oriented New Victory Theater, appropriate for ages 6 and up, packs five decades of Cuban dance history into 95 minutes. The synchronized precision of the Rockettes meets the flair of flamenco and salsa. Friday and Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m., Sunday at noon and 5 p.m., 209 West 42nd Street, 10th floor, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org. (Siobhan Burke)Monica Bill Barnes (Wednesdays through Dec. 16) Karaoke night meets office party in “Happy Hour,” the latest concoction from Ms. Barnes and Anna Bass, best known these days as the dancers — alongside the radio personality Ira Glass — in the touring revue “Three Acts, Two Dancers, One Radio Host.” Their new weekly gig, in a Lower Manhattan dance studio, features the cheeky duo playing two guys playing their everyday selves, as Ms. Barnes continues her love affair with awkwardness, failure and physical comedy. The audience gets drinks, prizes and the chance to sing. At 6:30 p.m., Studio G, Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, 646-837-6809, monicabillbarnes.com. (Burke)★ Company XIV (through Jan. 17) If the traditional “Nutcracker” evokes the transition from childhood to adolescence, then Company XIV’s “Nutcracker Rouge” might be the subsequent crossover into adulthood and the accompanying sexual awakening. The choreographer Austin McCormick combines a strong dose of burlesque, baroque and ballet with glittered pasties and G-strings for a charmingly sensual and playful holiday romp. Tchaikovsky never sounded so scandalous. Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., Sundays at 5 p.m., Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-745-3000, companyxiv.com. (Schaefer)Complexions Contemporary Ballet (through Sunday) Having relocated to Atlanta after 20 years in New York, Complexions returns to its native city for a busy season at the Joyce Theater. Its two-week run, which ends this weekend, includes new works set to Metallica, Bach and the jazz singer Jimmy Scott, as well as a tribute to Maya Angelou and a premiere by the company’s co-director Dwight Rhoden, an extension of his 2009 ensemble work “Mercy.” Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Gallim Dance (Thursday through Dec. 6) We sometimes speak of love as a stand-alone idea, but wound in there is sex (its physical expression) and domesticity (its day-to-day practice). Andrea Miller, the founder and choreographer behind Gallim Dance, explores these layers in her new work, “Whale.” Backed by Jordan Chiolis’s live electronic score that taps into love’s foreboding side, Ms. Miller uses her typically raw, gestural vocabulary to evoke the vulnerability that is love’s blessing and curse. Thursday and next Friday at 8 p.m., Dec. 5 at 2 and 8 p.m., Dec. 6 at 2 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)Marguerite Hemmings and Katrina Reid (Wednesday through Dec. 5) For more than 30 years, the choreographer Jawole Willa Jo Zollar has celebrated the stories of black women through dance. As a mentor in Gibney’s DoublePlus series, she has selected two young artists who are doing the same. In the solo “we free,” Ms. Hemmings uses street dance to express the millennial generation’s sense of what she calls “aggressive” freedom. In “Don’t move too slow through the broken glass,” Ms. Reid tells a personal tale with help from bluegrass, R&B, and house music lyrics. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Schaefer)Movement Research Festival Fall 2015 (Monday and Thursday through Dec. 5) Jaamil Olawale Kosoko begins this festival on Monday at Judson Memorial Church, a dance venue that for him raises questions about history, memory and space. Starting Thursday, the action moves to Danspace Project at St. Mark’s Church, where the South African artist Nelisiwe Xaba presents an evening of solos addressing the complicated politics of her birthplace. On Friday, Abby Zbikowski and Gwen Welliver each contemplate the impact of what they call “kinetic imagination.” And on Saturday, Melinda Ring revisits her 1999 work “Impossible Dance #2 (still life)” in two distinct ways. Monday at 8 p.m., Judson Memorial Church, 55 Washington Square South, Greenwich Village, movementresearch.org. Thursday through Dec. 5 at 8 p.m., St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Schaefer)★ New York City Ballet (Friday through Jan. 3) Thanksgiving leftovers are still in the fridge and yet Christmas is here since “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” is back on stage. Of the dozens of productions in town, none match the scale of City Ballet’s or the giddy sense of childlike awe it inspires. Pantomime dominates the first half but Act II culminates in a breathtaking pas de deux for the Sugar Plum Fairy and her Cavalier. After all, this is a duet for Balanchine and Tchaikovsky, too, and it’s magical. At various times, David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement★ Tere O’Connor (Wednesday through Dec. 12) A news release for Tere O’Connor’s new work, “The Goodbye Studies,” says it will “embrace tangent and anomalous structural conceits.” Head scratching though that may be, Mr. O’Connor consistently manages to turn such esoteric ideas into surprising and satisfying dances of substance. Here, he employs his strong sense of drama and a knack for meaningful gestures to examine his group of 12 dancers as a single entity rather than individual beings – which is quite a task since individually, they’re captivating. At 8 p.m., the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org. (Schaefer)Pilobolus (through Dec. 6) A girl on the verge of womanhood falls asleep and wakes up in a surreal fantasy world. Nope, not “The Nutcracker” (though stay tuned). This is “Shadowland,” a new adventure from Pilobolus receiving its United States premiere. In collaboration with Steven Banks, a writer of “SpongeBob SquarePants,” the company delivers a mix of theatrical spectacle and physical inventiveness soaked in wonder. As per its title, “Shadowland” showcases two-dimensional silhouettes formed by creative contortions of the body. (No performance on Monday.) Friday and Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., Tuesday through Thursday at 7 p.m., Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, 566 La Guardia Place, at Washington Square South, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111, nyuskirball.org. (Schaefer)‘Show Me the Tap… Show Me the Soul!’ (Friday through Sunday) After a one-night performance in 2014, Tap Soul Productions brings back this musical revue for four performances. Starring the Broadway veterans JL Williams and Jarran Muse, the show features original music, singing and, of course, lots of tapping to tell an oft-told tale about resilient artists fighting for their dreams with big hearts and big sounds. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 and 7:30 p.m., Hudson Guild Theater, 441 West 26th Street, Chelsea, 212-760-9800, tapsoulpro.com. (Schaefer)A dance entry in the Listings pages last Friday about Gallim Dance at the Joyce Theater in Manhattan, using information from a publicist, misstated the given name of the composer of the score for the work “Whale.” He is Jordan Chiolis, not Jared. The entry also referred incorrectly to Gallim Dance’s founder and choreographer at one point. As the entry correctly noted elsewhere, she is Andrea Miller, and thus Ms. Miller, not Ms. Gallim.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 27, 2015, on Page C22 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Dance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.