By LAUREL GRAEBERNOV. 27, 2015
It’s like an alternate universe. The space is as crowded, noisy and bristling with energy as the New York we all know, but also softer, gentler and infinitely welcoming. Crime never threatens; traffic rarely collides; and all the taxis are tiny, round and cute. For that matter, so are the cabbies.This is “NYC + Me: A Little Bite of the Big Apple,” an exhibition at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan that celebrates life in the big city with its smallest residents. It also explains it: Amid all the places to pretend and play — and drive child-size police cars and taxis — visitors old enough to read will learn interesting facts. Did you know that by calling 311, you can get information in more than 170 languages? (A nonworking telephone lets little ones practice.)Sprawling throughout a 3,000-square-foot gallery, the show offers opportunities to role-play — from sanitation worker to the mayor — and quintessential city scenes. “Tastes of New York,” a giant fake food cart, lets small citizens play at buying and selling ethnic goodies, while a mock ice rink invites them to “skate” in their socks. At a two-tiered construction area, they can ferry blocks from the floor to a building platform with a huge crank-operated conveyor. In an enclosed space beneath the platform, small windows reveal one of the exhibition’s little jokes: an entire rodent construction crew, busily working on their own infrastructure. Rats never seemed so industrious — or so friendly.Admirers of New York’s cultural life will find its emblems, too. A re-creation of the entrance to the New York Public Library offers children’s books about New York. Another corner explores public art and provides young visitors with ingenious material to create their own: large, sturdy slotted disks that can be interlocked as sculpture. They’re like a marriage of Tinker Toys and Rube Goldberg’s wit.Advertisement“NYC + Me” also offers plenty of whimsy: a five-borough game of Twister, a laser tunnel in which movements set off sounds of the city — including that urban anthem, the car alarm — and my personal favorite, an installation devoted to the New York minute. It includes a digital countdown clock and humorous ways that this fleeting time might be spent. But don’t expect to use it to tour this show; for that, you need at least a New York hour.Advertisement(Through Jan. 18 at the Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street; 212-721-1223, cmom.org.)‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Continuing) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing Middle Eastern artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (around 1900) where young archaeologists can dress in costume and portray early-20th-century immigrants to Palestine. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Beauty & the Beast’ (Saturday and Sunday) The music of Jules Massenet accompanies this version of the French fairy tale, adapted by Nicolas Coppola, artistic director of Puppetworks. While most of the characters are played by marionettes, the Beast is appropriately huge and intimidating: He’s a grown-up. The show also promises some interesting effects, including animated vines in the enchanted wood that close in on the Prince while he’s traveling there. (Through Dec. 20.) At 12:30 and 2:30 p.m., Puppetworks, 338 Sixth Avenue, at Fourth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-965-3391, puppetworks.org.‘Brooklyn Sewers: What’s Up Down There?’ (Through May 29) When it comes to subterranean infrastructure projects, New York City’s subway system seems to get all the attention. But a group of teenage curators at the Brooklyn Historical Society would like to introduce you to another underground marvel: Brooklyn’s sewer system, one of the city’s oldest and most extensive infrastructure projects. This exhibition explores engineering conundrums and courtroom battles and tells the story of the sewer system through photographs, drawings and maps. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.‘Connected Worlds’ (continuing) Human choices and actions have an impact on the world’s ecosystems, but people usually can’t see the effects as they happen. That isn’t true in this new permanent exhibition in the renovated Great Hall of the New York Hall of Science. Consisting of huge screens (one is 38 feet tall), the show depicts six interconnected environments with a shared water supply. With the help of technology that responds to gestures, “Connected Worlds” allows children to use simple motions to plant, harvest, cut trees, create clouds and make other changes in the projected landscapes — and see how the native flora and fauna fare. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.Dana Holiday Lighting (Thursday) One Christmas tree is grand, but how about two dozen? The Central Park Conservancy plans to light up more than 20 on a floating dock in the Harlem Meer at this free annual celebration. The fun begins at 5:30 p.m. with a visit from Santa, Mrs. Claus and the elves, who will pose for pictures with children. Visitors can also enjoy free cookies and cocoa and an ice-carving demonstration, followed by caroling and the lighting ceremony at 6. Charles A. Dana Discovery Center, Central Park, at Fifth Avenue and 110th Street, 212-446-2242, centralparknyc.org/events. Rain or shine.‘The Discovery of King Tut’ (Through May 1) The Egyptian pharaoh Tutankhamen died when he was only a teenager, but the magnificent riches of his tomb have made him immortal in the public imagination. This touring show at Premier Exhibitions 5th Avenue recreates Tut’s tomb as it was when the British archaeologist Howard Carter discovered it in 1922. The display includes reconstructions of the tomb’s three chambers and reproductions of more than 1,000 treasures and ritual objects, accompanied by video documentaries and texts. 417 Fifth Avenue, at 38th Street, tutnyc.com.‘Evergreen Express’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) There’s a lot of locomotion going on in the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden at the New York Botanical Garden, and it’s all centered on trees. In this celebration, part of the botanical garden’s Holiday Train Show, children can investigate trails in search of evergreen trees and shrubs. At the Discovery Center Depot, they can investigate evergreen plant parts, make pressings of a conifer specimen and create a miniature pine sachet. Other activities include making an evergreen puppet, patterned after the work of the master artisan Ralph Lee, and putting on puppet shows in the Woodland Theater. (Through Jan. 24.) Weekdays (except Mondays), 1:30 to 5:30 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 6:30 p.m.; Sundays, 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. This Friday and Saturday, there are extended hours, with activities taking place from 10 a.m. to 7:30 p.m. Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.AdvertisementFamily Art Project: Harvest Time Hangings (Saturday and Sunday) Even in late November, there are wonderful things to find in a garden. Wave Hill in the Bronx is inviting families to experience its fall bounty through this art activity. First, participants will roam the grounds to gather leaves, cones, pods and seed heads. At Wave Hill House, they will weave these together with other garden materials to create wall hangings to take home. From 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx, 718-549-3200, wavehill.org; admission is free on Saturday until noon.Family Programs at the Museum of the City of New York (Saturday and Sunday) Workshops at the museum, for ages 6 through 12, usually combine looking, learning and making. On Saturday, “Passion for Fashion Jewelry Swap” will take young visitors on a dazzling trip through antique glamour via the exhibition “Gilded New York.” After looking at the jewelry, costumes and decorative arts from the late 19th and early 20th centuries displayed there, children will create glittery pieces of their own to take home. On Sunday, “Finger Knitting Fun” will include instruction in this craft and exposure to the ways New Yorkers have used it. (Yarn will be provided.) From 11 a.m. to 2 p.m., 1220 Fifth Avenue, at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org.‘Fancy Nancy: Splendiferous Christmas’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company, which gave eager young audiences “Fancy Nancy: The Musical,” is now reviving its other show starring that inimitable little diva. Based on the book written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, “Fancy Nancy: Splendiferous Christmas” deals with Nancy’s fancy expectations for the holiday season. With a book by Cara Lustik, music by Randy Klein and lyrics by Matthew Hardy, the production revolves around Nancy’s purchase of a grand decoration for the top of the Christmas tree, and what ensues when her dreams don’t turn out quite as planned. (Through Dec. 27.) At 1 p.m., Theater at St. Jean, 184 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Fashion Academy, the Musical’ (Sunday) Vital Theater Company’s latest show for children over 7 is reopening at a new theater. It focuses on a middle-schooler, MacKenzie Williams, known as Mickey. When her colorful and completely original style doesn’t go over well at her new school, Fashion Academy of Brooklyn, she decides to make over not only her wardrobe, but also herself. Based on the book “Fashion Academy,” by the mother-daughter team of Sheryl Berk and Carrie Berk, this adaptation, by the elder Ms. Berk and Sabrina Chap, asks whether Mickey’s new persona, Kenzie, is really worth the sacrifice. (Through Dec. 13.) At 3:30 p.m., Theater at Blessed Sacrament, 152 West 71st Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Flight School the Musical’ (Sunday) If you want to fly, and you’re a bird, you should be all set, right? Well, not if you happen to be a penguin. That’s the challenge confronting the little hero of this musical from Vital Theater Company, adapted from “Flight School,” a picture book by Lita Judge. With a script by Cara Lustik, lyrics by Joshua H. Cohen and a score by David Mallamud, this charming show — the score is particularly impressive — is now at a new theater. Recommended for ages 2 through 7, it chronicles Penguin’s determination to remove the technical obstacles between him and the sky. (Through Dec. 6.) At 11 a.m., Theater at Blessed Sacrament, 152 West 71st Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Frolic!’ at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan (Through Dec. 31) You’re never too young to rock — and this space proves it. A new pop-up installation at the museum, “Frolic!” uses rock music and a themed décor to stimulate sensory play and learning in visitors ages 5 and under. In addition to a stage, a pretend ticket booth and ’70s-style props — including a Volkswagen mini-van to climb into — the 1,500-square-foot area has programs of workshops and live performances to help little ones get into the groove. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’ (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) This Friday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.High 5 for the Holidays! (Saturday) Santa Claus normally travels in a sleigh, but at this free event, he’ll ride in a sports car. (Presumably, reindeer aren’t allowed on Fifth Avenue in Brooklyn.) But he’ll still have candy canes to give out to children at this celebration, part of Small Business Saturday. In addition to Santa, who is to be on hand at 2:30 p.m., the festival will include a light show, arts and crafts, live music and family activities at participating businesses. It all culminates in the lighting of a 20-foot Christmas tree during a ceremony from 6:30 to 9 p.m., with free hot chocolate and treats for the crowd. From 1 to 9 p.m., Fifth Avenue and Fourth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-551-5545, parkslopefifthavenuebid.com/news/treelightingthissaturday.‘The Hunger Games: The Exhibition’ (Through Jan. 3) What enterprising 12- or 13-year-old wouldn’t like to foment a little rebellion? Such a visitor can do so vicariously at this attraction at Discovery Times Square, stepping into the role of Katniss Everdeen, the teenage heroine of “The Hunger Games” and the ultimate leader of the resistance against her nation’s totalitarian government. Based on the Lionsgate film adaptations of Suzanne Collins’s novels, the show includes costumes and artifacts from the movies, as well as re-creations of Katniss’s journey and interactive, role-playing elements like a gamesmaker’s table and a chance to learn and practice stunt choreography. 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com, thehungergamesexhibition.com.Advertisement‘If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home’ (Through Jan. 17) Maps present facts, but they can also engage the imagination. This new exhibition at the Children’s Museum of the Arts explores the intersection of cartography and art, showing work that expands upon, redefines or simply refers to maps. Among the eight artists represented are Matthew Cusik, who makes collages from map fragments; Joyce Kosloff, who layers images and textured paint onto maps; Loren Munk, who adds plaques of color and information to street maps; and Nikki Rosato, who subtracts from maps, cutting away all but roads and rivers. In the museum’s Cynthia C. Wainwright Gallery, 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.‘Jean-Michel Cousteau’s Secret Ocean’ (Through Jan. 10) Ever encounter a goby or a blenny? How about a Christmas tree worm? These small marine species, often unnoticed and uncelebrated, are among the stars of this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History. Filmed by Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau, and Holly Lohuis, a marine biologist, the film captures 30 species that are among the tiniest to inhabit the seas. Daily schedule: Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘The King of Chelm’ (Sunday) What happens when you cross the comic-book universe with the shtetls of Jewish folklore? In this musical from the National Yiddish Theater Folksbiene and Lost & Found Project, closing this weekend, a boy named Aaron, who longs to be a superhero, wakes up one day in Chelm, the fictional Polish village known for its foolishness. Written by Boris Zilberman, with music by Dmitri Slepovitch, and based on the work of the Soviet poet Ovsey Driz, the show charts Aaron’s investigation of what it means to be a hero. Each performance is followed by a 30-minute audience workshop. At 1 and 4 p.m., Kraine Theater, 85 East Fourth Street, East Village, eventbrite.com or mjhnyc.org/chelm. (The 1 p.m. show is sold out.)‘LARD: Life’s a Real Dream’ (Saturday) This show about LARD, the concept, has nothing to do with lard, the substance. An acronym for “Life’s a Real Dream,” “LARD” is the title of a rollicking musical production starring Lard Dog, who also happens not to be a dog. The alter ego of the multimedia artist Steven Erdman, Lard is a gregarious out-of-this-world character who has flown in from the planet Belopio on a giant pretzel. He and his Band of Shy perform this hourlong entertainment, which includes cartoon graphics and a pretzel toss. (Through Jan. 2.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, houseoflard.com.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’ (Friday and Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.Music in Motion (Saturday) That motion is the gentle rocking of a boat for this series of family neighborhood concerts presented by Bargemusic, the floating barge at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge. As always, the material — announced just before the performance — is chamber music, but these programs differ in important ways from the regular Bargemusic fare: With unreserved seating, they last only an hour, include a post-show question-and-answer session with the musicians and are free. (Through March 26.) At 4 p.m. (doors open at 3:45), Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org.Nature Exploration in Prospect Park (Friday through Sunday) The Prospect Park Audubon Center is inviting children to spend the holiday weekend focused on birds — and not just turkeys. Free programs at the center include the Bird Nerds Game Hour, starting at 1 p.m., when budding ornithologists will test their knowledge through bingo, card games and puzzles. At 2 p.m., in “Nature on the Go!,” an Audubon naturalist will lead young visitors on a walk to learn about species thriving nearby. And at 3 p.m., the fun will move beyond birds to some of the wildlife in the Audubon Center’s collection. In this animal encounter, children can observe creatures like snakes close up and even assist in a feeding. At the Audubon Center, near the park’s Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue entrance, Brooklyn, 718-287-3400, prospectpark.org/audubon.‘The Three Bears Holiday Bash’ (Friday through Thursday) There’s no word on whether Goldilocks is invited to this seasonal celebration, but Santa Claus definitely is. An annual production from the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, this puppet musical centers on a variety show put on by the Bears, in which Baby Bear asks Santa to star. The fun draws on Hanukkah and Kwanzaa, as well as on Christmas. (Through Dec. 30.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon (except this Friday, when performances are at 11 a.m. and 1 and 3 p.m.), with an additional 2:30 p.m. performance on Wednesday; weekends at 1 p.m.; Swedish Cottage, 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org. Reservations required; some shows are sold out, including all performances this Friday.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’ (Continuing) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. On Sundays through Dec. 13, the museum will also present “Soil to Oil,” a workshop in producing olive oil and using it to light a Hanukkah menorah. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Advertisement‘Winter on a Flatbush Farm’ (Sunday) Flatbush certainly doesn’t resemble farming territory these days, but Lefferts Historic House, the farmhouse museum in Prospect Park, will recreate the atmosphere and activities of 19th-century rural Brooklyn in this afternoon celebration. Children can learn how to make a candle, watch wool spun into thread and sample traditional treats made over an open fire. At 3 p.m., St. Nicholas will also visit. From 1 to 3 p.m., Prospect Park, the Willink entrance, Flatbush Avenue and Empire Boulevard, Brooklyn, 718-789-2822, prospectpark.org/lefferts.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 27, 2015, on Page C24 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.