By JOSHUA BARONENOV. 27, 2015
Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Friday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events.American Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (continuing) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out infection. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.American Museum of Natural History: ‘Dark Universe’ (continuing) With the return of the Hayden Planetarium, which closed in August for renovations, comes the latest space show, “Dark Universe.” Narrated by Neil deGrasse Tyson, the film explores mysterious dark matter and dark energy, and how scientists are working to better understand these phenomena. Every half-hour from 10:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. on weekdays; to 5 p.m. on weekends, Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.American Museum of Natural History: ‘The Secret World Inside You’ (continuing) In recent years, the microbiome — the roughly 100 trillion bacteria living inside and on human bodies — has been a popular talking point for science journalism. With ever-evolving research into this mysterious area of study, there’s still plenty left to explore. Now, it’s getting the exhibition treatment in this look at what scientists are learning about the role bacteria plays in health. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.AdvertisementBrooklyn Historical Society: ‘Brooklyn Americans: Hockey’s Forgotten Promise’ (through March 27) The New York Islanders may be new to Brooklyn, but the borough isn’t new to hockey. This exhibition tells the story of its first National Hockey League team, the Brooklyn Americans. The team wore red, white and blue jerseys and represented Kings County at the height of World War II and in the early days of the N.H.L. Still, as the exhibition shows, the team was unsuccessful and ultimately financially doomed. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.AdvertisementCenter for Jewish History: ‘After the War: Recovery, Relief, and Return, 1945-1949’ (through Jan. 15) This exhibition commemorates the 70th anniversary of World War II’s end with a look at its bleak aftermath. Photographs from the International Center of Photography’s Roman Vishniac Archive, as well as artifacts from the American Jewish Historical Society and Leo Baeck Institute, tellhow the war led to mass destruction and displacement, and how Europe and the United States moved on toward revitalization. 15 West 16th Street, Flatiron district, 212-868-4444, cjh.org.‘The Discovery of King Tut’ (through May 1) The king himself won’t make an appearance at this exhibition; the focus is the wealth of treasures from his tomb, along with the history of what happened when the British archaeologist Howard Carter discovered it in 1922. Replicas of the artifacts will be on display with explanations about how excavation and preservation work were carried out . Premier Exhibitions at 5th Avenue, 417 Fifth Avenue, between 37th and 38th Streets, Midtown South, 646-979-4120, tutnyc.com.‘Global Citizen: The Architecture of Moshe Safdie’ (through Jan. 10) This touring exhibition, a retrospective of Mr. Safdie’s career of more than 50 years, makes its way to New York with new material based on the architect’s recent work related to dense urbanism in Asia. Donald Albrecht from the Museum of the City of New York organized the material in this show, which also explores Mr. Safdie’s design philosophy that buildings should be extensions of their physical, historical and cultural contexts. National Academy Museum, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-369-4880, nationalacademy.org.Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum: ‘On the Line: Intrepid and the Vietnam War’ (continuing) Visitors familiar with this museum are likely well aware of its flight deck, perhaps even some of its wartime history. During the Vietnam War, the Intrepid served three tours overseas between 1966 and 1969. Now, in an exhibition set in the space where the crew lived and worked, the museum tells their stories with artifacts, film clips and photographs. Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.Museum of Chinese in America: ‘Sub Urbanisms: Casino Urbanization, Chinatowns and the Contested American Landscape’ (through March 27) Stephen Fan, an architecture professor and curator, examines the trend of Chinese casino workers in Connecticut converting suburban homes into multifamily communities. This exhibition is both creative and historical; it takes the present to imagine the future of housing design while looking back on the events that created the trend of suburban migration. 215 Centre Street, between Howard and Grand Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-619-4785, mocanyc.org.Museum of the City of New York: ‘The New York City Marathon: The Great Race’ (through March 8) At the beginning of the month, more than 50,000 runners made their way through all five boroughs of New York, starting on Staten Island and ending in Central Park. This annual race — a spectacle for anyone watching along the course — began modestly in 1970, with 127 people running laps around Central Park. City Museum’s timely exhibition tells the story of how the New York City Marathon became the world-class race it is today, including photos from amateurs and professionals on display. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘How Cats Took Over the Internet’ (through Feb. 21) Even people who hate cats can’t easily get through an hour of browsing online without coming across some kind of feline clickbait. This exhibition takes a critical look at and tells the story of how we, as a society, got to this point. Yes, there are cat GIFs. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.AdvertisementNational Museum of the American Indian: ‘Meryl McMaster: Second Self’ (through Dec. 11) Meryl McMaster, an artist from Canada and a Plains Cree member of the Siksika Nation, shows her “Second Self” photography series, which uses portraiture to explore the complex ways in which identity is constructed. 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.New York Hall of Science: ‘Gingerbread Lane’ (through Jan. 9) In recent years, the chef Jon Lovitch has worked every holiday season to break his own record for the world’s largest gingerbread village. He locked in Guinness World Records in 2013 and 2014. He’s back to do it again: 500 edible square feet with more than 1,050 houses and structures including a department store and a double-decker carousel. Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Holiday Express: Toys and Trains From the Jerni Collection’ (through Feb. 28) Toys of yore are on view in a mountainous landscape for trains and scene-setting trinkets pegged to the holiday season. This massive display also incorporates theatrical lighting and soundscapes, including a multimedia installation designed to make it feel like the museum’s 77th Street entrance is in the midst of passing trains. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Superheroes in Gotham’ (through Feb. 21) New York is safe as long as its long roster of comic-book heroes stick around. It’s been this way for nearly a century as these characters have defended the city in books, TV shows, movies, video games — even the Broadway stage. New-York Historical Society’s latest exhibition tells the story of how super heroes became a cultural staple for all ages and media. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Public Library: ‘100 Years of the Picture Collection: From Abacus to Zoology’ (through May 15) The library celebrates the centennial of its Picture Collection with a sort of greatest-hits exhibition chosen from nearly 1.5 million images. (Lined up, the length of the photos surpasses even the height of the Empire State Building, which is of course included in the archive.) Subjects in the collection are organized alphabetically and number about 12,000. Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman; free.New York Transit Museum: ‘Bringing Back the City’ (continuing) This new exhibition comes three years after Hurricane Sandy took a swipe at the city’s infrastructure. But what of the people who put the pieces back together? “Bringing Back the City” tells the stories of everyday services — like electricity and mass transit — that become extraordinary in times of crisis. Boerum Place, at Schermerhorn Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-694-1600, bringingbackthecity.com.Rubin Museum of Art: ‘Sacred Spaces’ (continuing) This exhibition’s premise is a question: What is a sacred space? It could be the museum’s Tibetan Buddhist Shrine Room, an immersive look at a traditional space for prayer and meditation. Or it could be a panoramic vista among the Himalayas. It could even be a video installation about Jain devotional rituals. All are on view in this exploration of veneration and its venues. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org.‘Sea Level: Five Boroughs at Water’s Edge’ (through Dec. 31) In its first pop-up exhibition for the Seaport Culture District, the American Institute of Architects presents a water’s eye view of the city through photos by Elizabeth Felicella and accompanying essays by Robert Sullivan. The panoramic view of New York starts at New York Harbor and makes its way along the East River, showing the shore of each borough along the way. Center @ the Seaport, 181 Front Street, South Street Seaport, Lower Manhattan, 212-683-0023, cfa.aiany.org.AdvertisementTrinity Wall Street: ‘Blood Mirror’ (through Dec. 1) After decades of banning gay and bisexual men from donating blood, the Food and Drug Administration updated its policy earlier this year to allow them to donate, but only after a year of celibacy, regardless of marital status. In response, the artist Jordan Eagles has gathered nine gay, bisexual and transgender men to donate a pint of blood each for this exhibit: a reflective, 7-foot-tall monolith that cases and preserves their blood in resin. Among the donors is the Rev. John Moody, who has been involved with Trinity for more than 40 years. Broadway at Wall Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-602-0800, trinitywallstreet.org/bloodmirror; free.African Diaspora International Film Festival (Friday through Dec. 13) For 22 years this festival has presented films from and about Africa and the African Diaspora. The lineup includes world premieres, as well popular and classic films, whose screenings are typically followed by talks with filmmakers and academics. Opening the festival is “The Man Who Mends Women: The Wrath of Hippocrates,” a documentary about the Congolese gynecologist Denis Mukwege, who last year won an award for his work to help victims of sexual abuse. The festival’s lineup is at nyadiff.org. At various times and locations, 212-864-1760.Brooklyn Holiday Bazaar (Saturday and Sunday) This market, hosted by Brooklyn Makers, provides a small-business shopping option with a cast of more than 40 local vendors. In addition to handmade goods, there will be free cocktails and cider, along with music from a live D.J. set and craft workshops for children. From 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., 501 Union, 501 Union Street, Gowanus, brooklynholidaybazaar.com.FIAF First Tuesdays (Tuesday) This monthly event from the French Institute Alliance Française is a one-stop shop for Francophiles: film, books and, of course, wine and cheese. The evening includes a talk with the author Anthony Lacoudre — who will discuss his latest book, about this history of French words in the English language — as well as a screening of Mathieu Amalric’s 2010 adaptation of Corneille’s classic play “L’Illusion comique.” At 6:30 p.m., French Institute Alliance Française, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, fiaf.org.‘Harry Shearer and Judith Owen’s Christmas Without Tears’ (Tuesday) This married couple, a comedy and song duo, started their holiday house party performance in Santa Monica 15 years ago. What began as a few songs around the piano has grown into an irreverent yet heartwarming variety show that doubles as a charity event for World AIDS Day. This year’s theme is “Does This Tree Make Me Look Fat?,” and guests include the actors Alan Cumming and Olympia Dukakis, as well as the comedian Mario Cantone. At 7:30 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Kevin Geeks Out Christmas Special’ (Thursday) It’s the Yuletide edition of Kevin Maher’s variety show, “Kevin Geeks Out,” in which guests use comedy and film clips to share their obsessions. Included in the lineup are Glen Heroy, who will share stories about his experiences working as Santa, and the Word & Film writer Tom Blunt, who plans to make a case for why VH1’s made-for-TV movie “A Diva’s Christmas Carol” is a holiday classic. At 9:30 p.m., Nitehawk Cinema, 136 Metropolitan Avenue, near Berry Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-384-3980, nitehawkcinema.com.Rockefeller Center Christmas Tree Lighting (Wednesday) The first Christmas tree went up at Rockefeller Center in 1931, when it was just a construction site and workers pooled their money to buy a 20-foot tall balsam fir. Today the trees are much taller (a minimum of 75-feet), and the lighting ceremony is as much of a New York holiday tradition as the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade or New Year’s Eve in Times Square.The journeys trees make to New York are their own shows. They travel on trucks, barges, even planes. This year’s tree — a 76-foot tall, 10-ton Norway spruce — was donated by the Asendorf and Puchalski family in Gardiner, N.Y., about 80 miles north of Rockefeller Center. After the holiday season, it will be donated again to Habitat for Humanity for home building.But through Jan. 6, the tree will take up residence on the plaza in front 30 Rock. On Wednesday, anyone can come to Rockefeller Center, between West 48th and 51st Streets, for the lighting ceremony, which begins at 7 p.m. with live entertainment. This year’s lineup was not available at the time of press, but previous performers have included Lady Gaga, Mariah Carey and the Rockettes. The event will also be broadcast on NBC from 7 to 9 p.m. More information is at rockefellercenter.com/holidays.Advertisement‘Santasia’ (Tuesday and Wednesday) This holiday musical comedy takes both a snarky and sentimental look at Christmas and family. Written by Shaun and Brandon Loeser, with choreography by Tania Pearson-Loeser, the show incorporates songs, sketch comedy and even Claymation movies. Tuesdays through Dec. 22 at 8 p.m., with 2 p.m. Wednesday matinees on Dec. 2, 16 and 23. St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, between Eighth and Ninth Avenues, Clinton, 212-239-6200, santasia.com.Union Square Holiday Market (through Dec. 24) If you can brave the nearly constant crowd, this can be a one-stop shop for holiday gifting, recognizable by the red- and white-striped tents that take over the park. The pop-up shops include craft vendors, as well as established stores like Strand Book Store. Food (and wintry drink) vendors, like Momofuku’s Milk Bar, are scattered throughout the market grounds as well. East 14th to East 17th Street, Broadway to Fourth Avenue, urbanspacenyc.com/union-square-holiday-market.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesday) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videologybarandcinema.com.Winter Village at Bryant Park (through March 6) The ice rink is back. Admission is free if you bring your own skates; if you don’t have any, they’re available for rent. Through Jan. 3, the park will also host an open-air market for holiday shopping with about 125 vendors. Avenue of the Americas, at 40th Street, 212-661-6640, wintervillage.org.‘It’s About Time: Together We Can End AIDS’ (Tuesday) To mark World AIDS Day, five leaders working to eradicate the disease discuss how we might be able to get rid of H.I.V./AIDS in this lifetime. The talk, moderated by the CBS News correspondent Mo Rocca, includes Mary Bassett, commissioner of the city’s Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; Mark Feinberg, chief executive of the International AIDS Vaccine Initiative; Charles King, chief executive of Housing Works and co-chairman of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s AIDS Task Force; Kelsey Louie, chief executive of the Gay Men’s Health Crisis and another member of the task force; and Chase Strangio, a staff attorney with the American Civil Liberties Union. At 7 p.m., Housing Works Bookstore Cafe, 126 Crosby Street, near Houston Street, SoHo, 212-334-3324, housingworksbookstore.org.‘Eileen Chang’s “Naked Earth”’ (Tuesday) Chang (1920-1995) was one of China’s most beloved writers of the past century. Still, her “Naked Earth” had never been published outside Hong Kong until New York Review Books Classics, the series that often revives previously untranslated or out of print books, released a translation in June. Ben Wang, a senior lecturer at the China Institute, will speak about Chang’s life, as well as the novel’s history and precise prose. At 6:30 p.m., 100 Washington Street, at Rector Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-744-8181, chinainstitute.org.Ted Merwin (Wednesday) Thanks to New York institutions like Katz’s Delicatessen, a hefty pastrami sandwich is as reflective of the city’s spirit as, say, a yellow cab. In his book “Pastrami on Rye: An Overstuffed History of the Jewish Deli,” Mr. Merwin traces the wavelike history of New York’s delis — born and booming on the Lower East Side between world wars, then rapidly unpopular and eventually back in favor among local Jews and tourists alike. Here, he’ll discuss the book and sign copies. At 6:30 p.m., Museum at Eldridge Street, 12 Eldridge Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-0888, eldridgestreet.org; free, but R.S.V.P. is requested.‘Robert Moses: Master Builder’ (Sunday) “Why weren’t they grateful?” Robert Caro asks at the end of his biography of Robert Moses, “The Power Broker.” After all, Moses was the master builder of New York in the 20th century — though not without a wealth of controversy. Ken Gold, a professor at the College of Staten Island, and Cara Dellatte, an archivist at the Staten Island Museum, discuss the legacy of Moses’s New York, in particular his projects for Staten Island like the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge and the Staten Island Expressway. At 2 p.m., Staten Island Museum at Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, 718-727-1135, statenislandmuseum.org.AdvertisementJoseph O’Neill (Wednesday) Mr. O’Neill — born in Cork, Ireland — became famous with his third novel, the best-selling and award-winning “Netherland.” Here, he’ll read from his most recent novel, last year’s “The Dog,” with subplots that “go nowhere, as in life,” Lawrence Osborne wrote in The New York Times. “But, unlike life, its wit and brio keep us temporarily more alive than we usually allow ourselves to be.” At 7:30 p.m., Irish Arts Center, 553 West 51st Street, Clinton, 212-757-3318, irishartscenter.org.Joy Williams and Don DeLillo (Wednesday) Symphony Space’s public radio series “Selected Shorts” brings together these two writers: Ms. Williams, author of the new story collection “The Visiting Privilege,” and Mr. DeLillo, whose works include the novels “White Noise” and “Underworld.” The actor James Naughton hosts an evening of readings from their fiction; he’ll perform, along with the actress Joanna Gleason and others. At 7:30 p.m., Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.Long Island City Tours: Queens Cool Uncovered (Sunday) The idea behind this tour is that Queens is due for more attention, starting with Long Island City. The tour includes highlights of the neighborhood’s history and arts scene, with stops at galleries and crafts and food vendors. The meeting location is given at registration. At 1:30 p.m., 212-209-3370, bqetours.com.City of Dreams Tour (Friday, Monday and Thursday) This tour covers the East Village, Bowery and Little Italy and follows the immigrant histories that shaped New York. Stops include a drink at McSorley’s Old Ale House — established in 1854, it’s one of the city’s oldest — and a trip to a Jewish bakery and an Italian store for food samples. Historical anecdotes feature a variety of famous characters, like Peter Stuyvesant and Jimi Hendrix. The starting point, which is available upon registration, is near Astor Place in the East Village. (Through Jan. 1.) Friday and Monday at 10 a.m., Thursday at 2:30 p.m., Astor Place, East Village, 347-464-9335, cityroverwalks.com.‘The Flamboyant and the Bohemian: Greenwich Village and How It Became Famous’ (Saturday) This Manhattan neighborhood has been home to some of the 20th century’s greatest writers, along with the movers and shakers of social change. This tour’s highlights includes the site of the Triangle Shirtwaist factory fire, as well as places associated with writers like Henry James, Willa Cather and Eugene O’Neill. The tour meets at 1 p.m., in front of the Washington Arch at Fifth Avenue and Waverly Place, Greenwich Village, 212-242-5762, joycegoldhistorytours.com.Flatiron District Walking Tour (Sunday) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.Save the Village (Saturday, Sunday and Tuesday) Last year the Steven Kasher Gallery in Chelsea put on an exhibition with the photography of Fred W. McDarrah, who documented the changing scene of Greenwich Village since the 1960s. Now, the spirit of that show has taken the form of this walking tour, which includes stops at the places McDarrah captured on film: locales like Washington Square Park and the Stonewall Inn. At 10 a.m.; the tour meets at Christopher Park, Stonewall Place, at Seventh Avenue, West Village, savethevillagetours.com.AdvertisementA Taste of Jewish New York: Borough Park Tour (Sunday) Participants in this tour will get an insider’s look at the customs of the Hasidic residents of Borough Park, Brooklyn. Highlights include a stop at a lively shopping area and the chance to try a variety of traditional foods. Modest attire is requested — no shorts, low necklines or sleeveless clothing. The tour meets at 9:45 a.m. at Fort Hamilton Parkway and 44th Street; 718-339-2302, timelinetouring.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturday) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.‘What’s New in Lower Manhattan’ (Saturday) Matt Postal, an architectural historian, leads this tour organized by the Municipal Art Society of New York. Lower Manhattan has changed drastically in the past 10 years — not only the construction of One World Trade Center, but the development in the blocks surrounding it. Highlights include new residential towers that are making the Financial District increasingly residential, as well as Nicholas Grimshaw’s massive Fulton Transit Hub. The tour meets at 11 a.m. at a location that will be disclosed upon making a reservation at 212-935-2075 or mas.org.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 27, 2015, on Page C24 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.