By KATHRYN SHATTUCKNOV. 27, 2015
Suffering from a Thanksgiving hangover? Soothe your tummy and temper with songs from Bruce Springsteen and Andrea Bocelli, binge on a supernatural thriller series, or slip into your pj’s with members of the Holderness family of North Carolina, known for their “Christmas Jammies” video. What’s On TVTHE TIES THAT BIND 9 p.m. on HBO. Bruce Springsteen muses on the making of “The River,” his 1980 landmark double album, against a backdrop of previously unreleased rehearsal and performance footage, as well as demos and outtakes from the 14-month recording process. The film’s director, Thom Zimny, has followed Mr. Springsteen onto the stage and into the studio for 15 years. (Image: Mr. Springsteen)SOUTH OF HELL 6 p.m. on WE. Binge on all seven episodes of this supernatural thriller starring Mena Suvari as Maria, a demon hunter for hire who has a problem with Abigail, the parasite who lives within her and feeds off the evil she exorcises from others.SANTA CLAUS IS COMIN’ TO TOWN 8 p.m. on ABC. It’s the day after Thanksgiving, which means it’s practically Christmas. Get festive with this animated classic featuring Fred Astaire as the voice of a very wise mailman and Mickey Rooney as the voice of the big man in red. (Image: A scene from the production)AdvertisementTHE HOLDERNESS FAMILY CHRISTMAS JAMMY JAM 8 p.m. on UP. Penn and Kim Holderness and their reality TV children, Lola and Penn Charles, parody songs of the holiday season in their snugly pajamas.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ANDREA BOCELLI: CINEMA 9 p.m. on PBS. This Italian tenor soars in songs from “The Godfather,” “Scent of a Woman,” “Love Story,” “Doctor Zhivago,” “Il Postino” and “Breakfast at Tiffany’s” at the Dolby Theater in Los Angeles, where he partners with Nicole Scherzinger and a virtual Ariana Grande. John Travolta, Ryan O’Neal, Ali MacGraw and Andy Garcia discuss these films. (Image: Mr. Bocelli)What’s StreamingHOW TO SMELL A ROSE (2015) on Fandor. The filmmaker Les Blank (with Gina Leibrecht) turns his camera on his peer Ricky Leacock, who helped pioneer what was called direct cinema in the 1960s, at the home Mr. Leacock made in Normandy with his companion, Valérie Lalonde. “Through its subject and its maker” — both of whom have since died — “‘How to Smell a Rose’ puts us in the vibrant presence of documentary history,” Nicolas Rapold wrote in The New York Times.AdvertisementKILLING THEM SAFELY (2015) on iTunes. It was supposed to revolutionize law enforcement by curbing the use of deadly force. And yet 500 people have died from Taser injuries since that weapon was introduced in the 1990s. Nicolas Rapold, writing in The Times, called Nick Berardini’s documentary “a dense stew of words and death.” (Image: A scene from the film)A version of this schedule appears in print on November 27, 2015, on Page C23 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s on Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.