AdvertisementSupported byFor full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.★ Arca (D.J. set) (Thursday) A 20-something producer who already has his thumbprints on Björk’s “Vulnicura,” Kanye West’s “Yeezus” and FKA Twigs’s “LP1,” Arca (whose full name is Alejandro Ghers) is primed to become the next generation’s Svengali for intriguing electronic textures. His latest album, “Mutant,” was released on Nov. 20. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Stacey Anderson)★ Erykah Badu (Wednesday) This vanguard artist of neo-soul is still riding the high of “New Amerykah Part Two: Return of the Ankh” from 2010. It’s taken her fans almost as long to absorb all the intricately wound contradictions, political theories and jazzy riffs inside her masterpiece. She recently dropped a slick cover of Drake’s “Hotline Bling” to announce a forthcoming mixtape, “But You Cain’t Use My Phone.” At 8 p.m., Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Brooklyn, kingstheatre.com. (Anderson)Miley Cyrus and Her Dead Petz (Saturday) Ms. Cyrus released her latest electropop effort, “Miley Cyrus and Her Dead Petz,” earlier this fall as a free download. The exhausting project cribbed nearly two dozen half-baked bangers, many cosmically co-produced Wayne Coyne of the Flaming Lips; it rang like an eager bid for controversy more than her usual celebration of debauchery. The Flaming Lips back her on this tour. With Dan Deacon. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)★ Four Tet (Wednesday) The veteran electronic musician Kieran Hebden cut his teeth as a member of the British post-rock band Fridge, and the moody undertones of its genre linger in his complex synthetic works as Four Tet. Though his solo efforts are often described as influenced by his occasional collaborators Radiohead, the reverse is arguably more accurate. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Anderson)Arlo Guthrie: Alice’s Restaurant 50th Anniversary Show (Saturday) This annual post-Thanksgiving soiree, hosted by Woody Guthrie’s son Arlo and assorted famous friends, is a firm Carnegie tradition. This year, he will perform in full “Alice’s Restaurant,” his satirical folk jab at 1960s counterculture; it’s a quite lengthy, jam-friendly song, like a tryptophan lull for the ears. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Anderson)Glen Hansard (Monday and Tuesday) No stranger to center stage, Mr. Hansard is the front man of the Irish rockers the Frames and the songwriting force behind the affecting film “Once” and its Broadway incarnation, which won the 2012 Tony Award for best musical. (The movie’s signature ballad, “Falling Slowly,” written and performed by Mr. Hansard and Marketa Irglova, won the 2007 Oscar for best song.) He released his second solo album, “Didn’t He Ramble,” in September. Monday at 8 p.m., Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Brooklyn, kingstheatre.com; Tuesday at 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)★ Ground Control Touring 15th Anniversary, With Kurt Vile and Waxahatchee (Wednesday) Mr. Vile’s latest indie-rock effort, “b’lieve i’m goin down,” opens with a drawling, incongruously beautiful song — “Pretty Pimpin’” — that sums up his fondness for clever contradictions. Waxahatchee, the lo-fi folk project by the singer-songwriter Katie Crutchfield, is as wintry as its inspiration: a snowy weekend at her parents’ home near the Waxahatchee Creek in Alabama. This excellent lineup promises one-off collaborations between Superchunk, Steve Gunn, Parquet Courts and more. At 7:30 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)Kelela (Tuesday and Wednesday) On her new six-track EP, “Hallucinogen,” this electro-R&B singer from Washington D.C. toys with a new, sensuous sparseness. Writing in The New York Times, Jon Pareles recently described the track “Rewind” like “Janet Jackson streamlined and rebooted, seemingly transparent and covertly intricate.” At 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)My Morning Jacket (Friday and Saturday) The psychedelic rock-and-country showmen turned to naturalistic themes on “The Waterfall,” the group’s seventh album. That effort, released in May, trod panoramic paths and failed relationships atop jam-heavy melodies that ultimately swelled with hope. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)‘Nona Hendryx Presents Parallel Lives: Billie Holiday & Edith Piaf’ (Sunday) Ms. Hendryx, the feisty alto of the trio LaBelle, belts with all-in passion and has a punk rocker’s aggressive stage presence. She delivers old-school charisma in this tribute to two talents who have made clear impressions on Ms. Hendryx’s voice. At 7 and 9:30 p.m., Joe’s Pub, at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com. (Anderson)★ Superchunk (Thursday) While enjoying a solid stretch as the quintessential indie-rock band of the ’90s, the members of Superchunk (Laura Ballance and Mac McCaughan) also dabbled in a side endeavor: a record label on which to release the band’s high-octane, no-frills fare. Now Merge Records is one of the top independent labels in the country, representing Arcade Fire, Spoon and others. Superchunk still delivers aggressive pathos onstage; “I Hate Music,” the wryly named 10th album, was released in 2013. At 8 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, babysallright.com; sold out. (Anderson)They Might Be Giants (Sunday) These Brooklyn-rooted eccentrics of the highest order represented Keep Williamsburg Weird decades ago with the 1990s singles “Istanbul (Not Constantinople)” and “Snail Shell.” The band recently released a 17th studio album, “Glean,” and staged a half-year residency at the Music Hall of Williamsburg. Clearly, the group can’t stay away from the club; it currently has three more dates planned here through Jan. 2. At 8 p.m., 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)Tiga (Saturday) This Canadian D.J. is a prolific remixer, having embellished hits by Scissor Sisters, LCD Soundsystem and the xx with his house and tech flourishes. His music program on BBC Radio 6, “My Name Is Tiga,” now on hiatus, highlighted new dance trends seemingly the day they broke. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Anderson)Paul Van Dyk (Friday) Misanthropes, unite under these strobe lights: This globe-trotting, Grammy Award-winning D.J. from Berlin is best known around New York for his annual post-Valentine’s Day set, in which he serves up an extended set for all those suffering from hangovers, emotional or otherwise. He returns to New York this week to conquer the post-Thanksgiving crowd. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)Advertisement