By BRIAN SEIBERTNOV. 26, 2015
After the great Spanish poet and playwright Federico García Lorca was assassinated during the Spanish Civil War, his homosexuality was concealed and suppressed for decades. In contemporary Spain, the truth is now widely acknowledged, but for an artist to treat the subject frankly, especially in the tradition-bound world of flamenco, as David Morales does in his show “Lorca Madly in Love,” still counts as taboo-breaking and bold.If only the production was more artistically admirable. The American premiere at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday was a two-hour ordeal.The main trouble is Mr. Morales, who choreographed the show and stars in it. He is the kind of flamenco dancer who makes a big display of passion, his hands reaching to the heavens or covering his face or clutching at his chest. It all reads forced and false, whether he’s pensively still or exploding in ungainly hops and heavy stamping that’s about as musical as a toddler’s tantrum.Insofar as the disjointed show has a story, it centers on Lorca’s last affair with a man, Juan Ramírez de Lucas. (Manuel Francisco Reina, who wrote the libretto, covered the affair in more depth in his 2012 novel, “Los Amores Oscuros.”) This man is played by a contemporary dancer, the barefoot and usually bare-chested Iván Amaya.Lithe, serpentine, flamboyant, Mr. Amaya is a far more skilled dancer than Mr. Morales, but he shares the tendency to melodrama and adds to it the vulgarity of windmilling arms and fan kicks. In their duets, there’s a sweetness to Mr. Morales’s smitten face and some sexual heat in hands snaking between thighs, yet any empathy the men might inspire has to fight through layers of bad taste.The dancer Noelia Sabarea also appears — first, I think, as a representation of divided Spain, struggling to wield a large shawl emblazoned with the colors of both the republican and the nationalist flags. The director, Juan Estelrich, projects graphics that contribute images of smoke, eyeballs and statuesque male backsides.The musicians, on violin, guitar and vocals, are higher caliber, though frequently diminished by poor sound design. In the middle, when the guest artist Miguel Poveda, one of the first openly gay flamenco singers, sang the words of a Lorca poem, alone, without accompaniment but with affecting, heartfelt artistry, it felt like a moment from a better show.A version of this review appears in print on November 27, 2015, on Page C12 of the New York edition with the headline: Tale of a Forbidden Affair.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.