AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Holland CotterThe filmmaker, photographer, essayist, poet, teacher, fabulist and proto-digital pioneer Hollis Frampton (1936-1984) eased off on producing photography after the 1960s but came back to it at the end of his too-short life. His final work in the medium, a portfolio of 14 pictures with the curious title “ADSVMVS ABSVMVS,” makes up this exhibition, which is also — but how can this be? — his New York gallery solo debut.A brilliant and distinctive writer, Frampton was also his own best elucidator, and the series comes with an introductory text. In it he suggests that photography is a kind of embalming mechanism for images, with a counterpart in the everyday world. His pictures give examples: pressed flowers; edible dried fish; a garter snake’s shed skin; the desiccated bodies of small creatures found on country roads. Each item is shot, like a scientific specimen, against a dark ground, and accompanied by a paragraph stating its precise find-spots (a shop in Manhattan’s Chinatown; a vegetable garden in Eaton, N.Y.), along with funny mixes of description, opinion, folklore and art-lore. (e.g., garter snakes are “alleged to hear through their tongues”; “Constantin Brancusi maintained that toads are more handsome than Michelangelo’s statues”).Both the texts and images of what amounts to a mordantly wacky show-and-tell stand-up routine on mortality can be savored at length after a gallery visit: They are all included in a take-away poster designed by the artist. Along with reproducing the poster, Room East has gathered related archival material to create a show that is both fascinating and historically substantial.It will prove particularly valuable if, as it should, it steers young artists and writers to explore Frampton’s rich work and singular sensibility. To this end it’s also worth noting that MIT Press has recently published a paperback edition of “On the Camera Arts and Consecutive Matters: The Writings of Hollis Frampton.” It’s a great, full-of-life book.Hollis Frampton ‘ADSVMVS ABSVMVS’Room East41 Orchard Street,­ Lower East SideThrough Dec. 20Advertisement