By MARTHA SCHWENDENERNOV. 26, 2015
The next time you see Loie Hollowell’s paintings it will probably not be in a small, artist-run gallery in someone’s apartment that is open only on Sundays or by appointment, which is the case with this show. Ms. Hollowell is a gifted painter, and her work could easily reach larger audiences soon.The nine paintings here, in her first solo exhibition, are made using the somewhat unusual technique of stretching linen over a hard wood panel. Onto this surface Ms. Hollowell has painted and sponged geometric shapes and Gestalt-type images that give the illusion of expanding and contracting, merging and converging. There are psychedelic elements and conscious allusions to painters like Georgia O’Keeffe and Arthur Dove. The vortex designs also recall popular 1970s art, from Judy Chicago’s paintings to the album cover for Stevie Wonder’s “Songs in the Key of Life.”Ms. Hollowell is not just recycling. She is trying to create her own lexicon of forms. The almond shapes in her paintings, which hark back to the Italian mandorla in religious paintings, represent the vagina; wavy ogee shapes, drawn from Gothic and Islamic architecture, signify female breasts. Shaded passages between these forms look like thighs or cleavage.Countering the myth of “pure” abstraction, Ms. Hollowell steps into the historical lineage of painters like O’Keeffe and Ms. Chicago, who were often discounted or derided for making references to the body in their abstract work. (The Swedish mystic Hilma af Klint might be another progenitor.)Ms. Hollowell’s sleight-of-hand abstraction arrives at an important moment, when so-called feminist imagery has been eclipsed by transgender and postgender arguments, and the celebrated “return of the figure” in painting feels like a remedial rejoinder. Ms. Hollowell offers a third option.Loie Hollowell‘AHHA’106 Green 104 Green Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn Sundays through Dec. 13A version of this review appears in print on November 27, 2015, on Page C30 of the New York edition with the headline: Loie Hollowell’s Abstract Body Landscapes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.