AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Roberta SmithThese two exhibitions confirm the ambition and physical command exuded by the work of Sheila Hicks, who started out in weaving and has spent her long career formulating different ratios of art, craft and design, with varying degrees of success.For the most part the shows also confirm, once more, that Ms. Hicks’s best efforts tend to be the small, innovative weavings that she calls “minimes” (pronounced min-EEMZ) and has been making on a hand loom for over 50 years. Rarely larger than 10 inches on a side, these intense, expressive little textiles expand upon their medium with all kinds of unusual additions (shells, feathers, paper, bamboo) and experiments with the warp and weft of weaving. They veer from extravagant explosions of color to naturalist studies in browns and tans. And they reward close study, like miniatures. In their intimate size, restricted format and great variety they bear comparison with the small still lifes of the Italian painter Giorgio Morandi (1890-1964).Ms. Hicks’s show at Davis & Langdale is dedicated to Roy Davis, who founded the gallery at its present address in 1952 (in 1980 a partnership started with Cecily Langdale, who has taken over the operation since his death last year). The gallery is known for staging the first American solo shows of 19th- and 20th-century British artists like Richard Dadd, Gwen John, Duncan Grant and Vanessa Bell and for its longtime representation of the reclusive American painter Albert York. Its famously small space is perfect for Ms. Hicks’s minimes, 13 of which line the walls, accompanied by several small examples of the irregular orbs of radiant yarn that Ms. Hicks calls “bundles,” on display in a vitrine. This show is a poignant coda to the gallery’s rich history; once it closes, Ms. Langdale plans to work privately at this address.The Sikkema Jenkins show presents 26 new pieces, 10 of which are lush, enticing minimes. The remainder reflect Ms. Hicks’s determination to tackle any size with works that venture into sculpture and installation art. The array reflects an inspiring drive, but too often the handsome and richly colored materials remain untransformed. They are for the most part just stuff, whether the myriad linen threads of “Predestined Color Wave II,” which wrap around a nearly six-foot-square stretcher in a poor imitation of a painting, or “White River,” whose strands of white fibers of varying thickness cascade from ceiling to floor.The main exceptions are two medium-size tapestrylike pieces in white wool and linen, “Unfinished Conversation” and “Agreed Upon,” which achieve a meditative unity commensurate with Agnes Martin’s grid paintings. These and the minimes are works that one can imagine living with and seeing anew each day.Sheila HicksSikkema Jenkins & Co.530 West 22nd Street, ChelseaThrough SaturdaySheila Hicks‘Ode to Roy Davis’Davis & Langdale Company231 East 60th Street, Upper East SideThrough Dec. 23Advertisement