
Antiques By                     
EVE M. KAHN

NOV. 26, 2015
New books reveal poignant, 19th-century pleas to Santa Claus as well as the bizarre fate of some heart-rending mail addressed to his workshop.“Dear Santa: Children’s Christmas Letters and Wish Lists, 1870-1920” (Chronicle Books; $14.95) contains gift requests published in newspapers around the world, with letters as mournful as “mama says that Santa Claus does not come to poor people” and “I am afraid you may forget me, like last year.”The scale of the desired gifts ranged from “some little trifle to make our hearts glad” to “the whole earth.” Santa’s finances and his reindeers’ health were among the writers’ concerns, as well as his safety while navigating narrow chimneys and the accuracy of his lists of addresses and children’s names and ages.“Letters to Santa Claus” (Indiana University Press; $16) reproduces about 250 messages from the 1930s, which belong to the Santa Claus Museum & Village in Santa Claus, Ind. The correspondents apologized for their poor handwriting and their recent misdeeds, and they offered to work alongside the elves. They also confided secrets: “mama cries at night when she thinks we are asleep, because she has no money.” One prisoner in Indiana, hoping to be released in time for Christmas, asked Santa for a lawyer and an appeal bond.AdvertisementAlex Palmer, a journalist living in Brooklyn, explores a family scandal in “The Santa Claus Man: The Rise and Fall of a Jazz Age Con Man and the Invention of Christmas in New York” (Lyons Press/Rowman & Littlefield; $25.95). In the 1910s and ’20s, Mr. Palmer’s great-great-uncle John Duval Gluck Jr. ran the Santa Claus Association in Manhattan. The group had volunteers sort through unopened letters to Santa that had ended up at post offices and tried to persuade philanthropists to buy the requested gifts.AdvertisementMr. Gluck, whose birthday was Dec. 25, was praised in the press and showered with cash donations. He planned to build a white marble headquarters in Manhattan, with the façade showing images of “Santa Clauses from all the countries of the world.”It is not clear how many Christmas presents the association sent out, nor is it certain that the children were telling the truth in the descriptions of their families’ dire needs. As money poured in, Mr. Gluck spent much of it on a luxurious lifestyle and a succession of wives.Government investigators, Mr. Palmer writes, eventually exposed the fraudulence of the Santa Claus Association. Mr. Gluck, who died in 1951 at the age of 73, later became a real estate agent in Florida. He kept memorabilia from the Santa Claus Association, including photos of tall stacks of mail.Mr. Palmer said in an interview that he found no evidence his forebear regretted deceiving generous people during holiday seasons: “He convinced himself that he was doing good.”Two of the year’s standout books about niche collections delve into antiques that protected smokers’ hands from heat, smells and stains.“A Token of Elegance: Cigarette Holders in Vogue” (Officina Libraria/ACC Distribution; $50), by the historians Martin Barnes Lorber and Rebecca McNamara, analyzes about 140 holders that Carolyn Hsu-Balcer has acquired in the past two decades. She owns silver and gold pieces studded with diamonds, plastic souvenirs from restaurants and tubes that sprout miniature sculptures of snakes, dragons, a monkey admiring itself in a mirror and a mermaid engulfed in smoke.Ms. Hsu-Balcer said in an interview that she commissioned the coffee-table book as a study of craftsmanship, social mores and problem solving, although it has been misconstrued by some as an endorsement of smoking. (She is a former smoker.)AdvertisementStarting in the 18th century, cigarette smokers devised ways to keep ashes off their gloves and fingers with long and sometimes curvy shafts. Inventors came up with built-in ashtrays and foldable stems for holders and experimented with new plastics. Styles from Rococo through Art Deco influenced the shapes and patterns on the shafts.Ms. Hsu-Balcer has paid as much as thousands of dollars each for objects made in, among other places, Brooklyn, Barcelona, Prague, St. Petersburg and Bangkok. She avoids items that show signs of wear and tear, although she made an exception for a faintly chewed tube of amber, blue enamel and gold that belonged to Princess Margaret. She plans to preserve the collection via an institution. “You need everything to really tell a story” of artistry and ingenuity, she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.James C. McComb Sinclair II inherited his collection of about 1,000 cigar bands, which a Philadelphia teenager named Hugh Augustus Wilson tucked into an album around 1900. Mr. Sinclair has reproduced the album pages in “Box of Cigar Bands” (Schiffer Publishing; $34.99) and analyzed the history of lithographed paper strips that were wrapped around cigar tips.Mr. Wilson, the son of a Philadelphia surgeon, apparently salvaged smokers’ torn bands from sidewalks. The bands depict an international assortment of writers, actresses, politicians and military heroes, and advertise hotels and clubs as well as cigar makers, especially ones in Tampa, Fla., and Havana. Mr. Wilson eventually outgrew the hobby (he left a few blank pages in the album), but for part of his boyhood, the collection most likely provided a kind of virtual escape.“He was looking at the world through the eyes of the people who were walking down the street,” tossing aside bits of multicultural lithography, Mr. Sinclair said. He added that he no longer smokes.A version of this article appears in print on November 27, 2015, on Page C28 of the New York edition with the headline: Letters to Santa Reveal the Forgotten.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »