AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenAnn Hampton Callaway belongs to the school of gifted pop singers for whom majestic vocal display is not enough. Along with Barbra Streisand and Celine Dion, to name two obvious examples, Ms. Callaway uses pyrotechnics as a platform for conveying inspirational messages of peace and hope. And the opening-night performance of her new show at Feinstein’s/54 Below, “Feminine Persuasion: Ann Hampton Callaway Celebrates Women Songwriters,” often had a sticky undertone of sentimentality.On the plus side, Ms. Callaway’s evolution from pop balladeer and piano-bar entertainer into a jazz singer is finally complete. Her uncanny talent for vocal mimicry has enabled her to evoke both Ella Fitzgerald and Sarah Vaughan. Supported by a trio that consisted of Ted Rosenthal on piano, Martin Wind on bass and Tim Horner on drums, she delivered a spectacular rendition of “How High the Moon,” one of Fitzgerald’s signature songs, complete with a Fitzgeraldian scat interlude that seemed to flow out of her spontaneously.It wasn’t so long ago that Ms. Callaway’s jazz singing felt disconnected from her body. But she has learned to swing from the gut. That’s no mean accomplishment. And the show’s opening numbers, Peggy Lee’s “I Love Being Here With You” and the vintage Frank Sinatra hit “Witchcraft,” had everything, including humor, toughness and an unforced sexiness.But with the fifth number, the Billie Holiday classic “God Bless the Child,” belted in a quasi-gospel style, I became aware of a missing ingredient: pain. Ms. Callaway used to specialize in ballads of romantic longing and heartbreak. But this was a different kind of suffering: material deprivation, shame and humiliation. Ms. Callaway’s declamatory rendition kept pain at a safe distance, and it registered as a sincere but pro forma gesture of sympathy.After that, “Feminine Persuasion” was a mixed bag. Ms. Callaway forgot the words to Adele’s “Someone Like You,” spent too much time on her own slick songwriting collaborations and filled her introductions with gushy hyperbole. Twice she described a songwriter as having “a heart bigger than the world.”­“Feminine Persuasion” runs through Saturday at Feinstein’s/54 Below, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 646-476-3551, 54below­.com. Advertisement