By JAMES R. OESTREICHNOV. 27, 2015
Not every new board member of the New York Philharmonic gets to celebrate his or her ascendance by playing Rachmaninoff’s Third Piano Concerto to a full house at David Geffen Hall. And thank goodness for that.Yet scarcely had the orchestra announced on Tuesday that the 24-year-old Russian virtuoso Daniil Trifonov, elected on Nov. 13, would join the board, than Mr. Trifonov took the stage for a blistering account of Rachmaninoff’s ultimate pianistic challenge. This program, which also included that composer’s great “Symphonic Dances,” is the last in the Philharmonic’s three-week Rachmaninoff festival, mounted largely to give Mr. Trifonov “a significant chunk of real estate,” as Alan Gilbert, the orchestra’s music director, says on its website.Mr. Gilbert adds, of Mr. Trifonov’s risk-taking: “You feel like you’re almost going off the rails, but he totally knows what he’s doing.”Indeed, the danger was evident several times, as when Mr. Trifonov pushed the already brisk tempo for the peroration of the finale. His hands were often a blur, but the myriad individual notes emerged with remarkable clarity.Tallish and slim, Mr. Trifonov somewhat evokes the Rachmaninoff of pictures and descriptions, but for the youngster’s mop of hair and ready smile. Mr. Trifonov’s long fingers, in particular, must resemble those that lured the composer into such pianistic audacities in the first place.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Trifonov gave full vent to tenderness and sensitivity, where appropriate, and offered more of both qualities in an encore, Medtner’s “Fairy Tale” in F minor (Op. 26, No. 3). But his playing was more often simply electrifying, and it was greeted by a shouting, standing ovation.The guest conductor, Ludovic Morlot, the music director of the Seattle Symphony, beat time rather squarely and rigidly. In the concerto, that need to keep things on the rails might have gotten the better of him, but the “Symphonic Dances” sounded even more tightly controlled, with little of the music’s essential lilt and sway.Above all, the work sounded loud. It is a podium paradox that an attempt at overcontrol often results in a loss of control. In the concerto, several orchestral solos, especially the early ones from the horns, sounded crude and blatant. Those words could be applied more generally to the “Symphonic Dances” performance as a whole, as Mr. Morlot harried it.­This program runs through Saturday at David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center; 212-875-5656, nyphil­.org.A version of this review appears in print on November 28, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Wild Sprint in Capping a Festival.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.