
Jessica Jones By                     
SIMON ABRAMS

DEC. 1, 2015
Episode 8 is a welcome corrective to the pity parties that were Episodes 6 and 7.” Here, Jones returns to her childhood home, now renovated by Kilgrave, and confronts her guilt directly. Jones may not have been in control of her actions before but that’s not the case here, as the episode’s writer, Scott Reynolds, reminds us immediately, by having Kilgrave tell Jones: “I was serious when I said I wanted you to choose.” Jones’s free will makes all the difference in “AKA WWJD,” a thoughtfully focused episode that swims around the idea that some people just don’t feel remorse about their actions.Kilgrave is one such person. Jones asks him “do your actions ever haunt you?” He doesn’t hesitate, but rather turns his nose up at the question: “Before I met you, I rarely dwelt on anything.” (David Tennant’s performance here is remarkable.)Jones has told us that life for her can be separated between pre- and post-Kilgrave, but for Kilgrave, life has never required introspection. When he challenges Jones about her alcoholism, you can tell that his accusations come from a place of complete self-absorption. Since getting his powers, he’s never been as powerless as Jones has, and therefore has no way to relate to her when she tells him that drinking is the only way she gets through her days “after what you did to me.”This exchange is key: because he’s protected by his massive ego, Kilgrave doesn’t buy Jones’s rebuke. But when he snaps back at Jones about her drinking problem, there’s an ounce of truth to his reply: “You blame me for your drinking problem?” This is one of those rare honest conversations between hero and villain that’s not so blunt that it destroys the doubt it sews in viewers’ heads.AdvertisementKilgrave is, in this case, right. Bear in mind: this is the guy that rationalizes his psychopathic behavior after Jones yells at him for “violating every cell in my body and every thought in my head” by saying “Like you, this power was forced upon me.” (We see a video, on the thumb drive Jessica was made to dig up, of a young Kilgrave — real name Kevin — experimented upon by his scientist parents.) The logic implicit in Kilgrave’s excuse is clear: Kilgrave has power, but doesn’t want to cope with the responsibility that comes with it. But when Jones downs a bottle of wine and blames Kilgrave for her drinking problem, she’s also making excuses for herself. So when Kilgrave rebukes Jones, his accusation sticks.AdvertisementCompare Jones with the cartoonishly dishonest Mrs. De Luca, Jones’s nosy childhood neighbor. De Luca’s relative psychological simplicity is the only major misstep in Episode 8. De Luca tells Jones that she wishes she could have prevented the car accident that killed Jones’s biological parents and brother. But Kilgrave instantly proves her to be a liar by having her reveal that she’s been making a big show of her grief because it “makes me feel important.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thankfully, Hogarth’s interactions with Wendy proves that “Jessica Jones” does sometime allow its lead protagonists to be fallible without either instantly absolving them, or making them completely detestable. Wendy’s bitter accusations — as well as Robin Weigert’s moving performance — are completely disarming. And Hogarth is desperate enough in her subsequent demands of Jones — ”Find some leverage on my ex before she ruins everything. Nothing else matters.” — that you don’t want to immediately dismiss her side of the story, even if Hogarth has yet to supply satisfying answers to Wendy’s claims. There are no real villains in Wendy and Hogarth’s subplot, just two hurt people who have made mistakes, and are now torturing each other in a last-ditch effort to escape each other. The show’s writers will hopefully continue to apply this level of sensitivity to Jones and Kilgrave’s future interactions.Stakeout Notes• Kilgrave to Jones: “I have to painstakingly choose every word I say. I once told a man to go screw himself. Can you imagine?” This line is mostly funny for the imaginary reaction shot it brings to mind.• Perhaps it’s just me, but maybe a high-powered lawyer who’s hip-deep in divorce proceedings shouldn’t be texting incriminating evidence to a paid employee?• Come back, Luke Cage, come back!• Anybody else feel bad for poor Mrs. De Luca when she blew up at episode’s end? Yes, she was manipulative, but that lady exploded like Yaphet Kotto at the end of “Live and Let Die.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »