
The Walking Dead By                     
 JEREMY EGNER
 
NOV. 29, 2015
“The Walking Dead” wrapped up the first half of Season 6 in an episode that saw walkers finally arrive inside the walls of Alexandria.But unlike both the frenetic season premiere that introduced this particular swarm and most of the episodes that followed, Sunday’s midseason finale was pretty sedate, consisting mostly of meaningful conversations punctuated by brief squabbles and other bursts of action. (A less charitable reading: It was kind of dull.)Aside from the presumed death of Deanna — though post-Glenn, that seems less certain than it would have a few weeks ago — the main cast survived, surprising for a “Walking Dead” finale, midseason or otherwise. (Update: Tovah Feldshuh did appear on “Talking Dead” for the usual post-mortem interview, for the record.) Potential perils telegraphed by last week’s episode, such as Ron stalking Carl with a handgun, turned out to be red herrings, at least for now.Ron, the son of Pete, the abusive rage monster taken out by Rick last season, did try to take out Carl in turn, but the perpetually hatted lad was able to thwart him. “I get it: my dad killed your dad,” Carl said in the night’s funniest line-reading, though perhaps not intentionally so. “But you need to know something: your dad was” not a nice person. (This is a family publication.)Advertisement[Related: Robert Kirkman on Glenn and the Future of Alexandria]The other main conflict involved Carol and Morgan, who squared off over the latter’s protecting of the murderous Wolf cub. No one won, aside from said Wolf, who knocked out Morgan and escaped with Denise as his hostage.AdvertisementMostly the episode set the table for the show’s Feb. 14 return, doubling down on this season’s cliffhanger addiction by leaving a number of strands dangling. (Good luck explaining your Valentine’s Day plans to your significant other.) “The Walking Dead” also briefly introduced the Saviors, a sinister rival group led by a brutal and eagerly anticipated villain named Negan, via an interstitial scene during a commercial break for “Into the Badlands.” (If there was an Emmy for using one series to boost another, AMC would win in a rout. At what point will they just start writing “Walking Dead” characters into that show?)[Related: Who Is Negan?]Though it was unclear if what we were watching was the fall of Alexandria, the walker invasion did represent the arrival, finally, of reality to the subdivision, validating the warnings Rick has been alternately elucidating and bellowing since he arrived there last season. The undead descended upon the colony, as symbolized in the opening scene, like so many ants atop a neglected innocence cookie (I think it was a cookie), an oblivious young Sam standing in for the Alexandrians’ callow vulnerability.The breaching of the walls and immediate aftermath was evocatively shot and intense, with pregnant Maggie scampering precariously up a ladder and Rick and Deanna paired up in leadership one last time. (I do appreciate that Deanna didn’t magically turn into a crack shot.)But after everyone made it inside, the assault stalled out somewhat. Sure, there were occasional walker advances into Jessie’s house to keep things interesting but on balance, the show felt like it was already looking ahead to the back half of the season.So let’s do the same. Here are a few questions that will have to wait a few months for some answers:Will Maggie and Glenn ever meet again? We covered Maggie’s ladder scramble. Glenn, meanwhile, was limited on Sunday to more Enid-lecturing. He got to glimpse Maggie stranded atop the wall but no contact was made. Does he have any more of those balloons handy?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Will Deanna’s legacy be a more humane Rick … Deanna disappeared into a haze of grief after Pete killed her husband at the end of Season 5 (resulting in the underusing of Ms. Feldshuh, a terrific character actress, in the process). But Deanna did re-emerge recently to illustrate for Rick the value of life above and beyond mere survival, pushing him past his protectionist impulses toward a more expansive notion of responsibility. “They’re all your people,” she said, giving him one last lesson before she died. But will it stick?… and a more involved Michonne? Michonne was the other Padawan at the bedside of Master Deanna, who urged her to lean in and find her purpose in a broken world. “What do you want?” she implored, more than once. I wish “The Walking Dead” wouldn’t hammer its themes so fervently, in general, but I’m all for any plan to elevate Michonne. She’s one of the show’s most engaging characters and Danai Gurira portrays her with great delicacy. I’d love to see her get more to do than to tell Rick to chill out every other episode.Will Sam get everyone killed?I’m going to say no, at least not everyone, though he’s clearly a liability. “Mom? Mom?” he said, amid the walker throng. Which part of “Tiptoe Through the Tulips” do you not understand, kid? Even Judith, in her oddly adorable gut-gown, thinks you needs to get it together. (Seriously, is no one going to tell him to hush?) Related: It’s probably best not to ponder too deeply why they don’t just use the innard camouflage trick at all times on this show.AdvertisementWill Tara and DeniGranted, this is a minor-key cliffhanger but Tara was clearly tormented to see her new flame in jeopardy. Of greater interest is what additional damage the young Wolf might do. Does the fact that he didn’t kill anyone mean that Morgan got through to him, at least a little? Of course, there are worse hostages than medics with first-aid supplies in tow. (He doesn’t know that even basic infections stump Denise.)Is Carol’s brutal efficiency curdling into something darker? She seemed willing to kill Morgan, which many of us have probably wanted to do this season, though I doubt most of us would actually go through with it. She clearly was willing to do so, and that trench knife is one of the more malevolent looking weapons we’ve seen her wield. We’ve also seen the number she’s done on poor Sam — he opened the episode holed up in his room, drawing the walker scene Carol described last season. Viewed a certain way, she’s indirectly responsible for whatever casualties do result from Sam’s fragility (Father Gabriel, if I had to bet). And with the Wolf’s escape, she’ll have Morgan even more mercilessly in her sights when she wakes up. Is she about due for another banishment, or at least an intervention? I guess we’ll find out in February.• Deanna met a noble end, opting to take as many walkers with her as possible over a quick suicide. And while I was at least 99 percent sure she was a goner, the fact that I didn’t actually see her die did give me a bit of a pause. Did anyone else have a similar experience? I don’t want to gratuitously bash the show over the Glenn thing but that is an example of what people (like me) meant when they complained that the subplot ultimately subverted the show’s strengths. I wouldn’t have doubted Deanna’s death at all this time last season.• I enjoyed Deanna’s (unprintable) response to her walker bite.• So that was Eugene saying “help” on Daryl’s walkie-talkie a couple weeks ago, as some commenters theorized.• I get that AMC wants to leverage the tremendous success of “The Walking Dead” into a strong start for “Into the Badlands,” but the interstitial scene crossed a line. You want to shoehorn the new show between “Walking Dead” and “Talking Dead,” fine. Not very considerate to “Walking Dead” fans, but fine. You want to put a Steven Yeun message inside “Badlands,” as you did last week, sure. But to put an actual scene from the show, about an aspect of the story many people are really looking forward to, outside the actual show feels like dirty pool. What about viewers who DVR “The Walking Dead”? Are they just out of luck?• Happy holidays everyone. See you in 2016.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »