‘PICTURES’
Conrad Tao, piano
(Warner Classics)
On this fascinating album, aptly titled, the brilliant 21-year-old American pianist Conrad Tao, a thoughtful artist and dynamic performer who is also a composer, has surrounded a repertory staple, Mussorgsky’s “Pictures at an Exhibition,” with varied works by contemporary composers, including himself. All of these pieces, in different ways, evoke images and people through music. The program opens with David Lang’s rhythmically hypnotic “cage,” a tribute to John Cage, and ends with Mr. Lang’s ruminative “wed” (from “Memory Pieces”). There is also a mysterious, alluring work by Toru Takemitsu; Mr. Tao’s dreamy “A Walk (for Emilio),” a portrait of Emilio del Rosario, Mr. Tao’s first significant teacher; and Elliott Carter’s “Two Thoughts About the Piano,” a pair of breathlessly skittish, complex pieces, played dazzlingly by Mr. Tao, especially the perpetual- motion “Caténaires.” Though his account of “Pictures at an Exhibition” is sometimes a little percussive for my taste, he plays it with enormous imagination, color and command. (Anthony Tommasini)‘SCRAPYARD EXOTICA’
Del Sol String Quartet
(Sono Luminus)
I could be wrong, but I’m guessing it’s been a while since you’ve rocked out to a string quartet recording. See if your foot can stay still once you put on this funky disc of rhythmically infectious (if often warped) music played by the adventurous Del Sol String Quartet. Mason Bates’s irresistibly oddball collection of four bagatelles layers electronics and percussive accents on top of a crisp, angular score. Mohammed Fairouz’s “The Named Angels” is a smooth cocktail of Middle Eastern dance tunes and film-noirish Minimalism. Ken Ueno’s “Peradam” offers a heady brew of harmonies flickering with microtones, harmonics and vocalizations that draws heavily on the individual talents of the versatile Del Sol players, which in the case of the violist Charlton Lee includes eerily accomplished samples of Tuvan throat singing. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)‘JOYCE AND TONY: LIVE AT WIGMORE HALL’
Joyce DiDonato, mezzo soprano; Antonio Pappano, pianist
(Warner Classics)
The mezzo-soprano Joyce DiDonato demonstrates the full range of her expressive and technical gifts in a wide-ranging program that opens with Haydn’s cantata “Arianna a Naxos” and closes with “Over the Rainbow.” Antonio Pappano, better known for his work on the podium, is an exemplary collaborative pianist here, supporting Ms. DiDonato’s voluptuous singing with characterful, virtuosic playing. In addition to the Haydn, the first of two discs includes brilliantly rendered selections by Rossini and the colorful, seldom-performed “Evening Songs” (1908) by Francesco Santoliquido. The second disc features an exploration of American art and popular song, including Foster’s “Intimate Dreamer,” William Bolcom’s “Amor” and Irving Berlin’s “I Love a Piano.” (Vivien Schweitzer)SPOTIFY PLAYLISTTracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)