
The Affair By                     
 MIKE HALE
 
NOV. 29, 2015
It was a dark and stormy night. No, really.“The Affair” has never been known to shy away from a big, obvious metaphor, and this week it totally embraced one, with the fervor of Noah Solloway after his fifth or sixth drink. A March hurricane — named Alice or Alex, I couldn’t make out which — rolled into New York, and our four central characters all found themselves tested by it. To what should be no one’s surprise, the only character to completely fail the test was Noah.The episode, written by David Henry Hwang and Alena Smith and directed by Jeffrey Reiner, summarily dispensed with the show’s usual he-said-she-said structure and instead went through the day chronologically, jumping among the characters like any other cable drama. It also dispensed with the future murder mystery — no Gottlief scenes — perhaps a sign that, with three episodes left in the season, the two time lines are close to converging.The action was straightforward, if a little high strung. Helen ran into the doctor who saved her son Martin, brought him home for a quickie in the basement while her children were upstairs, freaked out and then settled back into her usual melancholia. Alison went into labor five weeks early, freaked out because she couldn’t reach Noah and then had the baby anyway. Noah went with Eden to a party at a movie producer’s house, got high, freaked out when a naked woman he was staring at proved to be his daughter Whitney, ran away in the rain to be with Alison and freaked out again when his SUV got stuck. Cole packed up Alison’s house to prepare it for sale, freaked out when he learned that his new girlfriend, Luisa, couldn’t have a child, drove her away with his foul mood and then freaked out again when he saw his dead son calling to him.Whew. That’s a lot of freaking, and a quick description doesn’t do justice to the episode’s lush melodramatic flourishes. Best was the ending, when the scenes of Alison struggling to push out her baby alternated with scenes of Cole — symbolically unable to prise free the boards marked with the heights of his and Alison’s dead son — setting fire to her house. New life out of the literal ashes, especially appropriate if the girl turns out to be Cole’s.AdvertisementThe long party sequence was a lurid hoot in its own right, and continuing proof of just how square “The Affair” is. Yes, we’re supposed to see Noah as a kid with his face pressed against the glass, but that doesn’t entirely account for the prim, moralistic way in which the show treats the presence of cocaine or skinny dippers at a Hamptons party. Similarly, in the Helen story line we were supposed to believe that middle-aged woman are scarce on Tinder, which is manifestly untrue. (Also, who uses the same vibration for Tinder alerts and texts?)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The party did provide an opportunity for Dominic West, as Noah, to show off all of his well-preserved 46-year-old physique, as he floated like John Cheever’s swimmer through the producer’s pool.Plot seemed to be less of a concern to the writers and producers than the layering of associations and correspondences. Martin’s doctor, who upset Helen with his New York guy obtuseness, self-centeredness and pragmatism (the most realistic thing about the episode), was balanced by the utterly selfless, angelic female doctor who delivered Alison’s baby. Both Helen and Noah found themselves reduced to tears by their feelings of inadequacy — she overwhelmed by being a single mother to four kids, he embarrassed and angry at not being by Alison’s side. Children were the thread tying all the stories together. When Helen asked the doctor to stay and ride out the storm, he looked at her brood and said, “I’d rather drown” (a rather heavy-handed reference to the fate of Alison and Cole’s son). Alison had her baby alone, while Noah caught himself perving on his own daughter. And when Cole realized he’d forgotten to bring condoms, Luisa said she was O.K. with unprotected sex — for reasons Cole would soon discover.AdvertisementLet us know what you thought about Episode 9 in the comments. Am I the only person who thinks it’s a little strange how often Noah and Cole end up on lonely roads at night? Are we supposed to laugh when “Descent” is compared to Henry Miller, Nabokov and Mailer? As a final note, a big shout-out to James Naughton, giving his usual authoritative performance as the sleazy but smart producer. See you next week.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »