
Homeland By                     
JUDITH WARNER

NOV. 29, 2015
This recap contains spoilers for Sunday’s episode of “Homeland.”Saul to Carrie: “Come here.”Ivan to Allison: “Sh-sh-sh. You’re shaking. It’s O.K.”I could really use one of those hugs. Couldn’t you?I think it’s fair enough to assume that we’re all in a pretty bleak place right now, our turkey hangover and end-of-the-long-weekend blues leavened not at all by the sight of our beloved Peter Quinn in a gas chamber, choking, convulsing, foaming at the mouth, and cursed with far too much knowledge of the added horrors (asphyxiation, release of bladder and bowel) to come.So let’s try to self-soothe. Breathe deep like Allison and think of the injectable sarin antidote, surreptitiously administered to Quinn just minutes before his gassing begins. And think of the comforting conventions of action-hero TV: the Jack Bauer-types like Quinn never die. Their shows couldn’t survive without them.AdvertisementSh-sh-sh. It’s going to be O.K.At least we have Saul back, fatherly again, and seemingly having forgiven Carrie for having refused to back his bid for the C.I.A. directorship. Is it because he’s come to realize that he didn’t deserve it?Advertisement“I’m gonna miss you, Allison,” he says to his second-best mentee, who notably does not return the sentiment. “I was asleep for 10 years. You woke me up.”One suspects that the awakening wasn’t sexual. Saul’s distress at the contrast between Allison’s ardor toward her hedge fund lover and thinly veiled disinterest in bed with him is painful to watch. And the timing of his declaration, part of a double play that will lead to his placing a tracking device in her purse, makes me wonder if it’s Allison’s perfidy — and his awareness of how blind and mind-blunted he has been — that has awakened him to his better self.Let’s move on to Allison. You may well hate the murderously venal Berlin station chief — though I still can’t bring myself to — but you’ve got to love the artistry with which she has been depicted. The twisted irony behind the disdain with which she asks Saul, “You realize how guilty this makes you look?” after he runs from the C.I.A. and fakes his defection to Israel. Her marvelous dance with Ivan, which spins, briefly, into mutual hysteria before pivoting and flipping with a slap and a chin-grab, into razor-sharp, centered calm.“Ivan. Stop. Think,” Allison says, and the man who, a few seconds earlier, had been flailing in his too-tight shirt, punching the wall, possibly denting his now-noticeable wedding ring, and losing his grip on the English language suddenly pulls himself together.(Let’s pause for a moment to enjoy that out-of-character language slippage. “You’ve been playn,” Ivan says, having previously bungled the pronunciation of “burned,” forcing Allison to interrupt the flow of action to ask, “What?”)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But how masterfully she then plays Saul and Dar, recasting the sights and sounds witnessed by a room of agents so convincingly that her highly seasoned bosses lose their grip on the game.Why, I even found my own certainties slipping, wondering just for a moment whether it was possible that Ivan was, indeed, Allison’s agent — and I fear that Carrie may waver, too, judging by the little bit of lower lip trembling that seized her just at the moment that Saul ordered Allison’s arrest.Saul’s not the only one who “didn’t wanna be” convinced of Allison’s guilt. Not by a long shot.“Maybe you can live.”These are words to cling to this week, as we cross our fingers tight in the ever-darkening days and hope that Quinn will rise from the almost-dead, stronger and madder than ever. My guess is that, even if he survives (And he will! He will!), his agonies will nonetheless make a powerful propaganda video, setting off a geopolitical chain reaction that will power us at full tilt through the remaining episodes of this season, and, perhaps, even — like Saul’s kidnapping and eventual complicity in Dar Adal’s deal with Haissam Haqqani — set up the drama for next season. If the video gets out, it will also, no doubt, add another spark to the subtly simmering competitive tensions between Astrid and Carrie.AdvertisementI, for one, can’t wait.Judith Warner, a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine, is the author, most recently, of “We’ve Got Issues: Children and Parents in the Age of Medication.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »