AdvertisementSupported byThe LeftoversBy Jen ChaneyIf Kevin Garvey’s recent journey through purgatory suggested that mysticism would explain all things on “The Leftovers” going forward, the reveal at the end of this week’s episode clearly shows otherwise.The jaw-dropper ending confirms that Evie and her girlfriends didn’t depart after all, even though they mysteriously disappeared after hanging out near the same location that acted as Kevin’s conduit to the spiritual realm. It turns out all three girls still have their feet firmly planted on Earth, and, more specifically, in a camper that figures prominently in Meg’s plan to upend all sense of peace in Jarden.In contrast to last week’s episode, this one goes out of its way to provide rational answers to previously unanswered questions. Evie and her friends didn’t vanish and join the rest. They simply ran away and hooked up with Meg’s faction of the Guilty Remnant. When Meg and her former fiancé, Darren, visit Miracle during a flashback sequence, the audio tour says fracking and sewage system explosions are responsible for all those cracks in the town’s foundation. (At that time, the tours have just gotten started; presumably those recordings were later revised to include a more “miraculous” back story.)When Meg and Evie meet for the first time, bonding over baby carrots and a knock-knock joke that, per the season premiere, Evie will later share with her father, Evie frankly tells her new friend: “I’m sorry you didn’t find what you were looking for here. No one ever does.”Meg’s disillusioning visit to Miracle — which happens more than a year before Matt, Kevin or Nora arrive — is what ultimately sets her on a path toward violence. Meg doesn’t merely want to follow Guilty Remnant protocol by serving as a “living reminder” of what happened on October the 14th. She wants to start a revolution and, possibly, a civil war. Co-writers Damon Lindelof and Monica Beletsky, as well as director Keith Gordon — who also directed Season 1’s Matt-centric “Two Boats and a Helicopter” — subtly note that such battles have been waged in Texas before. During Meg’s chat with Evie, a monument to the Confederate Army is clearly visible in the background; on the bus ride to Miracle, Meg and Darren are surrounded by African-Americans singing “Wade in the Water,” a song associated with the Underground Railroad.Meg’s goal, as she tells Matt, is to usher the residents of the refugee camp into Jarden. She wants to be their Moses, leading them to a promised land, but only so she can cause chaos and prove that the promise of Jarden has not been kept.Meg has often felt like the most marginalized of “Leftovers” characters, especially this season when, until now, she only appeared long enough to cryptically torture Tommy. This episode attempts to rectify that by sharing more information about her than ever before. Season 1 explained that her mother died on Oct. 13, but in this episode, we finally see that death and the moments that transpire beforehand, which illuminate the communication gap between mother and daughter. (That gap contradicts the information on the fliers Matt once circulated and that he refers to in this episode, which called the two “very close.”) We also see Meg in Miracle, seeking answers from Isaac while bringing along the sweater that was draped over her mother’s shoulders when she died. (That’s the same sweater Meg had with her when she moved into the Guilty Remnant house in the first season’s “Penguin One, Us Zero.”) Just as we did in Season 1, we also see Meg attempting to persuade her Guilty Remnant superiors to up the brutality ante, something she’s now decided to take upon herself.There’s something wonderfully counterintuitive about Liv Tyler playing such a dangerous woman. With her angelic, Arwen-in-“Lord of the Rings” features and her down-feathery voice, Meg is the last person you’d expect to go rogue-terrorist, which is what makes her so scary; if she can turn this unrepentant, anyone can. The question is: why?The events depicted in this episode imply that Meg is prone to escaping reality via outside forces: cocaine use, contact with psychics, life in the Guilty Remnant. One wonders if she would have found another purpose if her meeting with Isaac had gone differently. After proving his psychic legitimacy by confirming that Meg’s mother sent back her salad on that fateful day in the restaurant, Isaac is unwilling — unlike Tommy and Laurie — to lie to provide comfort. When Meg asks to hear the story her mother had been planning to tell her, Isaac is honest. Though we never learn the details of that story, we grasp that it’s banal enough to convince Meg that life is just a big, cosmic, pencil-related joke with the punch line, “It’s pointless.”It’s such a classic “Leftovers” move to not tell us what Meg’s mother intended to say. But the truth is that part of the lunch conversation doesn’t matter anyway. The point is what Meg’s mother tells her daughter: “When you have a cause, there’s no stopping you.” Just like that wonderfully used Olivia Newton-John song says, Meg has to believe she is magic. And nothing will stand in her way.Leftover “Leftovers” Notes• Tommy — whom Meg brings to Miracle, presumably so she can use his connection to Kevin to cross over the bridge — finally confronts Meg about their sexual encounter and, interestingly, does not refer to it as rape. Even more interestingly, she says she initiated the intercourse because, “I wanted to get you pregnant.” For biological reasons alone, that’s an odd thing to say. But it suggests that perhaps Meg is working through some of the issues of her failed engagement since, physically, Tommy looks an awful lot like Darren. Whether Meg knows it or not, that comment also echoes the way Holy Wayne operated, which may explain Tom’s attraction to her. She’s yet another zealot to whom he can’t say no.• Betty Buckley plays the role of Meg’s mother, which is wink-wink casting that works on a couple of levels. Ms. Buckley’s character on “Eight Is Enough” had the maiden name Abbott, and her association with that series almost seems like a message from the writers: “For some of you, that eighth episode last week might have felt like the resolution of the ‘Leftovers’ mystery. But sorry: Turns out eight is not enough to explain what’s going on here.”Advertisement