AdvertisementSupported byJessica JonesBy Simon AbramsThere’s enough truth to the glaring streak of self-loathing that runs throughout the seventh episode of “Jessica Jones” to make it both palatable and believable. That’s no small feat for an episode that encourages viewers to forgive Jones, but never forces her to confront the demons that she’s courting. Instead of accepting and confronting the guilt she feels over killing Reva Connors, Jones yo-yos between steps two and four of the five stages of grief: anger and depression.After being cut off at a local bar, and then getting thrown into a curbside pile of garbage, Jones hunts down Wendy, Jeryn Hogarth’s soon-to-be ex-wife. Jones threatens Wendy in an attempt to get her to sign divorce papers, and accidentally drops her onto subway tracks. Jones tries to get to Wendy by airing her own dirty laundry, asking her if she’s ever “hurt, [or] disgusted someone so completely that you can see it in their eyes.” She continues to make Wendy’s plight all about her by babbling about the black, oozing stuff inside. “You sweat it through your skin, but it keeps spreading until you would do anything not to feel it. Anything.”So many of the encounters in this episode similarly boil down to whether or not Jones can live with herself. When Dorothy Walker, Trish’s biological mom and Jones’s adopted mother, tells Jones that “people can change,” Jones brings the conversation back to herself by saying it doesn’t erase the bad stuff she’s done. And when Trish tries to reassure Jones (“You have guilt and shame, and it’s clouding your judgment”), Jones doesn’t own up to her own feelings of guilt, but rather excuses them by claiming that she’s not living up to Trish’s standards: “I’m still not the hero you want me to be.”Thankfully, Wendy reminds us that the show’s supporting characters aren’t just fun house mirrors for Jones’s problems when she storms into Hogarth’s office, and blackmails her. This scene is a welcome rejection of one of the central conceits of “Jessica Jones”: everyone inevitably serves as a foil for the title character. When Wendy fights back, she reminds us that there’s a world of events and references that are only indirectly unrelated to Jones. It’s a welcome respite in an episode that otherwise myopically fixates on Jones’s hurt feelings. Likewise, Trish has her way with Will Simpson in another satisfying scene that has nothing to do with Jones. Forget Jones and Cage: Trish and Mike are the show’s most empowering couple.Jones spends way too much of Episode 7 putting herself down, and often in the least productive ways imaginable. She suggests that she knows she wasn’t completely responsible for Reva’s death when she, after discovering Ruben’s body in her bedroom, says “this is the third death I’m directly connected to.” The fact that she can qualify that statement is a kind of progress. But Jones’s confrontation with Kilgrave reveals nothing about what specific emotions she’s thinking about after talking to Cage about Reva’s death. Kilgrave steals the spotlight from Jones when she tries to punish herself — and draw Kilgrave out — by trying to get into a Supermax prison. But Kilgrave doesn’t say anything that really bursts Jones’s bubble. Instead, he professes “eternal love,” and claims that he’s “the only one who challenges” her.There are no substantial emotions at play in Kilgrave’s encounter with Jones, just as there’s no sting to the scene in which Robyn, Ruben’s sister, tries to snap Jones out of her funk by reminding her that Ruben, Kilgrave’s latest victim, was loved, was needed, and was real to someone other than Jones. The power of Robyn’s speech is undercut by the indecisive direction of the scene. The camera doesn’t settle on actress Colby Minifie for long when she begs Jones to tell Ruben that they can go to the zoo next week, just as long as he comes back. Instead it settles on Krysten Ritter as she looks on in stunned disbelief. Jones shouldn’t own this scene, but somehow, she does anyway.Advertisement