AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckGroove into the workweek — and whittle off some holiday pudge — with the Soul Train Awards, complete with a how-to video. Can’t move from the couch? Prepare for the final season of “Downton Abbey” or follow some elite mountain climbers into thin air.What’s On TVSOUL TRAIN AWARDS 2015 8 p.m. on BET and Centric. You can’t use her phone — or yours, either: Erykah Badu, performing a new track, scolds cellphone offenders as the host of this ceremony, taped in Las Vegas this month, celebrating black music and entertainment. Jill Scott is honored with the Lady of Soul Award; Kenny Edmonds, a.k.a. Babyface, receives the Legend Award. And Brandy, Fantasia, R. Kelly, Boyz II Men, Tyrese, Cameo and Bobby Brown perform. Viewers can get prepped with  a video featuring the Soul Train dancers’ go-to moves. (Image: Ms. Badu)BEHIND THE STORY WITH THE PALEY CENTER: GIRLS 10 a.m. on Sundance. Judd Apatow, one of the show’s executive producers, chats with Lena Dunham, its creator; Jenni Konner, a writer; and the actors Allison Williams, Andrew Rannells and Alex Karpovsky.MEET THE PRESS 10:30 a.m. on NBC. The Republican presidential contenders Donald J. Trump and Ben Carson explain some of their remarks. Mr. Carson also appears on THIS WEEK, at 10 on ABC, and FACE THE NATION, at 10:30 on CBS. (Image: Mr. Trump, left, and Mr. Carson)THE OPEN MIND 3:30 p.m. on PBS World. Jill Soloway, the creator of Amazon’s Emmy-winning series “Transparent,” talks about gender identity.MADAM SECRETARY 8:30 p.m. on CBS. Just as Elizabeth is about to tell the United Nations that Russia was behind the attack on Air Force One, Henry blows her theory to smithereens.A SALUTE TO DOWNTON ABBEY 9 p.m. on PBS. Lord Grantham — er, Hugh Bonneville — hosts this highlight reel featuring interviews with Julian Fellowes, the show’s creator; Gareth Neame, an executive producer; and assorted cast members. There are also behind-the-scenes snippets and a glimpse of what’s to come in the final season.THE LEFTOVERS 9 p.m. on HBO. Why did Meg become a Remnant crusader? Clues, here.QUANTICO 10 p.m. on ABC. In the present, the trainees analyze serial killers. In the future, Alex is interrogated by the F.B.I.What’s StreamingMERU (2015) on iTunes. Jimmy Chin, an elite professional climber (who directed this documentary with his wife, Elizabeth Chai Vasarhelyi); his mentor, Conrad Anker; and the young Renan Ozturk try to conquer the Shark’s Fin, a 1,500-foot blade of granite at the top of Mount Meru in the Garhwal Himalaya range in India. Blizzards and avalanches, frostbite and trench foot, and sleeping in a tiny tent dangling in thin air are part of the thrill. “Meru is the culmination of all I’ve done and all I’ve wanted to do,” Mr. Anker explains. The film is so “blindingly beautiful” that it “easily makes you forget that what you are watching is completely bananas,” Jeannette Catsoulis wrote in The Times. (Image: Mr. Anker)Advertisement