LOS ANGELES — Rocky Balboa made a near-triumphant return to movie theaters over the five-day Thanksgiving weekend, helping to bolster total domestic ticket sales by about 12 percent compared with the same period last year.But even as “Creed,” the seventh movie in the “Rocky” series, turned out bigger crowds than Hollywood expected, another Thanksgiving entry, “The Good Dinosaur,” from Disney’s Pixar Animation, arrived to ticket sales that were more gentle than giant. And a third new wide release, “Victor Frankenstein,” bombed badly.As expected, the No. 1 movie in North America was “The Hunger Games: Mockingjay Part 2” (Lionsgate), which took in an estimated $75.8 million between Wednesday and Sunday, according to Rentrak, which compiles box office data. “Part 2” has now taken in roughly $441 million worldwide after 10 days of release, only 8 percent less than the 10-day global total for “Part 1.”“The Good Dinosaur” was a sturdy second, collecting an estimated $55.6 million, a total that Disney described as the fourth-highest Thanksgiving opening on record. Even so, the total lagged behind pre-release analyst expectations and ranked as one of Pixar’s quieter arrivals. (One asterisk: Pixar films tend to open in the summer, although “Toy Story 2” and “A Bug’s Life” were November releases.) “The Good Dinosaur,” which cost at least $200 million to make and received reviews on par with Pixar entries like “Brave” and “Cars,” was delayed because of production difficulties. Its release marks the first time Pixar has delivered two films in one year; “Inside Out” arrived to stratospheric results in June.The euphorically reviewed “Creed,” starring Michael B. Jordan and Sylvester Stallone, sold about $42.6 million in tickets, triple the initial total for the last movie in the series, “Rocky Balboa,” which was released in 2006, and at least 20 percent more than analysts had expected. “Creed,” which came in at No. 3, cost $35 million to make, with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer overseeing production and Warner Bros. taking the lead on marketing and distribution.“Victor Frankenstein” (20th Century Fox), a $40 million horror-drama that was initially planned for a pre-Halloween release but got pushed back, died an ugly death, taking in just $3.4 million over the holiday period.