AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsJames Prideaux, who wrote television movies that starred Katharine Hepburn and Elizabeth Taylor and a play for which Julie Harris won a Tony Award for best actress, died on Nov. 18 in West Hills, Calif. He was 88.The cause was a stroke, said his agent, Michael Peretzian.Mr. Prideaux (pronounced pree-DOUGH) was working on Off Broadway shows and for TV soap operas in the late 1960s when Ms. Hepburn recruited him to Hollywood to write a screenplay.While that project was abandoned when she returned to New York to appear in “Coco,” her only Broadway musical, she would star in three TV movies written by Mr. Prideaux: “Mrs. Delafield Wants to Marry” in 1986, “Laura Lansing Slept Here” in 1988, and “The Man Upstairs” in 1992. Ms. Hepburn, hovering around 80 and still radiant, was generally applauded for displaying her customary spunk in the vehicles that Mr. Prideaux created for her.Ms. Harris won a Tony Award and the prolific Mr. Prideaux won a Drama Desk Award for most promising playwright in 1973 for “The Last of Mrs. Lincoln,” although the show, which explored Mary Todd Lincoln’s widowhood, closed after six weeks. It was reprised as a 1976 film.Mr. Prideaux’s “Return Engagement,” a 1978 Hallmark Hall of Fame production in which Ms. Taylor played a history professor who develops a relationship with one of her students, was described by John J. O’Connor of The New York Times as “not believable for a moment, but that flaw has rarely been fatal in television-land.”Mr. Prideaux also wrote a one-man show titled “Lyndon Johnson,” based on the book “Lyndon: An Oral Biography,” by Merle Miller. The show starred Laurence Luckinbill and was produced in 1987 for television and in 1991 for the stage (as “Lyndon”), where The Times described it as “more oral than history.”James Priddy was born in South Bend, Ind., on Aug. 29, 1927, the son of Lloyd Priddy, a professional photographer, and the former Beulah Shirey. He had no immediate survivors.Aspiring to become an actor, he changed his name and moved to Chicago and then New York, but became a writer instead. He went on to write for magazines and joined the Barr-Wilder-Albee Playwrights Unit, a theater workshop.In 1970, his “Postcards,” in which a man and woman compete for the best-written cards to send to famous people, made it to the Belasco Theater on a double bill, preceding what was promoted as the first all-nude Broadway play, “Grin and Bare It!”In 1980, Mr. Prideaux’s “Mixed Couples,” about two married couples who happen to meet in a New Jersey airplane hangar 25 years after they had switched partners, was scorned by Frank Rich of The Times.“If actors as gifted and hard-working as Julie Harris, Geraldine Page, Rip Torn and Michael Higgins cannot breathe life into a play,” he wrote, “it’s a fairly safe assumption that the play is a corpse.”“Mixed Couples” closed after a week when Ms. Harris bowed out because of an unidentified illness.After decades of rubbing shoulders with celebrities, Mr. Prideaux wrote a memoir, “Knowing Hepburn and Other Curious Experiences,” published in 1996. Advertisement