AdvertisementSupported byBy Jim FarberRock ’n’ roll is littered with stories about should-be stars who never got a shot. But increasingly, enterprising fans, filmmakers and archivists are bringing little-known talents to light. The folk musician Rodriguez became a sensation following “Searching for Sugar Man,” the Oscar-winning documentary exploring his disappearance. The singer Vashti Bunyan released one album in 1970, returning in 2005 after she was discovered by a new school of “freak folk” performers.Now Scott Fagan is getting his unlikely second chance — at 70 years old — after a lifetime of close calls and hard-to-believe flukes left him a near-footnote to musical history.Forty-seven years ago, the then 23-year-old singer-songwriter released a quirky psychedelic album called “South Atlantic Blues” on Atco Records that flopped badly. This week, it’s returning, thanks to a re-release by the history-minded label Saint Cecilia Knows Records. The label’s founder, Chris Campion, stumbled upon Mr. Fagan’s music while researching a book on John Phillips, the leader of the Mamas and the Papas. (Both musicians spent time performing in the Virgin Islands.) After hearing “South Atlantic Blues” on Mr. Fagan’s website, Mr. Campion was “blown away.”“From the first note, I knew this was a great work,” Mr. Campion said. “He was drawing on his personal story from a deep emotional well.”He didn’t yet know Mr. Fagan’s history: that the musician’s songs had found their way into the hands of the visual artist Jasper Johns (who created a series of lithographs based on the music, now in the collections of the Museum of Modern Art and the Metropolitan Museum of Art); and that Mr. Fagan had encounters with the Beatles (who almost signed him to the fledgling Apple label) and Richard Gere (who sang in a rock opera Mr. Fagan co-wrote). It also turned out that Mr. Fagan is the father of the celebrated modern alternapop wit Stephin Merritt of the Magnetic Fields — a fact unknown to Mr. Fagan for nearly 40 years.Mr. Fagan’s music stands out, in part, because of his eccentric vocal approach. He sings with a heavy vibrato exaggerated by a staggered delivery that brings to mind the styles of Donovan or Robin Gibb of the Bee Gees. Though Mr. Fagan’s music is now being remarketed as “psych-folk,” his songs embrace a broad sonic fantasia, swirling in ’60s New York R&B and ’40s jazz, as well as the Caribbean rhythms of calypso, meringue and pachanga.The lyrics, often dark and frustrated, are a direct result of Mr. Fagan’s early years, which were filled with profound want. “Life often got violent,” Mr. Fagan said in a telephone interview from his home in Middletown, Pa. “That fed into the music I made. I sing like I mean it — because I mean it.”He was born in 1945 on 52nd Street, then known as Swing Street, to parents deeply involved in the jazz scene. His father, a saxophonist and singer mentored by Lester Young, fronted a Dixieland jazz band under the name Frankie Galvin. His mother was a modern dancer.After his parents divorced, Mr. Fagan was taken, along with his sister and two younger brothers, to live with his mother and her new painter/sculptor boyfriend in an artists’ colony on St. Thomas, V.I. For a time, he resided in El Fanguito (“the little mudhole”), a slum in Puerto Rico. Mr. Fagan, then 9, and his sister were street children, while their mother was hospitalized because of a complicated pregnancy and his stepfather was in detox. (His mother married seven times, six to alcoholics.) The boy found his only refuge in singing.At 16, Mr. Fagan led a band aptly named the Urchins, with whom he developed his original “folk-rock-calypso” sound. He made several efforts to get to the United States for more exposure, stowing away on two planes, only to be returned by the authorities. Finally, in 1964, he found work on a ship actually called “Success,” bound for Miami. Mr. Fagan began to play clubs in Fort Lauderdale, raising enough cash to board a bus for New York, seeking fame. With just 11 cents to his name, he called the number his mother received from a friend to reach “someone in the music industry.” Even she didn’t know those digits belonged to the well-known songwriter Doc Pomus.The author of hits for the Drifters, Dion and Ray Charles, Mr. Pomus gave the young artist an audition and began working with him. “I was living in a magical dimension, right next to the one we’re living in, where things like this happened,” Mr. Fagan said.He had grown up idolizing the Latin/R&B connection heard in hits Mr. Pomus wrote with Mort Shuman like “Save the Last Dance for Me” and “This Magic Moment.”Mr. Fagan learned to write songs from that team, but he quickly burned through dead-end deals at Columbia, Big Top and Bang Records (an early home to Neil Diamond and Van Morrison). The man who became his second manager, Herb Gart, brought his music to Peter Asher, who was signing artists for the Beatles’ new Apple Records. Looking for a singer-songwriter, Mr. Asher was deciding between Mr. Fagan — and James Taylor. Guess who won that deal.Mr. Fagan finally got his own album contract with Atco Records, an offshoot of Atlantic. He described the mood during the recording of “South Atlantic Blues” as desperate. “My mother was homeless in Florida, my younger brothers had been taken into foster homes. God almighty, a lot of people were counting on me for success,” he said. “I had great pressure on me.”The intensity shows in the Brechtian gestalt of the songs Mr. Fagan wrote, as well as in his high-wire singing. Horace Ott’s graceful arrangements added to the drama. Unfortunately, the man who had signed Mr. Fagan to Atco soon left the company, and so, Mr. Fagan said, “the record was lost then and there.”Two years later, however, Jasper Johns fished the album from a cut-out bin and was impressed enough to create his lithographs, titled “Scott Fagan Record.” Mr. Fagan said that one day he got an invitation to attend an art opening that would include works inspired by his songs. “I was wary,” he said. “I thought we’d be going to some little place in the East Village where some guy had stuck chicken bones on a Day-Glo canvas. Imagine my surprise when it’s at MoMA. Jasper treated us like royalty.”The exposure gave the singer hope, but not cash. He did manage to get another project going, becoming a writer of “Soon,” the first “rock opera” to be produced on Broadway. It arrived in January 1971, nine months before “Jesus Christ Superstar.” The show featured Peter Allen, Vicki Sue Robinson, Barry Bostwick, Nell Carter — and a young Richard Gere. “As a singer, he wasn’t bad,” Mr. Fagan says of the actor, who had yet to appear in his first mainstream film.Mr. Fagan continued to perform while “doing everything I could to raise five children, by four different mothers, except robbing and selling weed,” he said.Over the years, Mr. Fagan often told his kids they might have an older brother somewhere. When he was 19, back in St. Thomas, the singer had had an affair with, he said, “a wonderful bohemian woman.” He had heard she might have gotten pregnant but had no confirmation.In an email interview, Mr. Merritt recalled that at the age of 7, “my mother told me my father was ‘a folk singer from St. Thomas.’ My mother made me promise, at 14, not to become a professional musician like my no-goodnik father.”Mr. Merritt, 50, who grew up without a father figure, said he never sought Mr. Fagan out because “a lot could go wrong. What if he needs a kidney or something?”Yet in his 20s, Mr. Merritt looked up Mr. Fagan in a record catalog and found the album “South Atlantic Blues” listed. “I thought it was a great title, and that made me curious,” he said.In the 1980s, Mr. Merritt performed one of his father’s songs, “Ghetto Fighter,” with his band the Zinnias. Still, he didn’t seek him out. Then, on Valentine’s Day in 2000, one of Mr. Fagan’s ex-wives was listening to “Fresh Air” on NPR when Mr. Merritt made an appearance and mentioned his father’s name. She called Mr. Fagan, and he tracked Mr. Merritt down by email. They began to exchange cordial, if tentative, messages.The wild-haired Mr. Fagan and the buttoned-up Mr. Merritt are an almost comical study in contrasts. “Stephin is very well-defended, and so am I,” Mr. Fagan said. “And we don’t have a marriage counselor helping us bridge time or be more daring.”Mr. Merritt finally agreed to meet his father in 2012 at Lincoln Center, at a screening of a documentary about Mr. Pomus (“AKA Doc Pomus”) produced by the songwriter’s daughter, Sharyn Felder. “I brought my mother as a chaperone and my friend Jonathan as a bodyguard,” Mr. Merritt wryly noted. “He could have been a knife-wielding maniac. Afterward we went for Chinese food at Grand Sichuan.”Though Mr. Fagan said he’s been careful “not to press myself” on his son, he is using Kickstarter to raise money to record a tribute album of Mr. Merritt’s songs. He hopes those funds increase with the awareness over the revived “South Atlantic Blues.”Mr. Fagan believes the songs he wrote for that album hold up, because, he said: “I was learning from the best writers in the world: Doc Pomus and Mort Shuman. And, by God, I was serious. I could see no value in distracting people from their misery. I sang with conviction. And I still do.”Advertisement