
Snapshot By                     
 ANDREW R. CHOW
 
NOV. 25, 2015
The musical world doesn’t seem quite so huge when in the hands of Shaina Taub. This 27-year-old singer-songwriter has a knack for bridging the gap between genres and forms: She has sung jazz-influenced pop at Lincoln Center; written and arranged for theater and “Sesame Street”; and, fittingly, was the first signee of a venture between Razor & Tie Music Publishing and Ghostlight/Sh-K-Boom Records for songwriters who work in both pop and theater.Ms. Taub — whom Stephen Holden described in The New York Times as among “a breed of performers who, apart from being artists, are gravitational forces around whom others cluster like filings to a magnet” — looks poised to break out. Her politically pointed debut album, “Visitors,” arrives in December, and she’ll perform original songs in the vaudeville-style “Old Hats,” which returns to the Signature Theater in January. (Nellie McKay occupied a similar role during the first run.)Meanwhile, she’s working on a Shakespeare in the Park production for next summer that she can’t say much about. During a phone call from India, where she was attending a friend’s wedding, she did have plenty to say about the art of genre-hopping. Excerpts from that conversation follow.Q. Are you writing songs in India?A. When I’m traveling, it’s less music-based: I’m often journaling a lot. I was in Israel earlier this year and wrote a song about it. But it’s more sort of furious scribbling. I have these giant text documents of so many lyrics. I’ll just go through and distill and distill.Advertisement“Visitors” begins with the song “When,” a commentary on gun violence. Does protest music still have the power to motivate change?Absolutely. The rage we all feel, and the hope we all try to hold onto, is crystallized through music as a healing force that allows us to take action. We’ve watched it happen in so many generations.How do you describe your own music?I have a ton of soul, jazz, funk, gospel, even Broadway influences. I love groove, and I love storytelling. So groove-based storytelling, maybe.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Does genre matter when you’re writing?No, I’m never thinking about that. I’m inspired by so many different places — there’s a voicing of a chord in a Stevie Wonder song that I’ll be sort of obsessed with, but there’s a certain kind of poetry in a Joni Mitchell song, or something from an old cast album. Early on, I thought I maybe had to define myself by genre. I then realized, no, there’s no need. What I love about a Sondheim song is also what I love about a Paul Simon song, or a Ben Folds song: A great story being told transcends any genre or context.How have you evolved as a songwriter?I’ve grown more interested in finding ways to fuse very mundane experience and very profound experience. I’m also very intense about rewriting.You’ve written and will perform songs in Bill Irwin and David Shiner’s “Old Hats.” What has that been like?What’s so deep and soulful about their comedy is it’s all based on the absurdity and sadness of human experience and how funny that can be. I’m inspired by that balance: writing a doo wop song about dying and trying to find ways to juxtapose happy music with more intense subjects.AdvertisementWhat’s coming up next?I’m writing a musical adaptation of a Shakespeare play for Shakespeare in the Park. It’s a full-on musical where the songs are contemporary language, set in a city where there’s constantly parades and bands and buskers. They encouraged me to put my own voice into it, and that has been a total joy.A version of this article appears in print on November 29, 2015, on Page AR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Influences and Inspirations by the Score.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »