AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasIt was a tight fit, and so not altogether a surprise when Jacqueline Green, gliding past a row of dancers, was suddenly smacked in the face.“Ice!” Robert Battle called out, clapping his hands to stop the music during a rehearsal for “Awakening,” his first work created for Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater since becoming its artistic director in 2011. In Mr. Battle’s dances, choreographic pathways are taut, rhythmical labyrinths in which even the slightest misstep can lead to a collision. He explained to his dancers that they should almost have a stuntman’s approach. “You need to know where you’re going to be,” he said, “and then you can have abandon.”He noticed that Ms. Green was back in action. “Do you need ice?” he asked, peering at her face. “You look good. We call it doing battle.”Amused by his wordplay, Mr. Battle, 43, bounced jauntily back to his chair at the front of the studio and popped another sugar-free cough drop into his mouth. “I don’t know how good they are for your stomach,” he admitted later that afternoon in his office. “But they calm me. I used to smoke two packs a day.”For a choreographer who adheres so strictly to structure in his dances, Mr. Battle’s office is a refreshing free-for-all: His desk is smothered with papers, books, bottles of hot sauce and more containers of Hasty-Bake Gourmet Greek Seasoning than one man could possibly consume. (He loves to cook; his specialty is meat.) But it’s also comforting, like stepping into your little brother’s dorm room. He’s in charge of his life now, but he’s not a different person.As laid-back as Mr. Battle appears — “when I’m ready to push, I push,” he said, “but I like people to feel safe” — he is a choreographer who knows what he wants. “He’s a stickler about things, so we can only relax so much,” said Jamar Roberts, the lead dancer in “Awakening.” “He’ll say something light to you, but then when he goes to watch you, there’s this face — it’s like he has X-ray vision.”For “Awakening,” which is part of Ailey’s City Center season opening on Wednesday, Dec. 2, Mr. Battle turned to the composer John Mackey, a longtime friend and collaborator, for the propulsive score. The dance, which features 12 performers, is set to three works by Mr. Mackey: “Turning,” “The Attention of Souls” and the third movement from the symphony “Wine-Dark Sea.”“When I started the dance, I was thinking about Alvin,” Mr. Battle said of the company’s founder. “He’s always there, but I never knew him. So I was thinking of this dance as starting the moment after his death. When the dancers are running out of the wings, turning and running back in, it’s almost an internal chaos when the figure — the spirit — leaves the place.”Out of the chaos, a hero is born, in the form of Mr. Roberts. “He’s almost a reluctant leader,” Mr. Battle said. “It’s like ‘Rite of Spring.’ You’re almost chosen. And he doesn’t quite understand what’s happening.”He cast Mr. Roberts for the part because, aside from his strength and height, the dancer transmits vulnerability. “As much as he can stand in the center of the stage, there’s a part of him that sometimes would rather not,” Mr. Battle said. “That, to me, is something of that character in this dance. By the end, he takes that center spot but not without trepidation.”Mr. Battle can’t deny that the work isn’t somewhat autobiographical. At the same time, he added, “I’m just slowly building a folk dance.”So why has it taken him so long to make his choreographic mark on the company? During his reign, Ailey choreographed 56 dances, and his successor, Judith Jamison, 12. For Mr. Battle, “Awakening” is an important first step toward claiming the Ailey mantle, but he said that the wait was necessary; early on, he felt choreographing for the company would be too much. “I knew I would be shell-shocked,” he said. “Because there’s a part of me that’s still on April 28, 2010, with Judi grabbing my arms and saying, ‘It’s yours.’ There’s still a part of me going, I know I wanted to do it, but where’s the blueprint?” (Officially, he became artistic director in July 2011.)Mr. Battle, who is from Miami, was focused on music, playing piano and singing in the church choir, before starting dance training in high school. The Juilliard School brought him to New York; after graduating, he joined Parsons Dance and then formed his own group, Battleworks Dance Company.As Ailey’s artistic director, Mr. Battle has challenged his dancers with ballets by Wayne McGregor and Christopher Wheeldon, and expanded the modern repertory to include works by Paul Taylor — this season, his “Piazzola Caldera” will be shown — Bill T. Jones and Ohad Naharin, whose “Minus 16” was an immediate hit. In the future, he wants Mr. McGregor to stage an original work for the company.“When he was in the studio,” Mr. Battle said, “there was such a feeling of mutual excitement and interest.”Mr. Battle should know. He has devoted hours to watching guest choreographers like Mr. McGregor and Mr. Naharin work with the Ailey dancers. He compares it to his own private composition class. “As a student at Juilliard, I didn’t appreciate comp as much as I do now and the need for it,” he said. “But all of that has been food. So I feel like, O.K., now I can say what I’ve been seeing or feeling.”He regards “Awakening” as an evolution from “No Longer Silent,” a powerful, ritualistic work originally created for the Juilliard School in 2007 and first performed by the Ailey company last year. It’s also unabashedly rooted in traditional modern dance, which might seem old-fashioned to some; he’s not embarrassed to admit that he’s deeply drawn to the form’s roots.“This is a repertory company, so the things I don’t do I can bring in people who do,” he said. “I’m not terribly funky. I’m really not. I can’t dance hip-hop. I always do a version for my assistant, and I just look like I’m lumbering over. I’ve always been that way. So now I can go toward what is me. That’s what this feels like.”In “Awakening,” he doesn’t want to hide his nature. “This is my chance, this is my time to tell the truth,” he said. “It may come out a little dirty here, not so great there, but this is the time to do it. In this dance, I don’t feel I have to be cool. I don’t have to go with any trend. This is what I love.”And creating a dance for Ailey dancers has led to another shift. “I certainly knew they were my dancers to a certain extent, but I’m not the founder,” he said. “And in some ways, they are Ailey dancers. So there’s all that in between you and that relationship. It’s a rep company, and yes, I’m providing the rep, and I’m there, and I’m seeing, and I’m doing, but until you have that experience of creating in the studio?”That, Mr. Battle described, is a place where everyone is vulnerable and where both sides — the dancers and the choreographer — become “the tribe of yes.”For him, it’s a relationship both pure and necessary. “That’s what is new for me,” he said. “I know that I feel new.”Advertisement