AdvertisementSupported byBy William RobinLOS ANGELES — When Andrew Norman was growing up, “Star Wars” was the only film his family owned on video. “We watched it every weekend for, seriously, years on end,” he said in October, during a short hike up a steep hill near his home. Fascinated by John Williams’s classic score, Mr. Norman decided when he was young that he wanted to be a composer.If not quite as eagerly anticipated as “The Force Awakens,” the premiere of Mr. Norman’s latest work — “Split,” a mercurial piano concerto written for Jeffrey Kahane and the New York Philharmonic, on Dec. 10 at David Geffen Hall — is still a major event in the music world. With an uncanny gift for daringly theatrical symphonic writing, Mr. Norman has found increasing support among major orchestras and praise from critics. His quasi-symphony “Play” (2013), a recording of which was released last year, is already regarded as a modern classic.“He’s a wonderful orchestrator, and his imagination is just so exceptional,” Mr. Kahane said in a recent phone interview. “He is really someone whose music sounds like no one else and nothing else.”Little on the surface of “Split” resembles Mr. Williams’s scores, but Mr. Norman’s symphonic works are suffused with cinematic scope. “It’s all swirling around in my head,” Mr. Norman said of his childhood fascination with “Star Wars” and video games. “But I think it has more to do with storytelling, now, than the actual musical gestures.”Part of the appeal of his music is a sense of sweep that harks back to the symphonies of Beethoven, whose orchestral writing represented a kind of public oratory. But rather than draw on old forms, Mr. Norman’s feverish style pulls concepts from architecture, games and digital media. “How we pause videos when we’re watching YouTube,” he said, describing his influences. “How we manipulate stuff on our computers that have to do with cutting things up and pausing them and freezing them.”Tall and clean-cut, Mr. Norman, 36, has piercing blue eyes and a recently grown blond beard that barely conceals a still-boyish face. Raised in Modesto, Calif., he first engaged with music as a curious improviser.“I sometimes forget that, for a lot of people, their experience of classical music is not about exploring and making things up, it’s about being perfect,” he said. The son of an evangelical minister, Mr. Norman played keyboards in worship bands in his teens and the viola in a youth orchestra. He also found early success as a composer, writing music for the Modesto Symphony that was heavily influenced by film scores and 19th-century Romanticism.In college at the University of Southern California, though, Mr. Norman experienced a creative crisis when he first encountered the chilly strictures of the Modernist music of the 20th century. His inclination toward unabashed self-expression collided with newfound self-consciousness. In graduate school at Yale, Mr. Norman recalled, he told a professor that he would “rather quit composing, period, than be viewed as a neo-Romantic, or a reactionary, or a naïve composer.”His religious upbringing had drawn him to moral binaries, and he feared he would either remain a traditionalist or lose his voice to Modernism entirely. But Mr. Norman eventually sought out a middle ground, employing the techniques of the avant-garde as building blocks for a hyper-kinetic, post-Romantic style. His music matured from the brazen drive of the 2004 violin octet “Gran Turismo” to the contemplative mystery of the 2010 string trio “The Companion Guide to Rome.” Mr. Norman moved to Brooklyn after graduating from Yale but returned to the West Coast in 2013 when he was hired to teach at his alma mater.Drawing ideas from video games and virtual media allowed him to reconnect with the music of his youth without worrying that it signaled the embrace of an outmoded style. “I could all of the sudden feel O.K. about writing a big symphonic movement with a big climax in it,” he added. The resultant work can be frantically twitchy — a quality that some colleagues have jokingly nicknamed “Normcore” — as in the manic jump cuts of “Play.” It can also be profoundly serene, as in “Suspend,” a 2014 concerto for the pianist Emanuel Ax and the Los Angeles Philharmonic that dreamily meditates on Brahms.Mr. Norman acknowledges that his musical life is somewhat old-fashioned. Unlike many prominent younger composers, he hasn’t founded his own ensemble, played regularly as a performer or collaborated with pop musicians.“I go away and hide in my cave for six months and come out with this fully formed piece, and people play it,” he said. Today, that cave is a converted garage adjacent to the home that he shares with his partner, Alexander Birkhold, a lawyer, in the El Sereno neighborhood here. Mr. Norman’s studio often becomes strewn with manuscript paper as he works through sketches; its relative tidiness in late October was explained by the complete draft of “Split” that rested on his work table.The new concerto picks up on an idea developed in “Play”: Specific percussion instruments trigger abrupt shifts between different musical materials. Mr. Norman paged through the score and demonstrated snippets of these changing channels on his piano — languid arpeggios, spindly runs, hiccupping circus music, haunting chords. The concerto’s puckish soloist is to play almost ceaselessly throughout, constantly switching between distinct temperaments.Despite the music’s madcap energy, its structure allows the audience to perceive the rules of the game. “If you wanted to, you could start to make a connection,” Mr. Norman said. “Boom, there’s a flower pot that gets hit, and every time the flower pot gets hit, the pianist switches to this kind of thing.”“The piece teaches you how to listen to it,” he added.Sections of the orchestra mirror the soloist, creating what Mr. Norman called a “hyper-piano.” These masses of synchronized instruments echo the mid-20th-century Modernism of Olivier Messiaen, and also a more conventional prototype.“It recalls, in a way, Mozart,” Mr. Kahane said, “in the way that in Mozart’s piano concertos, for example, the piano part and the solo parts in the woodwinds or even the string parts are inextricably woven into one another.”Many of Mr. Norman’s contemporaries focus on the orchestra’s sonic palette, making subtle narratives that emphasize combinations of instrumental color. Mr. Norman instead treats an ensemble as a grandly theatrical apparatus. His scores frequently ask musicians to perform explicitly visual gestures: String players freeze in place, or sliding glissandos ricochet through a section.“By thinking of the orchestra as only a sound-making machine, we’ve actually eliminated a huge part of what makes a concert experience amazing,” Mr. Norman said. A laptop, he pointed out, easily supersedes what the symphony can offer in terms of sonic power and flexibility. “What makes an orchestra special, for me, is not actually the sounds that it makes but the fact that there are a hundred human beings doing that, right in front of me,” he added. “In a way, it’s performance art.”As he pushes the orchestra in new directions, Mr. Norman remains attuned to its limits. Conscious of how little rehearsal time is allotted for new works, he tries to write pragmatically, but he expressed frustration at a structure that seems rigged to undermine the creation of a new repertoire. With a typical commission, he said, “there’s three years of lead time, and then I work on it for six months or a year, and then they look at their parts individually for three weeks, and then we play it two days before the premiere — for the first time! — and then we premiere it. And then they forget about it.”Even as he spoke convincingly about the need to reform this situation, Mr. Norman acknowledged that he wasn’t quite sure whether his true issues were related to the failings of the system or simply his personal struggles with getting notes on the page. During his college crisis, he stopped composing entirely for two years and flirted with becoming an architect. Many of his subsequent works have been mired in major blocks. The premiere of a percussion concerto for the Utah Symphony, originally scheduled for the spring of 2014, was delayed until a few weeks ago. Alternating between the concert hall and his studio takes a toll.“For three nights, I’m out in front of thousands of people baring my soul with this thing — made by strangers, for strangers — and then I go back to my head,” he said. “And that’s hard.”But as soon as he finished “Split,” Mr. Norman was back at it, starting to compose a new piece for the Los Angeles Philharmonic — and, in characteristic fashion, questioning himself all the while.“I also ponder why it is that I take these big orchestral things that wipe me out for the better part of a year,” he said. “Ultimately it’s because I love the orchestra, and I believe in it, and I think there’s a future there, and I think we should all be trying as hard as we possibly can to figure out where that medium can go. And for me, that requires me sitting by myself for a really long time, producing a piece.”Advertisement