
Fargo By                     
SCOTT TOBIAS

NOV. 30, 2015
Last week, the critic Alan Sepinwall wrote a persuasive defense of the individual TV episode in the age of serialization. A key part of his argument is that satisfying, distinct episodes needn’t be the enemy of novelistic storytelling: Hours like the “brain-shredding” trip inside Kevin Garvey’s head in “The Leftovers” or last week’s “Rio Bravo”/“Assault on Precinct 13”-inspired siege in “Fargo” are stand-alone pleasures that can give a show texture and variety without seeming like a detour. It was nice to see Mr. Sepinwall cite the latter in his piece, because “Fargo” had been a counterexample all season, a 10-episode narrative juggernaut that seemed entirely of a piece until last week.“Loplop” picks up on all the subplots that were sidelined during last week’s episode and strikes a uniquely delirious tone, poised somewhere between absurdist dark comedy and a blood-caked personal odyssey. Because the separate adventures of the Blumquists and Hanzee have little in common and don’t dovetail until the end, it may seem like a cheat to think about “Loplop” as a stand-alone unit. But like last week, just the act of narrowing the focus on a few characters can seem clarifying and new. Not every episode needs to be a juggling act of ongoing developments, and “Fargo” has benefited greatly from dividing the characters and running two straight episodes along a parallel timeline.Last time we saw the Blumquists, Peggy was successfully fending off Dodd Gerhardt and his henchmen while Ed was fleeing from police into the darkness. This week, the two attempt to use Dodd as a bargaining chip to get the Gerhardts off their backs, which again returns the series to the theme of amateur criminality, to particularly uproarious effect. Much of the comic punch comes from the stand-off between a fully “self-actualized” Peggy, giddy with delusional empowerment, and an increasingly unsettled Dodd, who often withers in the face of it. The moment at which Peggy stabs him twice below the shoulders with a kitchen knife is a grisly delight that gets an extra kick from Dodd’s recoiling in bug-eyed horror. Is this irrepressibly nasty man finally afraid of someone?Having the Blumquists hole up with Dodd as a hostage in “Uncle Grady’s cabin” nods to scenes in the movie “Fargo” in which Steve Buscemi and Peter Stormare’s kidnappers hold William H. Macy’s wife in a cabin on Moose Lake, part of their own scheme-gone-awry. The outcome isn’t quite the same here, but the references are dense for Coen fans: A patch of dialogue in which Ed is described as “goin’ crazy out there at the lake,” the trouble getting reception on a crummy tube TV, even the pillowcase that’s thrown over Dodd’s head at night. But the show doesn’t let homage get the best of it here.AdvertisementPeggy’s taming of Dodd has more in common with “Misery” than with the Coens’ “Fargo,” and the fretful presence of Ed, left alone to puzzle out a screwy hostage negotiation while gently keeping his wife in line (“Honey, you gotta stop stabbing him”), adds to the offbeat chemistry.AdvertisementUntil Peggy hit Rye Gerhardt with her car and kept driving, the Blumquists were not the criminal kind, and they continue making plenty of rookie mistakes now that they are. Still, they haven’t been caught yet — not by the police, not by the Gerhardts, and not by the Kansas City mob, all of whom are anxious to have the couple under their control. Through a mix of dumb luck and improvisation, the Blumquists have survived at the center, functioning almost like the eye of a hurricane that’s leveling the Upper Midwest. Their odds of survival have improved every week.Hot on the Blumquists’ trail, Hanzee finds his way to the cabin through Constance, who’s expecting Peggy at the Lifespring conference, and an elderly gas station clerk, who properly interprets Hanzee’s insistent query (“Redhead. Heavy set.”) as a threat. That last encounter recalls the gas station clerk who is subjected to Anton Chigurh’s coin toss in “No Country for Old Men,” but “Fargo” isn’t content to leave Hanzee as a one-dimensional enforcer, despite the fact that he’s defined by his chilling relentlessness. Casting a Native American as a tracker and killer courts an ugly stereotype, but the show has been hinting at a more rounded portrait from the very beginning, when Ronald Reagan presided over a massacre at Sioux Falls in the movie-within-a-show that opened this season. Tonight’s episode paid it off beautifully.Hanzee has been the Gerhardts’ most reliable weapon all season — as pitiless as Dodd but significantly more competent and less temperamental. We know that the Gerhardts took in Hanzee as an orphan and that Dodd considers him a right-hand man, but the show has been subtle in suggesting how Hanzee is part of the family but not a true member of it. He’s expected to be loyal but he doesn’t have a seat at the table. It’s an apt metaphor for the Native American experience: To be part of a country — enough to fight its wars, as Hanzee has — but never achieve true citizenship. In “Loplop,” Hanzee finally decides that he’s gotten a raw deal.The turning point comes at a bar where he makes inquiries about the Blumquists. The back entrance has a puddle of puke right under a plaque dedicated to the Sioux, and he gets scarcely more respect from the bartender, who spits into his glass of water. “There you go, chief,” the man says, before voicing his contempt for Native Americans seeking to start their own country. (“I’m not sure I want to serve alcohol to a man who doesn’t want to be an American.”) The confrontation ends violently, with Hanzee shooting a couple of racist yahoos in the knees before gunning down the bartender and two cops, but it should be noted that the scene doesn’t move the plot forward. For once, Hanzee doesn’t get any helpful information for tracking down the Blumquists; the scene acts more as a moment of personal clarity for a character whose role has gone unexamined — internally as well as from the outside.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And so it’s at Hanzee’s hand that Dodd finally dies, rather than Simone’s (or Mike Milligan’s, by way of Simone), which means that “Kiss my grits” are not the last words he ever hears. Zahn McClarnon gives so little away as Hanzee that it’s hard to determine whether he intended to kill Dodd after finding him or wasn’t in the mood, at that moment, to be called a “half-breed” and a “mongrel” by his ostensible partner-in-crime. “Loplop” ends with Hanzee fleeing the Solversons and the Blumquists, a fugitive from the law and from the Gerhardt family. He has no home, no loyalties, no identity. He’s a man without a country.Three-Cent Stamps• Keith Gordon directed the last two “Fargo” episodes, as well as Sunday’s episode of “The Leftovers,” so he’s got the two of TV’s best dramas in his pocket. Cinephiles may remember Mr. Gordon first as an actor in the ’80s, when he had small parts in Brian De Palma’s “Home Movies” and “Dressed to Kill” before grabbing the lead in the Stephen King adaptation “Christine” and the Rodney Dangerfield vehicle “Back to School.” He has directed a few independent films — 1992’s “A Midnight Clear” and 2000’s “Waking the Dead” most significantly — but he’s become a seasoned TV director of late. Those De Palma skills have been in full effect on “Fargo.”• That said, the use of split screen to break up a single shot of Peggy and Ed on the road was a bit too self-conscious. The contrast between Ed’s concern and Peggy’s deranged enthusiasm (“We’re movin’ now! Things are flowin’!”) is plain enough without the split screen creating a “wall” between them.• Jeffrey Donovan’s Dodd has been a consistent treat all season, vicious and scheming yet almost childlike in his petulance and neediness. His exchanges with Kirsten Dunst ended his run on high note.Advertisement• Mr. Gordon lingers on the box of Hamburger Helper that Ed picks up from the convenience store. Any theories on why? It’s beyond my interpretive capacity.• One superb piece of technique: The slow pan around Peggy as she’s immersed in a movie, revealing that Dodd has escaped from the chair. We know that reveal is coming, but the agonizing speed of the camera movement heightens the suspense considerably.• A funny “game recognize game” moment between Ed and Mike Milligan, when the former calls the latter about his hostage.“Maybe you heard of me,” Ed says, “the Butcher of Luverne.”“I have heard of you,” Mike replies, “and let me say, ‘Brother, I like your style.’ ”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »