BOSTON — With placards reading “God Hates Renoir” and “Aesthetic Terrorism,” a small band of protesters descended on the Museum of Fine Arts here this week. In their view, the long-dead French Impressionist Pierre-Auguste Renoir, who painted “treacle” and “deformed pink fuzzy women,” is overrated, overvalued and should not be taking up gallery space here or anywhere else.The R.S.A.P. (“Renoir Sucks At Painting”) movement said the event here would be the first of “many anti-Renoir direct actions at museums.” The goal of the self-proclaimed “cultural justice seekers” is for museums to take down their bad Renoirs and replace them with actual masterpieces; failure to do so, they say, amounts to “aesthetic terrorism.”The instigator of the movement, Max Geller, a political organizer based in New York, created a following through an Instagram account that parodies and derides the Renoir oeuvre. Among the comments is one from Genevieve Renoir, who says she is the painter’s great-great-granddaughter and who took exception to the movement: “When your great-great-grandfather paints anything worth $78.1 million dollars (which is $143.9M in today’s dollars), then you can criticize. In the meantime, it is safe to say that the free market has spoken and Renoir did NOT suck at painting.”In a statement, Matthew Teitelbaum, the museum’s director, said:Renoir was a polarizing figure in his day, as were other 19th century Impressionists, and it’s fascinating to witness the current dialogue surrounding his art. We live in an era in which authority of the time can be questioned, with many different voices expressed and heard. The MFA is proud to display its great works by Renoir, including the iconic “Dance at Bougival,” beloved by generations of Museum visitors. Today’s museums play an important role in contemporary conversation and the exchange of ideas.A spokeswoman said that the museum would not remove any works from display. There are currently six paintings and two sculptures on view.A version of this article appears in print on 10/08/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Rage Over Renoir.