The director Alex Proyas and the movie studio Lionsgate Films have apologized for casting predominantly white actors in the movie “Gods of Egypt” – a fantastical war epic about a showdown between gods and mortals in ancient Egypt.The controversy over the casting began in November, when posters featuring the lead actors – who include Gerard Butler and Brenton Thwaites – were posted on the film’s official Twitter account.Movie directors and studios have lately drawn public ire, especially on social media, for casting white actors in roles that would seem to call for actors of color. Ridley Scott’s 2014 biblical epic, “Exodus: Gods and Kings,” and Darren Aronofsky’s “Noah” drew negative reactions for placing white Australians in the roles of the Biblical figures Noah and Moses. (In neither case did the directors issue an apology.)The screenwriter and director Cameron Crowe issued an apology after casting Emma Stone as a Chinese-Hawaiian character in his movie “Aloha.” The director Joe Wright faced a backlash when he cast Rooney Mara as the Native American princess Tiger Lily in the recent movie “Pan.” He defended his decision by noting that he had opted to have actors of several races represent the members of Tiger Lily’s tribe. “When people see the film, they get it,” he told Reuters.The casting choices for “Gods of Egypt” drew both ridicule and indignation on social media, including some strong reactions from celebrities like Bette Midler.Movie, #GodsOfEgypt in which everyone is white?  Egyptians, in history and today, have NEVER been white. BRING BACK GEOGRAPHY!! It’s Africa!— Bette Midler (@BetteMidler) 12 Nov 15In a statement first published online by Forbes late last week, the movie’s director, Alex Proyas, said: “The process of casting a movie has many complicated variables, but it is clear that our casting choices should have been more diverse. I sincerely apologize to those who are offended by the decisions we made.”A statement attributed to Lionsgate said:  “We recognize that it is our responsibility to help ensure that casting decisions reflect the diversity and culture of the time periods portrayed. In this instance we failed to live up to our own standards of sensitivity and diversity, for which we sincerely apologize. Lionsgate is deeply committed to making films that reflect the diversity of our audiences. We have, can and will continue to do better.​​”After Lionsgate published its apology, some figures from the film industry, like the “Selma” director Ava DuVernay, posted their admiration for the statements, while others, like the director Lexi Alexander, suggested they were too little, too late.This kind of apology never happens – for something that happens all the time. An unusual occurrence worth noting. https://t.co/xRTEy7woWs— Ava DuVernay (@AVAETC) 28 Nov 15What Twitter thinks of the #GodsOfEgypt apology: https://t.co/mjtUnAKLoY— Lexi Alexander (@Lexialex) 27 Nov 15“Gods of Egypt” will be released on Feb. 26.