The investor and philanthropist Grazyna Kulczyk is set to finance a museum in Warsaw to which she intends to donate her collection of art, deemed by art critics the most valuable collection of contemporary artwork in Eastern Europe.Ms. Kulczyk, one of the wealthiest businesswomen in Poland said in a telephone interview that she was in talks with local officials to establish a 6,000-square-meter (about 64,500 square feet) exhibition space, that will be called the Museum of Contemporary and Performance Arts, in an as yet undetermined location in the city.Her art collection features over 600 works by Polish and foreign artists, including Wladyslaw Strzeminski, Tadeusz Kantor, Roman Opalka, Antoni Tàpies, Anselm Kiefer, Joan Mitchell and Andy Warhol. It is estimated to be worth at least 100 million euros ($106 million).Many of the works have been exhibited over the years in Poland and, last year, an exhibition “Everybody Is Nobody for Somebody” was presented at the Santander Art Gallery in Madrid.Still, Ms. Kulczyk said that hundreds of pieces from her collection, which apart from paintings includes sculptures, installations and photographs, have never been exhibited.Marta Smolinska, an art critic and historian from the University of Fine Arts in Poznan, Poland, said that the collection was organized around three themes: Juxtaposition of Polish artists against their foreign counterparts, female artists as well as aesthetically minimalist and conceptual art.“It’s stunning and absolutely world class,” Ms. Smolinska said. “You will not see anything like this in this part of Europe.”Ms. Kulczyk, whose wealth is estimated by Forbes at 1.7 billion Polish zloty ($422 million), said that she was ready to invest over 700 million Polish zloty ($174 million) in the project. She said she would like the museum to open on the centenary of Poland’s independence in 2018.To finance it, she said she had decided to sell her most prominent venture, Stary Browar, a unique space combining a commerce center and an art gallery located in an old brewery in Poznan.Ms. Kulczyk, who is financing the construction of another museum in Switzerland where she plans to showcase Polish artists, has been fighting to create a space for a permanent exhibition of her collection in Poland for years.“This would be the first time a private person builds an art object of this scale in Poland,” Ms. Kulczyk said.Initially, the museum was supposed to be built in her home city, Poznan, but the local authorities rejected the offer, even though they would have been required to pay only  for the upkeep of the museum which was to be designed by Tadao Ando, a Pritzker Prize-winning architect.Ms. Kulczyk now hopes to convince the authorities in Warsaw to “accept her gift.”“This is my dream,” she said. “I want this collection to bring Polish people joy and a sense of national pride. But it can’t bring joy to anyone if nobody sees it.”A version of this article appears in print on 12/01/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Plans for Art Museum to Be Built in Warsaw.