AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckGather around the littlest tree for a 50th-anniversary celebration of “A Charlie Brown Christmas,” think twice about sitting on a certain Santa’s lap and try to decide whether you’ll be shopping NBC’s new “Superstore” when it officially opens in January.What’s On TVIT’S YOUR 50TH CHRISTMAS, CHARLIE BROWN 8 p.m. on ABC. Kristen Bell hosts this 50th-anniversary celebration of “A Charlie Brown Christmas,” with performances by Kristin Chenoweth, Matthew Morrison, Sarah McLachlan, Boyz II Men, Pentatonix, David Benoit and the All-American Boys Chorus. Charles M. Schulz’s 1965 animated classic, starring a certain little tree that still makes us weepy, follows at 9. Craving a Christmas cookie? “The Great Holiday Baking Show,” the American spinoff of “The Great British Bake Off,” at 10. (Image: “A Charlie Brown Christmas”)THE SECRET LIFE OF WALTER MITTY (2013) 4 p.m. on HBO. Ben Stiller mopes around as Walter, a drone in Life magazine’s photography department, who finds himself on a caper beyond his wildest imagination when the negative for the final print edition goes missing. Sean Penn is the mysterious photographer behind Walter’s travels to Iceland, Afghanistan and other stunning far-off places. Alas, “an ordinary fellow should not have to be quite so special to win our admiration,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times.JACKIE BROWN (1997) 6:25 p.m. on MoreMax. Pam Grier puts on a red dress and hits a stride as a flight attendant caught between a Fed and the gun dealer she launders money for. (That would be Michael Keaton and Samuel L. Jackson.) The best news in Quentin Tarantino’s adaptation of Elmore Leonard’s “Rum Punch”? Mr. Jackson’s “role is even splashier than the one he had in ‘Pulp Fiction,’” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times, and “his performance is even more of a treat.” (Image: Pam Grier)SUPERGIRL 8 p.m. on CBS. Kara lets rage get the best of her during a training exercise with the Red Tornado. And Cat’s world is rocked by a visit from her mother.CRAZY EX-GIRLFRIEND 8 p.m. on CW. Rebecca’s and Greg’s mothers also show up.GOTHAM 8 p.m. on Fox. Bruce Wayne is kidnapped, and a battle of villains erupts.BAD SANTA (2003) 9 p.m. on WGN America. Don’t sit on this lap: Billy Bob Thornton lets it rip as a drunken bum of a safecracker who comes out of hibernation as a Santa with an elf sidekick, just long enough to swindle department stores during the holidays.SUPERSTORE 10 p.m. on NBC. America Ferrera (“Ugly Betty”) is back as the most loyal employee of a big-box store in this workplace comedy with “The Office” in its DNA. The official premiere is in January, but you can peek now.What’s StreamingGORTIMER GIBBON’S LIFE ON NORMAL STREET on Amazon. Gortimer (Sloane Morgan Siegel) and his two best friends, Ranger (Drew Justice) and Mel (Ashley Boettcher), go about their business in an ordinary suburb where something magical lurks beneath the surface. Season 2 bumps them up to the eighth grade — and first dates. (Image: From left: Ashley Boettcher, Drew Justice and Sloane Morgan Siegel)Advertisement