By JASON ZINOMANNOV. 29, 2015
In the cramped basement at Union Hall in Brooklyn, Jessica Williams and Phoebe Robinson have argued over Jay Z, clashed about Anita Baker and gone to war over Patti LaBelle. But when it comes to Billy Joel, they are on the same page.In their show “2 Dope Queens” earlier this month, they gushed over that singer and then described being two black women at his concert as a fish-out-of-water story.“We were fulfilling the diversity quota,” Ms. Robinson said with a laugh, before they both discussed how they were the only people in the audience flummoxed by one of the surprise guests: Steve Miller. (Who is Steve Miller?)A divide did emerge as they took turns recounting how two security guards offered them seats in front because, they were told, Mr. Joel likes to look at pretty women in the first rows. Ms. Williams, 26, wondered if this violated her feminist principles before taking the seats. But Ms. Robinson did not pause. “I’m 31,” she told her friend. “I’ll take any compliment.”AdvertisementComedy is undergoing what Adam Sternbergh rightly defined in New York Magazine as a “double act renaissance,” which includes such stellar duos as Amy Poehler and Tina Fey, the past Golden Globes hosts whose second movie together, “Sisters,” opens Dec. 18; and the women from “Broad City” (Abbi Jacobson, Ilana Glazer). Ms. Williams, a correspondent for “The Daily Show,” and Ms. Robinson, a popular New York stand-up comic, are best known for their solo work, but their onstage chemistry suggests they have the potential to be the next formidable breakout team.Advertisement“2 Dope Queens,” which runs about twice a month (the next show is on Wednesday), typically features a strong lineup of storytellers or stand-up comics anchored by a long set with Ms. Williams and Ms. Robinson chatting about their lives and debating pop singers with urgency. When Ms. Williams said she didn’t care for Ms. LaBelle, Ms. Robinson acted as if Ms. Williams had confessed to a murder.Their exchanges have the pleasingly unpredictable, casual rhythm of great dinner party conversation. They make their share of jokes but are also comfortable going without punch lines if they stumble on a good story or are working through an idea. Holding their microphones, they talk to each other as much as they talk to the crowd, finding laughs through repartee, ribbing and even reassurance. It’s the rare show that is best when the performers seem to forget the audience, losing themselves in conversation the way actors appear to do in a play.“2 Dope Queens” grew out of Ms. Robinson’s podcast, “Blaria,” shorthand for “Black Daria,” a reference to the acerbic animated MTV character. Ms. Williams joined forces with Ms. Robinson, and they turned their act into a live show at Union Hall, whose low-ceiling basement amplifies the audience’s laughter, giving it the best acoustics of any comedy room in Brooklyn. In January, “2 Dope Queens” will premiere as a podcast, part of a new division of the public radio station WNYC called WNYC Studios.The two do not fall into straight man and joker roles, but like the best classic comedy pairs, they are a study in contrasts. Ms. Williams shifts into a variety of assured impressions, including a hard-boiled film noir femme fatale and entitled white girl. Ms. Robinson fits tangents and detours into her own spiky voice. Ms. Williams is a commanding and kinetic stage presence, towering over Ms. Robinson, who is more unpredictable and provocative; she is quicker to laugh, to be vulnerable or to insult.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One of the reasons “2 Dope Queens” stands out, of course, is that it’s not common to see two black women hosting a comedy show, let alone a public radio broadcast. And part of what makes their arguments engaging is that the women share certain assumptions. (You don’t often see bits about the way older black women judge younger black women at, say, the Comedy Cellar.)But what has a bigger impact on the show is their clear commitment to the diversity of the comedians they book. Those who regularly visit this show could never conclude that the reason there are few star black female stand-up comics is a dearth of talent. (Calise Hawkins and Naomi Ekperigin are both dynamite comics whom I saw live first at “2 Dope Queens.”) This show attracts a young and heterogeneous audience that stands out in the bustling Brooklyn scene of alternative comedy spaces. After grabbing the microphone last month, Ms. Ekperigin, a repeat guest, looked into the crowd at the Park Slope bar and said, “This is as multi-culti as Union Hall gets.”If there are any subjects that compete with pop music in this show, it’s relationships and sex. Ms. Williams has been happily dating someone for a long time, so inevitably her stories are less interesting than those of the now single Ms. Robinson. Her cheery reports from the dating front lines veer from romantic to pragmatic in the length of a sigh. “I’m over hanging out with dudes with mattresses and no headboard,” she said.Ms. Williams often serves as a sounding board and a support system, pushing her friend to linger in the glory of sleeping with a white beat-boxer, and furiously denouncing a guy who led Ms. Robinson to think he was single when he was not. These conversations have the feel of unrehearsed debriefings, and part of the fun is feeling like you’re eavesdropping.When it comes to these subjects, the women generally disagree less than they do on music, but there are exceptions. In a recent show, when Ms. Williams discussed the appeal of Stanley Tucci, Ms. Robinson fired back: “Why are you talking like a recently divorced white lady?” Ms. Williams flashed a defiant look and held her ground: “Stanley Tucci is universal.”A version of this article appears in print on November 30, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Podcast Pair Onstage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.