By STEPHEN HOLDENNOV. 29, 2015
“Hang on!” When Baby Jane Dexter, a downtown cabaret fixture for more than four decades, sang those two words from the R.E.M. anthem “Everybody Hurts” at the Metropolitan Room on Saturday, her mighty pop contralto descended into a baritone and she exuded the authority of an inspirational commander-in-chief. Ms. Dexter has endured more than her share of hard times, but she keeps hanging on. And her new show, “It’s Personal!, is an impressive recovery after an engagement last year when she seemed to have lost the ability to sing on pitch or to remember lyrics.The Baby Jane Dexter of 2015 has bounced back, bowed but unbroken. Her skill at delivering lyrics with a forceful honesty has only sharpened. Her voice, despite many ragged edges, still conveys strength, confidence, determination and humor. Ross Patterson, her accompanist for the last 24 years, fortified her singing with lean, pungent blues-flavored pianism.“It’s Personal!” is infused with the spirit of her close friend Julie Wilson, the cabaret legend who died in April at 90. And there were moments, especially near the end of Saturday’s performance, when I imagined Ms. Wilson singing through her. Outstanding moments included a very slow, deliberate “House of the Rising Sun” and a bare voice-and-piano rendition of “Blue Moon” that treated this Rodgers and Hart standard as a miraculously answered prayer. Her performance was capped with the spoken declaration “I’m not alone.”The show’s spiritual subtext intensified with a revelatory treatment of the Young Rascals’ 1967 hit “How Can I Be Sure,” which she interpreted as a dialogue about faith and doubt. It could as easily have been about God as about a lover, and the evocation of “a world that’s constantly changing” rang truer than ever. Mr. Patterson’s piano arrangement illustrated the musical sophistication of a song that might be a potential standard hiding in plain view.Ms. Dexter’s encore was a blunt, fatalistic “For All We Know,” attached to “Everybody Hurts,” which has become her latter-day theme song. It was greeted with tears and cheers.Ms. Dexter’s program repeats Friday at Metropolitan Hall, 34 West 22nd Street, Manhattan; metropolitanroom­.com.A version of this review appears in print on November 30, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Back With a Vengeance, Singing With Pungent Wit and Warmth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.