AdvertisementSupported byBy Caryn GanzOnstage at Terminal 5 on Saturday night, Miley Cyrus sang, “I feel like a slab of butter that is melting in the sun” and struggled to grab her crotch. Her movement was restricted, because she was dressed like a stick of butter, in a rectangular costume that ended halfway to her knees. In the venue’s balcony, two girls posed for a selfie, a middle-aged gentleman in a sport coat pressed record on his iPhone and a young man with a beard full of glitter glided by. We had just hit peak 2015.Like many former child stars, Ms. Cyrus — the onetime anchor of the Disney franchise “Hannah Montana” — has spent the past few years negotiating her transition to adulthood in the public eye. Unlike many former child stars, the 23-year-old singer and songwriter chose to record an album of psychedelic pop with Wayne Coyne, the singer and guitarist in the Flaming Lips. “Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz” (Smiley Miley), which was inspired by the singer’s close relationship with animals, was made without the support of her major label but, she has said, with the assistance of various drugs. (The album opens with Ms. Cyrus’s distorted voice shouting, “Yeah, I smoke pot/Yeah, I love peace.”)On an arena tour supporting her more conventional pop album “Bangerz” in 2014, Ms. Cyrus dabbled in trippy imagery and candid, profanity-punctuated speeches encouraging her fans to be themselves. Now, on a brief tour of much smaller venues with the Flaming Lips as her backing band, Ms. Cyrus is totally free to do what she wants.Like a brand-new college student let loose among different types of people, ideas, substances and cuisines, Ms. Cyrus has gained the stylistic equivalent of the freshman 15. She employed excess like a blunt utensil, bludgeoning the senses again and again. Anything was up for grabs: delivering a lengthy reminiscence about the “really tight relationship” she had with her deceased blowfish, Pablow; singing about space-people sex (not aliens, she clarified); wearing a sizable sex toy affixed to her waist; stripping in a cage to practically nothing.In one of the night’s most successful gambits, Ms. Cyrus performed “BB Talk,” about her boyfriend’s infantilizing, lovey-dovey baby talk, dressed like a giant newborn, complete with an oversize diaper. In “Bang Me Box,” she dispensed with the typical innuendo of pop songs and detailed her desire plainly. There was forethought here, intentionally feminist or not, that spoke to Ms. Cyrus’s natural ability to provoke.There was enough confetti, costumes and flickering and throbbing Day-Glo visuals projected onto screens to fuel an acid test; there were not, however, enough songs to carry a two-hour-plus show. The sometimes dreamy, more often nightmarish “Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz” is a thin effort. The crowd sang loudest to the album’s strongest track, “Lighter,” a slow lite-pop collaboration with Mike WiLL Made-It, on which Ms. Cyrus equates the connection of love with the spark of a joint. (Ms. Cyrus reclined at the lip of the stage while a woman dressed like a giant cigarette lighter frolicked behind her.)By the show’s halfway point, joy felt less like a spontaneous reaction to the unfolding spectacle, and more like an emotion being manufactured and projected from the stage like one of the happy-faced balloons floating above the crowd; the glut of wacky costumes and relentless psychedelic imagery came across like the most powerful antidrug ad motif since the fried egg. What a long, tiresome trip it had been.Before joining forces with Ms. Cyrus, Mr. Coyne, who is 54, engaged in a variety of creative shenanigans on his own: He sold vinyl records that included his collaborators’ blood and released an EP encased in a skull made of gummy candy. It is still too early to say where his time with Ms. Cyrus will fall in the catalog of his achievements. Here, he mostly played the role of cheerleader, encouraging bewildered fans to applaud and shooing balloons into the air.Ms. Cyrus made several references to the first time she had teamed up with Mr. Coyne at Terminal 5, to perform the grand, ominous song “Tiger Dreams” at a party for the cable network Adult Swim in May. Before she played it last night, a large disco ball descended from the ceiling behind the stage and Ms. Cyrus returned dressed like its twin, in a reflective suit and helmet.“I don’t think we got where we were going,” Ms. Cyrus sang while pulsing lights refracting off all the glimmering surfaces beamed back into our eyes, making it difficult to look ahead. It felt like we were struggling to watch a star exploding before our eyes. In many ways, we were.“Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz” plays at the Electric Factory in Philadelphia on Saturday.Advertisement