By BEN RATLIFFNOV. 29, 2015
A few years after the invention of bossa nova in Brazil, in the late 1950s, there appeared a wave of samba-jazz groups, often piano trios. The two styles are linked at the root by samba rhythm, but they can feel like opposites. The best bossa nova was light, sensitive, skeptical, measured, full of silence. The samba-jazz of the early ’60s was dense and fast and barreling, and the Rio 65 Trio, who made two records in 1965 and 1966, embodied that sound.The Rio 65 Trio, formed at the Baccarat club in Rio de Janeiro, had its inevitable 50th-anniversary concert on Saturday night at Zankel Hall. Why inevitable? Because milestone-year concerts often bring out Brazilian audiences in New York. (All right, not just Brazilian audiences: At the same time on Saturday, in Carnegie Hall’s Stern Auditorium next door, Arlo Guthrie was playing a concert to honor the 50th anniversary of the real-life events on which his song “Alice’s Restaurant” was based.)Inevitable, too, because the trio’s pianist, Dom Salvador, who plays with samba in the left hand and jazz phrasing in the right, is in good health and easy to find. He moved here in the mid 1970s and has been playing continuously since 1977 at the River Cafe in Brooklyn, surely one of the longest gigs in local history. The group’s original bassist, Sérgio Barrozo, flew from Brazil for the concert. Missing was Edison Machado, the drummer, who also moved to New York in the ’70s but died in 1990. His spot was filled by Duduka da Fonseca, one of his most dedicated admirers, and a New York musician for about as long as Mr. Salvador.Mr. Da Fonseca played with vigor and detail and consolidated the band’s sound. But this might be one of the few reviews where it is right to expand for a minute on a musician who wasn’t there. The Rio 65 Trio didn’t last long — it exists for us as two records with fantastic auras, specificities of time and place — and as such, the group without Machado is a bit like Led Zeppelin without John Bonham. Machado’s drumming was a duality: giddy and grounded. It came from the top down, fed first through the ride cymbal and always threatening to run ahead of the beat. At the same time it kept an independent, relaxed samba thump with his bass-drum foot. The mark of the band’s sound on those two records is a clattering hustle built around Machado’s tempo and ideas. (That, and a slightly out-of-tune piano.) He could dominate a recording, no matter who else he played with: His own “Edison Machado é Samba Nova” and the records he made with another band, Bossa Tres, have a similar feel.The Rio 65 Trio had a connection to this city even before two of its members moved here, because the American jazz it emulated tended to be New York hard-bop, as opposed to the more relaxed West Coast jazz that inspired bossa nova. Their best examples of this on Saturday were “Farjuto” and “Meu Fraco é Café Forte,” short and swift songs immersed in the dynamics and song structures played back then by Horace Silver, Sonny Clark and other East Coast bandleaders. When they played any slower, or longer, they were usually playing songs from well after the life span of Rio 65, such as “Azul Contente,” from an album Mr. Salvador made in 2007, or “Depois da Chuva,” another later work, inspired by Antônio Carlos Jobim’s “Double Rainbow.”Those later pieces were exploratory, with an expanded sense of form and melody that gave all the musicians a chance to show more individual sound. They were well played, too — in “Unification,” a duet for piano and drums, Mr. Da Fonseca organized his drumming into elegant, rolling gestures outside of strict time. But they belonged to a different and more expansive concert. By contrast, the Rio 65 Trio’s music, in its time and now, has a beautiful and limited conceit. It seems to exist precisely for a short set in a small club, through stylish and unsentimental tunes that open with a bang, get straight to the fizz and close without ceremony.A version of this review appears in print on November 30, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Resurrecting the Barreling Sound of a Samba-Jazz Band From the ’60s.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.