AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian Seibert“George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” begins with a yawn. The child heroine, Marie, has an exciting night ahead of her: a Christmas party with presents and dancing, the attention of a mysterious godfather and a handsome boy, a tree that grows 40 feet tall, a battle with giant mice, a walk in a blizzard and a journey to the Land of Sweets. And yet her first gesture suggests not just sleepiness but also boredom.At this time of year, when New York City Ballet goes all-“Nutcracker” for more than a month, it’s tempting to join Marie in that yawn: “‘The Nutcracker,’ again?” But that’s a mistake. As the opening night performance at the David H. Koch Theater on Friday re-established, this ballet is a perennial entertainment, with more than enough theatrical detail to merit repeated viewings, more than enough layers of embedded history and emotional depth to fascinate again and again.That’s true even when, as on Friday night, the performance is a bit wobbly. From the littlest children up to the principal dancers, there was slight sense that the drugging effect of Thanksgiving meals hadn’t entirely worn off. Even angels and fairies sometimes stumble.There were no adult role debuts on Friday — those tend to be scheduled for later in December, but that show was the first performance conducted by Andrew Litton since he assumed the post of company music director. That night — and again during Saturday’s matinee — all the colors of Tchaikovsky’s enduringly enchanting score were especially robust.As the boy who becomes the Nutcracker, F. Henry Berlin was precociously dashing on Friday, already princelike before he became the Little Prince. In the same part the next day, Philip Henry Duclos was more fastidious yet similarly gallant.Sterling Hyltin, Friday’s Sugarplum Fairy, glowed with a joyful secret; supported by the swashbuckling Andrew Veyette, she cascaded into backbends with full abandon. In her first solo, she struggled with the same series of turns that Rebecca Krohn did in that role on Saturday, but Ms. Krohn (partnered by the wonderfully easygoing Amar Ramasar) gave a routine performance. She harbored no secret.As Dewdrop on Friday, Sara Mearns was typically explosive, yet her grandeur was too tragic for the Waltz of the Flowers. She was also a little sloppy (one of her shoes broke), whereas Ashley Bouder, on Saturday, though she bobbed her head excessively, was all darting speed and strength.The greatest contrast in casting, though, was between the men playing that mysterious Herr Drosselmeier. On Saturday, the young David Prottas was fine, but the veteran Robert La Fosse has been embroidering this role for years. His performance is now nearly as layered as the ballet itself.“George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” continues through Jan. 3 at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, nycballet­.com.Advertisement