By SCOTT REYBURNNOV. 27, 2015
Since the financial crash that started in 2008, contemporary art has pretty much been the only game in town for well-off Westerners thinking about becoming collectors.Brand-name works from the past 60 years, instantly recognizable and giving off a sense of being in the cultural moment, have become the status symbol of choice for the investment-conscious art buyer.But as the money flows toward auctions, galleries and fairs like Art Basel Miami Beach (opening on Thursday), which specialize in those works, more traditional collecting areas have been neglected.Prices of once-coveted but now unfashionable objects like old master paintings or 18th-century French furniture have stagnated or even fallen.AdvertisementOne notable example is the classical art of Japan’s Edo period from 1615 to 1868, which is often cited as a revolutionary and seminal influence on the more recent Western art that is bringing new highs at auction.To be sure, Japanese postwar art has been well and truly discovered by the West in the past few years. The avant-garde Gutai group, active from 1954 to 1972, was the subject of a revelatory retrospective at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York in 2013. The foot-paintings of Kazuo Shiraga, a leading figure in the Gutai movement, are a regular feature at New York and London auctions, achieving prices as high as $5.3 million, in 2014.But what of Edo landmarks like the “Ukiyo-e” (Pictures of the Floating World) wood block prints, which the art historians Hugh Honour and John Fleming have described as “more influential than photography” on the development of Impressionism, Post-Impressionism and, by extension, modernism? Or the superbly concentrated netsuke carvings that were the subject of Edmund de Waal’s 2010 best seller “The Hare With Amber Eyes”? Or the 17th-century landscape screens that can make David Hockney’s latest iPad paintings seem old-fashioned?The market in Japan for works by Edo masters like Hokusai, Hiroshige and Utamaro was profoundly affected by the so-called lost decade that followed the collapse of the country’s asset bubble in 1990. At the same time in the West, contemporary art was gaining increasing market share, leaving fewer discerning collectors to buy Japanese prints.The current high prices at auction (not adjusted for inflation) for Hokusai and Hiroshige of $1.5 million and about $792,000 respectively were set way back in 2002. Demand became so moribund that Sotheby’s closed its Japanese department in 2007.AdvertisementBut other Asian art has seen an exponential rise in value, fueled by the meteoric growth of the Chinese economy and the financial speculation that has come with it. In April last year, the Chinese billionaire Liu Yiqian paid $36.3 million for a palm-sized Ming Dynasty porcelain “chicken cup.” (This month he paid $170.4 million for Modigliani’s 1917-18 canvas “Nu Couché.”)“Prices have been depressed for some time,” said Sebastian Izzard, a dealer in New York who specializes in Japanese prints. “But at least the market is solid, and there’s no bubble. You get a lot more bang for your buck with Japanese art.”Mr. Izzard said that auction results were no longer an accurate barometer of the trade in prints. “A lot of prints went back to Japan in the 1980s and ended up in museums,” he said, which took many of them off the market.The few high-quality examples that do become available for sale in the West tend to be traded privately by specialist dealers. Mr. Izzard said that last year he sold a rare Hokusai print for about $1 million, but he would not divulge the subject.Nonetheless, museum-quality Japanese prints occasionally turn up at auction and can bring eye-catching prices. An exceptionally well-preserved print from 1794 of a female impersonator by Toshusai Sharaku sold for 275,000 euros with fees, about $290,000, at the Paris auctioneers Beaussant Lefèvre on Nov. 18. It carried a presale estimate of €30,000 to €40,000.Another factor that has kept a lid on the value of classical Japanese art, at least in the West, has been a preference for later, Meiji-period objects exported in shiploads to satisfy foreigners’ taste for “Japonisme.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The most recent manifestation is the heat in the market for works by the lacquer master Shibata Zeshin (1807-1891), who represented Japan at exhibitions in Philadelphia in 1876 and Paris in 1878. In November 2014, a Zeshin panel showing a farmhouse in the snow at Sano sold for 842,500 pounds, about $1.3 million — an astounding 10 times its estimate — at Bonhams’ sale of lacquer and paintings from the Misumi Collection.Zeshin’s virtuosic black lacquer wares in the “iki,” or Edo chic, style are frowned on by some Japanese connoisseurs, but they are a personal favorite of ultra-wealthy international collectors like David Khalili and members of Qatar’s royal family.“Since the 1980s, people have focused on the Meiji art the Japanese made to appease the Westerners,” said Gregg Baker, a dealer in London. “Because the auction houses have been able to get Meiji, they’ve pushed Meiji. But that isn’t real Japanese art.”AdvertisementMr. Baker, whose gallery specializes in early Buddhist art and 17th- and 18th-century painted screens, with the latter priced at £15,000 to £50,000, has fond memories of the 1981-1982 blockbuster at the Royal Academy of Arts, “The Great Japan Exhibition,” devoted to classical art of the Edo Period.Despite a relative lack of both supply and demand for classical Japanese art, there have been a few recent attention-grabbing prices at auction. In 2011, a late 18th-century ivory netsuke of a “shishi” (a Chinese guardian lion-dog) sold for a category-high £265,500 at Bonhams in London, and in May, Christies sold a 17th-century six-panel screen of the arrival of a Portuguese trading ship for £818,500, also an auction high for the category.But these pale compared with the eight- and even nine-figure prices paid in recent years for 20th- and 21st-century Western art and imperial Chinese porcelain.“There are areas of the Japanese market that have remained stable, but there hasn’t been the influx of money from East Asia we’ve seen in the Chinese market,” said Jonathan Stone, Christie’s international business director of Asian art. “There just hasn’t been a new generation of buyers in Japan to create this kind of exponential growth.”Given the systemic thinness of Japan’s collector base, then, the country’s historic art is likely to remain a niche market. Whether it represents a better long-term investment than Chinese art or Western contemporary art is open to question.So maybe the thing to do is simply buy it and enjoy it. Japanese wood block prints, being flat and made in colorful multiples, are particularly suitable for web commerce.Christie’s third online-only auction devoted to this category, which closes on Thursday, offers 130 examples, including well-known images by Hokusai, Hiroshige and other famous names of the Floating World, mostly valued between $500 and $5,000.These unnumbered prints were produced by the tens of thousands, and examples offered at this level will be less than perfect.But they nonetheless represent an entry-level opportunity to own and enjoy one of the great moments in art for less than half the price of a Damien Hirst butterfly print. Just don’t worry about return on investment.AdvertisementBuy simply to enjoy? Maybe Japan is still giving something revolutionary to the art world.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.