
Scream Queens By                     
 NEIL GENZLINGER
 
DEC. 1, 2015
Did anything of substance happen on this week’s episode of “Scream Queens”? Of course, using the word “substance” in connection with this show is an incongruity, but you know what I mean. We learned that Dean Munsch, whom the Chanels tried to kill several times, is apparently immune to puffer fish venom and to being frozen to death in a cryotherapy chamber. We learned that Pete has apparently murdered someone. But did the story move forward much? Did any major characters or even minor ones die? Did the episode have some redeeming value, like being amusing? No. Maybe this should have been a 10-episode series. (Two more to go.)The Chanels shook off their discomfort at having found Gigi’s head on their turkey platter last week and headed for the mall for Black Friday, lingering too long and getting locked inside it. The Red Devil soon turned up, and the secondary Chanels escaped, but Chanel No. 1 decided to confront Red, and she was shot with a crossbow for her troubles. Either Chanel, like the dean, has an unkillable quality or there really is a place in the upper body where one can be shot with an arrow yet not bleed even a little. Anyway, good old Denise, now the police chief, showed up and saved the day, if by saving the day you mean, “let the killer get away.”There was some infighting in the sorority over whether to murder Dean Munsch on the presumption that she is the serial killer, and Grace was ultimately tossed out of the group for refusing to stay on board. After the poisoning and freezing fiascoes, a third assassination attempt fell apart when the lesser Chanels got distracted by an argument over underwear and failed to turn up at the assigned killing spot.Then Grace visited Pete, who was busy packing to leave town because he’s somehow involved in something shady. She offered him her virginity, but he wasn’t interested. “I can’t, because I don’t want your first time to be with a murderer,” he told her. Hmm. End of (an uneventful) episode.I laughed when Hester tried to give the rest of the sorority a lesson in Russian history by comparing Munsch and her un-kill-ability to Rasputin, but not much else here hit my funny bone. You?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »