A foundation which says it owns the rights to the ballets created by the founders of the Joffrey Ballet, Robert Joffrey and Gerald Arpino, said this week that the ballet company owed it more than $373,000 in back payments for performing the works in recent years. The foundation, the Gerald Arpino and Robert Joffrey Foundation, was established by Mr. Arpino, the choreographer who helped found the dance company with Mr. Joffrey more than half a century ago and, after Mr. Joffrey’s death in 1988, succeeded him as its artistic director. The foundation filed a demand for arbitration this week claiming that a 1995 agreement required the Joffrey to pay it $30,000 a year, adjusted for inflation, to dance works by Mr. Joffrey and Mr. Arpino after the death of Mr. Arpino. Mr. Arpino died in 2008.“The company has paid nothing due under the license agreement and had refused the claimant’s demand that it pay,” the filing said. Taking inflation and interest into account, the filing claims, the Joffrey owes it $373,528.37 for payments due since the end of 2008.Beth Silverman, a spokeswoman for the Joffrey, said in an email that, “The Joffrey Ballet is disappointed that the Gerald Arpino and Robert Joffrey Foundation has chosen a path of public disparagement when the Ballet believed the parties were engaged in good faith negotiations,” and added that the company was confident that it could resolve the dispute.Asked whether the Joffrey agreed that the foundation owns the rights to the ballets, or that the 1995 agreement required the payments of $30,000 a year, she declined comment.Charthel Arthur, the executive director of the foundation, said in a statement that it was “very sad that it has come to this.”“Most of the members of our board are former Joffrey Ballet dancers and we have tremendous respect and affection for the company, but it has never paid a penny of what is owed and has never come up with any legitimate excuse for not paying,” Ms. Arthur said in the statement.She added that the money would allow the foundation to do more in terms of educational outreach and supporting young dancers and choreographers.