Compiled by JON PARELESDEC. 1, 2015
Adele has everyone talking. Drake has offered to do her laundry. Britney Spears has professed her love for “Hello.” But conversation about Adele has mostly focused on numbers — and her (ultimately lucrative) decision not to make her new album, “25,” available to streaming services — rather than her music.In an interview with Jon Pareles, the chief pop music critic for The New York Times, however, the singer and songwriter explained why she releases music the way she does from the perspective of a musician who’s still a music fan.“I want to make an album,” she said. “I’m not putting four singles out before my album’s out. I don’t want my album snacked on.”In the interview, conducted for an in-depth feature article, Adele also spoke about her changing voice and vocal style, dealing with her growing fame, her tour next year and her artistic process. These are edited excerpts from that conversation.AdvertisementOn fame: “I feel like it’s a lot easier to give in to fame than it is to resist it. On a daily basis, you have to keep checking yourself. It’s very charming, fame, but it’s not real life. Why wouldn’t you want to live a real life? I feel like I can enjoy [fame] more if I just dip my toe in every now and then.”AdvertisementOn ego, her earlier album “21” and artistic satisfaction:“Every artist of any kind has an ego and it needs to be fed. I don’t write music only for myself. I write music because I want someone to say, ‘That sounds really nice, that’s a lovely song, that makes me think about this, that makes me feel like this.’ So I am more than [expletive] happy to have had that album, ‘21,’ and ‘Someone Like You’ or whatever to be my song. Because that’s what every creative person wants: They want to make one thing that is their thing that’s remembered. I love what I produced. I think it’s great. I felt uncomfortable about it for a while, but I quickly got to the place where, this is [expletive] sick. This is what I did it for.”On her vocal style:“I didn’t want to write a throwback record again, and be thought of as 1960s or anything like that. I wanted to make a more modern record, and I think I have, even though I was also really inspired by ’70s songwriting for this record [“25”]. I’m doing things with my voice that are a bit more modern, rather than sort of soul or anything like that. And that was a very conscious decision.”On pop stardom: “When I was a kid and there used to be shows here like ‘Top of the Pops’ and ‘cd: uk’ and ‘Live & Kicking’ and stuff like that, I wanted to be a pop star. When I used to watch these pop stars who I idolized, I wanted their life of always looking happy. They were always smiling, and always looking great, always dressed amazingly. But they smiled all the time because they had to. They looked great because they had a stylist. Always flying around, never having to be in one place at a time — I wanted to be somewhere else for a lot of my life. That’s just a bad habit. I still feel like that sometimes. Not to run away — I just would want to know what’s going on somewhere else. So I was always intrigued by all of that. I didn’t want to be a pop star, but I wanted to live their life because it looked so shiny. And now that I have it, it’s not as shiny as it looks. Because actually everything backstage is made out of MDF wood and polystyrene, and it’s not all as solid as it looks on the front. But I would be lying if I said that I never wanted any of this, because I did.”On the possibility of touring arenas worldwide:“Performing to that many people for every night, for that long, I find something very lonely about it. Which sounds weird, because you’re performing for like, 20,000 people every night, but you leave on your own. You don’t go home and, like, share a bed with 20,000 people and have a little pajama party and watch movies. Obviously I’m going to have my friends with me and I’m going to have my family with me, but the thought of how lonely that could be frightens me more than the load of doing a worldwide tour.”On insomnia: “I have trouble sleeping. When the lights go out and I’m left to my own mind, my mind goes to the worst places ever. When I’m left with my thoughts and my thoughts only, the smallest thing evolves into the biggest thing, so I get quite worried. So I go to bed when I’m tired, when I need to fall asleep. Otherwise I can make the biggest deal out of the tiniest thing. It’s like a fear of being left on my own in the dark.”On love and hate:“The way I hate people, I’m starting to lose that now. I don’t really hate anyone anymore, it’s a bit extreme and I ain’t got time. The way I hate and the way I love feel exactly the same to me. To have the energy to hate someone is also to have the same energy of loving someone. It’s investing your time into someone.”On friends:“The more successful you get with your work, the smaller your life becomes. Which is fine, and my friends that I have are my best friends, and they’ll be my friends forever, and also a couple of them are my friends from before all of this. They’re my soul mates. If I get a bit carried away with myself, they won’t have it. They all give me their very honest opinion.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On her relationship with her boyfriend, Simon Konecki:“We have always been together since we got together, despite what everyone else sometimes says. I am very happy and I think that’s the reason that I feel so comfortable that I can write about whatever I want. I got Simon’s blessing for that. He was: ‘Don’t worry about what I’m going to think. This is your thing. Write about whatever you want.’”AdvertisementOn motherhood: “I thought it would be easy. Everyone does it, there’s seven to eight billion of us now. Everyone does it, how hard can it be? Hoo! It’s the hardest thing ever.”On singing after throat surgery:“I think I can sing better than I used to before. I don’t know if that’s because of my throat surgery. My voice got so low in my pregnancy! That’s why ‘Skyfall’ is so low.” [Laughs.] “Now I can be low and then go higher than I used to be able to, though it’s not like notes that dogs can hear. I was never very confident with my voice before. Now in my rehearsals, and in the studio, I’m hitting notes with power that I used to sing falsetto because I’d be scared that I couldn’t reach it. But now I just climb and I get there.”On working with multiple producers and collaborators:“I don’t like working with one person. I get really bored. I have a really short attention span. I don’t like working in the same studio with the same person on the same instrument. I’m not up for it. I get so bored, and I bore myself as well. That’s why I can’t only rely on myself like I used to. And also, trying to make the world make sense to a baby, your vocabulary shrinks. So I wanted to be with different people to stimulate me.”On singing with a piano:“If I could, I would do my shows just with a piano. But it’s like, how long can you entertain someone when it’s just piano ballad, piano ballad? So I wouldn’t dare disrespect anyone that would pay money to come and see me to bore them like that. But I just love the piano. I just hear melodies on the piano.”On seeing Kate Bush’s London comeback concerts as her turning point:“Her whole show was about before her parenthood and then being a parent, and her kid was in it. I read somewhere, and I don’t know if it’s true or not, that [her son] said when he was 16, ‘I want to know now why everyone loves you.’ And it makes me so emotional. After that show, it was: ‘I don’t want to wait. I don’t want to wait till my kid is 16, I want to show him now.’ After that, I was: ‘I don’t care if no one wants me to make another [expletive] record. I’m making one for myself.’”On the music business:“I’m really pretty out of touch with the music industry. The ins and outs of it don’t interest me in the slightest. And there are lots of modern artists that I really like, that I’m a massive fan of, but I’m a fan. I don’t listen to them as an artist, I listen to them as a fan. And I feel about them how I used to feel about artists in the past. I really have to switch on to go into my work mode. I’ve got to put it on in the morning, in the car, on the way to something. That’s the only reason I can still do it as well. I’m generally a fan — though not of myself.” [Laughs]On current artists she enjoys: “Alabama Shakes. Lana Del Rey — she just stabs my soul all the time and makes me just want to cry. I love how mysterious she is as well. And I love that she just puts a record out and that’s it.”On releasing “25” with so little advance notice:“Of course it was strategic. It probably makes me sound like a hypocrite, but in a world where everything moves so fast, why are people doing three-month campaigns? I haven’t got [expletive] time to invest in you three months before an album comes out. Release your album and then I’m on it. I’ll be your fan forever if I like it.”On career ups and downs: “Having albums that are more successful and less successful, and a really [bad] show and a bad review, and all that, is part of having a career, which is a marvelous thing. The comebacks and stuff like that, that’s what all the greatest artists of all time have always done. It’s the comeback, like the almighty comeback that’s [expletive] epic. People will always remember you and everything you’ve ever done if you come back with something great.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.