By ALASTAIR MACAULAYDEC. 1, 2015
Ailey at City CenterChristmas dance entertainment in New York is always dominated by two companies: New York City Ballet in “The Nutcracker,” which opened Friday at the David H. Koch Theater, and the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater at City Center, which begins Wednesday. Both seasons run through Jan. 3.There is an impressive number of world premieres at Ailey this season. Wednesday’s gala begins with “Open Door,” a new creation by Ronald K. Brown; Thursday’s program opens with Rennie Harris’s new “Exodus”; Friday’s ends with “Awakening,” the first new work made for the company by the artistic director Robert Battle since he took the helm in 2011. Other premieres follow in later weeks. Mr. Battle surely seeks to put his own stamp on a company that is older than he is; and he must hope that the devoted Ailey audience (a conservative one in its way, never long happy without a fix of good old “Revelations”) will enlarge its tastes. I find myself hopeful. Maybe this 2015-16 season will enrich the Ailey recipe.Tere O’ConnorThe choreographer Tere O’Connor is a downtown guru to some, a loudly opinionated troublemaker to others. What matters is that, working in pure movement, sometimes he makes dances of rare subtlety, and helps skilled performers to reveal further facets of themselves. His new work — for 12 dancers — opens Wednesday at the Kitchen and runs through Dec. 12; it’s called “The Goodbye Studies.” The new score is by James Baker, Mr. O’Connor’s collaborator for 30 years.Other New DancesFive other choreographers, all from different backgrounds, are showing work in New York this week. The Brooklyn Academy of Music will be the scene of two new works: The Berlin-based Sasha Waltz presents “Continu,” opening on Friday at the Howard Gilman Opera House, and on Wednesday, at Fisher Hall in the Fishman Space, Souleymane Badolo (born in Burkina Faso, based in Brooklyn) introduces “Yimbégré,” with Burkinabe drumming by Mamoudou Konate. Andrea Miller’s Gallim Dance (for the first time accompanied by live music) presents a world premiere at the Joyce from Thursday to Sunday (“Program contains nudity” the theater’s website notes.); Pavel Zustiak and his Palissimo Company perform his new “Custodians of Beauty” at New York Live Arts on the same dates. And Anneke Hansen presents the world premiere of her full-length “hymn” from Wednesday to Saturday.Only if you saw nothing else could you catch all five of these; I myself have seen previous work by only three of these choreographers. But that’s New York dance for you: too large for any single devotee to keep abreast of.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.