AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckBack to business: Bono and former President George W. Bush commemorate World AIDS Day; the Kardashians present their rules to live by; and Rob Schneider shows up in a Netflix series that may hit a little too close to home.What’s on TVVICE SPECIAL REPORT: COUNTDOWN TO ZERO 9 p.m. on HBO, HBO Go and HBO Now. “Vice” commemorates World AIDS Day with this investigation into the search for a cure and a vaccine. Former President George W. Bush discusses his President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, enacted in 2003, and Bono of U2 travels to Rwanda to see it in action. (Image: Shane Smith, left, and Dr. Hans-Peter Kiem)GRANDFATHERED 8 p.m. on Fox. Jimmy hires Gerald as his restaurant’s new host. In “The Grinder,” at 8:30, Dean can’t quite stand being replaced by his TV brother when he’s asked to give his character closure by filming a scene in “The Grinder: New Orleans.” His real brother hopes he’ll go back to acting. (Image: Ravi Patel, right, in “Grandfathered”)MAY FOOLS (1990) 8:30 p.m. on TV5Monde. In May 1968, a family in French wine country quarrels over the estate of its recently deceased matriarch, oblivious to the student and worker uprising across the country. Michel Piccoli and Miou-Miou star as the feuding siblings in Louis Malle’s bourgeois comedy of manners.CHICAGO MED 9 p.m. on NBC. Ouch. Dr. Rhodes comes face to face with his past — and his sister — when a family friend is impaled by glass shards.KEEPING UP: KARDASHIAN FAMILY RULES 9:30 p.m. on E! Principles to live by when you’re not like everyone else.DONNY! 10:30 p.m. on USA. I’m coming out: Donny makes a remark that is misconstrued.THE SKIN I LIVE IN (2011) 11:05 p.m. on Starz Cinema. A Spanish plastic surgeon whose wife has died of burns keeps a beautiful patient locked in his isolated mansion, where he watches her watching him. But how did she get there, and why? Antonio Banderas and Elena Anaya star in what Manohla Dargis of The Times called Pedro Almodóvar’s “intoxicating, lush mystery.” (Image: Ms. Anaya, foreground, and Mr. Banderas)What’s StreamingCAN YOU DIG THIS (2015) on Vudu. The filmmaker Delila Vallot chronicles four “gangster gardeners” in South Los Angeles who are calling for people to put down their guns and pick up their shovels. John Legend is an executive producer.REAL ROB on Netflix. Rob Schneider taps his real wife, Patricia Azarcoya, and daughter, Miranda Scarlett, to play his on-screen family in his new series about a comedian about to shoot a sitcom while his wife opens a male strip club. Sound worth the time? Mike Hale of The Times accused the series of bringing down Netflix’s curve, adding that it “has a numbing effect, like the long afterlife of Novocain.” (Image: Mr. Schneider and Ms. Azarcoya)Advertisement