The American chemist, businessman and art collector Alfred Bader and his wife, Isabel, have donated a 1658 Rembrandt painting, “Portrait of a Man With Arms Akimbo,” to the Agnes Etherington Art Center at Queen’s University in Ontario. This is the third Rembrandt painting, among the more than 200 works of art that Mr. Bader, 91, has donated to the center at Queen’s, his alma mater, but it is considered the most significant gift so far.“We’re the only institution in Canada with an early and a late Rembrandt, but this third Rembrandt really extends the collection, and it harmonizes beautifully with paintings by we have by artists in Rembrandt’s orbit in the 17th century,” said Jacquelyn N. Coutré, the Bader curator and researcher of European art at the Agnes Etherington Centre at Queen’s. “To have this beautiful and I think absolutely exemplary portrait from 1658 really unites the collection in a profound way.”Mr. Bader declined to comment on the donation except to write in an email: “It is the best Rembrandt in Canada, and Queen’s is the best university in Canada. It is very fitting.”The Baders amassed 271 artworks over several decades,  a collection dominated by Dutch and Flemish paintings from the Baroque period, in addition to Italian, German, and French old masters. They bought “Portrait of a Man With Arms Akimbo” in 2011 from the  Las Vegas casino magnate Steve Wynn, who bought it two years earlier at a Christie’s auction in London for $33.2 million. Otto Naumann, the New York-based old masters dealer who brokered the deal, said that the Baders bought it at an undisclosed price that provided Mr. Wynn with “a small profit.” Mr. Bader later put it on the market himself, offering it through Mr. Naumann’s gallery at the European Fine Arts Fair in Maastricht for $48 million, a price that Mr. Naumann said remained the asking price for the last five years. But it did not find a buyer.Mr. Naumann currently estimates the value of “Man With Arms Akimbo” at $60 million, based on two recent private sales of Rembrandt works of comparable quality and scale. In September two Rembrandt portraits from the French businessman Éric de Rothschild’s collection sold for 80 million euros apiece (about $85 million) to the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam and the Louvre in Paris, and in June an anonymous buyer in Britain.paid  35 million British pounds (about $54 million) for Rembrandt’s 1657 portrait of “Catherina Hoogsaet.” Ms. Coutré and officials from Queen’s University declined to comment on the value of the work.David de Witt, head curator of the Rembrandt House in Amsterdam, a museum in the home and studio Rembrandt owned from 1639 to 1658, said that the “Man With Arms Akimbo,” which was probably one of the last works he painted in that house, is a “monument of his late period.” The former Bader curator at Queen’s, he also declined to comment on the estimated value of the work. 