AdvertisementSupported byBy William GrimesEldar Ryazanov, whose rueful satires puncturing the absurdities of everyday life in the Soviet Union and the Russia of the post-Gorbachev era made him one of Russia’s most popular film directors and screenwriters, died on Monday in Moscow. He was 88.His death was announced by the Russian filmmakers’ union Kinosoyuz.While still in his 20s, Mr. Ryazanov became an instant sensation with his first feature film, the musical comedy “Carnival Night.” Released in the Soviet Union in 1956, it was a harbinger of the post-Stalin thaw and the emergence of a new postwar generation. It depicted the struggle of Communist Youth League members trying to organize a fun-filled New Year’s Eve party at a local cultural center, opposed by an overbearing bureaucrat determined to make it an educational event.For the next 30 years, Mr. Ryazanov perfected a genre he called “sad comedy,” exposing the foibles of party officials and ordinary citizens alike, wielding the scalpel deftly enough to remain in the government’s good graces. He was a master of every comedic shade, the newspaper Novaya Gazeta wrote in an appreciation, “from lyric to satiric, from slapstick to tragicomic fantasy.”Only one of his films, “A Man From Nowhere,” was banned outright. Made in 1961, it followed the adventures of a Stone Age man who visits the Soviet Union and comments, a little too acerbically, on the manners and customs he observes.Mr. Ryazanov’s comedy “Irony of Fate,” about a Moscow doctor who goes on a bender, winds up in Leningrad and does not realize his mistake — the apartment buildings and their interiors are all clones of one another — became a national institution after being broadcast on television in 1975. Every year thereafter, it was shown on New Year’s Eve and wove its way into the fabric of Russian life.“It is Russia’s ‘A Christmas Carol,’ ‘Miracle on 34th Street’ and ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ rolled into one,” The Washington Post wrote in 1998. Affection for the movie helped make the 2007 sequel, “The Irony of Fate 2,” directed by Timur Bekmambetov, the highest-grossing film in Russian history.A number of Mr. Ryazanov’s films were exported to North America, including “A Forgotten Tune for the Flute,” “The Ballad of a Hussar” and “Ruthless Romance,” but he never gained traction on the festival circuit. He was not a dissident, and his brand of light comedy seemed somehow un-Russian, lacking in gravitas.Despite his popularity, he looked at his career, in retrospect, with a certain pessimism. “Freedom has come too late for me," he told The Los Angeles Times in 1988.Eldar Alexandrovich Ryazanov was born on Nov. 18, 1927, in Kuybyshev (now Samara), on the Volga River in the eastern part of European Russia. His father, an economist, spent nearly 20 years in prison, a victim of the Stalinist purges.After graduating from the State Institute of Cinematography in 1950, he began making documentaries for Mosfilm, the principal government studio, on subjects that included the school system in Moscow, a championship chess match and Sakhalin Island fishermen. On his website, he wryly noted that documentary film at the time “had no relationship whatever to life, documentation or truth.”He made nearly 30 films, with a screwball touch and a fondness for connivers and scoundrels, that often drew comparisons to the director Billy Wilder. Like Alfred Hitchcock, he made a habit of appearing in cameo roles. Like Woody Allen, he had a gift for dramatizing the plight of lovable intellectual losers.“The films have very little to do with politics,” said David MacFadyen, the author of “The Sad Comedy of El’dar Ryazanov: An Introduction to Russia’s Most Popular Filmmaker” and a professor of comparative literature at the University of California, Los Angeles. “They are more about people living their lives despite politics, despite ideology. These are little people facing big obstacles — and they don’t always win.”In “Beware of the Car” (1966), released in the United States as “An Uncommon Thief” in 1967, Mr. Ryazanov told the story of a latter-day Robin Hood, an insurance clerk who steals cars from speculators and sells them to other speculators, donating the proceeds to orphanages.The imminent disappearance of five coveted spaces for garages, about to be erased when a new road comes through, sets off a whirlwind of schemes and manipulations in “Garage” (1979). The heroine of “A Train Station for Two” (1982) sells melons on the black market, making her, in official terms, a social parasite. “People are complicated,” Mr. Ryazanov told Newsweek in 1985. “There are charming speculators.”The loosening of cultural restrictions that came with Mikhail S. Gorbachev and the collapse of the Soviet Union, lifted the heavy hand of the censor and, as a kind of bonus, continued to provide Mr. Ryazanov with abundant material for comedy, although of a darker hue.In “Forgotten Tune for the Flute” (1987), his first film to be released with no cuts from the censor, he depicted former cultural bureaucrats at the fictional Main Directorate of Leisure Time thrown into a deep state of depression at not being able to ban books or bulldoze art exhibitions.“The Promised Heavens” (1991) described the plight of former teachers and army officers pushed to the margins of society by the unraveling of the Soviet system. They gather at a local dump and eke out a living by begging and by fleecing the unwary. In “Old Hags” (2000), a rapacious Mafioso swindles an elderly woman out of her apartment.Mr. Ryazanov was awarded the State Prize in 1977 and in 1984 was named a People’s Artist of the U.S.S.R.From 1979 to 1985 he was a host on the popular television show “Kinopanorama” (“At the Movies”) and later had his own talk show, “Guests of Eldar Ryazanov.”His first marriage ended in divorce, and his second wife, Nina Skuybina, died of cancer in 1994. He is survived by his wife, Emma Abaidullina; a daughter, Olga; and a grandson.Sophia Kishkovsky contributed reporting.Advertisement