AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayLONDON — Imagery in choreography is often easy to miss. Who in the audience really sees the eagle, snake, moon crossing the sky, emeralds, rubies and unicorns that are said by Balanchine connoisseurs to be present in his ballets?Early in Frederick Ashton’s “The Two Pigeons,” however, we see real pigeons fly across the stage, and when the leading couple, the Painter and his model, the Young Girl, liken themselves to the birds, we see the point at once. What’s astonishing is how Ashton then amplifies this simile. He makes other dancers behave pigeonishly, sustains pigeon behavior as a metaphor and turns comedy into deeply affecting pathos. What begins as a joke (humans as performing pigeons!) turns into a profound statement of sexual love and passionate reconciliation (man and woman as turtledoves).For many of us, this 1961 two-act work is a beloved, sometimes heartbreaking drama. The Royal Ballet at Covent Garden here is staging its first major revival of it in 30 years; a broadcast of the Jan. 26 performance will be shown in New York and other American cities on March 23.The infectious score (arranged by Ashton’s frequent collaborator John Lanchbery) is by André Messager, one of the great French melodists of the era of Georges Bizet and Léo Delibes. The story and title derive from one of Jean de La Fontaine’s 17th-century fables. In French, the word “pigeon” has two senses: a dove-like bird, but also a dupe, victim or fall guy. Both aspects are apparent in Ashton’s ballet.Ashton begins his version of the story in a painter’s studio in Paris; through a wide skylight, we see the cityscape. The period is the late 19th century of the music — the Young Girl and her friends wear the midi-length ballet dresses painted then by Degas, which, implying slight bustles, complement the curves of the young women’s figures.At first, the ballet’s central image is a comic simile. When the heroine — who is the Painter’s model and, implicitly, his live-in mistress — spots a pigeon flying outside the studio, she responds cutely, as if to say: “That’s us! Look how like pigeons we two can be!” If you wonder how humans can move like pigeons, she shows you. She puffs out her chest, juts her head forward and back, places her wrists on her hips and flaps her elbows like wings, flutters her feet in the air like wingtips, flexes those feet and struts on them, and in arabesques and jumps, expands her line to suggest the shape and trajectory of flight.Both adorable and petty, her movement shows us how she at once irritates and enchants. Ashton is the most kinesthetically affecting of ballet choreographers. Just watch how every part of her is involved in this full-bodied pigeon imitation, and some fiber in us responds as if in potent inner recognition. But then the heroine’s eight girlfriends adopt it, too, and so does the Painter. Thus pigeon mannerisms come to illustrate human nature at its more fallible, vulnerable, endearing.The Painter leaves the nest in pursuit of the Girl. He seems to be trying to throw off his own avian character, but he can’t. Even amid the new ardor and expansiveness he finds in the Gypsy encampment, the smaller, faster, neater movements of his earlier manner keep showing themselves, whereupon the Gypsies turn on him and throw him out.The ballet’s closing scene is back in the studio. Here both Painter and Young Girl are forlorn and hurt; and their final pas de deux begins with amorous intimacy, with him touching her sensuously as if healing a broken wing. Her torso, shoulder, arm all respond, but then flutter back into a private, folded-over position both marvelously birdlike and psychologically revealing. What builds from that beginning is among the most powerful of all choreographic statements of love as both physical need and spiritual reunion. It includes remorse, abandon, retrospection, forward movement and profound rapture.On Friday, I watched the Kiev-born Iana Salenko, a guest artist, and Steven McRae as the “pigeon” pair; Ms. Salenko, lively and engaging, as yet lack aspects of the ballet’s musical phrasing and the full sensuality of its texture. The vivid Mr. McRae, now in his prime, has become an exemplar of Royal Ballet dancing and acting; all that’s missing is the anguished regret that surely motivates his gestures into the air during that great final duet. Fumi Kaneko, a soloist dancing the virtuoso Gypsy Girl, was highly impressive in both theatricality and dance brilliance.The company is pairing this work with a pure-dance Ashton work (currently the 1965-66 “Monotones I and II”; the 1980 “Rhapsody” in January). A drawback throughout the program is that Barry Wordsworth, after some 40 years of conducting this choreographer’s repertory, now allows the music to be tepid. All these dancers new to “Pigeons” bring it a crispness he has lost.“Pigeons” seems to want to look an amazingly dated piece of work — at first. The England in which Ashton introduced it was seething with the theatrical advances of Samuel Beckett, John Osborne and Harold Pinter; and yet, here and in other neo-Romantic ballets of that time, he dared to investigate aspects of triviality, sentimentality and prettiness. It’s characteristic of his genius, though, that “Pigeons” soon gets deep beneath the skin. Those frissons of physical contact between lovers show a sexuality that’s remarkably contemporary; they open up areas of extraordinary poignancy.“The Two Pigeons” continues in Royal Ballet repertory through Jan. 30 at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, London; ­roh.org.uk.Advertisement