
Ask a Showrunner By                     
 GILBERT CRUZ
 
OCT. 7, 2015
Once mostly anonymous, the producers who oversee top television series have become as well known as the actors who star in them. On occasion, The Times will pose questions from readers (and some of our own) to notable show runners, and post their responses. (Interviews are edited for clarity.)This week, Kenya Barris of “black-ish” discusses “left-handed actors,” his favorite shows and his old Wham! sweatshirt. Coming soon: Scott M. Gimple of “The Walking Dead.”Q. Many TV show runners are not black. Do you think that the current TV landscape is creating more opportunities for people to transition from being writers to show runners? — Patricia, BrooklynA. Short answer, yes. For me, Shonda Rhimes is an amazing person that I look up to. She empowered a lot of her writers to go on and do other things, while at the same time, she made sure she kept her stamp on those things and grew her business. If nothing else, she gave more writers of diverse backgrounds a chance and a place in the industry to make their names. It’s unavoidable that we are living in a world that requires more than one point of view. And whether that’s from an L.G.B.T. point of view, a diverse-background point of view, a female point of view, you’re seeing it more and more.AdvertisementQ. The 2014 TV season was notable for multiple shows, including yours, that featured nonwhite leads and ensembles. Are you optimistic about that continuing?AdvertisementA. I have a “hope for the best, expect the worst” mentality. What I did not want to be was a fad, because fads die. I had one of the George Michael Wham! neon-colored sweatshirts, and I thought it would never go out of style. Fads die.I didn’t mind if the show was going to be part of a trend, because trends sometimes stay within the course of what a society becomes. I thought we should not worry about trying to be something that we weren’t. So often, you’re so quick to want to jump on network statistics. And that’s not what we are driven by. We are driven by what this family’s story would actually be. Continuing to tell the stories that this family would experience, in a comedic fashion. We’re not going to do a transgender story. For right now, that’s not a part of this family’s story. We’re not going to do things that are in the zeitgeist because they’re within the zeitgeist. That would not be fair to those audiences or that part of our society.Q. There are many types of African-Americans, including ones who have immigrated from Africa and the Caribbean within the last 3-4 decades. Have you thought about stories that show the diversity of black Americans? — Elias Hussen, New YorkA. I have not, but I think it’s an interesting point of view. It’s hard because there are not a lot of shows that are covering the topics and the ground that we are covering. There’s so much that people want us to talk about, but we have to tell the stories that feel organic to what this family would go through. If there’s an organic way into something, I would love to do it. I don’t want to just force something. People were like, “What about Black Lives Matter?” I’m a huge proponent of that and supporter of that, but I don’t know right now, for this family, a natural story line that would not feel like we were trying to be exploitative or pandering to a topic that really needs to be supported in an honest way.Q. Is that frustrating? I can see how people would say: “This is a show with an African-American family. They have to talk about this and this and that.”A. It’s not frustrating. It’s disheartening because I want to do it all. It’s disheartening to me because I don’t have the platform within this show to be all voices for all people. And that’s something that’s oftentime mistaken in black culture, that we are a monolithic voice. We are not. We have a lot of different voices and a lot of different points of view, and I try to show as many of them as I can.Q. How much input does Larry Wilmore have now that he has his own show? He started as the show runner of “black-ish,” but had to leave before it even launched.AdvertisementA. Larry will always be felt, because Larry is my brother and we’re still very close friends. He doesn’t weigh in on a daily basis, because he has a daily show that takes up a lot of his time. But I call him constantly and ask for advice and mentorship, which he never fails to give me.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. What was it like having to transition into being a show runner when he left?A. Terrifying. I had had shows before, but never at this level. We had developed this partnership between us that was such a great Batman and Robin-type thing. But if Larry had still been here, even though I probably would have had the same amount of input, my voice would not have been heard as loud. And I wouldn’t have been able to develop as a writer in the way that I have, because Larry is such a big presence. It would have been The Larry Wilmore Show. And I think Larry knew that, too.Q. Charlie strikes me as the secret M.V.P. of the show. How do you keep him as funny as he is without making him completely ridiculous?A. A lot of that is just Deon Cole’s natural ability. We knew it was going to be Deon when we were writing the character. I’m a huge fan of writing for people rather than writing and then trying to wedge people in. I’d love to know who the people are before I can write for them. For me, it’s a much more organic way to create characters.But Deon to me always was — I call them left-handed actors. Danny McBride is one. Jack McBrayer from “30 Rock” is one. Actors who take a line and say it back in a way that you never thought it should be said, and it’s better than you thought it would be, but it’s completely different.Q. What is the best show on TV right now and why? What is your favorite show on TV right now and why?A. The best show on TV this year was “Mr. Robot.” I did not see it coming. It sneaked up on me, and even when there were conventions I had seen before, every week it kept giving me more than I expected. The acting was superb, the way it was directed was superb. A close second, for me, was “American Crime.”My favorite show was “Veep.” I’m so sad Armando [Iannucci] is leaving — that show is just so funny, so enjoyable. It does not let me down, continues to be irreverent and brilliant in every frame. Julia Louis-Dreyfus is so sexy and so funny, and smart and fearless. The casting of that show — every single person seems like they were drawn for that role.The episode where they had to get called into a congressional hearing was brilliant. It wasn’t anything but interview after interview after interview, and I was like, “God, I wish I had done this.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »