
The Leftovers By                     
JEN CHANEY

NOV. 2, 2015
Sunday’s “The Leftovers” was the most compelling hour so far of season two, and that’s a bold statement considering how outstanding the second season has been. “No Room at the Inn” — which, like season one’s third episode, focused on the seemingly boundless bad luck that befalls Matt Jamison — was a pulse-pounder: intense, semi-violent, and surprising in scene after scene. It also continued to lock in on the themes of spirituality and faith that are central to “The Leftovers,” in ways overt (the conversation between John Murphy and Matt) and more subtle (the use of that Regina Spektor song that declares, “We’re all laughing with God”).There are roughly 8.8 zillion shows on TV and streaming platforms. But how many, in the same episode, would allude to the Book of Job, a classic Bill Murray comedy, and — if the appearance of Brett Butler counts as an allusion, and I say it does — the ’90s ABC sitcom “Grace Under Fire”? Not many, guys. Not many.The aforementioned Bill Murray comedy — “Groundhog Day” — is explicitly referenced in the opening, in which Matt Jamison lives the same day over and over, à la Murray’s Phil Connor. Each morning, Matt listens to the same song (the Bellamy Brothers’ “Let Your Love Flow,” not “I Got You, Babe”) while spending 24 hours engaged in rituals both heartbreakingly basic (applying lotion to Mary’s contorted hands) and slightly comical (eating that gross burrito every night). While “Groundhog Day”’s Phil was thrust into life on repeat, Matt has chosen it, convinced that if he and Mary do the same things they did on the day she awoke from her vegetative state, she’ll snap to again, for good. He’s wrong, and it’s not the only way in which he repeats the same behavior, hoping for a new result.Revisit season one’s Matt-centric “Two Boats and a Helicopter,” and you’ll notice several plot parallels between that hour and the one that aired tonight. In both episodes, under different circumstances, Matt gets into major altercations, including ones that result in head injuries; struggles to raise money he desperately needs; gambles (either at a casino, or on a tweaked-out Swede named Elmer) in an ill-advised effort to resolve his problems; and is victimized after trying to help a stranger with car-related trouble. Even within the broader “Leftovers” narrative, Matt is “Groundhog Day”-ing it. (It’s also worth noting that in “Two Boats and a Helicopter,” he has a series of post-head injury visions, including one of him making love to Mary.)AdvertisementAs a man of faith, Matt has always believed in two truths: that good people are rewarded, and that God will eventually alleviate suffering. It’s no surprise that when Brett Butler’s character asks Matt to name his favorite Biblical book, he says Job. It’s Job who says: “Naked I came from my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return.” Perhaps that’s why, at episode’s end, Matt returns to the refugee camp, strips off his clothes and places himself in those stocks. Matt sees himself in Job’s image, a man “blameless and upright,” who must suffer mightily before reaping the benefits.AdvertisementBut is Matt blameless and upright? We learn in this episode that Mary is pregnant, a shocker of a reveal initially met with joy until it dawns on Matt that no one will believe what he says happened: that the child was conceived during the brief period when Mary was awake again. If she was never really awake, as John Murphy contends, then what Matt did was rape — he had sex with his essentially comatose wife without consent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This is the second time rape has come up this season, the first being Meg’s rape of Tommy, an act depicted, intentionally I think, in murky ways. It was clearly something that occurred against Tommy’s will but as it was happening, there seemed to be a flicker of connection between the two that made the sex seem almost consensual, even though it wasn’t. With Matt and Mary, we have an even starker example of maybe-rape but maybe-not. That “The Leftovers” keeps returning to this subject suggests it’s a metaphor for the questions the series raises about faith, and whether it’s forced upon people who lack the capacity to resist.If one rationally considers the evidence, Matt certainly seems to be guilty of raping Mary. When he gets angry with her and says, “Look at me,” he sees his own image in the laptop camera recording the two of them and reacts as though he’s just caught a familiarly unpleasant image of himself in a mirror. After Matt gets clocked in the head by the guy with the broken-down car, he has a vision of Mary speaking that seems to be more hallucination than reality, suggesting the other times she talked to him may have been in his imagination, too. Given the way Christopher Eccleston plays the character — as a kind man with smiles as open as the Miracle sky, but also a capacity to snap — it’s not difficult to imagine that he lost it one night and hallucinated his wife into consciousness when she was still unconscious. It’s telling, too, that when he reminds Mary of what they did the night she came back, he doesn’t mention that they made love.And yet, on a show about millions of people inexplicably disappearing into thin air, you can’t just dismiss the idea that maybe Mary really did wake up and willingly have sex with her husband. By giving this episode the title “No Room at the Inn,” and depicting Matt and Mary as an expectant couple with nowhere to go, writers Damon Lindelof and Jacqueline Hoyt clearly evoke the story of Mary and the baby Jesus. The implication: maybe that miracle did happen in Miracle.Sure, one could argue that Matt’s merely in denial about the sin he committed, and deals with it by dumping Mary at his sister’s so he can put himself in the stockades, i.e. punish himself. But one can just as easily view Matt’s actions as those of a believer who reaches the same conclusion, over and over, no matter what happens: that the Lord is testing him. He’s sure his wife’s awakening and pregnancy is a miracle and knows all he has to do is what Job did: keep suffering in His name until God, finally, hears his cry.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »