Bert Kreuk, a wealthy Dutch art collector, and Danh Vo, an artist, settled a bitter legal dispute this week over an artwork commissioned for an exhibition.After six hours of negotiations at an appeals court in The Hague on Tuesday, the two men ended their legal quarrel by agreeing that Mr. Vo, a Danish and Vietnamese installation artist, did not have to create a large work commissioned in 2013 for $350,000 by Mr. Kreuk.The case received international attention after a Rotterdam judge ordered the artist last summer to complete a work within one year, or face daily fines. The feud had lingered for months over claims of broken promises and name-calling because the two had never signed a formal contract for an installation by Mr. Vo.The installation was scheduled to be part of an exhibition at the Gemeentemuseum of works from Mr. Kreuk’s collection called “Transforming the Known.” When Mr. Vo failed to deliver the work, Mr. Kreuk sued in the Dutch courts, which recognize verbal agreements backed by witnesses and other forms of evidence.“I started the case about the principle that everybody has to abide by an agreement; I won my court case and made that point,” Mr. Kreuk said on Wednesday in an interview. “Now it is time to move on and concentrate on the joys of collecting art.”Mr. Kreuk noted that the agreement means he will not have to pay the $350,000.Mr. Vo, on Wednesday, also confirmed the agreement, describing it as an “unconditional withdrawal of his claims.”With the settlement, both are resolute that they will not have anything to do with each other in the future. Mr. Kreuk said he has sold the seven works he had collected by Mr. Vo and will never buy another one. Mr. Vo, a Vietnamese immigrant, typically explores his family’s past in his works, by mixing fragments like cardboard boxes, photographs, flowers and crosses. Those are creations, he said, that Mr. Kreuk will never get again from him. A version of this article appears in print on 12/04/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Artist and Collector End Legal Battle.