
Jessica Jones By                     
SIMON ABRAMS

DEC. 2, 2015
Trauma and violence go a surprisingly long way in this episode, which is a highlight of an already strong first season. Like the best revenge dramas, “AKA Sin Bin” gives viewers the visceral terror of wondering whether torture and violence can be cathartic. Rest assured: almost every wound, scream, and attack feels appropriately unnerving here.The episode’s director John Dahl makes the pulpy scenario, imagined by the writers Dana Baratta and Jamie King, consistently engrossing, especially during over-the-top scenes like Pam’s teasing seduction of Hogarth, or the scene where Kilgrave’s parents confront him for the first time in years. Mr. Dahl, director of neo-noir gems like “Red Rock West” and “The Last Seduction,” has recently directed several standout episodes of series like “Justified” and “Hannibal.” “AKA Sin Bin” is another good example of Dahl’s remarkable knack for blending neo-noir and horror elements.Jones has to figure out a way to get under Kilgrave’s skin long enough to make him reveal his powers on camera. This is no small task since Kilgrave is trapped in the soundproof, hermetically-sealed chamber that Simpson showed Jones in episode five. The contrivance of directly confronting Kilgrave in his cell is a bit silly, though it does make the episode that much more claustrophobic, and thematically resonant: while anyone on the outside of Kilgrave’s cell can hear him through a jury-rigged PA system, they cannot be influenced by his mind-control powers unless they are in the same room as him.This poses a problem: how to get Kilgrave to slip up, and give Jones the evidence she needs to get Hope off the hook for murdering her parents? Hope is ready to take a plea bargain that will reduce a life sentence to 15 to 20 years. And Kilgrave won’t use his powers while under such intense scrutiny, which makes Jones’s accomplices — Hogarth, Trish and, later, Detective Clemmons — very uneasy. The only person who believes Jones’s story implicitly is Simpson, and he’s busy making a deal with the mysterious Dr. Kozlov.AdvertisementMs. Baratta and Ms. King do a fine job of toying with our expectations in one of the series’s most surprisingly nuanced scripts thus far. The conclusion of Hogarth and Kilgrave’s first private interaction is especially suspenseful since it seems to end with a stalemate between two equally stubborn characters. He effectively messes with her by making her think that, if he did have the powers that Jones claims he does, he could do anything. (Including, perhaps, influencing her ex-wife.) That notion — think of all the good you could do if you had Kilgrave’s power — has been floated a couple other times this season. But Hogarth doesn’t bite, at least initially. Instead, she hesitates before rhetorically asking Kilgrave to repeat what he just told her into the camera she and Jones set up to capture Kilgrave’s actions. There are a couple other moments in episode nine that similarly play with our emotions, like Kilgrave’s embrace with his estranged mother, or the second time that Hogarth approaches, and almost frees Kilgrave.AdvertisementBut Mr. Dahl is the Episode 9 MVP, drawing out the tension of the bestsequences and making us feel just as powerless as Jones and her colleagues. He reminds viewers of the finite dimensions of Kilgrave’s cells, in part, by muting the episode’s soundtrack twice.We’re first reminded that anyone outside of Kilgrave’s room can’t hear him without the PA by showing Kilgrave yelling silently at us. After that, the soundtrack is briefly muted again when Hogarth shocks both Kilgrave and Jones. We’re inside Kilgrave’s cell: Kilgrave and Jones are both incapacitated, lying close, but not next to each other. The decision to cut out the soundtrack is artistic rather than functional. We can hear inside Kilgrave’s room, but now we also feel how jarring Kilgrave’s torture is.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Dahl unassumingly makes you aware of the physical and emotional distance that separates characters, like the brief moment when Louise seems to disappear between the window panes that border Kilgrave’s cell as she approaches him for a hug (and then a stab). The previous episodes of “Jessica Jones” have all been basically well-helmed, but Mr. Dahl’s direction proves to be next-level absorbing.Stakeout Notes• The very ending — where Jones realizes that she’s immune to Kilgrave’s powers — is perfectly realized. So glad that Mr. Dahl doesn’t over-explain this conclusion.• There’s a moment where Hogarth pauses before approaching Kilgrave’s cell for the first time. Mr. Dahl shows us that Hogarth’s attention is elsewhere: is she looking at the shelf with vials of Sufentanil? It’s a great little tease that draws out the tension of the scene.• Who else wanted to slap Jones when she laid into Louise at the Kilgrave survivor’s group? Knowing that she’s Kilgrave’s mom only does so much to change the fact that Jones acts insufferably here.• Poor Detective Clemons. The scene where he wrenches his hand out of his own handcuff is brutal even though it’s not overly violent.• Speaking of explicit violence: the fact that we don’t see the blade of the scissors as they go in and out of Louise’s chest makes this sequence that much more terrifying. We’re stuck on the outside, watching and hoping Jones gets in there in time to fix things.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »