Six years after pleading guilty to assaulting Rihanna, Chris Brown remains, for some, radioactive.The R&B singer, who was sentenced to five years of probation for the attack on his then-girlfriend, was forced on Tuesday to cancel the Australian and New Zealand leg of his “One Hell of a Night” tour, following visa issues stemming from the conviction.The promoter Ticketek Australia announced on Facebook that the five December shows in Perth, Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane and Auckland would not take place, after months in limbo. “Mr. Brown and the promoters both remain positive that the tour will take place in the near future,” the company said in a statement. “Mr. Brown wishes to express his deepest gratitude to the fans for their support and looks forward to a successful tour in the near future.”In September, Australia’s immigration minister, Peter Dutton, said that Mr. Brown had received a “Notice of Intention to Consider Refusal” in response to his visa application. The singer was then given 28 days to appeal.Michaelia Cash, the country’s minister for women, said then, “People need to understand if you are going to commit domestic violence and then you want to travel around the world, there are going to be countries that say to you, ‘You cannot come in because you are not of the character we expect in Australia.’”Representatives for Mr. Brown said at the time: “We respect their right to review this request and have faith that a decision will be made with the full consideration of his continued personal growth, ongoing philanthropic endeavors and desire to perform for his fans. Since 2009, Chris Brown has visited Australia on two separate occasions and is looking forward to returning in December.”The singer also made his case on Twitter. “I would be more than grateful to come to Australia to raise awareness about domestic violence. I’m not the pink elephant in the room anymore,” he wrote in September. “My life mistakes should be a wake up call for everyone. Showing the world that mistakes don’t define you. Trying to prevent spousal abuse.”He added: “The youth don’t listen to parents nor do they listen to P.S.A.’s. The power that we have as Entertainers can change lives.”The tour abroad was not Mr. Brown’s only major cancellation of the week: He was scheduled to appear as a guest on Tuesday night’s episode of “The Daily Show With Trevor Noah,” but was quietly replaced by Nick Cannon. The show posted to Instagram about its new guest on Tuesday evening without reference to Mr. Brown.“Guest bookings are always subject to change,” said a representative for Comedy Central on Wednesday. “The show hopes to reschedule Chris for a future appearance.”Representatives for Mr. Brown did not respond to a request for comment.A version of this article appears in print on 12/03/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Visa Issues Prompt Chris Brown to Cancel Concerts.