By KATHRYN SHATTUCKDEC. 2, 2015
Gather round, viewers, as Rockefeller Center flips the switch on its big, beautiful Christmas tree. Then get out your tissues as you watch animals fight for their lives. And there are apparently no words for the season finale of “Empire.”What’s on TVCHRISTMAS IN ROCKEFELLER CENTER 8 p.m. on NBC. O Tannenbaum: Sting, James Taylor, Mary J. Blige, Andrea Bocelli, the Band Perry, Carly Rae Jepsen and Pentatonix make merry at this 83rd tree-lighting ceremony. Donated by Albert Asendorf and Nancy Puchalski of Gardiner, N.Y., the 78-foot-tall Norway spruce, with 45,000 LED lights, is to be topped with a Swarovski crystal star. After Jan. 7, the tree will be milled for lumber for Habitat for Humanity. The Rockettes will put a little kick into the festivities. (Image: this year’s tree)CMT ARTISTS OF THE YEAR 2015 8 p.m. on CMT. Blake Shelton, Florida Georgia Line, Little Big Town, Luke Bryan and Sam Hunt are honored as the top country musicians of 2015 at this ceremony, broadcast live from Nashville. Kenny Rogers will receive the Artist of a Lifetime Award, Chris Stapleton the Breakout Award and the cast of “Nashville” the first International Impact Award. (Image: Mr. Stapleton)RACING EXTINCTION (2015) 9 p.m. on Animal Planet, Discovery and Science. Watch it and weep. The director Louie Psihoyos, who won an Oscar for “The Cove,” his dolphin-slaughter exposé, examines how wildlife trafficking and carbon emissions have brought a multitude of animal species to the brink of oblivion. The film’s gory scenes “are shocking but necessary,” Jeannette Catsoulis wrote in The New York Times. “Contrasting the ugliness of destruction with the beauty of its victims is the film’s core aesthetic.” (Image: a scene showing photographs of endangered species projected onto the Empire State Building)EMPIRE 9 p.m. on Fox. Who, me, speechless? That’s what the show’s producers are promising with this season finale, which finds Lucious learning the hard truth about his business strategy, and Cookie planning a concert at the prison where she was locked away for 17 years. (Image: Da Brat, a guest star)AdvertisementSANTAS IN THE BARN 9 p.m. on TruTV. Ten Kris Kringles learn to climb chimneys and get those reindeer off the ground for $100,000 and the title of America’s Best Santa.SOUTH PARK 10 p.m. on Comedy Central. The boys search for two classmates who’ve disappeared with PC Principal.What’s StreamingTHE ATELIER WITH ALINA CHO 6:30 p.m. on MetMuseum.org. Ms. Cho interviews Diane von Furstenberg, the chairwoman of the Council of Fashion Designers of America, at the Met.AdvertisementCASUAL on Hulu. As their parents’ wedding looms, Alex tries to understand why Valerie slept with his girlfriend.A version of this schedule appears in print on December 2, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.