By KATHRYN SHATTUCKOCT. 1, 2015
9:55 A.M. (Starz Edge) PANIC ROOM (2002) On their first night in a Upper West Side brownstone, a newly separated mother (Jodie Foster) and her young daughter (Kristen Stewart) must contend with three intruders — a rich boy gone bad (Jared Leto), a sad family man (Forest Whitaker) and a sociopath (Dwight Yoakam) — on a mission to retrieve something that the previous owner left behind. Good thing there’s a superfortified hiding place in the master bedroom, complete with a bank of video monitors. “It could be an especially grisly, profanity-laced entry in the ‘Home Alone’ series,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times about this David Fincher thriller. “And, it must be said, an exceptionally well-directed one.” (Image: Ms. Stewart and Ms. Foster)9:20 A.M. (MoreMax) THE LAST KING OF SCOTLAND (2006) The dictator Idi Amin fled Uganda in 1979 after the fall of a regime estimated to have killed 300,000 people. This drama, based on the novel by Giles Foden and directed by Kevin Macdonald, imagines Amin — played by Forest Whitaker, right — within his palace walls, being tended to by a Scotsman, played by James McAvoy, who is his personal physician. Writing in The Times, Manohla Dargis called both performances excellent and said that the movie “delivers shocks worthy of the horror film it becomes.” (Image: Mr. Whitaker)8 P.M. (Fox) BONES Six months after trading the Jeffersonian for domestic bliss, Brennan (Emily Deschanel) and Booth (David Boreanaz) are back analyzing the remains of someone close to them. Then he goes missing.8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY Bailey (Chandra Wilson) feels the pressure on her first day as chief. In “Scandal,” at 9, a new case takes Olivia (Kerry Washington) out of Washington and away from Fitz (Tony Goldwyn). And in “How to Get Away With Murder,” at 10, Annalise (Viola Davis) is ruthlessly interrogated on the witness stand during a preliminary hearing for Nate (Billy Brown).Advertisement9 P.M. (NBC) THE BLACKLIST The new season finds Liz (Megan Boone) and Red (James Spader) on the F.B.I.’s 10 Most Wanted Fugitives list after she’s accused of murdering the attorney general. Enter the Troll Farmer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (13) THEATER CLOSE-UP Tonya Pinkins and Dianne Wiest do a wary dance as co-workers pitted against each other in a doctor’s office in “Rasheeda Speaking,” Joel Drake Johnson’s take on racial tensions in the workplace. Cynthia Nixon directed this New Group production, which opens Season 2 of “Theater Close-Up,” a collaboration between Channel 13 and a group of Off Broadway theaters. Blythe Danner hosts. “There is certainly something provocative in Mr. Johnson’s desire to infuse a social-issue play with the dynamics of a psychological thriller, as he attempts here, but with a subject as sensitive as the issue of race in America, a more probing and less sensational approach is not just advisable, but necessary,” Charles Isherwood wrote in The Times.Advertisement10 P.M. (IFC) BENDERS Some friends (Chris Distefano, Mark Gessner, Ruy Iskandar and Andrew Schulz) find their obsession with their adult-hockey team getting in the way of life in this new series. Lindsey Broad is the wife stuck in the middle. In “Gigi Does It,” at 10:30, David Krumholtz plays Gertrude Rotblum, a septuagenarian who loses her beloved husband but gains $6.2 million in the process.11:50 P.M. (CBS) THE LATE SHOW WITH STEPHEN COLBERT Secretary of State John Kerry, who is in New York for the United Nations General Assembly, and Claire Danes, whose series “Homeland” has its Season 5 premiere Sunday, are the guests.What’s Streaming NowDOPE (2015) Malcolm (Shameik Moore), a high school senior with a 4.0 and a thing for old-school rap, does a favor for a midlevel gangster (ASAP Rocky) and ends up with a backpack full of drugs and a handgun that could make or break his shot at Harvard. Zoë Kravitz and Chanel Iman play the girls who can’t resist Malcolm’s geeky charms. Writing in The Times, A. O. Scott called Rick Famuyiwa’s tribute to ’90s-vintage ghetto dramas, with Forest Whitaker as a producer, amiable, energetic and scrambled. “It’s easy to root for Malcolm, to admire his pluck and share in his enthusiasm,” he said. “It may be a little harder to buy what he and ‘Dope’ are selling.” (iTunes) (Image: Mr. Moore)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s on TV Thursday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.