By STEPHEN HOLDENDEC. 1, 2015
Lena Hall wasn’t even born when Jefferson Airplane’s “White Rabbit” marched onto the airwaves on a bolero strut just in time for the Summer of Love. But her parents, artists living in the Haight Ashbury district of San Francisco, were charter members of the hipoisie in the emerald city of groovy enlightenment. And as Ms. Hall recalls in “The Villa Satori Growing Up in Haight Ashbury,” her show at Feinstein’s/54 Below, the neighborhood was still a bohemian mecca when she came along in 1980.As the drummer Brian Fishler tapped out the song’s ominous, militant beat on Monday night, Ms. Hall, who won a Tony Award last year for best featured actress in a musical (“Hedwig and the Angry Inch”), almost matched Grace Slick’s original recording, belting the ambiguous psychedelic rallying cry to “feed your head.”It was followed by a rendition of the song that Janis Joplin made her signature, “Piece of My Heart,” and Paul McCartney’s wistful ballad “She’s Leaving Home,” imbued with a deep pathos. Like “White Rabbit,” “She’s Leaving Home” contemplates the gulf between clueless parents and their rebellious children.Ms. Hall, who has a cutting delivery, and her musicians might be described as a top-notch rock cover band. But they are more than that. They carefully bridge the gap between Broadway and rock without going too far. The show’s songs by the Sex Pistols, Metallica, Hole, the Foo Fighters, Pearl Jam, Radiohead and Alanis Morissette are platforms for a roughly chronological autobiography of Ms. Hall’s musical education and personal evolution.AdvertisementShe spat out the Sex Pistols’ seminal punk-rock rabble-rouser “Anarchy in the U.K.” with an authoritative sneer, disgorged the desperation and bravado in Metallica’s “Nothing Else Matters” and located both the grim intensity of Pearl Jam’s “Release” and the paranoia of Radiohead’s “Karma Police.”But to describe her performances of “Anarchy in the U.K.” and the Courtney Love song “Violet,” with its contemptuous accusation, “When they get what they want, they never want it again,” as polished is almost oxymoronic. These songs are not nice. They mean to stir up trouble. The band, which besides Mr. Fishler included the guitarist Watt White, the bassist Lee Nadel and the keyboardist Chris LoPresto, kept the volume at a safe level.AdvertisementWhat does it say that the show’s strongest moment was also its sweetest — and the only song outside the rock canon? Bob Telson’s ballad “Calling You,” from the film “Bagdad Cafe,” rang as a piercing cry in the night.Lena Hall performs through Monday at Feinstein’s/54 Below, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 646-476-3551, 54below­.comA version of this review appears in print on December 2, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: From Sneering to Poignant in a Rollicking Journey.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.