AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan SobleTOKYO — Shigeru Mizuki, an influential and widely popular Japanese cartoonist with a talent for humanizing mythical monsters and dissecting the monstrous side of humanity, died here on Monday. He was 93.The cause was multiple organ failure, his office, Mizuki Productions, said. He had undergone emergency surgery several weeks earlier after falling and hitting his head, the office said.Mr. Mizuki was admired by generations of Japanese animators and won fans abroad with his style, which combined a love of the grotesque with sympathy and breezy humor.His most popular work, about the adventures of a one-eyed ghost-boy named Kitaro, spawned an empire of live-action and animated films, a musical and five television series — a reboot every decade from the 1960s to the 2000s. The series’ battles between fantastic creatures were the template for later Japanese fare, like Pokémon.But Mr. Mizuki also took on serious subjects in graphic form, including the barbarities of war, drawn in part from his own harrowing combat experiences in World War II, and the rise of Adolf Hitler. His life was the subject of films and acclaimed autobiographical works.Even in a country as saturated with manga and anime as Japan, few artists rivaled Mr. Mizuki in commercial success or distinctiveness of vision. He was ranked with Osamu Tezuka, the creator of Astro Boy and probably Japan’s most lauded animator, who died in 1989 at 60.Mr. Mizuki, who was known for his humility, was reluctant to make such a comparison himself.“Tezuka was always working through the night, and he died young,” Mr. Mizuki said in a speech on receiving a national cultural award in 2003. “I’ve spent my life half-asleep, and I’ve lived a long time.”He was born Shigeru Mura on March 8, 1922, in Osaka to a wealthy family in the wholesale business. The family moved to rural Tottori Prefecture when Mr. Mizuki was a boy and fell into financial trouble during the Depression. He took the pen name Mizuki from the name of a guesthouse in which he stayed as he developed his early work after World War II.He made his start before the war drawing story panels used by street-corner raconteurs. He was drafted into the army in 1943, just as the tide of the war was turning decisively against Japan.Sent to Rabaul, a town on New Britain Island in Papua New Guinea, Mr. Mizuki escaped an American machine-gun ambush by diving from a cliff into the sea, he recounted in a memoir, “Neboke Jinsei” (“Half-Asleep Life”). Most members of his platoon were killed.When he turned up at camp days later, ragged and missing his rifle, his commander accused him of dishonoring himself by not dying with his comrades. The attitude surprised and disgusted him, he said, and it emerged later in works that were deeply critical of the war.Mr. Mizuki lost his left arm in Rabaul when a field hospital where he was recovering from malaria was struck by United States bombers. But he outlasted the conflict and was repatriated to Japan in 1945.There he returned to drawing, and by the 1950s he was experimenting with the burgeoning medium of serialized comics.His first story, “Rocketman,” was published in 1958. It brazenly copied American superhero imagery — one character wears a cape, tights and an “S” on his chest — and meshed it with the occult themes that would become his signature. In the story, an astronaut is murdered on his way to space, but comes back to life as a giant, vengeful flying sea urchin.The first Kitaro story appeared in 1960 as “Hakaba no Kitaro,” or “Kitaro From the Graveyard.” Its characters were inspired by ghosts and demons from traditional Japanese folk tales, which Mr. Mizuki said he had loved since he was a child. Kitaro’s father is a phantasm with an eyeball for a head. His main rival is a greedy half-ghost, half-human named Rat Man.Children loved the escapist fantasy — “Monsters don’t have exams or school!” went the theme song of the TV version — while adults found wry satire in the comic depravity of the supernatural characters.Mr. Mizuki changed the “graveyard” name, at the insistence of sponsors, to the softer “GeGeGe no Kitaro” — a play on the sound of spooky laughter and the stuttered way in which Mr. Mizuki pronounced his given name as a boy.For more serious projects, Mr. Mizuki turned to different sorts of ghosts, those of history. His first-person accounts of his war experience, most famously in “Onward Towards Our Noble Deaths,” from 1973, used a light touch to deliver unsparing criticism of suicide squadrons, the mistreatment of “comfort women” in military brothels and other cruelties.His graphic novel about Hitler’s rise, first published in Japanese in 1971, came out in a widely praised English translation this year. In 1979, decades before the Fukushima nuclear accident shone a spotlight on Japan’s atomic power industry, he illustrated a magazine exposé of worker exploitation at the facility, titled “Darkness at the Fukushima Nuclear Plant.”His survivors include his wife, Nunoe Mura; a younger brother; and two daughters.“Mizuki-san experienced the war, came home alive and thought hard about what he should do with his life, then went out and did it,” Leiji Matsumoto, the creator of the animated science-fiction series “Space Battleship Yamato,” told the Japanese national broadcaster NHK. “I wanted him to live to 100 and tell even more stories.”Advertisement