By KATHY JESSEDEC. 1, 2015
MUNCIE, Ind. — Six months into retirement, David Letterman stepped onstage here at Ball State University looking much the way he did as host of “Late Show”: suit and tie, loafers and white socks. But he has grown the kind of beard a man wears when he doesn’t have to get up for work every morning — looking not so much like Santa Claus but, as he said, like Charles Darwin.In his first visit to Ball State, his alma mater, since retiring after 33 years in late-night television, Mr. Letterman moderated a conversation with the movie directors Spike Jonze and Bennett Miller that touched on everything from filmmaking mistakes to sexism in Hollywood.After the Top 10 lists and the 16 Emmys, the on-camera breakups (Crispin Glover) and makeups (Oprah Winfrey), Mr. Letterman, 68, can always come back to Ball State, where he started his career in broadcasting at the campus radio station. And he has come back, many times, bringing with him the likes of Rachel Maddow and Ms. Winfrey as part of a lecture series he financed.On Monday night, the university president, Paul W. Ferguson, announced that Mr. Letterman would donate all of his Emmys, part of his “Late Show” set and other memorabilia to his alma mater. Ball State will call the exhibition “The David Letterman Experience,” a title that prompted some self-effacing mockery: “If you can call sitting behind a desk and pretending to talk to actors an ‘experience,’” Mr. Letterman told the audience of more than 3,500 at the university’s Emens Auditorium.AdvertisementThen, he invited Mr. Jonze (“Her”) and Mr. Miller (“Foxcatcher”) to join him for an onstage chat about what it takes to make what Mr. Letterman called “life-changing and inspirational films” within the constraints of the Hollywood system.Mr. Jonze, director of “Where the Wild Things Are,” his critically well-received adaptation of that Maurice Sendak book, described his struggles with Warner Bros. to maintain creative control of that film. “I didn’t fully understand how nervous people are when they give you $80 million,” he said, explaining that he was trying to make a film about what it felt like to be a kid.Advertisement“The studio didn’t like the movie,” he added. “They said it was too strange, sad and dark. I got in a lot of fights with them. They just wanted it to have no jagged edges.”He added that once a director starts compromising, it “adds up to a big loss.”Mr. Miller said that he relied on improvisation in his filmmaking and might even rewrite a scene the morning it is to be shot. “For me, it’s about exploring and discovering and searching for this thing that is ethereal,” he said. “You have to be open to that thing in your gut.”Neither Mr. Miller, 48, nor Mr. Jonze, 46, has a college degree, a paradox that was not lost on the audience of mostly college students. Both agreed that film school wasn’t necessary for success.“I learned by making a lot of stuff,” Mr. Jonze said. “Skateboard and music videos. I made a lot of bad stuff and each time I learned from mistakes and got a little better.”Mr. Jonze also discussed his famous decision to replace Samantha Morton, who played the voice of a computer operating system in his 2013 film, “Her.” After most of the scenes with the star, Joaquin Phoenix, were filmed, Scarlett Johansson took over because, Mr. Jonze said, he realized he had miscalibrated the character.“I needed a different color,” he told the audience. “It was a terrible phone call to make” to Ms. Morton, he continued. “But I believe she’s in that movie still. Her essence is in that character and definitely in Joaquin’s performance.”AdvertisementMr. Letterman asked the two directors for their response to a recent article in The New York Times Magazine about “pervasive sexism” that keeps women from the upper levels of decision-making in Hollywood.Mr. Miller struggled for an answer and returned to the topic several times during the evening. “I tense up when this subject is broached,” he said. “It is a hot issue. I’m not a studio executive.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Letterman pressed on. “Having been very, very successful, now can’t you devote your career to help others who struggle to be successful?” he asked.The audience applauded, but Mr. Miller said he found that approach “patronizing.” Referring to the film industry, he said: “It is a jungle and it is competitive. I have discovered that you can’t ask for permission.”On Twitter, responses to his comments came quickly. “It is not patronizing to ‘help’ change a system,” wrote Kristen McCauliff, an assistant professor of communications studies at Ball State. “It is an obligation for those with influence and privilege.”A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Retired, Letterman Keeps Interviewing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.