AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave ItzkoffAt this point in his career, Jerry Seinfeld is a comedian who can work as often or as little as he wants to. And now this popular stand-up performer, sitcom star and digital host is offering New York audiences the opportunity to see as much of him as they can take.The Madison Square Garden Company announced on Tuesday that it was giving Mr. Seinfeld a residency at its Beacon Theater on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, where he will perform stand-up roughly once a month, starting on Jan. 7, for at least six shows.“A career comes out of the culture that you grew up in,” Mr. Seinfeld, 61, said on Tuesday at a news conference on the Beacon Theater stage. “And I feel like New York and Long Island is what gave me the perspective to do what I do.”Mr. Seinfeld’s arrangement mirrors a similar one that the Garden announced with Billy Joel at the end of 2013. That deal made Mr. Joel, the piano-playing Long Island bard, the Garden’s first entertainment franchise (alongside sports teams like the Knicks, Rangers and Liberty), and gave him a regular monthly show at that arena that started on Jan. 27, 2014, and is planned to run through at least April 15, 2016.Mr. Seinfeld, whose Beacon Theater series will be called “Jerry Seinfeld: The Homestand,” cited Mr. Joel as an inspiration for seeking his own residency.“When Billy Joel does ‘New York State of Mind’ at the Garden, it’s different,” Mr. Seinfeld said. “It sounds different. It feels different than when he does it in Charlotte. So, I thought this is a really unique moment to see a guy who’d come from this area and built his career.”Noting that he owns a house that he bought from Mr. Joel, Mr. Seinfeld added, “I thought, well, as long as I have his house, why don’t I steal his whole career?”Mr. Seinfeld is also booked for Beacon shows on Feb. 18, March 2, April 14, May 5 and June 8. After that, he said, “We’ll see how it goes, and if everybody’s happy, maybe we’ll do some more.”The Beacon has hosted rock and pop stars like Adele, Mariah Carey and Steely Dan, and was for many years closely associated with the freewheeling monthlong residencies of the Allman Brothers Band, a custom that came to an end last year.It seats about 2,800 people, only a fraction of the capacity of the Garden, which uses more than 18,000 seats for its sports events, and 11,000 to 15,000 for concerts and comedy events.Still, Mr. Seinfeld said the Beacon was the right size for the work that he does.“It was made for comedy,” he said. “When you come see somebody here that you like, it hits you in a different way.”Asked if he felt any sense of competition with Mr. Joel’s residency at the Garden, Mr. Seinfeld answered, simply, “No, I don’t.”In addition to the ubiquity Mr. Seinfeld enjoys from his eponymous NBC sitcom (which continues to run in syndication and online, yada, yada, yada), he is also the star and creator of the Crackle series “Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee,” and directed Colin Quinn’s one-man show “Colin Quinn: The New York Story” at the Cherry Lane Theater.When he is not performing his stand-up show in other theaters or arenas around the country, Mr. Seinfeld remains a habitué of New York’s comedy clubs, where he often makes unannounced appearances to hone his routine and try out new material.“Those are just noodling around with ideas,” Mr. Seinfeld said of his surprise club shows.The Beacon performances, he said, will be “the lineup of my best hitters.”“You will see my best show here, every time I do it,” he said. “This is not a workshop.”During the news conference, Mr. Seinfeld received sports jerseys from Walt Frazier, the Hall of Fame Knicks player and MSG channel commentator, and from Rod Gilbert, a Hall of Fame member of the Rangers.Mr. Seinfeld, a devoted fan of the New York Mets, also presented tickets to one of his Beacon shows to John Franco, a former relief pitcher for that team.He also took the occasional opportunity to taunt the Garden executives who appeared with him on the Beacon’s stage, including James L. Dolan, the company’s executive chairman.When, in his opening remarks, Mr. Dolan said that “everyone who attended this theater when it first opened is no longer with us,” Mr. Seinfeld was heard to reply, “Oh, buzzkill.”Advertisement