By KATHRYN SHATTUCKOCT. 7, 2015
10 P.M. (CNBC) JAY LENO’S GARAGE It’s no secret that Mr. Leno is obsessed with all things automotive, owning about 130 cars and more than 90 motorcycles — from Bentley, Bristol, Bugatti and Duesenberg to Jaguar, Lamborghini, Lotus and McLaren. In this new spinoff from his web series, Mr. Leno takes to the road in search of the most weirdly wonderful vehicles ever made and the wonderful weirdos who love them. He begins with the American muscle car, visiting his fellow aficionado Tim Allen; hitting the drag strip with Erica Enders-Stevens, the first female Pro Stock Car champion; peeking at the Pegasus, GM’s top-secret 1960s concept car; and climbing into a souped-up Corvette alongside the Nascar driver Jimmie Johnson.9:10 A.M. (MoreMax) LOVELY AND AMAZING (2002) In Nicole Holofcener’s examination of narcissism and its fallout, Emily Mortimer plays Elizabeth, an actress who has just been rejected for a soap opera as not being sexy enough, and Catherine Keener is her sister Michelle, who has anger-management problems and an interest in her 17-year-old boss (Jake Gyllenhaal) at the one-hour photo shop where she works as her art career falters. Brenda Blethyn is Jane, their divorced mother, who has recently adopted an 8-year-old, Annie (Raven Goodwin), born to a crack addict. When Jane develops complications from liposuction, Elizabeth and Michelle are left to care for Annie. Still, “as smart and observant as it is, ‘Lovely and Amazing’ doesn’t really go anywhere,” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times.8 P.M. (13, 49) BIG BIRDS CAN’T FLY If it can’t fly, can’t sing and has fluff instead of feathers, is it still a bird? “Nature” examines the peculiar evolution behind ostriches, emus, rheas, cassowaries and kiwis.9 P.M. (Fox) EMPIRE Cookie (Taraji P. Henson) does it again — this time scheming with Anika (Grace Gealey) to catch Pitbull’s eye without Lucious (Terrence Howard) knowing about it. But he’s doing some plotting of his own by trying to sign Young Ma (Bre-Z Murray). Meanwhile, Andre (Trai Byers) and Rhonda (Kaitlin Doubleday) are hoping that their baby will thaw Lucious’s cold, cold heart.Advertisement9 P.M. (NBC) LAW & ORDER: SPECIAL VICTIMS UNIT After an emaciated toddler is found wandering the street, detectives discover another gravely ill child back at home. It soon becomes clear that the family’s caseworker (John Magaro) hadn’t checked on the children in months, leading him to blame his supervisor (Whoopi Goldberg) for masterminding false reports. When neglect results in a death, Barba (Raúl Esparza) has them arrested for manslaughter.Advertisement10 P.M. (FX) AMERICAN HORROR STORY: HOTEL Lady Gaga checks in as the socialite owner of the Hotel Cortez in downtown Los Angeles, where room service includes murder, as this anthology series begins its fifth season. Angela Bassett, playing a fabulous actress named Ramona Royale, hinted at a fine romance by proclaiming Lady Gaga “a good kisser” on a recent talk show. What else we know: Kathy Bates is Iris, who runs the hotel and can’t stand Sarah Paulson’s Hypodermic Sally, an alluring drug addict. And Naomi Campbell shows up as a fashion editor whose critiques don’t go over well.What’s Streaming NowCARNEGIE HALL OPENING NIGHT GALA The hall inaugurates its 125th  season with the New York Philharmonic, conducted by Alan Gilbert, in the premiere of Magnus Lindberg’s “Vivo”; Ravel’s “Daphnis et Chloé” Suite No. 2; and Tchaikovsky’s Piano Concerto No. 1, featuring Evgeny Kissin at the keyboard. (medici.tv) CASUAL Valerie (Michaela Watkins), a therapist mired in a nasty divorce, moves in with her younger brother, Alex (Tommy Dewey), a dating-site creator who becomes her cyber-wingman in this creation from Zander Lehmann. Tara Lynne Barr plays Laura, Valerie’s sexually precocious 16-year-old daughter, with whom she shares a thing for a high-school photography teacher. “It’s the idiosyncratic story of an idiosyncratic Los Angeles family that shows how idiosyncrasy has become a formula itself,” James Poniewozik wrote in The Times. “But this is a well-executed version, which becomes more than the sum of its quirks.” (hulu.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 7, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.