AdvertisementSupported byEmpireBy Craig JenkinsWhile the buildup to this week’s “Empire” midseason finale often seemed more concerned with sustaining a weekly sense of unpredictability than cashing in on the robustness of its characters, the main event successfully made pretty bows out of a number of the season’s loose yarns.Hakeem’s wandering eye snapped into focus as old flame Camilla (Naomi Campbell) resurfaced after leaving him unceremoniously at Lucious’s behest last season. She’s come back, puzzlingly, as Mimi’s wife. Hakeem might see an end to philandering in Camilla’s sudden re-emergence, but if she is Mimi’s lover, does that make her the domineering significant other who ran the mogul ragged earlier in the season?More so than a love interest, Hakeem sees Camilla as an instrument of revenge. Mimi’s surprise betrayal of Lucious at an Empire board meeting forces a crisis where he is to be removed from command of his own company unless he can muster trustee support to fend off the plot. He can, if every member of the Lyon family votes in solidarity, but the sight of Camilla outside the boardroom brings the brunt of Lucious’s conniving dealings with his son to a head, and Hakeem, suddenly the swing vote in his father’s undoing, twists the knife. With Camilla handling day-to-day Empire operations as Mimi undergoes treatment for an illness, Hakeem is now frighteningly close to the throne. It’s an unusual windfall for the Lyon who spent weeks distancing himself from the family practice through radical acts of self-sabotage. But we all know Hakeem’s thrashing is the thirst of a youngest brother for validation, and this will certainly do.Lucious lost control of more than just the boardroom this week. His bullish orchestration of Jamal’s album release campaign proved a little too successful, as father and son found themselves squaring off for the same prestigious “American Sound Award.” Jamal is catching on faster than his daddy did years ago, and it won’t be long before Lucious starts treating his son like competition. At the ceremony announcing the ASA nominees (where Hakeem and Freda Gatz also vie for the same rap award), Lucious convinces Jamal to debut a new collaboration with Sky Summers (Alicia Keys) instead of singing the song he’s nominated for. The performance goes well, but as Sky worriedly predicted when she began writing with Jamal, her audience isn’t ready for her gear shift into social justice. What’s more, hip-hop radio personality Charlemagne the God cruelly questions Sky and Jamal’s physical relationship, and social media quickly turns a good performance into a public relations nightmare.The finale coyly brought clarity to a few plot questions while leaving many more unexplored partly because “Empire” is a show in which solutions cause more problems but also because as a series that jumped from a 10-episode first season into an 18-episode second season, it might still be figuring out its pace. The balance of mystery and resolution felt defter here than it has in a few episodes, but there were still messes aplenty.Here are three outrageous moments in an episode brimming with them:Lucious quips “She fixed you?” upon finding out Jamal has slept with Sky. The only thing more exasperating than Lucious’s homophobia is his belief that the “right woman” can “cure” it, and I do not put it past him to have orchestrated the meeting between the Jamal and Sky to achieve this exact result. Just when you think he’s stopped measuring his pride in his son’s talent against his sexual orientation, a moment like this suggests he may never come to terms with it. The world is like that sometimes, though, isn’t it?Cookie spits in Camilla’s face after she baits Hakeem to side with Mimi in the boardroom.. Cookie is a visceral, passionate, physical character, and Taraji P. Henson’s live wire, reactions when things go sideways, like the time she dragged the tablecloth and the entire family feast onto Lucious’s dining room floor, rank among the show’s funniest moments. But spitting is the province of the vile, and roughshod as she can be at times, Cookie is better than that.A mysterious villain breaks into Rhonda’s house while Andre is away and pushes her off her second floor balcony. It was Anika, wasn’t it? Anika’s been exhibiting increasingly bizarre behavior this season — keeping a secret Hakeem shrine, stalking Laura — and it is balderdash at best. Worse, by reducing a talented, educated, independent character to an animalistic creature clinging to a flaky, self-satisfied man-child with a baby she believes to be the ticket to prosperity, “Empire” undercuts the empowerment the show has given to its powerful, boundlessly clever women. That said, I never liked nor trusted Rhonda. RIP?Advertisement