
American Horror Story By                     
E. A. HANKS

DEC. 3, 2015
I don’t know those people; I don’t know what’s out there; I can’t tell what’s making that sound: all basic horror tropes. What’s that in the dark? Who’s there? Is that a shadow? The unknown —, that’s where fear is found.So what does an audience gain when a horror story’s big reveal is something many of them figured out weeks ago?John Lowe is the Ten Commandments killer, finishing the good work James Patrick March began many decades before. In an episode that was almost entirely composed of flashbacks (sometimes flashbacks within flashbacks), we learned that Lowe stumbled into the Cortez five years earlier, intent on a bender after working a gruesome case, only to pique the interest of the hotel’s homicidal owner. After March reads Lowe’s aura (only in L.A., right?) the two men spend long evenings discussing the failings of justice and their righteous indignation. It doesn’t take long until March decides that Lowe is the man he’s been searching for: he can continue making examples of those living in opposition to God’s law.Of course, neither March nor Lowe are godly men themselves. Interpreting God’s law and acting to avenge it has more to do with their own perverted sense of injustice and wrath. It turns out that Lowe’s son Holden, whom we know has been living in the Cortez as one of the vampire children of the Countess (March’s estranged wife), is only a pawn, stolen to push the already fragile Lowe into a murderous tailspin.AdvertisementAssuming March’s mantel, Lowe was living a half life: one with wife Alex at home, the other with the always weeping Sally. What exactly caused Lowe to forget all of this — his time at the Cortez, his relationship with Sally, the murders, remains unclear.AdvertisementWhen Lowe attempts to confess to his former police partner (one of two actors of color on this season thus far), Lowe ends up adding him to his grim collection of murder trophies. There’s no hand wringing for Lowe, he’s a new man: a man with purpose. After all, “I’m a homicide detective. What I know is that death is the only thing in life that has any meaning.”Now that “American Horror Story: Hotel,” has confirmed what viewers knew from nearly the beginning of the season, hopefully other plots will be attended to. There is the horde of school children let loose on their families after being infected with vampirism, as well as the stalled out plot for vengeance against the Countess by her jilted ex-lovers Donovan and Ramona. There’s Donovan’s mother Iris, who converted to vampirism in order to stay close to her son; Liz Taylor, who is in mourning for her lover Tristan; the Countess’s original maker Valentino and his wife, who remain sprung from their hidden room in the Cortez; and Bartholomew, the demonic son of the Countess. There is more than enough, in other words, to keep us busy for the remaining seven episodes.A question remains however: who are we supposed to be rooting for? Who, in this massive cast, is our hero, or at least our protagonist? John Lowe is a murderer, Alex Lowe is an icicle, we don’t know Donovan, Ramona or Sally. One can’t help but miss Season 1’s heartbroken Connie Britton and delusional Jessica Lange. In this season, Liz Taylor and Iris have stood out, thanks to the talents of Denis O’Hare and Kathy Bates, but they have hardly had enough screen time to be protagonists.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Perhaps now is finally the time to discuss Lady Gaga’s Countess. Set up as she is with suitably impressive wardrobe, and quips which aim for Bette Davis levels of sagacity, the Countess could have been an eerie, looming presence in the hotel. But “Hotel,” is never content to let something remain in the shadows, so now the character is as burdened with back story as she is bereft of sinister headiness. She may have killed Tristan in front of Liz Taylor out of jealousy but as we discussed here, what does that really mean for the audience when we’ve only seen the bartender and former model together in one or two scenes?Is the Countess scary? Unsettling, even? Only if you have a real problem when people over accessorize.So this leads us to another question, perhaps more important that who our hero is, given that this is supposed to be a horror show: who is our villain?In seasons past we’ve had the Rubberman, Nazi doctors and a power hungry witch, but thus far we are without a bad guy (or gal) who has kept us on our toes. The Countess? The Ten Commandments killer who, thus far, has been mostly a drag?Pleased that John’s two selves have finally merged into one cogent, if homicidal self, Iris wonders, “Are we ever ready to see ourselves for what we are?” and it’s a fair question.Eight episodes in, does “Hotel,” see, or better yet, understand what it is?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »