AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben Ratliff“Kannon”(Southern Lord)The band Sunn O))) creates theater of and about sound. Its performances involve the expert handling of sustained low frequencies. These are made primarily by Greg Anderson and Stephen O’Malley, with electric guitars and amplifiers, through drumless processionals of notes and chords in an improvised crawl. During a public interview in New York with Red Bull Music Academy two years ago, Mr. O’Malley was asked to confirm something he’d said earlier: that the amplifiers are really the star of his band’s live show. His eyes went big, and he nodded enthusiastically; then he took the idea one step further toward acoustic science. “The output transformers of the amps,” he offered. “And the preamp tubes.”Its concerts are spectacles anyway. They include the singer Attila Csihar’s slow physical gestures and baleful growls, near-total darkness, hooded robes as stage costumes, and a Great Wall of amplifiers. But they come down to the notion of sound as an almost physical presence, acting upon people in a room and the dimensions of the room itself.Mr. Anderson and Mr. O’Malley use the same voluminous amplifier setup in small studios as they do in clubs and theaters, and have figured out ways — with the help of the engineer and producer Randall Dunn — to record it with depth and clarity. Still, it’s a different experience on the record, without the black-magic vibe of the shows. In its last studio album, “Monoliths and Dimensions,” from 2009, Sunn O))) used a choir and arrangements for brass and strings; those extra elements created space and new textures in the music. But they were also fancy dressing for the preamp tubes.Since then, the band has seemed surer of itself, asking us to take it more at face value. It has released recordings of rehearsals and performances on its official Bandcamp site; this year it uploaded to a second Bandcamp page dozens of live recordings made by fans. And it has just released “Kannon,” a three-track album that gets close to the band’s standard live set.“Kannon” is surprising in two ways. One is its brevity: just over half an hour. The other is its austerity, even for a fairly austere band. This music demands a lot. It’s hard to love, and hard to share.“Kannon 1,” the longest track, with an ascending and descending guitar pattern and Mr. Csihar’s voice making deep glottal clicks like a stick run along an iron fence, is gorgeous, sensuous and layered: Its sense of audio space is enormous. But “Kannon 2” and “Kannon 3” are for the most committed, those who have gone deep into the secondary Bandcamp page. The first leans too heavily on a simple idea, repeating a bare melodic line under Mr. Csihar’s gray chanting; the second begins promisingly, with tremolo feedback leading into multitracked sighing vocals but becomes what sounds like another rehearsal tape: original in sound, as always, but thin on material. I wouldn’t mind seeing it live at all.Advertisement