AdvertisementSupported byBy William GrimesOlga Hirshhorn, who began buying modern art while married to Joseph H. Hirshhorn, the founder of the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington, and who over time became recognized as a serious collector in her own right, died on Saturday at her home in Naples, Fla. She was 95.Her death was confirmed by her son John Cunningham.Mrs. Hirshhorn was running a small employment agency in Greenwich, Conn., in the early 1960s when she met her future husband, an oil and mining tycoon and art collector who had recently bought a house nearby and needed to hire help.The two hit it off, and in 1964, she became Mr. Hirshhorn’s fourth wife.“It was a whole different world,” she told The Naples Daily News in 2006. “I was friends with dealers, with artists, with collectors. It was a total immersion in art for me.”Through her husband, she became friends with a roster of artists that included Pablo Picasso, Georgia O’Keeffe and Alexander Calder. Artists and dealers gave her works of art, as did her husband. “He would go to the galleries and point to different things and say, ‘I’ll take that, that, that and that, and throw that little one in for Olga,’ ” she told The New York Times in 1996.Before long she started buying her own art. Her first purchase was a painting by Josef Albers. “I remember thinking that two years earlier if someone had predicted I’d pay $2,000 for an 18-inch painting that was just a square within a square within a square, I would have said, ‘Ridiculous, a child could do that,’ ” she told Smithsonian magazine in 1998.Over the decades, Mrs. Hirshhorn collected hundreds of works by 19th- and 20th-century European and American artists, including Willem de Kooning, Henry Moore and Man Ray, as well as art from Asia, Africa and Oceania, picking up the pace after her husband’s death in 1981. She was also a dedicated patron of flea markets.In 1995, she donated more than 600 works from her collection to the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, rather than to the Hirshhorn, raising a few eyebrows. “The Corcoran needed it more, she told The Times. “I have a mini-Joe Hirshhorn collection, and at the Hirshhorn it would be lost.”Ten years later, when the Corcoran ousted its director, David C. Levy, she withdrew her pledge to donate her remaining artworks and a third of her estate to the museum, which, troubled by financial problems, was dissolved last year and its collections given to the National Gallery of Art.In 2013, the Baker Museum in Naples received the 220 works that Mrs. Hirshhorn had displayed in her tiny carriage house — she called it the Mouse House — on Embassy Row in Washington. The collection included small works by Picasso, de Kooning, Daumier, Giacometti and Man Ray.Olga Zatorsky was born in Greenwich on April 26, 1920, to Ukrainian immigrants. In a rich town, the family was working class: Her father was a gardener and chauffeur, her mother a cook for some of the wealthy neighbors.At Greenwich High School, Olga was a champion tennis player, competitive swimmer, editor of the yearbook and president of her class. A year after graduating in 1939, she married her English teacher, John Cunningham, and by the age of 25 she had three sons. To make ends meet, she started a babysitting business, which evolved into her employment agency, Services Unlimited. After divorcing her husband and marrying Mr. Hirshhorn, she became a prominent figure in museum circles, serving on the boards of the Hirshhorn, the Corcoran and the Baker Museum.In her later years, Mrs. Hirshhorn, who divided her time between her homes in Martha’s Vineyard, Washington and Naples, Fla., traveled around the country lecturing on her collection, which was exhibited at the Katonah Gallery in New York in 1976 and the Bruce Museum in Greenwich in 2009.In addition to her son John, a sculptor and professor at Skidmore College, she is survived by another son, Denis; five grandchildren; and a great-grandson. Her third husband, Robert Whittier Dudley, died of cancer a year after their marriage in 1985. Her son Graham died in 2011.In 2006, when a reporter for The Naples Daily News paid a visit to her art-filled house, Mrs. Hirshhorn gave instructions on what to write: “You can say: ‘As she sits at her desk she can see her three de Koonings, a Giacometti sculpture, and on the right wall is a Motherwell. Plus, other friends, other works.’ ”Advertisement