By NINA SIEGALDEC. 2, 2015
AMSTERDAM — In a painting of two lacquered floor lamps against a gray background, Beatrix Ruf, the director of the Stedelijk Museum of modern and contemporary art here, sees the entirety of Western art history.“This contains everything from Rembrandt to Warhol and beyond,” Ms. Ruf said about the 1994 work, “Zwei Lampen,” by the provocative German artist Isa Genzken, the subject of a new retrospective at the museum. Ms. Ruf was obviously delighted at seeing the painting finally on the wall, as it was the very first work she acquired for the Stedelijk, just two days after taking over the helm on Nov. 1 of last year.“It combines art and design, and of course a highly skilled ability of transforming painting into a different reality,” Ms. Ruf said. “She uses all these different techniques to get to this Renaissance idea of light that depicts itself.”Ms. Ruf, 55, has earned a reputation as a power curator and a tastemaker, most recently as the director of the Kunsthalle Zurich, a position she held for 13 years and where she jump-started the careers of a number of internationally known artists.AdvertisementIn March, W. Magazine wrote that she has “a nose for the next big thing,” and a headline in the Observer newspaper in London in September said that “Ruf is on Fire.” Art Review magazine has listed her as one of the 100 most powerful people in the art world since 2009. Last month, she flew to New York to receive the Agnes Gund award — or “Aggie” — from the Independent Curators International for her contributions to the art world.Advertisement“Zwei Lampen” is one of 287 works in the Stedelijk’s 40-year survey “Isa Genzken: Mach Dich Hübsch!” (loosely translated as “Make Yourself Beautiful”), which opened to the public on Sunday and runs through March 6.The painting is relatively sedate compared to much of Ms. Genzken’s oeuvre, here organized not chronologically but thematically across 18 gallery spaces on the museum’s second floor. She favors glitzy design objects in chaotic sculptural compositions, neon-tinged assemblages made of seemingly random consumer detritus (like masked mannequins and smashed bookcases), and reflective surfaces that force viewers to repeatedly encounter themselves.“Isa is an artist who is prepared to push borders and to venture into new ground, and that’s something that Beatrix also likes to do,” said Martijn van Nieuwenhuyzen, a co-curator of the Genzken exhibition, as he monitored the installation of Ms. Genzken’s series of faux busts of Nefertiti wearing reflective sunglasses.Choosing to mount a Genzken exhibition of such depth as one of her first big showcases reflects the kind of edginess that Ms. Ruf wants to bring to the Stedelijk, a museum known for its tradition of experimentation.The Stedelijk has long been the Netherlands’ leading museum of modern and contemporary art and design, but it has had some difficulty finding its footing in the last few years. A nine-year, 127 million euro, or $163 million, renovation suffered repeated setbacks and cost overruns, and became a point of mounting frustration within the local arts community.Two “Temporary Stedelijk” exhibitions were mounted at the museum during the work, but it remained largely out of the public eye. The renovated and expanded building reopened in 2012 under the former director Ann Goldstein, but it struggled to assert its identity on the city’s Museumplein, home to two more-prominent institutions, the Rijksmuseum and the Van Gogh Museum, which had just undergone renovations of their own.The rebooted Stedelijk is seeking to be an international tourist draw, with a collection that includes Picasso, Matisse, Malevich and Mondrian. At the same time, it wants to reestablish itself as a showcase for local artists, who have often used it as a stage for acts of radical experimentation.AdvertisementMs. Ruf says she does not see a conflict between these two aims. “The Stedelijk is by definition the museum for contemporary modern international arts, but where local artists were always involved and informed,” she said in her glass-walled corner office on the fourth floor of the Stedelijk, with a view of the grassy Museumplein.Ms. Ruf lifted the ceramic Agnes Gund award out of its case and weighed it in her hands. “Nonfunctional,” she said in a mischievous tone, then put it back in its case.Almost always dressed in black, with boyishly cut black hair framing her face and lips often daubed with jungle red lipstick, the German-born Ms. Ruf does conform to certain intimidating art world types. Yet her inviting smile and open manner has led people to marvel, as one Dutch interviewer did soon after she began her new position, that she is “like a fresh wind of air in the museum.”Comparisons have been made in the Dutch media between Ms. Ruf and Ms. Goldstein, who was sometimes criticized as being media-shy and inaccessible. Ms. Goldstein resigned from the institution in 2013, before a new director had been selected.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Goldstein declined to be interviewed for this article, writing in an email: “Beatrix is an old friend and I admire her immensely as a colleague. I was thrilled she was appointed to succeed me at the Stedelijk and have every confidence that the museum will flourish under her leadership.”As to all the declarations of her power and influence in the art world, Ms. Ruf said she was unsure what to make of them. “Finding new talent was my job,” she said with a shrug. But Maja Hoffmann, a Swiss art collector and patron, said Ms. Ruf’s talents went far beyond her job description.“All the artists shown at Kunsthalle Zurich since Beatrix started have become global, with first-rate galleries and international careers,” Ms. Hoffman said by email, mentioning  the British new media artist Ed Atkins, among others. “The amount of energy she spends with the artist during the conception and hanging is extraordinary. For them, nothing is impossible, yet she leads the way.”The German fine art photographer Wolfgang Tillmans has known Ms. Ruf for at least 20 years, and she curated his exhibition “Neue Welt,” the first show to open at the renovated Kunsthalle in 2012. He said artists appreciated her level of serious interest in their work, perhaps because she comes at art “as an artist” due to her background in choreography.“She’s good at paying attention,” said Mr. Tillmans, “and that sounds simple, or like a truism, but it’s actually really hard.” He added: “She is also constantly interested in what’s happening in the younger generation.”AdvertisementIn Ms. Ruf’s first year at the Stedelijk, she has sought to reinvigorate the programming, with special projects that have worked around pre-existing exhibitions or expanded on plans already in the works. In one example, the museum had already planned a collaboration with the German-British conceptual performance artist Tino Sehgal, but Ms. Ruf decided to turn it into a year-long survey of his work, with performances taking place  throughout 2015.The first show she scheduled this year was what she called an “immersive exhibition” of new works by Mr. Atkins and she acquired three of his digital artworks for the museum. During the summer, she commissioned a work to be displayed outside the museum, from the British contemporary artist Liam Gillick, who created illustrated panels of images from the Stedelijk collection that people could stick their heads through.She has also been focusing on the difficulty of running an institution that was largely closed to the public, although the Stedelijk continued to operate at various locations during renovations to its main building.Ms. Ruf had encountered the situation before. At the Kunsthalle Zurich, she initiated and oversaw a long and problematic renovation and expansion of the Löwenbräukunst building. When she came to the Stedelijk from Switzerland, the Dutch museum had already been open for a year and a half. “The energy was ready to blossom again,” she said.The first act to mark her arrival – the acquisition of the Genzken work — dovetailed with the museum’s existing collection of about half a dozen Genzken pieces, acquired since 1985.“Mach Dich Hübsch!” is the largest Genzken exhibition ever mounted, nearly twice as large as an illuminating 2013 retrospective of her work at the MoMA in New York.“It all comes together in this show, in my view,” Mr. van Nieuwenhuyzen said. “Isa’s work, Beatrix’s direction, and the tradition of the Stedelijk to be open to experiments. In a sense it’s also, I think, a statement for Beatrix’s future policy, of what she wants the Stedelijk to be: To tap into this adventurous history of the museum and bring the new contemporary forms back.”Ms. Ruf said that the Genzken show was reflective of the kinds of artists she admired and hoped to bring to the Stedelijk in the future. “Good artists are always the ones that may not have a vision into the future, but who are able to condense thinking about the contemporary reality,” she said.“They’re not giving you language, not giving you an answer, not giving you an applicable model, but really condensing and translating into an image all those things that make your brain and your emotions work.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.