AdvertisementSupported byQ. and A.By Stephen HeymanOn Saturday, as he has done every week this year, the Swedish troubadour Jens Lekman posted a new song to his website, part of his “Postcards” project, a collection of diary-like recordings, often made on his phone, about everything from talk therapy to falling in love with London. This one, a kind of spacey lament with a techno beat, blended topics big and small: the mood in Paris after the attacks, the tedium of a long-distance flight.Mr. Lekman, 34, is one of Sweden’s best-known musicians and a darling of the indie pop world. He sings mostly in English, and his slight accent — which turns words like “father” into “fah-der” — adds to his winsome charm. He has three full-length albums to his name — including 2007’s “Night Falls Over Kortedala,” which made it onto several critics’ lists of the last decade’s best records.Mr. Lekman has recently occupied himself with more intimate and immediate ways of music-making. For his latest tour, he opted out of the usual array of music halls and festivals and instead played in living rooms of private homes in small-town Sweden. Last month, he was in Cincinnati, Ohio, working on another project called “Ghostwriting,” where he interviewed people about their lives, and turned their stories — about heartbreak, a one-night stand, or a woman’s attempt to get her cat certified as an emotional support animal — into songs that he later released for free on his website.Mr. Lekman talked about the origin of all these low-fi experiments and the surprising way he supports his musical endeavors. The following is an edited excerpt from the conversation.Q. You have spent this year writing and releasing songs very quickly and trying to close the distance between you and your listeners. How did all this begin?A. There was a breaking point around New Year’s. I had been working on the record that I’m working on right now and just found myself adjusting the bass frequency of a kick drum for a week. And I thought, this is not the way I want my creativity and my writing to work. I felt like I needed an outlet that was more spontaneous where I could release ideas the moment I got them. And I wanted to use songwriting to tell other people’s stories, not just my own. With “Postcards,” I also found it interesting that at the end there would be 52 songs that would paint a picture of the year.Q. Tell me about some of the people you met and the songs you wrote for “Ghostwriting.” A.  In Cincinnati, I think I worked for at least 17 hours each day, and I interviewed about 12 storytellers during four days. It’s a cliché, but I loved every story. I talked to this guy who had moved to America from Indonesia and his family was struggling with the idea of the American dream — the distance between the life they had imagined in the States and the experience of being immigrants, and the way that took a toll on their marriage.Q. Were any of the songs funny? A. I’ve always liked when humor is not too obvious. I love for example the story I called “Cartwheels,” which is a very touching story about a woman who thinks back on the night when her mother dies. She’s sitting at the hospital just waiting, and she and her friend find an abandoned hall and they decide to do cartwheels down it. It’s not a “ha-ha” humor but it’s a beautiful, funny moment — as she says, “a brief ray of light in otherwise terrible night.”Q. You also performed “Ghostwriting” in Gothenburg. What was the difference between the Swedish and American versions? A. A lot of the ones submitted for Cincinnati were stories about enduring hardships and ending up at a point where you’re wiser or you’ve reached some kind of wisdom. The Swedish stories were different. The differences remind me of the “story-graphs” that Kurt Vonnegut did where he drew the dynamic narrative of stories and put them into these groups. Many of the Swedish stories were in the group called “Which way is up?” They were like, “I don’t quite know what this means. Or what the value is.”Q. Because so much of your work now is small scale or released for free, is it difficult to support yourself? A. It is, for sure. I don’t make money from it. But I do a lot of weddings — about 10 a year — which is one of my main incomes, actually. And that helps.Q. Could the way you’re working be thought of as a critique of the music industry? A.  It feels a lot like music is run by various energy drink companies these days. But I don’t really have a thought-out critique of all that. I haven’t been reading up on the consequences of Spotify or Apple Music. I’m just trying to stay afloat and do what I do.Advertisement