By MICHAEL COOPERDEC. 2, 2015
The long, tangled court battle between two groups seeking to revive the bankrupt New York City Opera came to an end on Wednesday afternoon when one group withdrew its proposal and cleared the way for its rival to try to bring back the beloved opera company.Gene Kaufman, an architect and one of the suitors who has been vying to reorganize and take control of City Opera, withdrew as part of a negotiated settlement that calls for granting his group $300,000, according to a court filing. The move made it almost certain that the next chapter in the company’s history would be written by NYCO Renaissance, a group backed by Roy G. Niederhoffer, an investment manager who served on the old City Opera board. It plans to make Michael Capasso — whose small company, Dicapo Opera Theater, foundered — the general director of the new City Opera.While NYCO Renaissance’s proposal must still be approved by creditors in the bankruptcy case, who will be mailed ballots, and by a judge, it is now the only plan under consideration. That raises the strong possibility that by Jan. 20, when the group plans to mount Puccini’s “Tosca” at the Rose Theater at Jazz at Lincoln Center, it will be able to use the City Opera name.“We are truly thrilled,” a lawyer for NYCO Renaissance, Gerard S. Catalanello, said in a telephone interview, adding that he expects the group’s reorganization plan, which is already supported by the official committee representing creditors in the case, to be approved.AdvertisementMr. Kaufman said in a statement: “I congratulate Roy and Michael and wish them all the best with their new venture. If they succeed, it will be a triumph for opera and for everyone who is passionate about the art form. New York City deserves a successful NYCO, and my withdrawal allows the reorganized company to leave the courts and return to the stage, where it belongs.”AdvertisementCity Opera — which had struggled in recent years after a series of poor management decisions led it to raid its endowment and then to leave its longtime home at Lincoln Center — shut down and filed for bankruptcy in 2013, leaving numerous debts, including to audiences that had bought more than $300,000 worth of advance tickets to a season that was abruptly canceled.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company, which filed for Chapter 11 protection, initially sought to wind up its affairs and close down, and sold off almost all of its assets, among them musical instruments and office equipment. Then the groups led by Mr. Niederhoffer and Mr. Kaufman began competing to buy the City Opera name, hoping to use it for a smaller company. Last winter, at an auction in court, Mr. Kaufman’s group bid $1.5 million for the name — but the board of the bankrupt opera company said that it favored a lower bid by Mr. Niederhoffer’s group, calling its plan stronger over all.Over the summer, the board withdrew its motion to sell the City Opera name, saying that it preferred to see the company reorganized. That could make it eligible to keep control of the remaining $4.8 million left in City Opera’s endowment, which was once worth more than 10 times that much, and to receive a multimillion-dollar bequest from a benefactor named Pierre DeMenasce, who died in 2013, just weeks before the company filed for bankruptcy protection.Both suitors have been viewed warily by some in the opera world. Mr. Capasso’s old opera company, Dicapo Opera Theater, eventually lost its nonprofit status and still owes money to its musicians. And some prominent members of the opera world said that Mr. Kaufman had exaggerated the support he had from them in some of the early proposals he filed.The NYCO Renaissance group’s reorganization plan calls for 36 performances in the 2016-17 season, with four large-scale productions at the Rose Theater at Jazz at Lincoln Center, which is in the Time Warner Center at Columbus Circle, where it wants to establish a base. It would mount two smaller-scale operas at the Theater at St. Jean’s, a 200-seat theater on the Upper East Side that Mr. Capasso helped build for his old company.But first up is this winter’s “Tosca,” which City Opera staged as its inaugural production back in 1944.An article on Thursday about the withdrawal of one of two rival groups seeking to revive the bankrupt New York City Opera misspelled the surname of a lawyer for the remaining group, NYCO Renaissance, who said he expects its reorganization plan for the company to be approved. He is Gerard S. Catalanello, not Catalenello.A version of this article appears in print on December 3, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Group Cedes Bid to Revive City Opera to Its Rival.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.