AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate Chinen“A Head Full of Dreams”(Parlophone/Atlantic)After darkness, light: Coldplay has wallowed and Coldplay has wept, but there comes a season for renewal. “A Head Full of Dreams,” the band’s seventh studio album, courts the communion of the dance floor, along with the good will of its allies and fans. Blissful even at its most bittersweet, it’s an album on which three songs make lyrical references to diamonds — as in, “We are diamonds” — and every surface contentedly gleams.The subtext is no secret here. Coldplay’s frontman, Chris Martin, has been closely watched since the end of his marriage to Gwyneth Paltrow last year, which gave us both the indelible euphemism “conscious uncoupling” and a muted, mournful album, “Ghost Stories.”“A Head Full of Dreams” flings back those heavy curtains while mindfully saving a space at the table for Ms. Paltrow: That’s her voice buried in the mix on “Everglow,” a Bruce Hornsby-esque piano ballad about the spark that endures between the uncoupled. (“This particular diamond,” the ever-gallant Mr. Martin sings, “is extra special.”) A less inert song called “Fun” recalls the good times in a tone more reflective than raw; the Swedish pop singer Tove Lo joins Mr. Martin on the song’s chorus and in a hopeful upturn at the end.Coldplay long ago diversified its sound, moving on from the ashes of Britpop toward a more global and electronic style — and now, on the title track and on “Adventure of a Lifetime,” a chiming iteration of disco. Rik Simpson, a longtime band associate, produced the album with Stargate, the prolific Norwegian duo, and there are also flickers of hip-hop in its sound.So “Army of One” pairs a patently Martinesque melody with a booming, processional beat. A not-so-hidden track called “X Marks the Spot” was produced by Daniel Green, who has obviously heard “Swimming Pools (Drank)” by Kendrick Lamar. And “Hymn for the Weekend” features both a love-as-intoxicant metaphor and, in a leveraging of strategic interests, Mr. Martin’s friend and fellow Tidal co-owner, Beyoncé.Mr. Martin, who has rediscovered the radiant properties of his voice, gilds a lot of lyrical treacle and borderline nonsense here. But on “Amazing Day,” he articulates a philosophical worldview: “Life has a beautiful crazy design.” In a similar vein, “Kaleidoscope,” which has earned some attention for its interpolation of Barack Obama singing a hymn of resilience, more prominently features a voice-over by Coleman Barks, reading his translation of a Rumi poem.That poem, “The Guest House,” presents joy, depression and other emotions as visiting guests: “Welcome and entertain them all!” Mr. Barks intones. (He leaves out the next part: “Even if they’re a crowd of sorrows,/who violently sweep your house/empty of its furniture.”) It’s not hard to picture Mr. Martin seizing Rumi’s insight like a lifeline.And it’s easy to trust the optimism he exudes on the album’s anthemic closer, “Up&Up,” even if that title seems suspiciously ripe for commercial tie-in with the in-house Target brand. “See a pearl form, a diamond in the rough,” Mr. Martin sings. “See a bird soaring high above the flood.”The additional vocalists on the song include Beyoncé; the veteran backup singer Merry Clayton; and Mr. Martin’s current girlfriend, Annabelle Wallis. Noel Gallagher shows up to play a guitar solo. But in the end, everything falls away, leaving Mr. Martin alone with a simple bit of advice: “Don’t ever give up.”Advertisement