By MATT WOLFDEC. 2, 2015
LONDON — The director Richard Eyre’s continuing inquiry into the plays of Henrik Ibsen has given audiences reason to cheer at various points in the past 10 years, and that partnership reaches a new peak with “Little Eyolf, ” a lesser-known work that opened last week at the Almeida Theater in North London.Written in 1894, “Little Eyolf” does not have the common theatrical currency of “Ghosts” and “Hedda Gabler,” the two Ibsen masterworks that Mr. Eyre directed at the Almeida in productions that won Olivier Awards for their leading ladies, Lesley Manville and Eve Best, respectively. If possible, “Little Eyolf” is even creepier than those two works — its landscape one of illicit passion, wished-for death, and supernatural forebodings that arrive in the form of a strange-eyed rat-catcher (Eileen Walsh, in a vividly disturbing turn).“Little Eyolf,” which tells of a wife, Rita (Lydia Leonard), who will apparently do whatever it takes to win the elusive affections of her writer-husband, Alfred (Jolyon Coy), has been filleted here by Mr. Eyre into an 80-minute chamber piece that casts an abiding chill. The ending may find husband and wife jointly turned toward the stars in a shared gesture of thanks, but the two seem by that point to be inhabiting some half-life of their own, any putatively happy ending informed by the horrors they have experienced along the way.To say much else about the plot would subvert an experience that exerts an ever-tightening noose, the seeming placidity of Tim Hatley’s design at deliberate odds with desires that are less attractively contained.AdvertisementAs if to complete an Ibsen trifecta that has given three splendid actresses pride of place, Mr. Eyre offers Ms. Leonard a star-making opportunity that the performer — a 2015 Tony nominee for her Anne Boleyn in “Wolf Hall” — seizes in return. Loosening her hair as well as her clothes with casual abandon so as to ensnare the love of a man whose primary devotion lies toward their ill-fated son, Ms. Leonard’s Rita is a case study in eroticism at its most charged in a play you may not know but, with this production, shall not soon forget.Ms. Leonard’s easy sexuality in “Little Eyolf” might have brought much-needed heat to the 50th-anniversary production of “The Homecoming,” the seminal Harold Pinter play that in its latest London incarnation finds a vacancy where its cryptic, teasing pulse should be; Jamie Lloyd’s production is at the Trafalgar Studios through Feb. 13.AdvertisementIn the crucial part of Ruth, the lone female who marries into a family of predatory males over whom she assumes full command, Gemma Chan substitutes opacity for the feminine force field on which the text depends. Ms. Chan strikes an appropriately enigmatic pose in the final tableau, which finds the outsider Ruth taking charge of the play’s testosterone-charged world. But at other times, Ms. Chan suggests that she herself is an outsider to the keen, cunning rhythms of Pinter’s landmark play: The crucial sense of Ruth’s usurpation of these men by stealth has to be taken on faith.A half-century on from its British premiere — followed by a Broadway debut that won the 1967 Tony Award for Best Play — “The Homecoming” still startles with the unbridled ferocity of its language, not least the splenetic outpourings of the paterfamilias, Max (Ron Cook), one of the more memorably bilious characters in modern drama. Announcing that he will give his middle son, Lenny (a somewhat studied John Simm), “a proper tuck-up one of these nights,” the brilliantly sharp-tongued Mr. Cook makes that sound like a fairly fearsome prospect. The actor is alive to the violence that courses through the play and that only Ruth — her name a telling synonym for compassion — seems able to bring to heel.Mr. Lloyd amplifies the prevailing aggression with a furious soundscape that leaves little room for Pinter’s celebrated silences. The production is of a piece with the recent Broadway revival of a later Pinter play, “Old Times,” that itself ladled on the aural atmospherics as if unsure whether to trust modern-day audiences perhaps unused to quiet. (The director of “Old Times,” Douglas Hodge, is an actor who has worked with Mr. Lloyd on several occasions.)The result makes for an unusually clamorous account of a playwright who is arguably at his most provocative when stillest. The angularity of Soutra Gilmour’s abstract set positions the door to Max’s house of misrule as a terrifying threshold upstage that gives way unto darkness, and when Mr. Cook is in charge, the darkly comic savagery on view retains its sting. But elsewhere, turning up the volume on Pinter does not necessarily ramp up his impact. Less, as this of all writers was well aware, is almost always more.Is there anything left to be said about “Medea,” the Euripides tragedy that is receiving its third London staging within the past 16 months? (The second of the three, a contemporary version starring Kate Fleetwood, preceded “Little Eyolf” at the Almeida.) Very much so, if this latest production is any gauge. Revisiting with a British cast a play she first directed to acclaim in Sydney, Australia, in 2012, the director Anne-Louise Sarks joins forces with the writer Kate Mulvany to tell the story of the infanticidal matriarch from the point of view of Medea’s two doomed sons.Don’t look for Jason, Creon or any of the play’s other adult figures in this story about the grievous extremes to which its title character will go to exact revenge: They are not to be found. Medea herself amounts to a supporting player — albeit a shimmeringly intense one as here acted by the splendid Emma Beattie.AdvertisementThe focus of the 70-minute intermissionless production at the Gate Theater in West London through Saturday is on the young boys, here called Jasper and Leon, who as we know will not be long for this world. A rapt audience watches with a gathering awareness of the horror that awaits as the children horse around, exchange loving barbs, and cling to garments belonging to a father who, we hear, has found an unnamed “friend” — much to the murderous distress of their mother.The production filters this time-honored tale through a freshly disturbing lens, with the audience flanking a set by Amy Jane Cook that turns the boys’ play room into a kind of prison. It reveals anew just how the most intensely felt love can devolve into all-consuming hate, the sons casualties of a depth of feeling that lies beyond all reason.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Purely in performance terms, a new generation of British acting talent announces itself in the skillful double act of Samuel Menhinick (Jasper) and Bill Keogh (Leon). (There are two sets of young performers throughout the run.) It’s unclear to what extent these not-yet-adults understand the minefield of emotion they are traversing, but I wish them happy and long careers and, unlike their characters, lives to match.Little Eyolf.  Directed by Richard Eyre. Almeida Theater through Jan. 9. The Homecoming.  Directed by Jamie Lloyd.Trafalgar Studios through Feb. 13. Medea.  Directed by Anne-Louise Sarks. Gate Theater through Saturday. We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.