AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony Tommasini“We hope you will make National Sawdust your home,” the composer Paola Prestini told an eager audience on Monday at that inviting new performance space in a bustling section of Williamsburg, Brooklyn. As the creative and executive director of this adaptable black-box venue, its walls and ceiling scattered with white mottled sound panels, Ms. Prestini was introducing her new institution, and also the last in a series of programs celebrating the pioneering American composer Terry Riley, who turned 80 in June.Based on this concert, National Sawdust, which opened on Thursday after a $16 million retrofitting of its building, once a sawdust factory, is sure to become home to lots of fresh contemporary music programming. Depending on how it’s configured, the box can accommodate up to 350 people. Monday’s concert had 150 or so.Mr. Riley, looking as much as ever like a genial, bearded guru of American music, attended the program, which included the premiere of his “Madrigal,” a mystical yet quirky 15-minute work performed by the impressive eight-member vocal ensemble Roomful of Teeth.That Mr. Riley’s music sounded so good in this space — resonant yet clear-textured — is a tribute to the acoustical design of National Sawdust. The program opened with a 20-minute instrumental piece from 2003, “Archangels” for eight cellos. It begins with several of the cellos playing a scratchy, jumpy rhythmic riff; their lines hovering above, other instruments slide around, making spectral sounds. The music evolves into thick, shifting clouds, like celestial wailing. A second movement seems like a cosmic dance in which a four-squared pulse is constantly broken up by syncopations.In “Madrigal,” Mr. Riley draws freely from a text by the poet Steve Kowit. The words are sung in prolonged, overlapping phrases, starting with: “Although you may not believe it will happen, you, too, will one day be gone.” Mr. Riley takes syllables and tweaks them into repetitive phonetic sounds, like “ha-ha” and such. As a pioneer of Minimalism, Mr. Riley is often thought of primarily for his rhythmic innovations. “Madrigal” is a reminder of his acute ear for spacious, modal-tinged, haunting harmony. Brad Wells conducted the superb Roomful of Teeth singers in a plush, enveloping performance with, when called for, precisely focused execution of Mr. Riley’s piercing, sustained harmonies.The program ended with the eight singers joining the eight cellists for Mr. Riley’s “Remember This, O Mind,” a 1997 work performed here in a new arrangement by Toon Vandevorst, also conducted by Mr. Wells. This 25-minute score, which draws from the Bengali religious text “The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna,” builds to an exuberant final section in which spans of cosmic choral writing float above percolating, ominous, cellos.During the standing ovation Mr. Riley, from his balcony spot, gave a thumbs-up to the performers. Then many people mingled with performers at the bar in the lobby. So far, so good, for National Sawdust.National Sawdust continues its opening events with a John Zorn festival this weekend, Brooklyn; 646-779-8455, nationalsawdust­.org.Advertisement