By NINA SIEGALDEC. 2, 2015
AMSTERDAM — “It’s a long time since there’s been any improvement in my condition,” wrote the German Expressionist Ernst Ludwig Kirchner shortly after he arrived in Davos, Switzerland, in 1917. “I’m still confined to bed and I have to make do with what I can see from out the window.”Kirchner had been one of the leaders of Die Brücke, or The Bridge — a Dresden-based circle of Expressionist artists known for their violent, darkly haunting imagery. In Berlin, from 1913 to 1915, Kirchner won acclaim for his avant garde depictions of the tawdry glamour of Berlin’s streetwalkers, and for his jagged, angular and extremely colorful “Street Scenes.”But after enlisting in the German army in 1915, he suffered a mental breakdown,  started to drink and became addicted to morphine. He retreated to a sanitorium in Davos: “It’s very beautiful up here when it’s not raining or nighttime, and there’s so much that I could paint if only I weren’t so weak.”Kirchner’s self-imposed exile in Davos would last 20 years, until the end of his life in 1938. It turned out to be the most productive and perhaps happiest, but least appreciated, part of his career.AdvertisementThat time is now the subject of “Kirchner: Paradise in the Mountains,” an exhibition that runs at the Singer Laren museum in the Netherlands from Dec. 9 until April 10, 2016. The show includes 25 paintings, 50 drawings, and photographs and other works on paper by Kirchner, all of them on loan from the Kirchner Museum in Davos, along with a handful of artworks by the Dutch artists he influenced.AdvertisementCurators at the Singer Laren museum, a modest house museum about a half hour’s drive outside of Amsterdam, became interested in Kirchner’s late works via one of the artists in its own collection, a Dutch painter named Jan Wiegers. In 1920, Wiegers also moved to the Swiss Alps for health reasons. He met Kirchner and became heavily influenced by his art as well as his philosophy, which he articulated as “life is art, and art is life.”Wiegers returned to his hometown of Groningen, where he helped found De Ploeg, or The Plough, a Dutch art movement that used elements of Expressionism and Impressionism to develop new styles. In researching Wiegers’s development, Jan Rudolph de Lorm, director of the Singer Laren, became interested in the crucial influence that Kirchner  had in Dutch art and then in Kirchner himself.“I completely fell in love with the whole story of Kirchner in Davos and what happens to this city guy, an angry young man who in a short time became extremely successful,” said Mr. de Lorm, who co-curated the exhibition with Anne van Lienden. “He goes to the mountains, he feels better and he discovers the beauty and the primitiveness of the nature and these surroundings. He stays there and he never goes home.”Kirchner is one of the most prolific artists of the modern era, with about 30,000 artworks attributed to him, said Thorsten Sadowsky, director of the Kirchner Museum Davos, which was established by the heir of Kirchner’s estate, Roman Norbert Ketterer, an art dealer and champion of German Expressionist artists who were vilified by the Nazis. The museum owns about 12,000 artworks and archival materials.Although Kirchner has often been associated with the Berlin avant-garde, more than half of his artworks were created during the alpine period.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The people who live here are proud,” he wrote to a friend in 1918. “The hard work, which is done with great love, the way they treat animals (you very seldom see an animal being mishandled) entitle them to be proud. In most cases, work here has reached the ideal standard of being done with love. You can see it in the movements of their hands. And that, in turn, ennobles the facial expression and imbues all personal contacts with a great delicacy.”His fascination with them comes across in his paintings, which are images of mountain vistas and of sturdy-looking men and women, sometimes romping around outdoors in the nude.In the latter half of the decade, German politics infiltrated his sanctum: Kirchner was singled out as one of the “degenerate” artists of Hitler’s anti-modern art campaign. A total of 25 of his works were displayed under denigrating Nazi slogans in the “Degenerate Art” exhibition in 1937. He was blacklisted, and more than 630 of his artworks were removed from museums and burned or otherwise destroyed.AdvertisementHis mental health rapidly declined, in part because of a real fear that the Germans might invade Switzerland, and Kirchner shot himself in 1938.For many years after his death, Kirchner was recognized as a leading German Expressionist, and his Berlin work, in particular, was hailed as the highlight of his career.“In the last several years many people have become aware of the idea that the late Kirchner was of the same level as the early Kirchner,” Dr. Sadowsky said. “He went on to find a new style. That’s a new kind of reception for the work of Kirchner, and the exhibition in Laren is demonstrating this very well.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »