AdvertisementSupported byThe Art of CollectingBy Elisabetta PovoledoVENICE — The world seen through the eyes of 25 female photographers can be a wondrous, at times harsh, place.It is populated by Diane Arbus’s unselfconscious socialites, circus performers and sex workers; Shirin Neshat’s musings on Muslim women; Nan Goldin’s intimate insight into 1980s-era New York subculture; and Martina Bacigalupo’s identical twins, who engage the spectator in a discourse on identity, as do Bettina Rheims’s stark portraits of transgender men and women.But it is also a world of violence, where men turn on their life’s companions, as Donna Ferrato chronicled nearly 30 years ago in “Living with the Enemy;” a world of lawlessness and poverty, as seen through the eyes of Letizia Battaglia, who not so long ago captured the gore and desolation of Mafia-infested Palermo, Sicily; and also a world of inconceivable cruelty, as Margaret Bourke White revealed through her portraits of survivors at the Buchenwald death camp, shot in April 1945 while traveling with Gen. George Patton’s Third Army.The discord is deliberate, said Francesca Alfano Miglietti, the curator of “Though Women’s Eyes,” which runs through Jan. 10 at the Casa dei Tre Oci, an exposition space specialized in photography on the Venetian island of Giudecca.“I wanted to present different ways of seeing,” she said, opting for photographers who look at the world, rather than those who use themselves as the principal subject matter — “which explains why someone like Cindy Sherman isn’t represented,” she added.“Women don’t exhibit just to exhibit,” Ms. Alfano Miglietti said by telephone. Even in the most difficult photographs — like those by Ms. Battaglia, capturing death — “you recognize the gaze of someone who is looking on the subject with empathy, not as a scoop.”That said, Ms. Alfano Miglietti would have been happy to omit the word “woman” from the title of the exhibition because she would have preferred the public to stumble on “that red line” by reading the names of the artists.Creativity, she said, is not linked to gender.The exhibition features both women who work as photographers for traditional media like newspapers and fashion magazines and artists who use photography as a medium. “There is no hierarchic issue,” Ms. Alfano Miglietti said, between, say, Lisetta Carmi, who adopted photography 50 years ago as an instrument of political activism (but is here represented with a famous series of photos she took of the aging Ezra Pound), and Sophie Calle, who describes herself as a narrative artist and whose photos co-exist with text.“One has a preoccupation with truth,” she said, while the other provides a more emotive vision of reality. “They all use the same platform, but they use it with different objectives,” she said.In its entirety, the exhibition is a “study that focuses attention on the intersections between art, photography and identity, with the scientific and social tensions of the time,” she wrote in the catalogue, published by Marsilio. Through three floors of exhibition space, artfully transformed by the Sardinian designer Antonio Marras, the show offers sweeping historical perspectives captured in snapshots of long-ago lives.Among the subjects are postwar Italy seen through the eyes of Chiara Samugheo, a neorealist photojournalist turned celebrity portraitist; 1980s Cuba snapped by the Brooklyn-born multimedia artist and essayist Martha Rosler; Yelena Yamchuk’s Soviet-like images of post-Soviet life in Russia and Ukraine; and Zanele Muholi’s black and white portraits of lesbian and transgender men and women, part of series photographed between 2006 and 2014.Catherine Opie explored similar themes 20 years earlier, and two of those portraits exhibited in Venice were described in The New York Times as being “like shock troops crashing a mannerly art-world party” when they were exhibited at the 1995 Whitney Biennial.Political overtones frame the work of the Israeli artist Yael Bartana and her contemporary reading of historic images that recorded the migration of Jews to Palestine from 1933 to 1948. The work of Lucinda Devlin, who traveled the United States between 1991 and 1998 to photograph prison execution chambers, produced images “perfect and icy as the glossy pages of a design magazine,” as the catalogue notes.Many of the photographers and artists are well-known to the public, the eyes behind iconic images that have been adopted into the world’s cultural patrimony. Bourke White alone can boast of being the “first female photographer” in various milieus.Others may be known in other guises. The artist and musician Yoko Ono is present both as a photographic subject — in two photos of the Bed-in for Peace demonstration with her late husband John Lennon — and with her 2009 “Dream” project created for the Fondazione Bonotto in Molvena, northern Italy. Donata Wenders, who has worked as a set photographer for her film-director husband Wim, is present in the show with hauntingly slight images from the 2005 book “Journey to Onomichi.”Ms. Rheims is a well-known celebrity portraitist and has worked on advertising campaigns for various fashion brands. Sam Taylor-Johnson’s renown as an artist, illustrated here in four large portraits with affixed predella, or decorative panels along the bottom — a Renaissance narrative conceit — has perhaps been eclipsed by a more recent project: She is the director of the 2015 movie “Fifty Shades of Grey.”Ms. Yemchuk is also known as a fashion photographer and has worked closely with Mr. Marras, the designer, who drew on Venice’s La Fenice opera house to transform Casa dei Tre Oci into a fitting showcase for the photographers.In the catalogue, Mr. Marras writes that the installation for the show was born “from the discarded props and costumes and abandoned, forgotten objects in the storerooms of the Fenice,” which were given new life, new meaning, and new energy in their reconfiguration.In the Casa dei Tre Oci — one of the most successful examples of Venetian neo-Gothic architecture, designed in 1913 by Mario De Maria, better known as the Surrealist artist Marius Pictor — the costumes “bring many stories with them and yearn to weave them, recount them,” Mr. Marras wrote. The exhibition design is “a reflection on courage, memory, and the spirit of the time: a composite reality, alive, which opens itself to beauty, to otherness, to the horizon.”Advertisement