AdvertisementSupported byThe Art of CollectingBy David BelcherBARCELONA — When a young Pablo Picasso left Barcelona for Paris in 1904, he left behind a group of friends who proved to be perhaps the greatest influence on his early life and work.One prominent Catalonian family, the Reventós, helped establish Picasso in Barcelona, where his family had settled from Málaga when he was a teenager. Two brothers, Jacint (“Cinto”) and Ramón (“Moni”) Reventós, became crucial friends for the young Picasso, influencing him both politically and artistically: Their household was frequented by pillars of the Catalan Modernisme movement, such as Santiago Rusiñol and Ramón Casas. Jacint Reventós remained a friend until he and Picasso were elderly. These friendships have inspired an intimate exhibition, “Picasso I Els Reventós,” at the Picasso Museum in Barcelona through Jan. 10. The show includes letters and drawings that reveal the artist’s lifelong connection to an adopted family whose influence came at a pivotal time in his life. “When Picasso came to Barcelona after studying in Madrid, he tried to establish himself here as an artist,” said Malén Gual, curator of the exhibition, during a recent tour. “He met Ramón, who introduced Picasso to his family.”“The Reventós home was a lively place where Picasso met lots of people at parties,” Ms. Gual continued. “The father was a poet and was in all the social meetings around the city. Picasso became an important friend for both Ramón and Jacint.”Picasso’s early works are a far cry from his Cubist and Surrealist work later in his career. The museum chronicles these early works, including his Blue Period (1901-4) and Rose Period (1904-6). But it is the period around 1900 that began to shape the young artist — and his connection to his native country and his sense of home.“The most important thing about our museum is that we can show Picasso in his youth,” Ms. Gual said. “I think he’s one of the few artists who you can see all of his early knowledge and his evolution in one place.”What “Picasso I Els Reventós” pinpoints in this period is not only the letters between Picasso and the Reventós brothers and the intimate illustrations he included in many of them, but also early artwork that was directly influenced by the friendships, including drawings from around 1900 of each brother decked in dapper outfits, with Ramón smoking a pipe.The brothers’ careers — Ramón, a writer, and Jacint, a doctor — influenced the young Picasso, too.“One day, Cinto took Picasso to the local morgue, where Picasso saw a dead young woman, which really affected him,” Ms. Gual said. “He returned to his studio and painted her.”That painting, “The Dead Woman” (1903), which Picasso donated to a Barcelona hospital shortly before his death in 1973 in honor of his friend Jacint, is one of just a few paintings in the exhibition: a peaceful corpse shrouded in moody shades of blue. The contrast to the whimsical illustrations that Picasso included in his letters is striking. The artist laced his words around the images in sepia ink, crayon and charcoal: a woman walking her dog, dancers in Paris nightclubs, and denizens of the city’s cafe life, which he helped to define through his works.The exhibition comprises three sections: letters and artwork from the early years of the friendships; illustrations by Picasso that accompany Ramón’s literary works, including newspaper and magazine articles; and the renewed friendship with the Reventós family, beginning in the 1950s. Picasso and Jacint remained in touch until Jacint’s death in 1968. The lifelong connection between the two runs through the exhibition, from lengthy to spontaneous letters: “I’m spending a few days in Paris and would like to see you,” Jacint wrote to Picasso in 1921. “I’m staying at the Grand Hotel. If you have a minute, write me a note and we’ll meet where and when you suggest. I don’t have anything to do.”As the years go by, and especially after Ramón’s death in 1923, the correspondence becomes deeper, mirrored in the exhibition’s final displays.“We may not meet again as our paths are very different,” Jacint wrote to Picasso in 1949 in one letter on display, “but no matter, you can be sure that one of my fondest memories is of you and that if you ever need me, you’ll always find the same Reventós of our early youth.”Advertisement