AdvertisementSupported byThe KnickBy Mike HaleThings got weird and morbid right away this week on “The Knick.” A patient on the addiction ward sneaked into the morgue, pulled a needle out of the neck of a corpse and chugged embalming fluid like a drunk inhaling Malibu rum in a dentist’s chair. He was the first victim in an episode that would see two deaths, a wife committed to an asylum, a wife abandoned and kicked out of her house and a father locked in silent paralysis.There was an enormous amount of incident in the episode, and Steven Soderbergh kept things moving at breakneck pace, squeezing (by my count) 32 separate scenes into about 50 minutes. He seemed to be drawing attention to the rapidity, occasionally starting the dialogue or sound effects for a scene before the previous one had finished.The episode’s second death was a shocker, and surely threatens to throw John Thackery into another tailspin. As he prepared to operate on his beloved Abigail, using the newly discovered substance celluloid to rebuild her nose, she went into cardiac arrest on the table — presumably because the drops of laudanum she gave herself before the surgery reacted badly with the anesthesia. An injection of strychnine and other heroic measures didn’t work, and the camera slowly circled Thackery to look into his haggard face as he said the only words that came to mind: “Take the tube out of her mouth.”In other bad news for the show’s women, Everett Gallinger had his wife, Eleanor, committed to a psychiatric hospital against her will after she admitted that she poisoned the dangerously obtuse Dr. Cotton, who, we learned, had subsequently died. (There was some amusing Hitchcockian suspense when Gallinger and Dorothy, his sister-in-law, watched a detective drinking the tea Eleanor had prepared for him.) Eleanor’s downfall was compounded when the long-suffering Dorothy, released from the duty of caring for her sister, climbed into bed with her sister’s husband.Effie Barrow, meanwhile, was pleasantly surprised when a vacuum salesman accidentally revealed to her that her husband, Herman, had bought a new house uptown (with a space-age central vacuum system). When she sat Herman down and, by candlelight, toasted his generosity, she got the real surprise: the house was for another woman and she and the children had to move out of their current house because he had sold it (to raise the money he suddenly needed for membership in Captain Robertson’s club).Not every victim was female: Lucy Elkins’s father, the wacko Rev. A.D. Elkins, suffered a stroke while having his rear end whipped in a red-lighted dungeon. Lying in a bed at the Knick, he was unable to move or speak, but his eyes darted around the room in desperation.There was other unhappiness, too. Cleary treated Sister Harriett to a visit to a chamber of horrors, where they were frightened by an early moving picture that appeared to show a man eating the movie camera. (This Kinetoscope or Mutoscope footage was surely an indulgence in movie love on the part of Mr. Soderbergh.) But when the besotted Cleary finally moved in for a kiss, she pushed him away and asked if he was crazy before storming off. And they’d even tested condoms together!Algernon Edwards also had a setback. He discovered a ledger with evidence of Gallinger’s eugenics work — involuntary sterilizations of 52 teenage boys — but Thackery said nothing could be done “because it’s not illegal and it didn’t happen at the Knick.” Thackery himself continued to have stabbing pains and to swig turpentine to alleviate them. And finally, Cornelia Showalter informed her brother, Henry Robertson, that their father was breaking the law and causing outbreaks of plague and was probably behind the death of Jacob Speight.Was there good news for anyone? The last addiction patient at the Knick began to receive some promising treatment: a talking cure with Abigail, as Thackery pioneered yet another discipline, this time psychology. But that was ill-fated, as we now know. Things were positive for Lucy, who was publicly fawned on by Henry and then got to sashay past Cornelia.But the greatest triumph in the episode belonged to Herman’s favorite prostitute, Junia. In a scene shot in slow-motion, with only Cliff Martinez’s techno score on the soundtrack, Barrow came to Ping Wu’s house and swept away the woman whose freedom he had purchased with the graft from the construction of the new Knick. Before the hospital is even finished, it has accomplished its first successful cure.Let us know what you thought of the generally downbeat “Not Well at All.” The title was a reference to Eleanor, who, after calmly telling her husband she was a murderer, said: “Oh Everett. Can’t you see? I’m not well at all.”Advertisement