AdvertisementSupported byJessica JonesBy Simon AbramsOne of the things that instantly distinguished “Jessica Jones” from other live-action Marvel TV adaptations was its forward momentum and sense of mystery. Integral characters like Luke Cage, Will Simpson and Dorothy Walker were introduced quickly in order to set up the urgency of Jones’s hunt for Kilgrave. And until Episode 10, the show’s creators had done a fine job of making Jones’s search for Kilgrave feel genuinely urgent, which is pretty impressive given how many times she’s caught him, lost him, then reluctantly rendezvoused with him, and back again. “AKA 1,000 Cuts” is the first episode that has an arrhythmic pace and a generally messy structure.The episode starts out well enough as a tense, ticking-clock thriller. It picks up immediately after he last one. Kilgrave has just escaped, and taken Hogarth hostage using his abilities. Jones must find Kilgrave before he can cause too much damage. She finds Hogarth at Wendy’s house shortly after Kilgrave has ordered Wendy to take out her divorce frustration at knife-point. This scene feels genuinely tense thanks to Robin Weigert’s nuanced performance, and the episode director Rosemary Rodriguez’s unsparing focus on Hogarth’s pain, and inability to escape.But Episode 10 loses steam once Kilgrave gets away. First, a righteously miffed Jones confronts Hogarth after Wendy’s attack and tells her that what she “helped Kilgrave do ... was murder.” Wendy’s terrifying assault may have briefly humanized Hogarth by showing her as the victim of a determined, knife-wielding attacker. But Jones’s admonishment puts the blame for Wendy’s death on Hogarth’s shoulders. Wendy is killed after Pam hits her on the head, which sends Wendy flying head first on to her coffee table. This death provides a perfect downer of a (temporary) ending to Jones’s chase: we see blood drenching the coffee table, and stay with Pam as she shakily asks Jones to stay with her. Hogarth technically gets the last word here when she tells Pam that she’ll take care of things. But the scene really ends with Jones telling Hogarth off. And that’s not even the last time Hogarth gets kicked while she’s down in this episode.The part of this episode in which Hogarth says that she stole Hope and Kilgrave’s unborn child in order to see if she could replicate Kilgrave’s powers feels like an obnoxious pile-on for the character (you’re pretty much irredeemable once you’ve stolen a lifeless fetus for scientific experimentation). Then again, you can forgive the series writers Dana Baratta and Micah Schraft for over-zealously condemning Hogarth — one of the most refreshing things about “Jessica Jones” is how thematically cogent it is compared to other live-action Marvel Comics adaptations.The rest of the episode is a collection of disjointed subplots. Kilgrave gets caught by Jones, but gets away due to a contrived development involving the Kilgrave survivor’s group, who go after Jones because Robyn is misguided, and loud, but also a really good mob leader.Robyn’s inconsistent characterization is the most obnoxiously off-kilter part of the episode’s back half. She’s queasily funny when she hollers at Jones that her fliers “took me three hours at Kinko’s, cougar,” and when she initially berates Jones by saying “If you see something, say something.” But this style of broad, sitcom-y humor makes Robyn feel like a kooky neighbor who also happens to be seriously mourning the loss of her brother (“Babe, we’re going to get you back,” she says to a photo of Ruben). Robyn is so distractingly shrill that she threatens to derail every scene she’s in.Thankfully, the episode does eventually get to its genuinely upsetting climax: Hope kills herself when Kilgrave uses her as leverage to get back at his father Kilgrave predictably escapes in the ensuing chaos, but Hope’s death delivers the superficial jolt it’s supposed to. Episode 10 may be a bumpy ride, but it’s also unpredictable enough that you leave wondering what will happen next.Stakeout Notes• Big laugh when Kilgrave turns up his nose and tells Jones that her life is full of “mediocrity and under-achievement.” Harsh, but not un-true.• How long would it take for Wendy to complete a thousand cuts anyway? Is this one of those rhetorical Tootsie Pop-style koans that the world may never know the answer to? I say thee nay: if any reader gets to ask show creator Melissa Rosenberg a question at a public Q&A, ask her how long it would take to land one thousand cuts on someone. Report back.• The episode writers do a great job of showing how Kilgrave, a dangerous egotist, doesn’t even register the revelation that his parents’ didn’t really torture him, but rather were trying to cure him of a fatal disease. He just goes back to his script: they are the real monsters, and he’s their victim. That’s a great touch.• Anybody else roll their eyes when Jones’s white horse showed up during her suicidal fantasy? No more Jungian symbols, please!Advertisement