Fantastique! L’Estampe Visionnaire; Kuniyoshi
Petit Palais.
Through Jan. 17.Two joint exhibitions here shine a light on strange prints from the 18th and 19th centuries. “From Goya to Redon,” includes Francisco Goya’s unnerving depictions of monstrous animals and beasts, made famous from his prints series “The Disasters of War.” Depictions of hellish creatures and demons by other artists like Gustave Doré and Eugène Delacroix are also on view in that show. “Kuniyoshi,” meanwhile, focuses on art by the relatively little-known print artist Utagawa Kuniyoshi (1797-1861), whose fantastical prints inspired modern-day Japanese styles like manga.Panafest
Various venues.
Through Dec. 8.This multivenue performance festival is a celebration of the African diaspora and a reckoning with the slave trade that caused much of it. Performers include Chief Woomin and the Bambu Center, a theater group that will perform “Wo Gbe Gyeke,” a pageant about the history of West Africa, including the slave trade. The American group the National Association of Black Storytellers will perform songs, poems and stories at several venues, including on the shore of a river down which African slaves were shipped. The festival also includes dance workshops and a colloquium at the University of Cape Coast.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Towards the Ineffable: Farideh Lashai
Tehran Museum of Contemporary Art.
Through Feb. 26.This exhibition places works by modern and postmodern greats — like Magritte, Giacometti and Warhol — alongside art by one of Iran’s leading modern-day artists, Farideh Lashai (1944-2013). Ms. Lashai worked as a novelist and translator, but she built her reputation mostly as a painter, known for understated, abstract work. Late in life, she turned to installation works, as well. The highly regarded Western artwork in the show comes from the collection of the Empress Farah Diba Pahlavi, who was forced out of power in the Iranian revolution of the late 1970s; her collection had not been prominently showcased since.Stereosonic
Various cities and venues.
Through Dec. 6.This roving pop music festival kicked off in Sydney on Nov. 28 and traveled to Perth; its final concerts take place in Adelaide, Melbourne and Brisbane. Some major international acts will play the closing concerts. The hard-driving hip-hop group Major Lazer will perform, and the group’s star, Diplo, will offer up a solo set. Other acts are primarily dance music groups and D.J.s, like the popular Dutch D.J. Armin van Buuren. The D.J. Tom Loud’s Hot Dub Time Machine, which sets pop tracks from the 1950s to the present to dub step beats, is one of many Australian acts that will take part.Andy Warhol/Ai Weiwei
NGV International.
Dec. 11-April 24.Newly commissioned artworks by Ai Weiwei will go on display alongside around 200 pieces by Warhol in this show, which compares the artists and their outputs. Warhol’s Campbell soup images are on view as well as some of his more personal pieces, like dozens of Polaroid photographs that he took of his circle of friends. The show examines the ways in which Warhol’s practice anticipated the social media-fueled habitat that Mr. Ai now occupies.Rubens: Adorazione dei Pastori
Palazzo Marino.
Through Jan. 10.An art historian discovered the Baroque master Rubens’s 1608 “Adoration of the Shepherds” in the early years of the 20th century, and the work has mostly remained in Fermo, the small Italian hamlet where it was found. The nativity scene, shown above, will travel to Milan for one month for a special exhibition timed to coincide with Christmas. The show will take place at the Palazzo Marino, a 16th-century palace that now serves as City Hall.Rodelinda
Bolshoi.
Dec. 13-19.Handel’s 18th-century opera tells the story of Queen Rodelinda, who, after her husband’s apparent death, is intent on keeping the throne away from her despotic suitor, Grimoaldo. The British director Richard Jones conducted this production, which is having its world premiere. The Moscow-born Dina Kuznetsova will sing the lead; Paul Nilon plays Grimoaldo; and David Daniels plays Bertarido, Rodelinda’s husband who is not, despite what she believes, deceased.Von Hockney bis Holbein
Martin-Gropius-Bau.
Through Jan. 10.The eclectic Würth collection, one of the largest private collections in Europe, includes works from the late middle ages to the present. This exhibition brings together the collection’s highlights, like the 16th-century artist Hans Holbein the Younger’s “Darmstadt Madonna” and David Hockney’s “Three Trees Near Thixendale,” a series of paintings that show trees that the artist painted on different dates and in different seasons. Major names aren’t the only ones on view.Cambodia International Film Festival
Various venues.
Through Dec. 10.This showcase for Asian cinema got a prominent last-minute boost when it was announced that Angelina Jolie Pitt would serve as an honorary president. More than 100 movies will screen in the lineup, which includes special sections dedicated to cinema from and about Cambodia, Japan and Malaysia. Movies to be shown include “Before the Fall,” about a nightclub singer caught in Phnom Penh as the Khmer Rouge’s forces advance on the capital, and “Dream Land,” about a real estate developer who feels trapped by life in Phnom Penh.