AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckStream, sing along, repeat: Bill Murray and company serenade the holidays in “A Very Murray Christmas.” A heartbroken Christmas-tree salesman searches for love in Brooklyn. And Kristen Stewart adds another award to her mantel for “Clouds of Sils Maria.”What’s StreamingA VERY MURRAY CHRISTMAS on Netflix. Come holiday time, it’s the small, perfectly imperfect gifts we often come back to. That’s this special, starring Bill Murray, as a version of himself, whose cabaret act at the Carlyle Hotel goes bust when New York is shut down by the blizzard of the century. So he improvises, with the help of his pianist sidekick, Paul Shaffer, as well as Rashida Jones, Amy Poehler, Michael Cera, Jason Schwartzman, Maya Rudolph, Chris Rock, Jenny Lewis, David Johansen, the band Phoenix and — in the fantasy climax — Miley Cyrus and George Clooney. It’s a little boozy, a little woozy, as if your coolest pals were transported into a Sofia Coppola flick. Which it is. And what’s a couple of cracked notes among friends? (Image: Mr. Murray)CHRISTMAS, AGAIN (2015) on Fandor. Kentucker Audley plays Noel, a heartbroken Christmas tree salesman who is rescued from despair by a mysterious young woman he takes into his trailer after she passes out on a bench. “This is a Christmas movie in which magic exists largely on the periphery,” Ben Kenigsberg wrote in The New York Times about Charles Poekel’s Brooklyn-centric drama, “and that is just the right mix of chilly and sweet.”CLOUDS OF SILS MARIA (2015) on iTunes. Kristen Stewart adds the best supporting actress prize from the New York Film Critics Circle to her César Award for this portrayal of a personal assistant who unwittingly mimics the role for which her boss — an aging French movie star, played by Juliette Binoche — achieved stardom: an ingénue catastrophically involved with a lovesick older woman. Writing in The Times, Manohla Dargis called Olivier Assayas’s drama “superb,” adding that “playing the second lead to Ms. Binoche liberates Ms. Stewart, who gives herself completely over to her role.” (Image: Ms. Binoche, left, and Ms. Stewart)What’s on TVMASTERCHEF JUNIOR 8 p.m. on Fox. The mini-cooks whip up a birthday party for the judges’ kids. (Image: the contestant Kamilly)AMERICA’S NEXT TOP MODEL 9 p.m. on CW. The series reaches the end of the runway. The models bring their mothers.MOBY DICK: HEART OF A WHALE 9 p.m. on Smithsonian. Real-life 19th-century whaling stories that inspired Ron Howard’s “In the Heart of the Sea,” opening next Friday.SCROOGED (1988) 9 p.m. on AMC. Bill Murray’s greedy television executive meets ghosts past, present and future in this comic tweaking of Dickens’s “A Christmas Carol.” Like “A Very Murray Christmas,” it has the screenwriter Mitch Glazer in its DNA.THE KNICK 10 p.m. on Cinemax. The innovative Thackery introduces a new cure to his inebriation ward. Then he performs plastic surgery on Abby.THE TONIGHT SHOW STARRING JIMMY FALLON 11:35 p.m. on NBC. Sting and Mylène Farmer perform their English-French hit, “Stolen Car.”Advertisement