DEC. 3, 2015
Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.‘La Bohème’ (Saturday and Wednesday) Franco Zeffirelli’s colorful fairground ride of a production returns with a mild-mannered cast led by the affable soprano Barbara Frittoli and the efficient tenor Ramón Vargas as the ill-fated pair of lovers. A charismatic group of singers made up of Ana María Martínez, Levente Molnar, Alexey Lavrov and Christian Van Horn portrays their bohemian friends. The conductor Paolo Carignani is a steadfast guide through Puccini’s classic melodrama; the Met’s chorus and children’s chorus in fine form. Saturday at 1 p.m., Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ ‘Die Fledermaus’ (Friday, Monday, Thursday) James Levine conducts his very first production of this operetta by Johann Strauss Jr. in what amounts to holiday programming at the Met. Jeremy Sams’s Klimt-inspired direction is a feast for the eyes, and there is a solid cast in store, too: Susanna Phillips is Rosalinde, Toby Spence is Eisenstein and Susan Graham is Prince Orlofsky. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (David Allen)★ ‘The Rape of Lucretia’ (Wednesday through Dec. 12) LoftOpera, the iconoclastic, increasingly popular company, presents Benjamin Britten’s 1946 chamber opera in the first of seven performances. Fully staged by Laine Rettmer, it’s conducted by Dean Buck. At 8 p.m., 501 Union, 501 Union Street, between Bond and Nevins Streets, Gowanus, Brooklyn, loftopera.com. (Allen)Advertisement‘Rigoletto’ (Saturday and Tuesday) The dramatic baritone Zeljko Lucic takes on the title role as the soprano Nadine Sierra steps into the role of Gilda in this fresh and confident revival of Michael Mayer’s production, set in a Las Vegas casino. The ardent tenor Piotr Beczala returns to sing the Duke of Mantua; the bass Dimitry Ivashchenko and the mezzo Nancy Fabiola Herrera round out the cast as the assassin Sparafucile and his sister Maddalena. Roberto Abbado conducts. Saturday at 8 p.m. and Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)AdvertisementBehzod Abduraimov (Saturday) Noted for a musical maturity that belies his youth, this fast-rising pianist brings a recital of works by Schubert and Liszt as well as Mussorgsky’s glittering “Pictures at an Exhibition” to the invaluable Peoples’ Symphony Concerts. At 8 p.m., Washington Irving High School, Irving Place at 16th Street, Manhattan, 212-586-4680, pscny.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Igor Levit & Marina Abramovic (Monday through Dec. 19) There is much talk these days of mindfulness, “being present” and the need to disengage from digital distractions. Those attending a performance of Bach’s magnificent “Goldberg Variations” by the superb pianist Igor Levit, part of an installation by the artist Marina Abramovic, will be required to deposit their electronic gadgets in a locker before entering the vast drill hall, where they are expected to sit in meditative silence before Mr. Levit begins to play. Monday at 7 p.m. and Tuesday through Thursday at 8 p.m., Wade Thompson Drill Hall, Park Avenue Armory, 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)Bargemusic (Friday) As part of this floating concert hall’s important Here and Now series, the pianist Jeffrey Swann celebrates the work of David Del Tredici and Charles Wuorinen, including the latter’s Second Sonata. At 8 p.m., Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org. (Allen)Jay Campbell (Sunday) This gifted young cellist, currently in Juilliard’s Artist Diploma program, offers a program dedicated to contemporary music. The lineup includes Elliott Carter’s “Figment I” for solo cello, David Fulmer’s “Original Wood,” Matthias Pintscher’s “Janusgesicht,” the premiere of Jason Eckardt’s “Practical Alchemy” and Charles Wuorinen’s “An Orbicle of Jasp.” Mr. Campbell will be joined by Conor Hanick, the pianist, and Mr. Fulmer, the violinist and violist. (Free tickets available at the box office at 6:30 p.m. on day of concert.) At 7:30 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)Central City Chorus (Saturday) This valuable choir celebrates its 35th season with a performance of Bach’s monumental Mass in B minor, led by Phillip Cheah, with stellar soloists including the sopranos Sarah Brailey and Kathleen Cantrell, and the Rebel Baroque Ensemble. At 7 p.m., St. Ignatius of Antioch Church, 552 West End Avenue, 212-330-7293, centralcitychorus.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center (Friday, Sunday, Tuesday) It’s Baroque week at the Chamber Music Society. On Friday and Sunday, there’s a smattering of sonatas, trios and more, by composers as varied as C.P.E. Bach and Couperin, Boismortier and Böddecker. Tuesday’s program is a solo given by the pianist Konstantin Lifschitz, who moves from Frescobaldi and Rameau to Bach and Scarlatti. Friday and Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 5 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Allen)★ Diana Damrau (Sunday) Ahead of her forthcoming performances in Bizet’s “Pearl Fishers” at the Metropolitan Opera, this charismatic coloratura soprano joins the pianist Craig Rutenberg for a program of Schubert and Strauss lieder, Dvorak’s Zigeunermelodien, Poulenc’s “Fiançailles pour rire” and selections from Manuel Rosenthal’s wry “Chansons du Monsieur Bleu.” At 2 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Jennifer Koh and Shai Wosner (Monday) “Bridge to Beethoven” is the title for an intriguing series of programs conceived and played by the brilliant violinist Jennifer Koh and the excellent pianist Shai Wosner. To present Beethoven as a model for adventurous composers today, they are performing Beethoven violin sonatas along with newly commissioned scores. For Program II, Jörg Widmann has written “Summer Sonata” in response to Beethoven’s “Spring” Sonata, which this duo will play along with two other Beethoven violin sonatas. At 8:30 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Anthony Tommasini)Advertisement‘Messiah’ (Tuesday and Thursday) The annual performance of Handel’s beloved “Messiah” by the luminous Saint Thomas Choir of Men and Boys, joined by the vibrant Concert Royal ensemble, with an enticing roster of vocal soloists, is one of the surest bets of the holiday season. Gary Thor Wedow conducts. At 7:30 p.m., St. Thomas Church, 1 West 53rd Street at Fifth Avenue, 212-664-9360, saintthomaschurch.org/music/concerts. (Tommasini)New York Festival of Song (Tuesday) The popular New York Festival of Song continues its season with a program pairing landmark songs by Schubert and the Beatles. Participating artists include the tenor Paul Appleby, the soprano Sari Gruber, the baritone Andrew Garland and the baritone and guitarist Theo Hoffman, accompanied by the pianists Steven Blier and Michael Barrett. Tuesday at 8 p.m., Merkin Concert Hall, Goodman House, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, nyfos.org. (Tommasini)New York Philharmonic (Thursday through next Saturday) James Gaffigan is at the helm this week, conducting Beethoven’s Symphony No. 4; Strauss’s tone poem “Till Eulenspiegel’s Merry Pranks”; and the premiere of Andrew Norman’s “Split, ” with the pianist Jeffrey Kahane (who inspired the composition) as soloist. At 7:30 p.m., David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Schweitzer)Orpheus Chamber Orchestra (Saturday) In a program of borrowings and updates, the violinist Augustin Hadelich joins the players of Orpheus for an arrangement of Stravinsky’s “Divertimento” and Tchaikovsky’s “Valse-Scherzo.” There’s also Handel, and Respighi’s “Gli uccelli.” At 7 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)★ Pacifica Quartet (Wednesday) The dynamic Pacifica Quartet calls this intriguing program “Last Words.” The ensemble plays late works like Elliott Carter’s fifth (and final) quartet, along with his Fragments for String Quartet; Janacek’s “Intimate Letters” Quartet; and Beethoven’s final work in the genre, Quartet No. 16 in F (Op. 135). At 7:30 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Tommasini)★ ‘Steel Hammer’ (through Sunday) Julia Wolfe’s “Steel Hammer,” the Pulitzer Prize-winning composer’s meditation on the John Henry folk myth, receives a staged reimagination from the director Anne Bogart and SITI Company, with new texts by four playwrights. The Bang on a Can All-Stars are joined by three singers and a battery of Appalachian instruments. Friday and Saturday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., BAM Harvey Theater, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 651 Fulton Street, near Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Allen)Talea Ensemble (Saturday) In Steven Kazuo Takasugi’s theatrical “Sideshow” for amplified octet and electronic playback, the members of the Talea Ensemble are characters in a freak show. This imaginative five-movement work, inspired by texts by the Viennese satirist Karl Kraus, is billed as a “meditation on virtuosity, freak shows, entertainment, spectacle, business and the sacrifices one makes to survive in the world.” At 9 p.m. (preconcert reception with free beer starts at 8 p.m.), DiMenna Center for Classical Music, 450 West 37th Street, Manhattan, taleaensemble.org. (Schweitzer)★ Tallis Scholars (Saturday) In a concert presented by the Miller Theater, this first-rate British vocal ensemble, directed by Peter Phillips, pays tribute to its patron saint with selections from Tallis’s “Missa Puer natus” interspersed with works by his fellow 16th-century composer John Sheppard and contemporary pieces by Arvo Part to form a Christmas celebration that covers centuries. At 8 p.m., Church of St. Mary the Virgin, 145 West 46th Street, Manhattan, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Jory Vinikour (Thursday) This acclaimed American harpsichordist, a longtime Paris resident, plays a diverse program at Weill Recital Hall, an ideally intimate space for his instrument. There will be works by the Renaissance English composer John Bull, Scarlatti, Rameau, Couperin and Bach (the composer’s great Partita No. 3). At 7:30 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)Advertisement★ Yarn/Wire (Friday) A double premiere from this quartet of pianists and percussionists includes “Mind Is Moving,” by Chiyoko Szlavnics, and “In the Breach,” by the composer and trombonist George Lewis, which also features the violinist Miranda Cuckson. At 7 p.m., National Sawdust, 80 North Sixth Street, at Wythe Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org. (Allen)A version of this schedule appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page C21 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.