DEC. 3, 2015
For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Mariah Carey (Tuesday, Wednesday and through Dec. 18) Some jovial clubs around the city have been blasting Ms. Carey’s yuletide hit “All I Want For Christmas Is You” since early November. Time for the rest of New York to join in for the whimsical, endlessly melismatic singer’s eight-night run at the Beacon Theater, the second time in two years that she’s hosted a seasonal residency in New York. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)★ Neko Case (Friday) In another era, Ms. Case’s smoky country-pop pipes and graceful songwriting might have made her a mainstream star twice over, with a variety show on television, for good measure. With its steely backbone and tight refrains, her most recently released studio album, “The Worse Things Get, the Harder I Fight, the Harder I Fight, the More I Love You,” nods to her earliest days spent covering twangy standards; Ms. Case’s vaguely gonzo wailing about ’80s nostalgia, feminist mores and bled-dry heartache remain her own distinct tornado. With Soren Juul. At 8 p.m., Apollo Theater, 253 West 125th Street, Harlem, 800-745-3000, apollotheater.org. (Anderson)City and Colour (Thursday) The lithe pop singer Dallas Green offers a featherweight falsetto and the palpable humility of an artist with his feet firmly planted. This solo project of Mr. Green’s, long a cult favorite in his native Ontario, yielded a hearty, Americana-influenced release in October, “If I Should Go Before You.” With Bahamas. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)Advertisement‘Cyndi Lauper and Friends: Home for the Holidays’ (Saturday) The perennially youthful “Time After Time” singer raises money at this lighthearted annual benefit for the True Colors Fund, a nonprofit that works to end homelessness among lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youth. The slate of performers includes Boy George, Valerie Simpson, Kurt Vile and more. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)★ Deerhunter (Tuesday and Wednesday) The omnivorous musical fan Bradford Cox culls from prancing glam-rock, loosely hewed folk, garrulous garage punk and more for his main band’s meticulous catalog. “Fading Frontier,” the band’s seventh studio album, released in October, is a strange, brilliant meditation on perseverance through adversity and an ode to Mr. Cox’s many tuneful obsessions — and it’s fully evocative of his eccentric stage prattle, too. With Atlas Sound. Tuesday at 7 p.m., Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan, 212-777-6800, venue.irvingplaza.com; sold out. Wednesday at 9 p.m., Warsaw, 261 Driggs Avenue, at Eckford Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, bowerypresents.com; sold out. (Anderson)Holiday Cheer for FUV with Brandi Carlile (Friday) This singer-songwriter’s delicate falsetto lends itself to country-pop melodicism and spare acoustic backing. Her new album, “The Firewatcher’s Daughter,” veers into more rock ’n’ roll terrain but still has gentle, cathartic moments of balladry, most notably on the Laurel Canyon-folk-influenced single “The Eye.” She headlines this holiday revue — an annual benefit concert for the public radio station WFUV — with Dawes and Sharon Jones and the Dap-Kings. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)Advertisement‘Hot for the Holidays With Busta Rhymes & Friends’ (Saturday) The most overstuffed hip-hop lineup of the season boasts an appearance by Busta Rhymes, the loquacious rapper who has been somewhat elusive as he completes work on long-awaited next album, “E.L.E. 2 (Extinction Level Event 2).” He did find time, however, to lend a sage cameo to the Netflix series “Master of None.” Also featured in the lineup is the powerhouse vocalist Mary J. Blige, who last year released her 12th studio album, “The London Sessions,” last year. With Puff Daddy, Lil Wayne, Mariah Carey, Fetty Wap and more. At 8 p.m., Prudential Center, 165 Mulberry Street, Newark, 800-745-3000, prucenter.com. (Anderson)‘Imagine: John Lennon 75th Birthday Concert’ (Saturday) Uptown and downtown musicians unite in this celebration of John Lennon’s legacy — a fitting synergy, as the music of this most avant-garde Beatle has always crossed genres and artistic castes. Tom Morello, Willie Nelson, Sheryl Crow, Eric Church, the Roots and more give peace a chance. At 7:30 p.m., Theater at Madison Square Garden, 800-745-3000, theateratmsg.com. (Anderson)Kid Cudi (Sunday) This charming rapper-actor borrowed a move from another multitalented mogul — Beyoncé — with the surprise release of his fourth studio album, “Satellite Flight: The Journey to Mother Moon,” on iTunes last year. He has turned his attention to the silver screen lately with roles in “Need for Speed” and “Entourage.” His new double album, the likewise testosterone-titled “Speedin’ Bullet 2 Heaven,” is scheduled for release on Friday. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)‘The Landlady Holiday Spectacular’ (Sunday) Adam Schatz, a familiar face in the Brooklyn jazz and rock scenes, leads Landlady, an expansive pop-folk band whose openhearted second record, “Upright Behavior,” draws from the wandering troubadour rock of Arcade Fire and the Band. The group headlines a holiday-themed party that also features Nels Cline, Eli Paperboy Reed, Cassandra Jenkins and more. At 8 p.m., The Bell House, 149 Seventh Street, Gowanus, Brooklyn, 718-643-6510, thebellhouseny.com. (Anderson)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Arto Lindsay (Friday) This experimental composer has been influenced by Brazilian music in his career — most notably as the bandleader of the Ambitious Lovers — but his roots lie in the raucous guitar of American avant-garde. An early champion of the No Wave movement, Mr. Lindsay is a highlight of this EP release show for PC Worship. Also with Gary War and Elder Ones. At 8 p.m., Palisades, 906 Broadway, Brooklyn, palisadesbk.com. (Anderson)★ Joanna Newsom (Monday and next Friday) One of the best classically-influenced pop composers of her generation, Ms. Newsom is often infantilized with such cloying descriptors as “elfin” and “twee.” But her lilting fourth studio album, “Divers,” reasserts her as a powerhouse musician with intricacies and intimacy in finely calibrated balance. The arrangements – which include a guest collaboration with Dave Longstreth of the Dirty Projectors – particularly reach new baroque heights. Monday at 8 p.m., Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Brooklyn, kingstheatre.com; Dec. 11 at 8 p.m., Apollo Theater, 253 West 125th Street, Harlem, 800-745-3000, apollotheater.org. (Anderson)★ Vince Staples (Wednesday) As he pulls simultaneously from gangster rap, distorted garage-rock guitar and the general volubility of a David Foster Wallace rant, the young rapper Mr. Staples asserts himself as a wholly formed freshman force on “Summertime ’06,” his debut album. At 8:30 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)Tanlines (Wednesday) This wickedly clever pop duo from Brooklyn outdid themselves this summer when they unveiled their new website, which mimicked the Netflix home page down to fake movie posters for tracks from their latest album, “Highlights.” (It also links to such seminal film categories as “Movies and TV That You Might Not Have Realized Are About Jews.”) Via these amusing trailers, the new album revealed itself as a spry furtherance of the pair’s lilting tropicalia melodies, Afropop percussion and tidy, club-ready synths. With Oberhofer. At 9 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)This Month in Cabaret Michael Feinstein, the suave singer, pianist and all-around entertainer, will play his first engagement at Feinstein/54 Below, the midtown club that now that bears his name, Dec. 20 through 30. In earlier years, Mr. Feinstein’s annual holiday shows at his former club in the Regency Hotel were the closest New York nightclub equivalents to the kind of family-friendly holiday television specials that flourished in the 1960s, with their emphasis on yuletide cheer.AdvertisementHe said his debut at 54 Below will be more musically focused. Instead of a jolly swing band, Mr. Feinstein will be accompanied by a pop-jazz trio led by Tedd Firth, the genius nightclub accompanist of the moment, with Mark McLean on drums and Sean Smith on bass. There will be holiday songs but the emphasis will be on hard-core swing and expansive ballads. A suite of Broadway songs will celebrate his 30th year performing in New York.On Dec. 20 through 24, the heroic baritone Norm Lewis will appear at the club in its 9:30 p.m. slot (Mr. Feinstein performs mostly at 7 p.m.) Mr. Lewis, like his only rival for king of the Broadway baritones, Brian Stokes Mitchell, can do no wrong; his voice is that powerful and his dramatic command range that confident. (254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 646-476-3551, 54below.com.)Other highlights include the Brazilian singer Eliane Elias on Tuesday through Dec. 12 at Birdland (at 8:30 and 11 p.m., 315 West 44th Street, Clinton, 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com) and the annual end-of-the-year engagement of Steve Tyrell (singing Frank Sinatra) at Café Carlyle through Jan. 2. (At various times, 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com.) (Stephen Holden)Zeds Dead (Friday and Saturday) Zeds Dead not only contributes chic dubstep to the international electro scene, but also provided a space for it: the group helped create Bassmentality, a popular weekly party in Toronto and the stomping ground of dance greats like Mary Anne Hobbs and Nero. The series is now inactive, but its influence endures. At 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com; sold out. (Anderson)An earlier version of these Listings included an entry about a performance by Eric Burdon and the Animals at the Paramount in Huntington, N.Y. The concert has been postponed and rescheduled for Feb. 6.A version of this schedule appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page C20 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Pop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.