AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.luciana achugar (Thursday through Dec. 19) Last year luciana achugar presented “Otro Teatro” at New York Live Arts, exploring what it would mean to “grow ourselves a new body.” Since that ecstatic, anarchic ritual of a performance, she has continued the investigation of pleasure, desire and dance as an agent for change. The next and perhaps final phase is “An Epilogue for Otro Teatro: True Love,” which takes over a studio at Gibney Dance’s downtown location for three hours at a time. Thursdays through Saturdays at 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Siobhan Burke)★ Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater (through Jan. 3) For a New York holiday tradition without the Sugar Plum Fairy, get thee to City Center for Ailey’s month-long winter season. After four years of shepherding the company into exciting artistic territory, the artistic director Robert Battle contributes a new work titled “Awakening” to the repertory (the world premiere is on Friday). Also new this year are premieres from Rennie Harris, Ronald K. Brown and Kyle Abraham. A Paul Taylor work also joins the lineup, along with works by Talley Beatty, Hofesh Shechter and Christopher Wheeldon, among others. And, of course, “Revelations” will be on repeat. At various times, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, alvinailey.org. (Brian Schaefer)American Dance Guild Festival (through Sunday) This annual festival celebrates dance of the past, promotes dance of today and honors those making significant contributions to the field. This year, recognition goes to the choreographers Liz Lerman, known for her multi-generational work; Doug Varone, a long time staple of the New York dance scene; and Alice Teirstein, the founder of Young Dancemakers. Their work will be shown over four separate programs, accompanied by a number of other artists and companies, including work by Merce Cunningham. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 7 p.m., Ailey Citigroup Theater, 405 West 55th Street, Clinton, 800-838-3006, americandanceguild.org. (Schaefer)Anneke Hansen Dance (through Saturday) Ms. Hansen’s new work, “Hymn” looks at physical exertion from a place of reverence. It also attempts to question gender expectations by focusing on female strength and masculine sensuousness (in one section, the men don flowing dresses to illustrate the point). Costume plays a central role in another section as well when a voluminous black skirt consumes much of the performance space, representing the work’s broad ambition. At 7 and 9 p.m., Irondale Center, 85 South Oxford Street, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, annekehansendance.com. (Schaefer)★ Soulemayne Badolo(through Saturday) Many artists who hail from a place and culture different from the one in which they reside use that heritage in service of their work. This can be a powerful tool, but also confining. Soulemayne Badolo, a seductive performer from Burkina Faso who is now based in Brooklyn, grapples with that dichotomy in “Yimbégré” (“beginnings” in the Mooré language) where traditional Burkinabé dance is in dialogue with contemporary dance. The drummer Mamoudou Konat provides live music for Mr. Badolo and the dancer Sylvestre Koffitse Akakapo-Adzaku. At 7:30 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schaefer)Monica Bill Barnes (Wednesdays through Dec. 16) Karaoke night meets office party in “Happy Hour,” the latest concoction from Ms. Barnes and Anna Bass, best known these days as the dancers — alongside the radio personality Ira Glass — in the touring revue “Three Acts, Two Dancers, One Radio Host.” Their new weekly gig, in a Lower Manhattan dance studio, features the cheeky duo playing two guys playing their everyday selves, as Ms. Barnes continues her love affair with awkwardness, failure and physical comedy. The audience gets drinks, prizes and the chance to sing. At 6:30 p.m., Studio G, Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, 646-837-6809, monicabillbarnes.com. (Burke)Bolshoi Ballet in Cinema (Sunday) The Bolshoi returns to the big screen in a live-from-Moscow broadcast of John Neumeier’s “The Lady of the Camellias,” adapted from the 1848 novel by Alexandre Dumas and set to Chopin. Svetlana Zakharova and Hamburg Ballet’s Edvin Revazov star in the three-hour story of love across class lines. At 12:55 p.m., participating theaters can be found at bolshoiballetincinema.com. (Burke)Cirque Mechanics (Friday through Jan. 3) A giant bicycle and other pedal-powered contraptions serve as the stage for “Pedal Punk,” created by the former Cirque du Soleil performer Chris Lashua who, according to his bio, has had a lifelong “obsession with wheels.” His team of dancers, clowns and acrobats taps into the magic of gadgetry in a circus spectacle designed for theater-goers ages 5 and up. Friday at 7 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m., New Victory Theater, 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org. (Burke)★ Company XIV (through Jan. 17) If the traditional “Nutcracker” evokes the transition from childhood to adolescence, then Company XIV’s “Nutcracker Rouge” might be the subsequent crossover into adulthood and the accompanying sexual awakening. The choreographer Austin McCormick combines a strong dose of burlesque, baroque and ballet with glittered pasties and G-strings for a charmingly sensual and playful holiday romp. Tchaikovsky never sounded so scandalous. Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., Sundays at 5 p.m., Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-745-3000, companyxiv.com. (Schaefer)Brendan Connelly and Scotty Heron (Thursday through Dec. 12) It’s been about 75 years since Martha Graham and Aaron Copland joined forces to create “Appalachian Spring,” an instant hit about life on the American frontier. Mr. Connelly and Mr. Heron, a contemporary composer-choreographer duo, offer a more chaotic collaboration — and possibly a more dystopian view of America — with “Appalachian Spring Break,” a noisy evening-length work involving sound-generating objects and references to the Ken Burns mini-series “The Civil War.” Thursday and next Friday at 8 p.m., Dec. 12 at 8 and 10:30 p.m., Jack, 505½ Waverly Avenue, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Burke)★ Andy de Groat & Catherine Galasso (Thursday through Dec. 12) In the 1970s, before Ms. Galasso was born, her parents were members of the Byrd Hoffman School of Byrds, a company founded by the avant-garde director Robert Wilson. It was there that they met the choreographer Andy de Groat, with whom her father, the composer Michael Galasso, went on to collaborate. Honoring this artistic lineage, Ms. Galasso remounts several works by Mr. de Groat and offers her own response to his pedestrian yet convoluted movement. The evening, titled “get dancing,” also includes “Rope Dance Translations,” a film accompanied by live performance. At 8 p.m., St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)★ Gallim Dance(through Sunday) We sometimes speak of love as a stand-alone idea, but wound in there is sex (its physical expression) and domesticity (its day-to-day practice). Andrea Miller, the founder and choreographer behind Gallim Dance, explores these layers in her new work, “Whale.” Backed by Jordan Chiolis’s live electronic score that taps into love’s foreboding side, Ms. Miller uses her typically raw, gestural vocabulary to evoke the vulnerability that is love’s blessing and curse. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)Gelsey Kirkland Ballet (Thursday through Dec. 20) It’s worth seeing this company’s “Nutcracker” not just for a well-constructed production of the Christmas classic, but also for a glimpse of the troupe’s new Brooklyn home, at what used to be St. Ann’s Warehouse. Founded in TriBeCa by Ms. Kirkland, a former American Ballet Theater principal, the company attracts promising young dancers from around the world, who will be joined by 70 students and alumni from the affiliated Gelsey Kirkland Academy of Classical Ballet. Thursday at 7 p.m., next Friday at 7:30 p.m.,s and Dec. 17 at 7:30 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Sundays at noon and 5 p.m., GK Arts Center, 29 Jay Street, Dumbo, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, gelseykirklandacademyofclassicalballet.org. (Burke)Marguerite Hemmings and Katrina Reid (through Saturday) For more than 30 years, the choreographer Jawole Willa Jo Zollar has celebrated the stories of black women through dance. As a mentor in Gibney’s DoublePlus series, she has selected two young artists who are doing the same. In the solo “we free,” Ms. Hemmings uses street dance to express the millennial generation’s sense of what she calls “aggressive” freedom. In “Don’t move too slow through the broken glass,” Ms. Reid tells a personal tale with help from bluegrass, R&B and house music lyrics. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Schaefer)Bill T. Jones and Dianne McIntyre (Wednesday through Dec. 12) In its shift toward more multigenre programming, New York Live Arts has been presenting a series of concerts by the contemporary classical music ensemble yMusic. To go with that music, the last installment includes some dancing by two luminaries of modern dance: Bill T. Jones, the artistic director of Live Arts, and the divine Dianne McIntyre. Each artist offers a new solo, Mr. Jones on Wednesday and next Friday, Ms. McIntyre on Thursday and Dec. 12. At 7:30 p.m., 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Burke)Keigwin + Company (Tuesday through Dec. 13) With a new plan for his company, Larry Keigwin is not so much passing the choreographer’s torch as he is sharing it with a younger generation. For his troupe’s return to the Joyce Theater, he has commissioned new works by the rising dance makers Adam Barruch and Loni Landon, while creating two new pieces of his own and bringing back his 2009 “Sidewalk,” set to Steve Reich’s “Double Sextet.” The Keigwin vibe is relentlessly fun, and some fresh voices should only amplify that. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday and next Friday at 8 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)Lincoln Center at the Movies: Great American Dance (Saturday and Thursday) For a fraction of what it costs to see “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” live, you can catch it onscreen at your local movie theater, sweets in hand. The holiday standard, performed by New York City Ballet, completes the first season of Lincoln Center at the Movies, which brings prerecorded performances to more than 600 cinemas around the country, including a few in Manhattan. The cast captured here features Megan Fairchild as the Sugarplum Fairy, Joaquin De Luz as her Cavalier and Ashley Bouder as Dewdrop. Saturday at 12:55 p.m., Thursday at 7 p.m., local time, see fathomevents.com for locations. (Burke)Movement Research Festival Fall 2015 (through Saturday) The festival continues on Friday with Abby Zbikowski and Gwen Welliver, with each contemplating the impact of what they call “kinetic imagination.” And on Saturday, Melinda Ring revisits her 1999 work “Impossible Dance #2 (still life)” in two distinct ways. At 8 p.m., St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Schaefer)★ New York City Ballet (through Jan. 3) Of the dozens of “Nutcracker” productions in town, none match the scale of City Ballet’s “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker,” or the giddy sense of childlike awe it inspires. Pantomime dominates the first half but Act II culminates in a breathtaking pas de deux for the Sugar Plum Fairy and her Cavalier. After all, this is a duet for Balanchine and Tchaikovsky, too, and it’s magical. At various times, David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.org. (Brian Schaefer)★ Tere O’Connor (Friday, Saturday and Tuesday through Dec. 12) A news release for Tere O’Connor’s new work, “The Goodbye Studies,” says it will “embrace tangent and anomalous structural conceits.” Head scratching though that may be, Mr. O’Connor consistently manages to turn such esoteric ideas into surprising and satisfying dances of substance. Here, he employs his strong sense of drama and a knack for meaningful gestures to examine his group of 12 dancers as a single entity rather than individual beings — which is quite a task since individually, they’re captivating. At 8 p.m., the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org. (Schaefer)Pilobolus (through Sunday) A girl on the verge of womanhood falls asleep and wakes up in a surreal fantasy world. Nope, not “The Nutcracker.” This is “Shadowland,” a new adventure from Pilobolus receiving its United States premiere. In collaboration with Steven Banks, a writer of “SpongeBob SquarePants,” the company delivers a mix of theatrical spectacle and physical inventiveness soaked in wonder. As per its title, “Shadowland” showcases two-dimensional silhouettes formed by creative contortions of the body. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7 p.m., Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, 566 La Guardia Place, at Washington Square South, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111, nyuskirball.org. (Schaefer)★ Urban Bush Women (Wednesday through Dec. 12) John Coltrane’s groundbreaking album “A Love Supreme” turns 50 this year, and Urban Bush Women, the powerful all-female troupe founded by Jawole Willa Jo Zollar, turns 30. “Walking with ’Trane,” choreographed by Ms. Zollar and Samantha Speis in collaboration with the company, salutes those anniversaries through a dance structured like a jazz record, with an A-side and a B-side. The composers George Caldwell and Philip White take inspiration from Coltrane in their original score. At 7:30 p.m., Harvey Theater, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Burke)Sasha Waltz (Friday and Saturday) The last time Ms. Waltz brought her company to the Brooklyn Academy of Music, she sent the stage up in flames, burning her own set to the ground. A big name in Europe, she returns with “Continu,” which may not be as flammable but still traffics in the large-scale and incendiary, with a cast of 21 dancers swinging between emotional extremes to Edgard Varèse’s 1927 “Arcana” and selections from Iannis Xenakis, Claude Vivier and Mozart. At 7:30 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Burke)Pavel Zustiak (through Saturday) Having completed his “Painted Bird” series, an ambitious trilogy about cultural displacement and shifting identities that earned him the 2015 Juried Bessie Award, Mr. Zustiak turns to new concerns in “Custodians of Beauty,” his latest work for his company, Palissimo. With his trusted collaborators, the composer Christian Frederickson and the lighting designer Joe Levasseur, he explores multiple meanings of beauty, how it endures or is threatened, asking, “Where do we find beauty today, and does it need our defense?” At 7:30 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Burke)Advertisement