AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel GraeberWhen you consider the ingenious ways that marine creatures maneuver, you have to feel sorry for humans. Walking seems so, well, pedestrian.Children can investigate these intriguing mechanisms — including jet propulsion, fins and flippers — on Sunday during “Ocean Locomotion,” part of the Milstein Science Series at the American Museum of Natural History. The program, in the Milstein Hall of Ocean Life, will feature scientists, activity stations and guests like a horseshoe crab, a nautilus, a bamboo shark and a sea star, all alive and touchable.“It’s a great opportunity to pull out our touch tanks and get really hands-on,” said Kira Lacks, the museum’s public programs manager, who added that the event would focus on how ocean animals move to escape predators, to feed and to find mates. For example, “humpback whales practice bubble net feeding,” Ms. Lacks said. “They collectively dive below their prey and slowly spiral toward the surface while releasing bubbles in a circular motion.” The bubbles trap small fish like herring and push them upward, giving the whales a feast.The researchers explaining such phenomena — at noon and 2:30 p.m. — will be Fabien Cousteau, an aquatic filmmaker and grandson of the explorer Jacques Cousteau; Lori Marino, a biopsychologist; John Calambokidis, a marine mammal biologist; and Frank Fish (yes, that’s his real name), who specializes in the dynamics of animal locomotion, a field that often benefits people. The study of humpback whale fins has contributed to wind turbine and airplane design, and the movement of manta rays has influenced the engineering of underwater vehicles.Children can pursue their own scientific inquiries, including operating small manta ray-inspired robots and collaboratively reconstructing a reproduction of the skeleton of an 18-foot-long pilot whale. “They’ll each get a vertebra to put on this metal structure,” Ms. Lacks said. “It’s to understand how a pilot whale uses its tail to move.”Young visitors can also examine bones, shells and other specimens; construct a flip book that demonstrates how dolphins swim; and work with the Brooklyn Puppet Conspiracy to make jellyfish puppets that help illustrate how that creature pulsates through water. (Above, visitors at a previous Milstein Science Series program.)Puppets will star, too, in an interactive presentation by the Center for Aquatic Sciences. The show, at 1:30 and 3:30 p.m., will explore the movement of sharks, octopuses and one of the ocean’s most venerable travelers: sea turtles, which have been doing their locomotion for more than 100 million years.(From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., 79th Street and Central Park West, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.)‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’✓ (Continuing) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing Middle Eastern artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (around 1900) where young archaeologists can dress in costume and portray early-20th-century immigrants to Palestine. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Be a Good Cookie’ Family Fun Day (Saturday) The good won’t be just in the baking for this event, though the results promise to be delicious. There’s a greater good in the cause behind it: combating childhood cancer. The funds raised at this celebration will go toward Cookies for Kids’ Cancer, an organization supporting medical research. Children attending can enjoy baked treats from 15 top chefs, as well as take part in cookie and cupcake decorating, an interactive mural project and other crafts. The young entertainer DJ Fulano and the Songs for Seeds program will provide music. From 2 to 5 p.m., Metropolitan Pavilion, 125 West 18th Street, Chelsea, cookiesforkidscancer.org.‘Beauty & the Beast’ (Saturday and Sunday) The music of Jules Massenet accompanies this version of the French fairy tale, adapted by Nicolas Coppola, artistic director of Puppetworks. While most of the characters are played by marionettes, the Beast is appropriately huge and intimidating: He’s a grown-up. The show also promises some interesting effects, including animated vines in the enchanted wood that close in on the Prince while he’s traveling there. (Through Dec. 20.) At 12:30 and 2:30 p.m., Puppetworks, 338 Sixth Avenue, at Fourth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-965-3391, puppetworks.org.‘Brooklyn Sewers: What’s Up Down There?’ (Through May 29) When it comes to subterranean infrastructure projects, New York City’s subway system seems to get all the attention. But a group of teenage curators at the Brooklyn Historical Society would like to introduce you to another underground marvel: Brooklyn’s sewer system, one of the city’s oldest and most extensive infrastructure projects. This exhibition explores engineering conundrums and courtroom battles and tells the story of the sewer system through photographs, drawings and maps. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.‘Connected Worlds’✓ (continuing) Human choices and actions have an impact on the world’s ecosystems, but people usually can’t see the effects as they happen. That isn’t true in this new permanent exhibition in the renovated Great Hall of the New York Hall of Science. Consisting of huge screens (one is 38 feet tall), the show depicts six interconnected environments with a shared water supply. With the help of technology that responds to gestures, “Connected Worlds” allows children to use simple motions to plant, harvest, cut trees, create clouds and make other changes in the projected landscapes — and see how the native flora and fauna fare. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.‘The Discovery of King Tut’ (Through May 1) The Egyptian pharaoh Tutankhamen died when he was only a teenager, but the magnificent riches of his tomb have made him immortal in the public imagination. This touring show at Premier Exhibitions 5th Avenue recreates Tut’s tomb as it was when the British archaeologist Howard Carter discovered it in 1922. The display includes reconstructions of the tomb’s three chambers and reproductions of more than 1,000 treasures and ritual objects, accompanied by video documentaries and texts. 417 Fifth Avenue, at 38th Street, tutnyc.com.‘Dvorak: Exploring the New World’ (Saturday and Sunday) You wouldn’t expect a conventional concert from someone named Professor Treblemaker. He’s the fictional guide to LOS Kids, the new series for children ages 3 through 7 from the Little Orchestra Society. In this program, Treblemaker’s presentation is upended by the arrival of none other than the composer Antonin Dvorak himself. Though he’s Czech, Dvorak, with help from the ensemble, visiting artists and the guest conductor Joseph Young, shows the audience how much he’s influenced by the American experience, especially in pieces like his symphony “From the New World.” Saturday at 10 and 11:30 a.m., Sunday at 11:30 a.m. and 1 p.m., Kaye Playhouse, Hunter College, 68th Street between Lexington and Park Avenues, 212-971-9500, littleorchestra.org.‘Evergreen Express’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) There’s a lot of locomotion going on in the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden at the New York Botanical Garden, and it’s all centered on trees. In this celebration, part of the botanical garden’s Holiday Train Show, children can investigate trails in search of evergreen trees and shrubs. At the Discovery Center Depot, they can investigate evergreen plant parts, make pressings of a conifer specimen and create a miniature pine sachet. Other activities include making an evergreen puppet, patterned after the work of the master artisan Ralph Lee, and putting on puppet shows in the Woodland Theater. (Through Jan. 24.) Weekdays (except Mondays), 1:30 to 5:30 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 6:30 p.m.; Sundays, 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.‘Fancy Nancy: Splendiferous Christmas’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company, which gave eager young audiences “Fancy Nancy: The Musical,” is now reviving its other show starring that inimitable little diva. Based on the book written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, “Fancy Nancy: Splendiferous Christmas” deals with Nancy’s fancy expectations for the holiday season. With a book by Cara Lustik, music by Randy Klein and lyrics by Matthew Hardy, the production revolves around Nancy’s purchase of a grand decoration for the top of the Christmas tree, and what ensues when her dreams don’t turn out quite as planned. (Through Dec. 27.) At 1 p.m., Theater at St. Jean, 184 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Fashion Academy, the Musical’ (Sunday) Vital Theater Company’s latest show for children over 7 is reopening at a new theater. It focuses on a middle-schooler, MacKenzie Williams, known as Mickey. When her colorful and completely original style doesn’t go over well at her new school, Fashion Academy of Brooklyn, she decides to make over not only her wardrobe, but also herself. Based on the book “Fashion Academy,” by the mother-daughter team of Sheryl Berk and Carrie Berk, this adaptation, by the elder Ms. Berk and Sabrina Chap, asks whether Mickey’s new persona, Kenzie, is really worth the sacrifice. (Through Dec. 13.) At 3:30 p.m., Theater at Blessed Sacrament, 152 West 71st Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Flight School the Musical’ (Sunday) If you want to fly, and you’re a bird, you should be all set, right? Well, not if you happen to be a penguin. That’s the challenge confronting the little hero of this musical from Vital Theater Company, adapted from “Flight School,” a picture book by Lita Judge. With a script by Cara Lustik, lyrics by Joshua H. Cohen and a score by David Mallamud, this charming show — the score is particularly impressive — is closing this weekend. Recommended for ages 2 through 7, it chronicles Penguin’s determination to remove the technical obstacles between him and the sky. At 11 a.m., Theater at Blessed Sacrament, 152 West 71st Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Frolic!’ at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan✓ (Through Dec. 31) You’re never too young to rock — and this space proves it. A new pop-up installation at the museum, “Frolic!” uses rock music and a themed décor to stimulate sensory play and learning in visitors ages 5 and under. In addition to a stage, a pretend ticket booth and ’70s-style props — including a Volkswagen mini-van to climb into — the 1,500-square-foot area has programs of workshops and live performances to help little ones get into the groove. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’ (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Thursday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.Hanukkah Family Day (Sunday) Sculpture, drawing, song, dance and reading: However you want to celebrate Hanukkah, the Jewish Museum will offer the creative means at this annual festival. A highlight this year will be an appearance by the actress Amanda Peet and the writer Andrea Troyer, who will celebrate their new children’s book, “Dear Santa, Love, Rachel Rosenstein,” about a little Jewish girl who wonders why Santa never comes to her home. They will sign books at 11:30 a.m. and read at 1 p.m. A giant drop-in art workshop will present opportunities to paint fabric, decorate dreidels, make a collaborative glowing collage and turn found objects — spools, wood blocks, metal — into holiday menorah sculptures. At 12:15 p.m., the storyteller Jeff Hopkins will use live drawing to illuminate Hanukkah tales, and, at 2:30 p.m., Shirlala, a.k.a. Shira Kline, will perform a holiday concert. Brief gallery tours at 1:30 and 3 p.m., focused on the Hanukkah lamp collection, will round out the day. From noon to 4 p.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org/programs/families.‘The Hunger Games: The Exhibition’✓ (Through Jan. 3) What enterprising 12- or 13-year-old wouldn’t like to foment a little rebellion? Such a visitor can do so vicariously at this attraction at Discovery Times Square, stepping into the role of Katniss Everdeen, the teenage heroine of “The Hunger Games” and the ultimate leader of the resistance against her nation’s totalitarian government. Based on the Lionsgate film adaptations of Suzanne Collins’s novels, the show includes costumes and artifacts from the movies, as well as re-creations of Katniss’s journey and interactive, role-playing elements like a gamesmaker’s table and a chance to learn and practice stunt choreography. 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com, thehungergamesexhibition.com.‘If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home’ (Through Jan. 17) Maps present facts, but they can also engage the imagination. This new exhibition at the Children’s Museum of the Arts explores the intersection of cartography and art, showing work that expands upon, redefines or simply refers to maps. Among the eight artists represented are Matthew Cusik, who makes collages from map fragments; Joyce Kosloff, who layers images and textured paint onto maps; Loren Munk, who adds plaques of color and information to street maps; and Nikki Rosato, who subtracts from maps, cutting away all but roads and rivers. In the museum’s Cynthia C. Wainwright Gallery, 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.‘Jean-Michel Cousteau’s Secret Ocean’✓ (Through Jan. 10) Ever encounter a goby or a blenny? How about a Christmas tree worm? These small marine species, often unnoticed and uncelebrated, are among the stars of this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History. Filmed by Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau, and Holly Lohuis, a marine biologist, the film captures 30 species that are among the tiniest to inhabit the seas. Daily schedule: Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘LARD: Life’s a Real Dream’ (Saturday) This show about LARD, the concept, has nothing to do with lard, the substance. An acronym for “Life’s a Real Dream,” “LARD” is the title of a rollicking musical production starring Lard Dog, who also happens not to be a dog. The alter ego of the multimedia artist Steven Erdman, Lard is a gregarious out-of-this-world character who has flown in from the planet Belopio on a giant pretzel. He and his Band of Shy perform this hourlong entertainment, which includes cartoon graphics and a pretzel toss. Shows this month also feature a holiday singalong and surprise giveaways for children. (Through Jan. 2.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, houseoflard.com.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’ (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.‘Meet the Scientist in the Discovery Room’ (Saturday) Yes, you inhabit your body, but like it or not, other living things reside there, too. In this program at the American Museum of Natural History, geared to children 7 and older, Susan Perkins, a co-curator of the new exhibition “The Secret World Inside You,” will discuss her work investigating those other organisms. In Dr. Perkins’s presentation, “From Malaria to Microbes,” she will explain how she became intrigued by this research, and how she focuses on the parasites in the blood of animals like lizards and bats, extracting their DNA. At 2:15, 3 and 3:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Music in Motion (Saturday) That motion is the gentle rocking of a boat for this series of family neighborhood concerts presented by Bargemusic, the floating barge at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge. As always, the material — announced just before the performance — is chamber music, but these programs differ in important ways from the regular Bargemusic fare: With unreserved seating, they last only an hour, include a post-show question-and-answer session with the musicians and are free. (Through March 26.) At 4 p.m. (doors open at 3:45), Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org.‘The Nutcracker’ (Friday and Saturday) Children who aren’t ready for a full serving of the Land of the Sweets and the other confections of '‘The Nutcracker’' may enjoy this low-calorie version: It’s just an hour. Presented by New York Theater Ballet and choreographed by Keith Michael, this variation gives the story an Art Nouveau setting and turns Marie into a young woman. This weekend the performances are free, part of the opening of a monthlong holiday celebration at the Winter Garden at Brookfield Place. The fun will also include a light installation and appearances by Santa Claus, who will pose for photos with the “Nutcracker” characters and visiting children two hours before each performance. Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 1 and 7 p.m.; 230 Vesey Street, near West Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-417-2414, artsbrookfield.com/nutcracker.‘NYC + Me: A Little Bite of the Big Apple’ (Through Jan. 18) There’s one place where little citizens can safely run loose on the streets of New York: the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. This new interactive 3,000-square-foot gallery is a city microcosm for small visitors, allowing them to pretend to be taxi drivers, bus drivers, construction workers, street performers and, most impressively, the mayor. Activities include directing traffic, erecting a skyscraper, “ice skating” in their socks and investigating urban tales on the steps of the New York Public Library. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Pedal Punk’ (Friday and Saturday) Forget about those daring young men on a flying trapeze — how about those daring young people on a flying bicycle? This circus show, presented by the troupe Cirque Mechanics at the New Victory Theater, takes place aboard the Gantry: a huge, Rube Goldberg-style contraption consisting of bicycle parts. It can be pedaled and ridden, but it can also be a platform and a series of devices for aeralists, contortionists, clowns and dancers, as this company of nine demonstrates. (Through Jan. 3.) Friday at 7 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m., 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.‘Peter & the Wolf’ (Saturday and Sunday) Prokofiev’s classic may seem to be common children’s fare at this time of year, but there’s nothing ordinary about this version. Given its premiere eight years ago as part of the Guggenheim Museum’s Works & Process series, this production combines performing arts with sets by renowned artists. Once again, Isaac Mizrahi, the story’s narrator, has designed the set and costumes and directed the tale, which has become a full theatrical production, with a cast of actors and choreography by John Heginbotham. (Through Dec. 13.) At 2:30 and 4 p.m., 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3575, worksandprocess.org. Seats are limited.‘A Rocking Hanukkah Celebration’ (Sunday) Families can plan on rockin’ around the menorah at this event, which has multigenerational activities. The fun begins at 3 p.m. with craft projects for children and an adult workshop on Hanukkah and human rights. Naomi Less and her band will provide the music at 4, with a pop concert titled “Any Way You Light It.” The celebration continues at 5 with dreidel playing, holiday songs, latkes and chocolate gelt and, of course, the lighting of the menorah. West End Synagogue, 190 Amsterdam Avenue, at 69th Street, 212-579-0777, Ext. 222, westendsynagogue.org; registration is advised.‘Seven in One Blow, or the Brave Little Kid’ (Friday through Sunday) In the Grimm fairy tale “The Brave Little Tailor,” the title character dispatches seven flies with one swat but allows the gullible public to believe that he has really whacked seven enemies. In its annual holiday production for children 4 and older, written and directed by Randy Sharp, Axis Theater has adapted the story to feature a clever New York boy. He triumphs over adversity, thanks to his wits and a lot of help from theatergoers, who are asked to shout lines and even sing. (Through Dec. 22.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 3 p.m.; Axis Theater, 1 Sheridan Square, off Seventh Avenue, West Village, 212-352-3101, axiscompany.org.‘A Taste of Magic’ (Friday and Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various Manhattan restaurants through Jan. 29, the presentation includes acts like mind-reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a three-course meal. Friday at 4:30 p.m. at Ben & Jack’s Steakhouse, 225 Fifth Avenue, between 28th and 29th Streets. Saturday at 8 p.m. at Docks Oyster Bar & Seafood Grill, 633 Third Avenue, at 40th Street. Information and registration: atasteofmagicnyc.com.‘The Three Bears Holiday Bash’ (Friday through Thursday) There’s no word on whether Goldilocks is invited to this seasonal celebration, but Santa Claus definitely is. An annual production from the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, this puppet musical centers on a variety show put on by the Bears, in which Baby Bear asks Santa to star. The fun draws on Hanukkah and Kwanzaa, as well as on Christmas. (Through Dec. 30.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional 2:30 p.m. performance on Wednesday; weekends at 1 p.m.; Swedish Cottage, 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org. Reservations required; some shows are sold out.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’ (Continuing) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. On Sunday, the museum will also present “Soil to Oil,” a workshop in producing olive oil and using it to light a Hanukkah lamp. And from Monday through Dec. 14, the museum will hold its Hanukkah Art Festival, which will feature not only the oil workshop, but also silk-screening, doughnut decorating and, on this Thursday, a game show and the lighting of a grand menorah. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Winter Family Fair (Sunday) You don’t have to be Ebenezer Scrooge to have a close encounter with the Ghosts of Christmas Present and Past this season. In this annual celebration for children 3 to 12, at the Morgan Library & Museum, members of the troupe the Grand Falloons will impersonate those Dickens characters (along with Bob Cratchit, Scrooge and Dickens himself), as well as read excerpts from “A Christmas Carol.” (Its manuscript is on display.) Other activities are an ornament-making workshop; performances of the Puppetworks show “The Steadfast Tin Soldier”; and dress-up play and photo taking with children’s medieval-style costumes. From 2 to 5 p.m., 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.Winter Solstice & Tree Lighting (Sunday) Yes, winter is coming, but so is Santa. He will visit this free solstice celebration at the Queens Botanical Garden, where families can take part in woodland crafts and enjoy a special tour of the grounds: The artist Mayen Alcantara will create a site-specific art piece as she leads the stroll. At 3 and 4 p.m., the Rough Dozen, an a cappella group, will offer a holiday concert, and all can join a tree-lighting ceremony with Santa at 5. (He will also pose for pictures with children, for a small fee, from 1 to 3 p.m.) From 1 to 5 p.m., Queens Botanical Garden, 43-50 Main Street, Flushing, Queens, 718-886-3800, queensbotanical.org.‘Young Charles Dickens’ (Saturday and Sunday) New York City Children’s Theater is no longer called Making Books Sing, but it is still bringing young people’s books to musical life through its theatrical adaptations. Its latest show, inspired by Deborah Hopkinson’s book “A Boy Called Dickens,” focuses on Dickens’s childhood experiences and how they shaped his art. With a book and lyrics by Barbara Zinn Krieger and a score by Charlie Greenberg, this musical, recommended for ages 8 and up, explores the year that Charles, 12, had to help support his family, which included working on Christmas Eve. (Through Jan. 3.) At 1 and 4 p.m., Theater 3, 311 West 43rd Street, Clinton, 646-250-1178, nycchildrenstheater.org.Dan Zanes and Friends Holiday Singalong (Sunday) While Dan Zanes caters to enthusiasts under 10, he is not just a children’s musician. The former frontman of the Del Fuegos, he specializes in folk-flavored rock whose complex harmonies are just as pleasing to parents. His digital holiday album, “Christmas in Concord,” recalls the joyous spirit of an annual party held by friends in Concord, N.H., from 1968 to 1989. Go prepared to raise your voices, too. At 11 a.m. (doors open at 10), City Winery, 155 Varick Street, near Spring Street, South Village, 212-608-0555, citywinery.com/newyork.Advertisement