AdvertisementSupported byFriday FileBy Mary Jo MurphyJohn Martin became the first full-time dance critic at a major American publication when he joined The New York Times in 1927. Before his appointment, music or theater critics wrote on dance, the stepchild of the arts, satisfying no one.But that was so pre-“Nutcracker” — or rather, pre-Balanchine, creator of “the ‘Nutcracker’ of all ‘Nutcrackers,’” as Mr. Martin’s present-day successor, Alastair Macaulay, once put it.Now it is all “Nutcracker” all the time every holiday season, with the New York City Ballet staging the pack-leading dance George Balanchine created for it in 1954.Mr. Martin, a Balanchine fan, could hardly contain his exasperation. All those children!Here’s what he had to say on Feb. 3, 1954, in his review of the premiere at City Center:“It is not much of a ballet, and all the genius in the world can never make it one. There is no dancing to speak of until the last scene, there is no story line, and no characters to develop.”He ends: “On the whole, it is a loving and imaginative resurrection of a decidedly mediocre work. But it is something to take the children to, beyond a shadow of a doubt.”Mr. Martin returned to puzzling over the ballet in his Sunday column a few days later.“George Balanchine is apparently in the grip of a severe attack of nostalgia,” he wrote. “Nothing else can explain the grueling labor and the affectionate care which have gone into his restaging of ‘The Nutcracker’ in its entirety for the New York City Ballet. In his native Russia it was part of his childhood, and as a youthful student in the school of the Imperial Ballet, he appeared in several of its juvenile roles. His relation to it is therefore understandably a subjective one. There cannot, however, be many members of the New York dance public who have a similar background, and the rest are likely to be in for some disillusionment.“Except for Tchaikovsky’s melodious score, which contains in two suites probably the most familiar ballet music in the world, there is nothing about ‘The Nutcracker’ to justify its presentation.” But for the “twenty minutes of dancing,” he wrote, “it is made up of the dullest kind of realistic pantomime on juvenile subjects, and some bright and ingenious moments of scenic spectacle.”Plus. Those children:“From the beginning Mr. Balanchine has maintained that this is a ballet designed to be performed for, and chiefly by, children, and that is the way he has staged it here. That being the case, it might appropriately be confined to matinees, where mothers can take their small fry in the attempt to lure them from their somewhat more contemporaneous absorptions in the rustling of fictional cattle and the conquest of interstellar space.”Calling the first act “a trial,” he had hoped for an “upturn” in the second act, “in the likelihood that by 10 o’clock, when the second act is scheduled to get under way, the kiddies will have been taken home and tucked into bed. But no; they stay with us to the bitter end, tripping into most of the divertissements with all their irrelevant charms and maintaining the style of the first act with supreme consistency.“Under the circumstances, what the members of the regular company, senile artists in their twenties and thirties, manage to do is wonderful beyond the call of duty.”“Certainly this production does nothing for the art of the ballet, and is a serious divagation from the true course of our most forward-looking company.”History wrote a different story — City Ballet’s “Nut,” decades later, has yet to crack.By November 1954, when City Ballet revived the production for the Christmas season, Mr. Martin seemed to have resigned himself to it.“Maybe you think an organization of this rank and quality should not be expending its energies on an old-fashioned Christmas pantomime with a minimum of dancing in it,” he wrote in his review this time around, “but there is no denying that it is doing a beautiful job of it.”He even resigned himself to the children, who “comport themselves like lively, well-behaved children instead of trained mice.”Advertisement