DEC. 3, 2015
For news about comedy, including critical commentary: nytimes.com/arts. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.‘Comedy at the Grocery’ (Monday) Julian Kiani, Evy Gour and Nick Poyner host this monthly show that always features a strong lineup. This edition’s guests include Chris Distefano, Chris Thayer and Roy Wood Jr.; the theme is “2015 Joke Purge,” in which the comics will give a send-off to old material that won’t be making it into the new year. At 8 p.m., Arlene’s Grocery, 95 Stanton Street, near Orchard Street, Lower East Side, 212-358-1633, arlenesgrocery.net. (Elise Czajkowski)★ Gad Elmaleh (Sunday) Frequently referred to as the “Jerry Seinfeld of France,” the Moroccan-born Mr. Elmaleh came to prominence in France with a series of one-man comedic shows before finding fame on television and film. Now he’s beginning a United States tour with his new show, simply titled “All In English.” At 7 p.m., Joe’s Pub, at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com. (Czajkowski)‘The Family Reunion’ (Friday) Tessa Skara and Joe Castle Baker star in this interactive musical comedy about family bonding. The duo — along with the director Bailey Williams — also wrote the show, which the venue’s website describes as a mix of “Broadway musical theater, the YouTube comment section and Hallmark greeting cards.” At 8 p.m., Ars Nova, 511 West 54th Street, Clinton, 866-811-4111, arsnovanyc.com. (Czajkowski)Advertisement★ ‘Night Train with Wyatt Cenac TV Tapings’ (Monday through Wednesday) A staple of the New York alternative stand-up scene, “Night Train” makes the jump to digital series on the upcoming comedy streaming platform Seeso. Six special tapings across three nights will be a mix of stand-up and surprise guests; performers include Seaton Smith, Janeane Garofalo, Kurt Braunohler, Jen Kirkman, Sasheer Zamata, Eugene Mirman and many more. At 7 and 10 p.m., Littlefield, 622 Degraw Street, Gowanus, Brooklyn, littlefieldnyc.com; some shows are sold out. (Czajkowski)Advertisement★ ‘Oh, Hello’ (Tuesday through Dec. 20) Nick Kroll and John Mulaney bring their memorable characters Gil Faizon (Mr. Kroll) and George St. Geegland (Mr. Mulaney), two Upper West Side gentleman with a fondness for Alan Alda and pranks involving tuna fish, to the stage. The duo have been part of the “Oh, Hello” show for more than a decade, having appeared in a web series before being prominently featured in Mr. Kroll’s Comedy Central sketch series, “Kroll Show.” Tuesdays through Saturdays at 9:30 p.m., Sundays at 7 p.m., Cherry Lane Theater, 38 Commerce Street, West Village, 866-811-4111, cherrylanetheatre.org. (Czajkowski)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘One Night Only With Joe Zimmerman’ (Thursday) An opening act for the universally beloved Brian Regan, Mr. Zimmerman is an endearing young absurdist with a clever approach to observational stand-up. At 8 p.m., Union Hall, 702 Union Street, at Fifth Avenue, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-638-4400, unionhallny.com. (Czajkowski)★ ‘A Show for Christmas’ (Tuesday through Dec. 18) The always captivating comedian and storyteller Daniel Kitson returns to New York for a short run of this Christmas-themed show, which, according to his website, will include “traditional seasonal concerns of loneliness,” “a brief scuffle in a newsagents” and “magic.” At 8 p.m., with additional performances at 3 p.m. on Dec. 12 and 13, and at 10 p.m. on Dec. 16 and 17, Connelly Theater, 220 East Fourth Street, East Village, danielkitson.com. (Czajkowski)‘We Are Thomasse: As American as Fish ‘n’ Chips’ (Saturday) The married comedy duo of Nick Afka Thomas and Sarah Ann Masse combine his droll British wit and her joke-packed American energy in this clever, cross-cultural sketch show. At 9:30 p.m., Peoples Improv Theater, 123 East 24th Street, Manhattan, 212-563-7488, thepit-nyc.com. (Czajkowski)Larry Wilmore in Conversation with Sway Calloway (Thursday) The host of Comedy Central’s “The Nightly Show With Larry Wilmore” discusses the first year of his inventive, acclaimed news-satire series with Mr. Calloway, a journalist and musician. At 8 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Czajkowski)A version of this schedule appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page C20 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Comedy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.