DEC. 3, 2015
Museums and galleries are in Manhattan unless otherwise noted. Full reviews of recent art shows: nytimes.com/art. A searchable guide to these and many other art shows is at nytimes.com/events.★ American Folk Art Museum: ‘Art Brut in America: The Incursion of Jean Dubuffet’ (through Jan. 10) This extraordinary show revisits and partly recreates a little-known chapter in outsider art history: the decade (1951-61) that the groundbreaking, still-forming Art Brut collection of Jean Dubuffet — the artist and one of the field’s earliest explorers — spent in the East Hampton mansion of the artist Alfonso Ossorio. While seen by a host of art world luminaries, it had little impact, as proved by how many of the impressive artists here are still unknown in this country. 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 66th Street, 212-595-9533, folkartmuseum.org. (Roberta Smith)★ Asia Society and Museum: ‘Philippine Gold: Treasures of Forgotten Kingdoms’ (through Jan. 3) More than half a millennium before Ferdinand Magellan reached the archipelago now called the Philippines in 1521, a number of related societies thrived there. One of the few things known about them today is that they were astoundingly skillful goldsmiths. This gorgeous and historically intriguing exhibition presents nearly 120 pieces dating from the 10th through the 13th centuries, including bracelets, necklaces, pendants, collars, finger rings, bowls and a balance scale made entirely of gold. The star of the show is a gleaming, nine-pound sash made of gold beads that could be mistaken for a futuristic ammunition belt. 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org. (Ken Johnson)★ Bronx Museum of the Arts: ‘Martin Wong: Human Instamatic’ (through Feb. 14) Fervor, desire and coded insider-outsider knowledge crackle through this career retrospective of one of our great 20th-century American visionaries. Expanding on an earlier survey at the New Museum, the Bronx exhibition takes the artist from precocious juvenilia to unearthly little pictures done the year before his death from AIDS in 1999. Along with his art we have the traces of his countercultural life as mythologist, homoeroticist, existential tourist and urban resurrectionist. And all revolves around his mystical visions of ghetto New York. Neighborhood buildings are fortresslike, crushing, sinister. Yet miracles abound: windows glow gold; night skies bloom with stars. 1040 Grand Concourse, at 165th Street, Morrisania, the Bronx, 718-681-6000, t. (Holland Cotter)AdvertisementBrooklyn Botanic Garden: Isamu Noguchi (through Dec. 13) The Noguchi Museum and the Brooklyn Botanic Garden are to be commended for installing such a show, in which sculpture is exposed to the elements (and the wandering visitors). But this exhibition of 18 of the Japanese-American artist’s sculptures parceled throughout the garden can be frustrating, as you attempt to locate his works on a specially provided map. The showcase of the exhibition is an installation of several Noguchi sculptures inside the Japanese Hill-and-Pond Garden, a marriage of modern and traditional forms, and there are works just below the Native Flora Garden that offer moments of successful communion with art and curated nature. 990 Washington Avenue, at Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights, 718-623-7200, bbg.org. (Martha Schwendener)Advertisement★ Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Personal Correspondence: Photography and Letter Writing in Civil War Brooklyn’ (through spring 2016) Symbolically, the Civil War ended when Robert E. Lee surrendered to Ulysses S. Grant in the spring of 1865. For many people who lived through it, though, the war never ended at all, and it lives on in letters sent to and from the battlefield. Thousands of these ended up half-forgotten in attics and bureau drawers; a small stash comes to light in this exhibition that consists of just one little room with a lot in it — including letters, Civil War souvenirs and explanatory texts — with everything as readily accessible as if in a well-packed suitcase. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org. (Cotter)Brooklyn Museum: ‘Impressionism and the Caribbean: Francisco Oller and His Transatlantic World’ (through Jan. 3) Francisco Oller (1833-1917) was the most celebrated Puerto Rican artist of the 19th century. For most of his career he was a facile imitator sojourning in Madrid and in Paris, where he hung out with Impressionist painters like Pissarro, Monet and Cézanne. But it wasn’t until after settling down in San Juan around age 60 that he came into his own, producing haunting landscapes and some mysteriously powerful still-life paintings that can plausibly be called great. This show presents 40 paintings by Oller and 45 works by other artists, including his European and American contemporaries and his Puerto Rican predecessors. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Frick Collection: ‘Andrea del Sarto: The Renaissance Workshop in Action’ (through Jan. 10) The big-guns highlights of the Frick show, this first major American exhibition devoted to the Renaissance artist Andrew del Sarto, (1486-1530) are three spectacular paintings, including “Portrait of a Young Man” from London and “St. John the Baptist” from the Palazzo Pitti, Florence. But the substance lies an array of 45 drawings, mostly in red chalk, in which we can follow del Sarto as he feels his way into compositions and molds figures into life with an angel’s hand, a scientist’s eye, and a striver’s drive for perfection. 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, 212-288-0700, frick.org. (Cotter)Guggenheim Museum: ‘Alberto Burri: The Trauma of Painting’ (through Jan. 6) This Italian artist’s prescient paintings from the 1950s and early ‘60s — in patched, burned and otherwise abused burlap, plastic or wood — form a lavish, beautiful and admirable, if sometimes monotonous retrospective at the Guggenheim. Unfortunately, he may also inaugurate a bane of current art: the use of found materials so inherently affecting — burlap is one — that they require little of the artist. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. (Smith)★ Jewish Museum: ‘The Power of Pictures: Early Soviet Photography, Early Soviet Film’ (through Feb. 7) Revolutions sell utopias; that’s their job. Art, if it behaves itself and sticks to the right script, can be an important part of the promotional package. That’s the basic tale told by this exhibition of photographs and vintage films of the 1920s and ’30s, but with a question added: What happens to art when the script is drastically revised? Russia was an experiment in progress in the heady years following the 1917 revolution, and avant-garde art, free-spirited by definition, was officially embraced. When Joseph Stalin came to power art became government-dictated propaganda and its makers, often under threat, towed the line. Remarkably, the show presents a dozen films — some familiar, some not — full-length, on a rotating schedule of four a day, in a small viewing theater built into one of the Jewish Museum’s galleries. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Jewish Museum: ‘Unorthodox’ (through March 27) With about 200 putatively unorthodox works crowded into tightly walled-in spaces, this lively show has the feel of an Outsider Art fair – in a good way. The paintings, drawings, collages, assemblages, ceramics, weavings and videos are variously funny, funky, quirky, eccentric, idiosyncratic and visionary. Are they truly unorthodox by the standards of a contemporary art world wherein no one wants to be thought orthodox? No, but that’s O.K. It’s an entertaining and intermittently exhilarating exhibition nonetheless. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Ancient Egypt Transformed: The Middle Kingdom’ (through Jan. 24) Ancient Egypt is box office gold: Do a show, and people will come. Why? Mummies, Hollywood and Queen Nefertiti contribute to its allure. Also, we tend to identify with Egyptians of thousands of years ago. In art, they look exotic, but not out of reach. They drank beer, collected cats and wore flip-flops. They yearned to stay young and to live forever, with loved ones nearby and snack food piled high. Who can’t relate to that? Few institutions have done a better job at illuminating Egyptian art than the Met. And it returns to the subject in an exhibition low on King Tut bling and high on complicated beauty, about a broad swath of history (circa 2030 to 1650 B.C.) that has never had a comprehensive museum showcase till now. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)Advertisement★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Andrea del Sarto’s ‘Borgherini Holy Family’’ (through Jan. 10) This fascinating gem of a show runs concurrently with the larger exhibition “Andrea del Sarto: The Renaissance Workshop in Action” at the Frick Collection and adds important layers to it. It both places the Renaissance artist within the political context of his time, and it draws on modern imaging technology to reveal his method for transforming and recycling images. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Celebrating the Arts of Japan: The Mary Griggs Burke Collection’ (through July 31) This lavish roll out of 160 objects came to the Met from the Mary and Jackson Burke Foundation last spring. The Burkes loved Japanese art — all of it — and the collection is close to compendious in terms of media, from wood-carved Buddhas to bamboo baskets, with a particular strength in painting, early and late. The quality of the work? Japan thinks highly enough of it to have made the Burke holdings the first Japanese collection from abroad ever to show at Tokyo National Museum. Some pieces on view now will be rotated out and replaced in February, making this an exhibition to visit at least twice. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Grand Illusions: Staged Photography from the Met Collection’ (through Jan. 18) With 40 works, this small, choice exhibition forms a freewheeling survey of the ways and means of staged photography — the arranging objects or people for the camera — and the many needs and sensibilities it has served. Its smart installation jumps between past and present, commercial and fine, pre- and postmodern, and is peppered with surprises by artists well-known and not. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Kongo: Power and Majesty’ (through Jan. 3) For centuries the West assumed that African art had no history, because none had been found written down. But this tight, intense show, beautifully designed, with a stirring catalog, demonstrates otherwise. It begins in the 15th century when the rulers of Kongo peoples in Central Africa were sending luxury textiles to European courts and receiving gifts in return. It continues through the devastations of the slave trade, shifting from art made for pleasure and profit to art made to save lives and souls. It concludes with 15 sensational, just under life-size sculptures that were last-ditch responses to the slow-motion emergency of colonialism. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Reimagining Modernism: 1900-1950’ (continuing) One of the greatest encyclopedic museums in the world fulfills its mission a little more with an ambitious reinstallation of works of early European modernism with their American counterparts for the first time in nearly 30 years. Objects of design and paintings by a few self-taught artists further the integration. It is quite a sight, with interesting rotations and fine-tunings to come. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ MoMA PS1: ‘Greater New York’ (through March 7) With a multigenerational team of organizers, MoMA P.S. 1’s every-five-years-roundup of New York art steps away from its founding premise of newness, the idea that it would be an update on the metropolitan market. The 158 artists on the roster range from 20-something to 80-something; a few are deceased. The notion that an “emerging” artist has to be young is discarded. Older artists newly in the spotlight, or back after a long delay, qualify. And history works in two directions. Art from the 1970s and ’80s is presented as prescient of what’s being made now, and new art is viewed as putting a trenchant spin on the past. 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Cotter)★ Morgan Library & Museum: ‘Ernest Hemingway: Between Two Wars’ (through Jan. 31) Mounted on walls that have been painted tropical blue to suggest Hemingway’s years in Key West and in Cuba, this show takes him all the way from high school to roughly 1950 with photographs, handwritten first-drafts and personal correspondence. But the largest and most interesting section focuses on the ’20s, Hemingway’s Paris years, and reveals a writer we might have been in danger of forgetting: Hemingway before he became Hemingway. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org. (Charles McGrath)★ El Museo del Barrio: '¡Presente! The Young Lords in New York’ (through Dec. 12) On July 26, 1969, a group of young Latinos stood on stage of the band shell in Tompkins Square Park, in the East Village, and declared the founding of the New York branch of a revolution-minded political party called the Young Lords. Its purpose was to gain social justice for New York’s working-class Latino population, then largely Puerto Rican and treated with contempt by the city. Most of the people on stage that day were recent college graduates well-versed in leftist political theory. To gain the trust and cooperation of the grassroots communities — concentrated in the East Village, East Harlem and the South Bronx — they knew they needed to get their feet on the street, and they wasted no time. They cleaned up neighborhoods; battled for health care; and created spaces for art and music. Spread over two institutions, "¡Presente!” rescues a crucial episode in the city’s history and treats a vibrant political organization as both a cultural and an ideological phenomenon. 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street, East Harlem, 212-831-7272, elmuseo.org. (Cotter)AdvertisementMuseum of Arts and Design: ‘Wendell Castle Remastered’ (through Feb. 28) This eminent woodworker became noted in the 1960s for carving chic, curvy furniture out of blocks of laminated wood. In the past four years he has revived that method with the assistance of digital and robotic technologies that enable him to make bigger and more adventurous works. This engaging show focuses on pieces from those two periods. “Suspended Disbelief,” made this year, has an irregularly oval, glossy black table top extending horizontally and without legs some 10 feet in the air from a trio of tall conical forms resembling the tips of monstrous tendrils. It’s spectacular. 2 Columbus Circle, Manhattan, 212-299-7777, madmuseum.org. (Johnson)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Endless House: Intersections of Art and Architecture’ (through March 6) This scattered but enjoyable exhibition, drawn from the museum’s art collection as much as its design holdings, focuses on the single-family home as a place of experimentation and regeneration; of conflict as well as dreams. Its highlight is a series of drawings and photographs by Frederick Kiesler, the Austrian-American polymath whose Endless House — never completed — fused fine art, architecture, furniture and lighting design into a bulbous, unstable whole. Several artists here echo Kiesler’s theme of the house as a reflection of the psychology of its inhabitants. None is more powerful than Rachel Whiteread’s sober image, made with white correction fluid, of a dwelling in East London: a preparatory drawing for a now lost sculpture crafted by filling the house with liquid concrete. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Jason Farago)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Joaquín Torres-García: The Arcadian Modern’ (through Feb. 15) Few artists can claim to have captured a revolution in thinking in a single image, but Joaquín Torres-García did. In 1934, Torres-Garcia (1874-1949) took a hard-won knowledge of European modernism from Paris back to his birthplace of Uruguay. He gave the transplanted movement a name — “The School of the South” — and designed for it a now-famous logo: the silhouette of the South American continent turned upside down and placed above the Tropic of Cancer, where North America was on conventional maps. And he explained the meaning: The South, as a font of creative energy, was the new North, or at least its equal. The image, and the spirit that produced it, can be found in MoMA’s career survey, the artist’s first major United States retrospective in four decades. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Cotter)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Picasso Sculpture’ (through Feb. 7) Nearly a work of art in its own right, this magnificent show redefines Picasso’s achievement with the first full view here in 50 years of his astoundingly varied forays into sculpture. His materials, not his female loves, become the muses, and are different each time out. The basic plotline: After introducing sculptural abstraction and space, he spent about 50 years counting the ways that the figure was far from finished. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Scenes for a New Heritage: Contemporary Art from the Collection’ (through April 10) MoMA’s latest installation of works from its permanent collection fills the second-floor contemporary galleries with videos, installations, sculptures, drawings, prints and photographs produced by more than 30 artists during the past three decades. It’s an uneven, haphazard selection, but leaving artistic quality aside, its unusually optimistic-sounding title inadvertently raises a large and intriguing question: At a time when contemporary art seems to be spinning its wheels, what could a new heritage be? 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Johnson)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Soldier, Spectre, Shaman: The Figure and the Second World War’ (through March 20) MoMA usually stages the years after 1945 as a triumph of American abstraction, but this vital show affirms that the human figure never disappeared from art — especially not in battle-scarred Europe. With the end of the war, and the full revelation of the Holocaust, the human body became a sign of pathos and existential dread, notably in the fraught paintings of Francis Bacon and the spindly sculptures of Alberto Giacometti. The same was true of other European artists who received less American acclaim — such as Jean Fautrier, whose haunted “Otages” (“Hostages”) are far better known in his native France. The show is drawn entirely from the museum’s permanent collection, and its greatest surprise comes from Jan Müller, a German émigré in New York, whose ghoulish “Faust I” (1956) depicts the witches of Goethe’s epic as starved, traumatized wraiths. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Jason Farago)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Transmissions: Art in Eastern Europe and Latin America, 1960-1980’ (through Jan. 3) Visiting this big, spirited group show is like walking into a party of intriguing strangers. For every person you recognize, there are 10 you don’t know. One topic everyone’s talking about, at different intensities, is the anti-institutional politics that swept Europe and the Americas in the 1960s, and almost everyone speaks the language of Conceptualism. A product of an in-house research initiative called Contemporary and Modern Art Perspectives, or C-MAP, intended to expand MoMA’s narrow Paris-New York view of modernism, the show is very much the beginning rather than the end of a learning curve. But with curators exploring material new to them — just steps ahead of their audience — the show has a refreshing buzz of surprise as it takes the museum in a realistic new directions. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Cotter)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Activist New York’ (continuing) With a focus on activist tactics from the 17th century to the present, this exhibition — designed by the firm Pentagram — is a room-size onslaught of sensory stimulation, complete with videos, graphics and text. Told through 14 “moments” in New York activism, it includes a facsimile of the Flushing Remonstrance (1657), a petition for religious tolerance given to Peter Stuyvesant, director-general of the settlement, as well as contemporaneous objects, like a Dutch tobacco box, a Bible and “Meet the Activists” kiosks adjacent to each display, which identify activist groups working in the present. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Schwendener)AdvertisementMuseum of the City of New York: ‘Folk City: New York and the Folk Music Revival’ (through Jan. 10) Handwritten Bob Dylan lyrics, well-strummed guitars from Lead Belly, Judy Collins and Odetta, concert posters, Sing Out! magazines, video from a raucous protest over banning folk singers from Washington Square, the street sign from Gerdes Folk City and plenty of songs on headphones evoke idealism and ambition in “Folk City.” The exhibition explores how New York City became a magnet for and a champion of rural styles and then the center of a pop-folk movement, from leftist “people’s music” efforts in the 1930s and ’40s, and the Red Scare reaction, to the civil rights rallies, coffeehouses and hootenannies of the folk revival at its peak. The tangle of tradition and change, earnestness and pop machinations are on view, along with the makings of a legacy that roots matter and a song can change the world. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Jon Pareles)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Jacob A. Riis: Revealing New York’s Other Half’ (through March 20) The Danish immigrant muckraker’s stark photographs, coupled with his documents from the New York Public Library and the Library of Congress, vividly portray the changing face of poverty since Riis exposed the poor to an oblivious public 125 years ago and remind viewers of the lingering challenges. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Sam Roberts)★ Neue Galerie: ‘Berlin Metropolis: 1918-1933’ (through Jan. 4) Another outstanding museum exhibition joins New York’s autumn roster with this ambitious, expertly designed and organized account of the rich cultural ferment of the fragile Weimar Republic. With many loans from Germany, it musters an egalitarian array of mediums into a poignant, detailed view of the tragic cost — less in human life than in immeasurable human potential land achievement — of Hitler’s devastating rise and rule and the shattering of a great city. 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street, 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org. (Smith)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ New Museum: ‘Jim Shaw: The End Is Here’ (through Jan. 10) In Mr. Shaw’s art, form follows polymorphous perversity. A virtuoso chameleon possessing an amazing range of skills, he does Surrealism, Pop Art, Abstract Expressionism, Conceptualism, cartoons and comic strips, psychedelic posters and myriad kitschy illustration styles all with his own endlessly inventive, comedic twist. His works range from huge to miniature and from political allegories to drawings documenting his dreams. Selections from his personal collections of found paintings and wacky religious materials add to the delirium. 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Whitney Museum of American Art: ‘Archibald Motley: Jazz Age Modernist’ (through Jan. 17) Let’s take it as a good omen that the first solo show to appear in the Whitney’s new home is a career retrospective of a still understudied artist. Motley (1891-1981) was born in New Orleans and lived in Chicago, where he painted the cultural life of the city’s African American neighborhood known as Bronzeville, portraying it with an eye for calibrations of class and race, and with a sense of his own conflicted position within its context. The show is modest in size but has features that many larger, sexier exhibitions lack: an affecting narrative, a distinctive atmosphere, and a complex and troubling political and moral tenor. 99 Gansevoort Street, at Washington Street, 212-570-3600, whitney.org. (Cotter)★ Whitney Museum of American Art: ‘Frank Stella: A Retrospective’ (through Feb. 7) This grand, high-spirited, slightly overstuffed exhibition pays overdue tribute to a prominent American artist whose 60-year odyssey through and beyond painting began in this city. It further anoints the Whitney’s new building: The show could never have been pulled off at its old uptown address. And its ingenious installation — alternately dazzling, oppressive and nuts — resounds with stimulating clashes of color, style and process that bring a new unity to his contentious achievement. 99 Gansevoort Street, at Washington Street, 212-570-3600, whitney.org. (Smith)★ Georg Baselitz: ‘Visit from Hokusai’ (through Dec. 19) Not given much thought to the painter Georg Baselitz of late? This beautiful show of large diptychs in ink and watercolor on paper will make you think again. In each, the German Neo-Expressionist has paired one of his versions of a wonderful ink self-portrait by the great Japanese master, with a reprise of some (usually figurative) motif from his own repertory. Part homage, part self-deprecating review, these marvelously assured, emotionally felt works also have the effect of an artist’s slide lecture, compressed. Bravo. Gagosian Gallery, 980 Madison Avenue, at 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-2313, gagosian.com. (Smith)★ ‘Carl Andre in His Time’ This beautiful exhibition celebrates both the rigor and glamour of Minimalism, which reduced art to its ready-made, quasi-industrial essence while also functioning as impeccable interior décor. Paired with works by other Minimalists, Mr. Andre’s fields of lead, copper or zinc tiles maintain most handily the paradox of this aloof, perfection-prone style. They are not only unapologetically radical but also functional and approachable, as they are meant to be walked on. Mnuchin Gallery, 45 East 78th Street, Manhattan, 212-861-0020, mnuchingallery.com. (Smith)★ Sheila Hicks: ‘Ode to Roy Davis’ (through Dec. 23) Before going private, this storied gallery pays homage to its founder and longtime guiding light (who died last year) with a show devoted to the small but powerful weavings called “minimes” by their maker, the veteran fiber artist Sheila Hicks. Like miniatures, these pieces reward close study and in their intimacy, limited format and expressive variety sustain comparison with the small still lifes of the Italian painter Giorgio Morandi. Davis & Langdale Company, 231 East 60th Street, Upper East Side, 212-838-0333, www.davisandlangdale.com. (Roberta Smith)Advertisement★ ‘Swedish Wooden Toys’ (through Feb. 28) This presentation of more than 300 playthings from the late 16th to the early 21st centuries will be catnip for anyone into antique toys. The show features diminutive vehicles of all kinds from old-time wagons, trains and fully-rigged sailboats, to futuristic cars and a rocket ship. There are naturalistic and anthropomorphic animals, weapons, puzzles, games, dollhouses and architectural construction kits. While many of these items were produced by big manufacturers like BRIO and Playsam, many others are one-of-a-kind wonders like a miniature baking set from around 1900 that includes rolling pins, spatulas and other implements all lovingly carved from wood and fitting into a tray just eight inches long. Bard Graduate Center Gallery, 18 West 86th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3011, bgc.bard.edu. (Johnson)★ H.C. Westermann: ‘See America First: Works from 1953-1980’ (through Dec. 19) No one who cares about contemporary art should miss this terrific exhibition of sculptures, drawings, prints and illustrated letters by H. C. Westermann (1922–1981). He once said that he wanted his constructions to look as if they’d been made by a mad cabinetmaker, and they do. Made with consummate craftsmanship, his constructions mainly in wood are by turns funny, philosophical and politically vehement. He was a great American original. Venus, 980 Madison Avenue, at 76th Street, 212-980-0700, venusovermanhattan.com. (Johnson)★ Gil Batle: ‘Hatched in Prison’ (through Jan. 9) Mr. Batle, 53, served a total of 20 years in five California prisons for fraud and forgery. Now living in the Philippines, he has been recounting his experiences in an unlikely medium. Using a high-speed dental drill, he carves miniature narratives of prison life into the surfaces of ostrich eggs. The 19 examples in this show, all made in the past two years, are amazing for their meticulous craftsmanship and detailed story telling. Ricco Maresca, 529 West 20th Street, Chelsea, 212-627-4819, riccomaresca.com. (Johnson)‘Expanding Perceptions: Jack Goldstein, Beverly Pepper, Deborah Remington’ (through Dec. 23) If you’ve often had a feeble if not negative response to the work of these three artists, the artist and curator Andy Onderdonx is out to revise — and expand — your experience. He has brought together eight interesting, sometimes little-known examples of their efforts, creating an amazing crossfire of techniques, palettes and imagery. A certain shininess, whether real or illusive, has something to do with it, and that’s not a criticism. Creative curatorial thinking is alive and well here. Marlborough Chelsea, 545 West 25th Street, 212-463-8634, marlboroughchelsea.com. (Smith)★ Joseph Kosuth: ‘Agnosia, an Illuminated Ontology’ (through Dec. 19) A pioneer of 1960s-style Conceptualism, Mr. Kosuth has consistently insisted on the primacy of language as a constructor of reality over the course of his 50-year career. This philosophically provocative exhibition gathers together more than 40 works from 1965 to 2015 that feature electrically illuminated words, phrases and sentences in a visually sumptuous installation designed by the artist. Sean Kelly Gallery, 475 10th Avenue, at 36th Street, Chelsea, 212-239-1181, skny.com. (Johnson)★ Giorgio Morandi (through Dec. 19) This exhibition of 20 paintings concentrates on the artist’s mature years (1950-1963) when his experimentation with the ways of painting his beloved still lifes continued, but subtly, and his manipulations of space, scale and suggestion were especially rich. The display culminates in a wonderful theme-and-variations sequence: four canvases from 1952 that depict a nearly identical arrangement of objects. David Zwirner, 537 West 20th Street, Chelsea, 212-517-8677, davidzwirner.com. (Smith)★ Giorgio Morandi (through June 25) The Italian master of modern still life, and closet abstractionist, is celebrated in a large show devoted foremost to his painting from the 1930s, which are not well known in this country. They reveal a period of struggle during which the artist had settled on what to paint, how to paint was still very much up for grabs. Joel Meyerowitz’s large color photographs of Morandi’s still life objects – which he sometimes altered – are also on view. Reservations are required. Center for Italian Modern Art, 421 Broome Street, near Crosby Street, SoHo, 646-370-3596, italianmodernart.org. (Smith)Merlin Carpenter: ‘Hands Against Hands’ (through Dec. 13) Known for making anti-painting paintings, this maverick British artist has taken 20 canvases portraying hands that he considered failed works and added further renderings of hands, these borrowed from another artist’s photographs. More conventionally Expressionist than his usual fare, the results underscore that while Mr. Carpenter strives to subvert all notions of the artist’s “hand,” his own painterly touch has long been a saving grace. Reena Spaulings Fine Art, 165 East Broadway, at Rutgers Street, Lower East Side, 212-477-5006, reenaspaulings.com. (Smith)Advertisement‘The Description of a New World, Called the Blazing-World’ (through Dec. 13) This group show exudes a tantalizing, sci-fi vibe. Cajsa von Zeipel’s metallic blue sculpture represents a character from the Japanese animated science fiction series “Cowboy Bebop.” In Anna Uddenberg’s sculpture “Jealous Jasmin,” a life-size woman is trying to climb into a baby carriage as if she were a zombie intending to eat her own child. Abstract paintings by Magalie Comeau and Tillman Kaiser allude to other dimensions of reality. A psychedelic drawing from 1971 by Betty Tompkins nicely punctuates the trippy mood. Mitchell Algus Gallery, 132 Delancey Street, at Norfolk Street, Lower East Side, 212-844-0074, mitchellalgusgallery.com. (Johnson)Alex Ebstein: ‘Form/Fit’ (through Dec. 20) A young painter adept with yoga mats (of all things) makes her New York debut in the new downtown gallery of a former and current employee of the Skarstedt Gallery venture. Ms. Ebstein exploits the mats’ bumpy texture and colors with compositions that have one foot in design (think soft Formica), one in 1950s biomorphism and a third in present interests in worldly abstraction and painting-without-paint. She paints patterns on a few of her cutout shapes, and these also look promising. Cuevas Tilleard, 142 Henry Street, at Rutgers Street, Lower East Side, 917-868-1225, cuevastilleard.com. (Smith)★ ‘For a New World to Come: Experiments in Japanese Art and Photography, 1968-1979’ (through Jan. 10) This exceptionally informative exhibition (divided between Japan Society Gallery and New York University’s Grey Art Gallery) presents about 350 photographs, photography books, paintings, sculptures and videos produced by 29 Japanese artists during a decade of ideological disillusionment following the utopian excitement of the 1960s. Most of the works are black and white and driven by abstract concepts, with many focused on the nature of photography itself. It’s a dry show, but it’s fascinating for its revelation of memes and trends that continue to resonate in photographic art around the world. Closes on Saturday at Grey Art Gallery, New York University, 100 Washington Square East, Greenwich Village, 212-998-6780, nyu.edu/greyart. Through Jan. 10 at Japan Society, 333 East 47th Street, Manhattan, 212-832-1155, japansociety.org. (Johnson)★ Hollis Frampton: ‘ADSVMVS ABSVMVS’ (through Dec. 20) The filmmaker, photographer, essayist, poet, teacher, fabulist and proto-digital pioneer Hollis Frampton (1936-1984) eased off on producing photography after the 1960s but came back to it again at the end of his life. His final work in the medium, a portfolio of 14 pictures, makes up this exhibition, which is also his New York gallery solo debut. The premise of the series is that photography is a kind of embalming mechanism for images, with a counterpart in the everyday world: a garter snake’s shed skin; edible dried fish; pressed flowers. Each item is shot against a dark ground, and accompanied by a paragraph stating its find-spot along with mixes of description, opinion, folklore and art-lore. The result is zanily moving memento mori. Room East, 41 Orchard Street, Lower East Side, 212-226-7109, roomeast.com. (Cotter)Loie Hollowell: ‘AHHA’ (through Dec. 13) The nine paintings here, in Ms. Hollowell’s first solo exhibition, include geometric shapes and Gestalt-type images with conscious allusions to painters like Georgia O’Keeffe and Arthur Dove. Ms. Hollowell is not just recycling. She is trying to create her own lexicon of forms representing the vagina and female breasts. Countering the myth of “pure” abstraction and the recent, celebrated return of the figure in painting, Ms. Hollowell’s sleight-of-hand abstraction offers a third option. (Sundays only.) 106 Green, 104 Green Street, near Franklin Street, 106green.com. (Schwendener)★ ‘Painting Tranquility: Masterworks by Vilhelm Hammershoi From SMK — The National Gallery of Denmark’ (through Feb. 27) One of Denmark’s most celebrated artists, Hammershoi (1864-1916) was known as “the painter of tranquil rooms.” This beautiful show of 24 paintings includes pictures in severely muted colors of women in nearly empty rooms suffused by atmospheres of mystery and loneliness; misty, gray cityscapes, devoid of people, that are like anxiety dreams; and tenderly unflinching portraits of the artist’s wife, Ida. Scandinavia House, 58 Park Avenue, at 38th Street, 212-779-3587, scandinaviahouse.org. (Johnson)Jeppe Hein: ‘Please Touch the Art’ (through April 2016) People with small children likely will enjoy Mr. Hein’s three-part show. If it’s a hot day, the kids will rush to be drenched by “Appearing Rooms,” which has water spouting up unpredictably from a square platform of metal grating. Youngsters as well as grown-ups also may be fascinating by the perceptually confounding “Mirror Labyrinth NY,” which consists of mirror-surfaced planks of stainless steel in varying heights planted in the grass in a spiral formation. Meanwhile, guardians can rest on one of 16 fanciful, shocking orange park benches while their young charges clamber about on the furniture’s surrealistically altered parts. Brooklyn Bridge Park, 334 Furman Street, Fulton Ferry, Brooklyn, publicartfund.org. (Johnson)Dia:Beacon: Robert Irwin: ‘Excursus: Homage to the Square³' (through May 2017) A walk-in maze with walls of white scrim lit by color-filtered fluorescent tubes, Mr. Irwin’s “Excursus: Homage to the Square³” had its debut in 1998 at the Dia Center for the Arts in Chelsea. It was so popular that the curators elected to keep it on view a year longer than its originally planned run. It’s reincarnation here is similarly transporting, if not as thoroughly as the original was. But to experience it at Dia:Beacon along Minimalist works by other artists that encourage heightened perceptual attention to the here and now is as spiritually calming as it is historically illuminating. 3 Beekman Street, Beacon, 845-440-0100, diaart.org. (Johnson)Advertisement★ ‘Enigmas: The Art of Bada Shanren (1626–1705)' (through Jan. 3) Beginning next January, the Freer Gallery of Art in Washington will go dark for a year and a half while it’s 1923 building gets an overhaul. Its Chinese painting collection will be especially missed. And as if intent on leaving a potent memory of it, the museum has served up a sparkler of final show, centered on a charismatic 17th-century superstar whose life encompassed dramatic shifts of fortune, and whose art holds mysteries yet to be understood. 1050 Independence Avenue SW, 202-633-1000, asia.si.edu. (Cotter)★ Museum of Fine Arts Boston: ‘Made in the Americas: The New World Discovers Asia’ (through Feb. 15) One of the great gifts that multiculturalist thinking gave us was freedom from the tyranny of purity. Simply put, there’s no such thing, at least not in art. Everything is a mix, and this has always been true. Globalism, which we take to be so 21st century, is as old as the hills. In this smallish show those hills encompass the Andes, the Alps, the Appalachians and Mount Fuji between the early 16th to the late 18th century. The main setting includes large swaths of North, Central and South America being colonized by various European powers, all of which had lucrative commercial links to Asia, and they were bringing Asia with them to the New World. The result: some of the most brilliant American art ever. 465 Huntington Avenue, Boston, 617-267-9300, mfa.org. (Cotter)★ National Museum of African Art: ‘Conversations: African and African American Artists in Dialogue’ (through Jan. 24) For its 50th anniversary, this museum has brilliantly thread together work from two sources: its own holdings in African material and the Camille O. and William H. Cosby Jr. collection of African-American art. The Cosby collection, weighted toward canonical figures like Romare Bearden and Charles White, will bring in the crowds, but it is the curators and museum itself, which is in a period of renaissance, that have made the show rise well above predictability. Smithsonian Institution, 950 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, 202-633-4600, africa.si.edu. (Cotter)★ Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art (ongoing) The skilled refurbishing of the Atheneum’s storied Morgan Memorial Building reveals as never before the museum’s splendors. The Great Hall is triple-hung with European paintings encircled by a spirited art-historical Cliff Notes from Egypt to Florence. On the second floor the fabulous Cabinet of Art and Curiosities leads to even more often outstanding paintings – Baroque to Modernism – accompanied by an array of decorative objects, especially porcelains. 600 Main Street, Hartford, Conn., 860-278-2670, thewadsworth.org. (Smith)David Gilbert: ‘The Secret Garden’ (closes on Sunday) To make his photographs, Mr. Gilbert creates rough sculptural assemblages and installations in his studio in Los Angeles and illuminates them with spectral lighting. The process links him not just with photography’s origins as an index of light, but with Baroque artists like Caravaggio and Georges de La Tour for whom light was alchemically symbolic. Like many of his contemporaries, Mr. Gilbert uses digital manipulation sparingly. The work has a raw, slightly scruffy sensibility, which amplifies its personal and romantic character, bolstering an overall shift in contemporary photography toward the poetic, mystical and mysterious. Klaus von Nichtssagend Gallery, 54 Ludlow Street, near Grand Street, Lower East Side, 212-777-7756, klausgallery.com. (Schwendener)★ EJ Hauser: ‘Amphibian’ (closes on Sunday) Seven years after her last solo show — and debut — in New York, this dedicated painter hits her stride with a series of canvases whose small blocky strokes conjure the digital, the woven and the wood blocked. The recurring image is radiantly attentive and skittish. It depicts a frog and has a totemic dimension, but sometimes suggests two people reverberating through time and space. The show confirms that good art takes time and persistence and the drawings are good in their own way. Regina Rex, 221 Madison Street, at Jefferson Street, Lower East Side, 347-460-7739, reginarex.org. (Smith)★ Ralph Lemon: ‘Scaffold Room’ (closes on Saturday) Mr. Lemon’s penumbral installation at the Kitchen served as a stage set for a series of performances that took place in early November, but also makes for a resonant exhibition by this wonderful artist. Populated by African sculptures dressed in handmade Beyoncé and Jay-Z outfits, by projected images of animals that seem to exchange forms with humans and by a video of Edna Carter, 86, who has created her own Garden of Eden in the Mississippi Delta, the show radiates an eerie, foreboding tenderness. Its underground edge embodies in a stack of books that suggests an assigned reading list: Kathy Acker, Iceberg Slim and the Marquis de Sade. 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org. (Cotter)Eva and Franco Mattes: ‘I Would Prefer Not to Include My Name’ (closes on Sunday) In their current exhibition, Eva and Franco Mattes deal with images, videos and information on the Internet that have disappeared completely at the hands of “content moderators.” Three short color videos, shown on monitors that are arranged like sculptural kiosks, tell the stories of current and former content moderators. Some are hired by Internet companies; others as independent contractors for anonymous “requesters.” Based all over the world, these workers are virtually invisible, yet, as this exhibition suggests, have a significant cultural impact. Essex Flowers, 54 ½ Ludlow Street, at Grand Street, Lower East Side, essexflowers.us. (Schwendener)Because of an editing error, an earlier version of the entry about the Georg Baselitz show at the Gagosian Gallery misspelled the name of the Japanese artist who inspired the works. He was Hokusai, not Hakusai.A version of this schedule appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page C22 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Art.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.