
Antiques By                     
EVE M. KAHN

DEC. 3, 2015
For centuries, antique prints, drawings and manuscripts were sliced apart, a standard practice that created individual pieces of vellum and paper for sale or display, in the hopes of drawing attention to the art forms. Institutions are now trying to reassemble the dispersed pages and fragments.Last month, Yale’s Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library acquired medieval works — books, loose pages and bindings — from descendants of Otto F. Ege, a dean at the Cleveland Institute of Art who died in 1951. Mr. Ege, who had a sideline as a dealer, took apart medieval books to create portfolios of illuminated manuscripts, which he sold.His boxed sets, many of which are part of institutional collections, contained vellum sheets inscribed and painted at European monasteries between the 12th and 16th centuries. The prayer texts and floral borders are studded with burnished gold.Mr. Ege wrote in a 1938 magazine article that scattering pages gave the public access to “the thrill and understanding that comes only from actual and frequent contact with these art heritages.”AdvertisementRaymond Clemens, the Beinecke’s curator of early books and manuscripts, said that while many book dismantlers operated covertly, Mr. Ege “was very open and blunt” about the technique being potentially useful to scholars.Mr. Ege’s family had long stored boxfuls of material. Yale’s purchase, for an undisclosed price, also includes covers for disassembled books, which may bear markings from monastic scribes and past owners. The library staff will be digitizing the material and looking for related pages. Yale has scheduled a conference on broken books for 2018.Lisa Fagin Davis, the executive director of the Medieval Academy of America, said she “can’t wait” to pore over the Ege documents. She is part of a curatorial team organizing  a group of exhibitions focusing on medieval books and fragments acquired by collectors in the Boston area. It will be set up next year at three sites in Boston and Cambridge.She has also set out to digitally reassemble the Beauvais Missal, a 13th-century French prayer book. In the 1940s, dealers including Mr. Ege dispersed its 309 pages, and Dr. Davis has tracked down a third of them. (On Thursday, in an online Christie’s auction, a Beauvais Missal sheet and a 12th-century page from a German or Austrian prayer book that Mr. Ege handled sold for a few thousand dollars each.)Dr. Davis added in an email, “It’s a very exciting time to be a ‘fragmentologist.’ ”Christoph Flüeler, a professor at the University of Fribourg in Switzerland, is overseeing a new centralized database, the Fragmentarium, for pieces of medieval manuscripts. More than a dozen institutions are collaborating, including Harvard, Yale, Stanford, the British Library and the Vatican. Dr. Flüeler said that historians, dealers and collectors would eventually be able to upload images of fragments and perhaps determine the original contexts.AdvertisementNext month, the Morgan Library & Museum in New York is opening an exhibition of drawings that belonged to Pierre-Jean Mariette, an art collector in 18th-century Paris. He routinely trimmed and spliced pages, and embellished the edges of unfinished images. When single sheets of paper had sketches on both sides, he sometimes split the layers to create two drawings and then inserted them into his favorite powder-blue mats.Giada Damen, the show’s main curator, said Mr. Mariette had hoped to increase the art world’s respect for drawings, which were underappreciated in his time. He was not trying to raise the value of his own 9,000 artworks; he did not sell them in his lifetime. After his death in 1774, they were dispersed through dozens of auctions. (Scholars have spent decades tracking them down.)By editing the pages, Ms. Damen said, “He wanted to make the composition more clearly readable and understandable.” In the minds of his contemporaries, she added, “He was doing the right thing.”In a tan outbuilding overlooking a pond in northeastern Connecticut, equipment for turning seashells into buttons has lain fallow for nearly eight decades. The building’s owner, Mark Masinda, a retired university administrator, is working to transform the site into a tourist attraction.In the early 1900s, his grandfather William Masinda, a Czech immigrant, supervised a dozen button makers in the building, which is on a rural road in Willington. They cut, drilled and polished bits of shells imported from Africa and Australia to make “ocean pearl buttons” with two or four holes. The area’s half-dozen button factories supplemented the incomes of families struggling to farm on rocky terrain.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Masinda operation closed in 1938, as plastic flooded the market. “The equipment he had just couldn’t make the transition,” Mr. Masinda said.Little has changed at the property, although it now has a Facebook page and is listed in online databases of lost Connecticut mills. The machines are dusty but intact. The forested trails nearby glitter with broken iridescent seashells.Mr. Masinda is planning to reactivate the equipment and open the site for tours by next spring. His team of helpers includes Paul Weigold, vice president of the Willington Historical Society, and the teenage triplets Benjamin, Nicholas and Alexander Boyer, who are all Boy Scouts. The sagging roof, siding, windows and floors have been rebuilt. While renovations are still underway, Mr. Masinda said, some passers-by have been so impressed that “they just pop in and offer to help us.”He recently discovered that his grandfather had worked for a time for John Frederick Boepple, a German immigrant who founded a pearl button manufacturing hub in Muscatine, Iowa, which turned mussel shells from the Mississippi River into millions of buttons a year.The Muscatine History and Industry Center’s pearl button museum displays artifacts from the region’s shuttered button factories. Terry Eagle, the museum’s assistant director, said he was pleased to hear about the Willington restoration project. His motto, he added, is “Let’s button up, America, and get this story out.”A version of this article appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page C29 of the New York edition with the headline: Scattered Medieval PagesGathered Together Again.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »