AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Jason FaragoThe polymath Pierre Klossowski was a venerable figure of the last century: novelist, translator and hero of the philosophers Michel Foucault and Gilles Deleuze. In the art world, however, he remains a lesser-known quantity, especially on this side of the Atlantic. Though his airy Mannerist-influenced drawings have appeared in museum retrospectives in London, Paris and Cologne, Germany, as well as in major group exhibitions like Documenta, Klossowski has been overshadowed in the United States by his younger brother, the painter Balthus (né Balthasar Klossowski).But the elder is the more compelling artist. Balthus’s scenes of jaded nymphets display an indifference to history and ideas that verges on revanchism. In Pierre’s art, especially the large figurative drawings he began making in middle age, eroticism is just one of many interlocking concerns: modernity, hospitality, violence, self-conception. Nine of these awkward but engrossing drawings — dating from 1979 to 1990, many featuring his aggressed but steadfast female character Roberte in compromising positions — are on view now in the new uptown branch of Gladstone Gallery. By any account they are unmissable, though you will want to leave the kids at home for this one.Klossowski was born in 1905 in Paris; his Polish father was an art historian, and his mother was a student of Bonnard. Pierre and Balthasar, three years younger, moved to Berlin just as World War I began; their parents split up, thanks in part to their mother’s affair with Rainer Maria Rilke.It was Rilke who introduced Pierre to André Gide, for whom he served as a secretary. The young Klossowski helped edit “The Counterfeiters” as well as “Corydon,” Gide’s bold 1924 defense of homosexuality, which drew heavily on contemporary sexology. A drawing here offers a hint of what Klossowski might have learned from his mentor: A young Greek athlete, naked but for his golden sandals, gazes up from a locker room bench to receive the benediction of Socrates while half a dozen other men look on.Bilingual, Klossowski translated several major works of German philosophy into French, among them Nietzsche’s “The Gay Science” and Walter Benjamin’s “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.” Sade, especially, was an influence. In the shadow of the Holocaust, Klossowski published “Sade Mon Prochain” (“Sade My Neighbor,” 1947), a study of desire and unreason, and then “Roberte ce Soir” a Sadean fusion of novel and philosophy in which the titular heroine is ordered by her husband to sleep with a series of guests.But in “Roberte ce Soir” and in the subsequent drawings on view here, sex is not especially dramatic, nor does submission look especially dolorous. Roberte — who in the novel is no feeble girl, like those brother Balthus liked to paint, but a radical member of Parliament — appears serene in a long, narrow drawing featuring her trussed between parallel bars, wearing a pageboy cap but no underwear. In another drawing she is splayed out nude on the lap of a medieval hero, but her stern mien expresses contentment and self-command.Sex is neither a joy nor a punishment in these drawings, but a ritualized encounter governed by complex rules of hospitality. Klossowski’s soft palette — mauve and orchid and powder blue and beige — compounds the sense of quiet, as does his languorous figuration: Roberte is extruded like one of Parmigianino’s long-necked sitters, while a boy on roller skates has legs as spindly and disproportionate as a flamingo’s. Where Balthus strove for academic precision in his drawings, Pierre drew more freely and more surreally. You may be reminded more of the sexed-up Surrealism of Max Ernst and Hans Bellmer, though Klossowski’s drawings are more uneasy.The model for many of the drawings of Roberte was Klossowski’s wife, Denise — a member of the French Resistance who was deported to the Ravensbruck concentration camp in Germany, then escaped. And indeed the legacy of World War II, and the proof it gave of modernity’s easy descent into atrocity, linger in the background of Klossowski’s writing and art. In the 1980 drawing “La Belle Empoisonneuse,” we see a woman in a bourgeois bedroom pushing a goblet toward her shocked husband’s mouth. Grabbing her from behind is a strange hooded figure in red: the devil, perhaps, or an executioner. Even stranger is a disembodied hand that extends from the right of the picture plane — an informant’s. For Klossowski, as for Sade before him, the everyday couple or everyday family was the true abomination, and the likelier source of violence. It was only in extremity that civilization could be preserved.It took many years, and a model of art history that stopped seeing the past as a mere succession of avant-gardes, before Klossowski finally won attention in Europe as a visual artist. I hope the same happens here. To mount an exhibition of such an unsung European artist counts as a statement of intent from Gladstone Gallery, which is inaugurating its Upper East Side space with this important show. And there is far more to explore: Klossowski was also a filmmaker, and played the lead in a screen adaptation of “Roberte ce Soir.”One last thing: Architectural aficionados should make a special trek. The new gallery is housed in a townhouse designed by Edward Durell Stone, a landmark of International Style now happily open to the public. Stone, one of the two architects of the original Museum of Modern Art, replaced the front of the townhouse in 1956 with an imposing, even pitiless facade of round concrete baffles. On the parlor level, the interior features a marble floor and ample natural light — an Apollonian setting for some of the last century’s greatest Dionysian drawings.“Pierre Klossowski” is on view through Dec. 19 at Gladstone Gallery, 130 East 64th Street, Manhattan; 212-753-2200, gladstonegallery­.com/Advertisement