AdvertisementSupported byBy Graham BowleyLawyers for seven women suing Bill Cosby for defamation in a Massachusetts federal court case have served notice that they hope to question Camille O. Cosby, the entertainer’s wife, under oath next month, but Mr. Cosby’s lawyer said he would fight the request.The deposition raises the prospect that Mrs. Cosby could enter legal proceedings for the first time as her husband fights allegations that emanate from dozens of accusations by women that he sexually assaulted them.Joseph Cammarata, a lawyer representing the seven women in the defamation case, said he notified Mr. Cosby’s lawyers on Tuesday that he is planning to depose Mrs. Cosby on Jan. 6. He proposed that the deposition take place in Springfield, Mass., to be close to where the couple has a home.“She is intimately involved in Mr. Cosby’s life, both personally and professionally, and she has information that we wish to have that is relevant to the case,” Mr. Cammarata said in an interview. He declined to elaborate.Mr. Cammarata is also looking to depose Mr. Cosby and several of Mr. Cosby’s lawyers and associates, he said. The defamation case against Mr. Cosby is based on statements made by several of his lawyers and representatives.Mr. Cosby has denied all wrongdoing and has never been charged with a crime.A lawyer for Mr. and Mrs. Cosby, Monique Pressley, said the request to depose Mrs. Cosby was improper and Mr. Cosby’s legal team would object.“We view it as harassment,” she said. “This is a case that is supposed to be a simple defamation case that is based on a set of statements by specific people and Camille Cosby is not one of those people, and neither is her husband.”Mrs. Cosby has been married to Mr. Cosby since 1964 and has kept a low profile since emerging last year to defend him and to criticize the media for what she said was a failure to scrutinize the women who had made the allegations.In a statement then, she said the Bill Cosby shown in the news media was not the “wonderful husband” she still loved.The women who brought the case, have accused Mr. Cosby of assaulting them decades ago but were blocked from filing civil suits directly related to any assault accusations because of the statute of limitations.Instead, they filed a defamation complaint, arguing that Mr. Cosby, in denying their accusations, had branded them as liars.Mr. Cosby faces three additional separate defamation cases against him, one each in Pennsylvania and California and another in Massachusetts. In total, 10 women are seeking redress on defamation claims.Mr. Cosby has already answered questions under oath in a separate California civil case brought by another woman, Judy Huth.Advertisement