AdvertisementSupported byInside ArtBy Robin PogrebinMIAMI BEACH — The rap on the annual contemporary art fair here is that much of the art has already been presold and most of the collectors come only for the parties.Veterans of Art Basel Miami Beach say there is plenty of fun to be had — it’s hard to keep track of the dozens of events on offer, including seated gallery dinners and liquor promotions.But there is also serious art-buying to be done and many dealers say they have their best results here. “It’s my favorite fair and normally it’s the most successful,” the dealer Paul Kasmin said. “I don’t think I’ve ever presold anything.”So where does that perception come from? “A lot of art dealers are very full of stories,” Mr. Kasmin said, “as you’ve probably noticed.”The dealer Lawrence R. Luhring, of Luhring Augustine, who was a member of the fair’s founding committee, said, “Once the reputation is out there it’s hard to lose.“There are a lot of people who come for the parties — there are people who don’t even come to the fair,” he added. “But we do business here.”Because tastes tend to be broad at the Miami fair, Luhring Augustine generally presents a sampling of artists in its booth. This year the gallery is featuring a selection of Brazilian artists as well as a new blurred image by Jeff Elrod, which sold the first day.Barbara Gladstone, the longtime dealer, said she makes a point of not selling any work in advance that her gallery brings to the fair. “I really like to wait because we very often have very nice surprises,” she said.As it turned out, many dealers were pleasantly surprised after the fair’s opening day on Wednesday, with many reporting strong sales, particularly for primary market works priced under $1 million. In the first day, for example, Pace Gallery said it sold 16 works by Louise Nevelson priced between $75,000 and $1 million, none of which were presold.As for the parties, many dealers say they simply opt out.“There are too many of them and I don’t think it’s that useful,” Ms. Gladstone said. “It just becomes a kind of perpetual motion machine. I usually hide.”•In 1957, Tatyana Grosman founded a print shop in her Long Island garage that became Universal Limited Art Editions (U.L.A.E.), which published the work of artists like Jasper Johns, Barnett Newman, James Rosenquist, Robert Rauschenberg and Helen Frankenthaler.Now, nearly 60 years later, U.L.A.E. has come to Art Basel Miami Beach for the first time, one of 29 new galleries at the fair.Bill Goldston, Ms. Grosman’s successor (she died in 1982) and the director of the business since 1976, said it was his daughter Larissa’s idea to “to try this fair thing,” adding that he went along with it “reluctantly.”Mr. Goldston’s daughter, who had her own Manhattan gallery, works with him. “As we all grow older, younger people begin to take the place of the older people,” he said. “And they put different ideas forward.”Other fair newcomers have long aspired to gain entry to the fair (700 galleries applied this year and 267 were accepted). François Ghebaly, for example, had given up after being wait-listed four times. Then, he said, the director of Art Basel, Marc Spiegler, showed up at the door of his Los Angeles gallery encouraging him to keep applying; he finally got in this year.“Now I aim to stay there,” Mr. Ghebaly said.Thomas Duncan, who used to work for Gagosian and now has his own Los Angeles gallery, which is also new to the fair, said that at Art Basel — here and at its Swiss counterpart — “there’s a level of visibility that is unparalleled.”And Maxwell Graham of the Essex Street gallery in Manhattan, said he feels “a very personal kind of joy” about being in the fair for the first time, because he is from Miami, where the fair was formative in his career.“It really had an impact,” Mr. Graham recalled. “The explosion of that much contemporary art in a concentrated area. I’d never experienced anything like it.”•The Argentine hotelier and real estate developer Alan Faena did not complete his $150 million Faena Forum in time for the fair, as originally planned; the 50,000-square-foot cultural center at 3300 Collins Avenue, designed by Rem Koolhaas, is still under construction.But walking through the expansive Forum the other day — as well as through the Faena Hotel across the street that did manage to open this week — one can see the new six-block Faena district taking shape.“It’s alive,” Mr. Faena said, as he toured the Forum in his signature white suit and Panama hat. “When you build this kind of building, you are building — in a way — the future.”When the Faena Forum is completed — expected to be in September — the opening will be celebrated with a processional directed by Claire Tancons, a curator and art historian who stages participatory performances in public squares. The Cuban art collective Los Carpinteros will present “Conga Irreversible,” a giant conga spectacle; the Spanish artist Antoni Miralda will create “Miami Global Banquet,” a food installation; and the Italian artist Marinella Senatore will present “School of Narrative Dance,” in which a classroom setting is constructed in real time.Mr. Faena and Ximena Caminos, the Forum’s executive director and Mr. Faena’s companion, say they see the Forum as an experimental, multidisciplinary “laboratory” for everything from lectures to dance performances. “There is not a work of art in here,” Ms. Caminos said. “We will create the culture together.”There are works of art in the hotel already, including a mirrored installation of carved flora by the Argentine artist Amaya Bouquet; chandeliers by Alberto Garutti; and a 9-foot-10, 24-karat gilded skeleton of the woolly mammoth in its own glass case.The mammoth belongs to Mr. Faena’s longtime business partner, Leonard Blavatnik, with whom he is developing the district (and who, incidentally, was the buyer of Lucian Freud’s “Brigadier” for $34.9 million at Christie’s last month).Getting the two-ton mammoth sculpture installed outdoors and protected from the ocean, UV rays, humidity and hurricanes was no easy feat. “The mammoth,” Ms. Caminos said, “has to have temperature control.”Advertisement