AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleAnother year, another “American Horror Story,” this one subtitled “Hotel” and set in a production designer’s dream of a Deco-era downtown Los Angeles lodging that has survived into the present day.In the show’s 90-minute fifth-season premiere (Wednesday night on FX), a pair of leggy, blond European tourists are dropped off at the Hotel Cortez and check in despite the mustiness, the mysterious moans and the frightening presence of Kathy Bates behind the front desk. We can buy that; it’s what European tourists do in horror shows. But checking in after they’re told there’s no Wi-Fi? What self-respecting young Swede does that?There’s a jokey, parodic feeling to that opening sequence that carries through the rest of the premiere and signifies a small but distinct change in mood from the earlier seasons of this Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk Grand Guignol anthology series. The show has always been all on the surface — paper-thin in terms of ideas and drama but drenched in creepy atmosphere and peekaboo depravity. “Hotel” keeps the depravity but, for now, appears to have dropped the voluptuous melodrama of the “Freak Show” and “Coven” seasons. It seems to be going more for burlesque than for sincere, if over-the-top, homage.“Hotel” possesses the usual “American Horror Story” framework (noticeable but not very important), in which a band of lost souls is trapped together — in a haunted house, a witches’ coven, a traveling carnival.In the new season the action takes place on an elaborate set, created by the production designer Mark Worthington, that recalls the Overlook in “The Shining” — as well as some actual Los Angeles hotels like the Cecil and the Hollywood Roosevelt — but also invokes movie-palace lobbies and the opulent spaces of department stores or cruise ships from old Hollywood movies.That set is easily the most interesting thing about the show so far. Within it, the usual sorts of things soon begin to happen — a man nailed to a headboard (that’s how he’s listed in the credits), a blood-soaked orgy, a rape with a drill-bit dildo. The phantasmagoric accouterments include Lady Gaga, the most notable addition to the cast, who appears halfway through the episode as a Joan Crawford-like predator called the Countess.“American Horror Story” has always depended on its performers to give some flesh and feeling to its spindly armature of high design and old-movie pastiche, and “Hotel” suffers from the absence of Jessica Lange, who has left the series, and Lily Rabe, who is scheduled to appear in only a couple of episodes. In Ms. Lange’s absence, the role of malevolent den mother appears to have gone to Lady Gaga, and that’s a pretty steep drop-off.Other members of the “Horror Story” repertory company return and continue to do amusing work, however. The invaluable Denis O’Hare plays a bald cross-dresser named Liz Taylor with his typical deadpan sang-froid, despite earrings the size of small crustaceans and 10-inch platform heels. Sarah Paulson once again has the “serious” role, this time as a drug addict with a leopard coat and a big head of Elsa Lanchester hair.The story they inhabit this time around barely comes into focus in the first episode, which plays like a series of vignettes with only the loosest of connections. People die in the Cortez in horrible ways, for reasons that don’t promise to be very interesting but which will be investigated by a detective (Wes Bentley) who has a personal connection to the hotel. At the same time, a developer played by Cheyenne Jackson, another addition to the cast, threatens to buy the place and gentrify it, providing an existential threat to the resident psychos and demons.Mr. Murphy directed the premiere, mixing a lot of Stanley Kubrick (not just “The Shining” but also “2001”) with touches of David Fincher and David Lynch, while keeping the camera moving restlessly around the elaborate, claustrophobic set. You won’t see more dolly shots, crane shots and gratuitous uses of a fish-eye lens in any other television episode this year.Whether he and Mr. Falchuk will concoct a narrative — or at least an atmosphere — entertaining enough to keep us watching through 13 episodes remains to be seen. It was unusual, for an FX show, that only one episode of “Hotel” was made available for review, and less than a week before the premiere. With “Horror Story” and “Scream Queens” on the air and the new “American Crime Story” in production, perhaps they’re getting a little overextended. There’s only so much genre reinvention that two men can do.Advertisement