By ZACHARY WOOLFEDEC. 3, 2015
The outrageous, eccentric Vicomtesse Marie-Laure de Noailles and her husband, Charles de Noailles, were two of Surrealism’s most important supporters, the patrons of artists like Man Ray, Luis Buñuel, Alberto Giacometti, Salvador Dalí and Francis Poulenc, whom the vicomtesse called Poupoule. So it made sense that a concert commemorating their influence on Wednesday at the Baryshnikov Arts Center would start off with some contemporary Surrealism.Two works by Mark Applebaum, who teaches at Stanford, shared a high-spirited, brazenly complicated absurdist style. “Aphasia” (2010) pairs a solo performer (here, Mr. Applebaum himself) and a recording of a human voice, processed with electronics into an array of clicks, coughs, squeals and whispers. Mr. Applebaum matched these sounds to a vocabulary of more than a hundred hand gestures, from dainty finger wiggles to zipping-up motions, and it becomes ambiguous whether the noises are eliciting the movements or vice versa.It was charming, but little more than that: the same description that could be given to “Control Freak 2” (2015), in which the baritone Tyler Duncan improvised on poems by K. Silem Mohammad, who has created bawdy new sonnets out of anagrams of some by Shakespeare. An octet of instrumentalists responded to the singer’s speak-singing inventions with a repertoire of blips, taps, paper rips and jittery flutters. The players were outfitted with wristwatches, and Mr. Applebaum, conducting, occasionally cued them to consult these, leading them to stand up and sit down abruptly, whack-a-mole style, whispering all the while.Poulenc’s “Le Bal Masqué” is scored for the same combination of musicians (singer, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, trumpet, percussion, violin, cello and piano). Written in 1932 under commission from the vicomte and vicomtesse, it sets Max Jacob poems that, like Mr. Mohammad’s sonnets, refer to the body and its failures, from bleeding eyes to the pulling of worms from a corpse’s nose.Veering from madcap brassy triumph to cafe-music suavity, the work here received a lively, agile performance from Mr. Duncan, his delivery light and natural, and a team of excellent players. This was the second in a small set of concerts at the arts center honoring early-20th-century French arts patrons; the series concludes on Dec. 16 and 17 with a celebration of Misia Sert and works by Satie and Ravel.This program repeats on Friday at the Baryshnikov Arts Center, 450 West 37th Street, Manhattan; 866-811-4111, bacnyc­.org.A version of this review appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Clicks, Coughs and a Whack-a-Mole Octet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.