AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Ben RatliffErykah Badu’s new mixtape, “But You Caint Use My Phone,” would seem to be about connectivity and unavailability, about needing the phone to communicate on a meaningful level or using it so much that you stop communicating on a meaningful level.Great subject, though Ms. Badu doesn’t get into it too deeply. It’s been five years since her last real album, and “But You Caint” is a stopgap of new material made in short order — one song per day, she has said — with the young producer Zach Witness. (She put it online the day after Thanksgiving.) It’s sweet and slight; try to describe it, and it becomes more so.It has two different tracks derived from Drake’s “Hotline Bling,” one of which includes a rapper named ItsRoutine, who sounds precisely like Drake with a cold. “Hello” encompasses a freestyle rap by André 3000 that includes the line “Kermit Frog jump off London Fog”; a short, slow cruise through Todd Rundgren’s “Hello, It’s Me”; and the closing refrain “don’t change, don’t change, Squirrel.” A sort-of cover of New Edition’s “Mr. Telephone Man” plays with that song’s chorus for two and a half minutes, then cross-fades into a repeated echoey piano arpeggio, at the end of which you hear Ms. Badu’s calm voice saying, “I dialed the right number, but I still couldn’t get through!” It’s all a pleasant distraction, and feels distracted itself.But there is value in it, and this has something to do with Ms. Badu’s overarching talent for giving you a reason to remain on hold. She does this at macro and micro levels: in her career, on albums, in concerts.She put on her first show since the release of “But You Caint” at Kings Theater in Brooklyn on Wednesday night, and her set started about 45 minutes late because of her work as a doula, according to her publicist.She sang in front of a small and flexible band that boiled down to drums, bass and keyboards, and the performance began with the business of new material: a handful of songs from the mixtape, performed in a concert setting for the first time. But they took the form of vamps and repeated phrases, because that’s the only form in which they exist.After that, she wended through songs from earlier records with more vamps and repeated phrases: “On & On,” “Tyrone,” “Next Lifetime,” “Out My Mind, Just In Time,” “Window Seat.” She was casually in and out of the material, stopping and starting, improvising melodic patterns, extending words and shaping her vowel sounds.It was a middling set, with a sort of rambling, memory-erasing quality. It could have been better. Both she and the band could have made it much more charged. It also felt authentic. Ms. Badu doesn’t orient herself around moments of surprise and tension. She trains you to be patient and hear her music as a continuity. She’s a mystic and a sort of teacher. (“Anything you want, you can have,” she told the audience near the end. “All you gotta do is write it down. Because spelling is a spell.”) But she’s also enough of an old-school performer that you still wait for those moments of surprise and tension, and feel gratified when they arrive.Two from Wednesday will stay with me. Both were passages of vocal improvising, one near the beginning and one near the end, when she broke out of relaxed mode and made her cool, thin voice rise up into bravura high notes and wide vibrato. She doesn’t need to do this kind of thing any more than she does: Leaving you wanting more is a universal trick, but there’s a specific tradition of American singers who use their power moves with extreme selectivity. Nancy Wilson and Etta Jones are in it, and so is Ms. Badu.Advertisement