AdvertisementSupported byBy Marina HarssIt’s just after dark on a November afternoon in a dingy studio on West 14th Street. Ten girls and two boys, all 11, are putting together a dance inspired by space invader movies with their teacher, Ellen Robbins. Ms. Robbins switches on a CD of Edgar Varèse’s “Arcana,” an unruly snarl of blaring brass, dissonant strings and booming percussion, from 1927. “Do you hear that crash of drums there?” she asks. Several heads nod enthusiastically. “That’s when you’ll start running.”She brings their attention to other buried elements in the score — a pause, the introduction of an instrument — and the children scatter across the floor and begin to create the dance. Ms. Robbins, a youthful 73, with a gray bob and purple sweats, lays the groundwork, goading them with descriptions that generate mental images. This is a dance class, but also a choreographic apprenticeship; the students are learning how to translate ideas and sounds into movement, how to tell a coherent story with their bodies.Ms. Robbins makes suggestions that mostly have to do with intention: “The shape of your body, and not just your face, should reflect the energy of your astonishment,” she says. The students immediately get her point; their bodies tremble, their muscles contract with effort.There’s nothing cute or random about what they’re doing. The modern-dance technique she teaches them allows them to be articulate and clear. As she explained after class, “I teach a balance of technique, composition and improvisation, and weave them into the technique.” After a few more tries by the students, things begin to take shape — the exercise is starting to look more like a dance.Ms. Robbins  has been teaching modern dance to children as young as 5 since the 1970s. She has a knack for tapping into the creativity of her students while painlessly introducing the rudiments of music theory and compositional structure through exercises that feel more like intricate games than like lessons.Even the 5-year-olds are given a chance to make up their own dances. By the time they are teenagers, they’re composing multipart group works. Twice a year they put on a show, “Dances by Very Young Choreographers,” with costumes and music (of their own choosing) and professional lighting at New York Live Arts in Chelsea. The next one will be presented on Saturday and Sunday.For decades, Ms. Robbins was the educator in residence at Dance Theater Workshop before it merged with the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company to become New York Live Arts. Now independent, she circulates among several studios in Manhattan. Her students follow.“I tell her, ‘No matter where you go, we’ll be there,’” said Ronald Domingo, the father of Autumn, 11, who has been studying with Ms. Robbins since before her fifth birthday. (“We totally lied about her age,” he admitted with a laugh.)The students come from all over the metropolitan area: Harlem, Staten Island, Upper East Side, Lower East Side, New Jersey. Some aspire to dance professionally, but that’s not Ms. Robbins’s goal. Her “hidden agenda,” as she puts it, is to give them the tools to make their own artistic choices. They also learn to give and receive constructive criticism.These aren’t the only classes in New York that incorporate composition into their lesson plans. New York Theater Ballet holds intimate performances for which young people compose their own dances. Dance Adventure, an after-school program at Public School 3 in the West Village, produces site-specific dances around New York City. Still, classes that combine technique and composition are rare.What is clear, judging from conversations with Ms. Robbins’s students, is how much such opportunities mean to them. “It’s amazing having someone who takes you seriously, even as a kid, and to know she trusts us,” said one student, Emma Lee, 17, who started classes with Ms. Robbins at 9.She also pushes them gently to say something that matters to them. “Her approach is really creative and helps you get your feelings out, and gives you a new view of the world around you,” Claire Judice, 11, an intense redhead, said after class. This weekend Claire will perform a solo inspired by “The Steam Man of the Prairies,” an 1868 science-fiction dime novel that she discovered after coming across Steven Snowden’s 2014 musical work of the same title  on SoundCloud with her dad, a photo retoucher.“And you don’t have to do what she says,” Autumn piped up. Autumn’s solo, in which she flourishes a red cape sewn by her grandmother, evokes the theatrics and postures of the bullfight.At a recent class for 16- and 17-year-olds, after some floor exercises accompanied on drum by Ms. Robbins, the young women began a sequence of pliés, or leg bends. Instead of executing them in place, as they would in a conventional dance class, they did them while walking and running at various tempos across the room. Then they added turns. Their faces beamed. (“I do it this way so they don’t get bored, but also to teach them about spacing,” Ms. Robbins said as she watched.)Near the end of class, the students did an improvisation to Shostakovich’s String Quartet No. 8, one of the darker pieces in the classical repertory. It seemed like a challenging choice, loaded with pessimism and disappointment. Yet the students took to it with relish, responding to its moods, dynamics and jagged time structures. They formed canons, imitated one another’s movements, supported one another in balances. It was thrilling to watch.Afterward, Ms. Lee talked about her coming solo, “Wallflower,” in which she repeatedly stumbles and pulls herself back up while wearing a party dress like a girl at the prom. “I wanted to play with the idea of reluctance, to make it more internal than external, sort of pedestrian and human,” she said. Ms. Lee is a smart, overcommitted New York teenager with many interests: soccer, track, drawing, photography, creative writing. She also attends a challenging school, Bard High School Early College, and will soon be applying to college. Ms. Robbins’s classes have helped to shape her identity, she said: She wants to double-major in dance and “some facet of the humanities.”Most of Ms. Robbins’s students aren’t virtuosos, although some, like Gia Taylor, 12, who studies ballet seriously, sings and attends the Professional Performing Arts School in Manhattan, seem destined for the stage. But technique isn’t really the point. “I try to get them to understand their bodies as Mother Nature put them together,” Ms. Robbins explained. There is a certain idealism to that approach, one that reflects the utopianism of early modern dance. She cites the modern-dance masters Mary Anthony, Erick Hawkins and Pearl Lang as influences. As a girl growing up in an artistic family in Yonkers, she studied with all of them.Her father, Bernard Robbins, was a violinist; her mother, Libby Robbins, studied the Isadora Duncan technique as a young woman, a free-flowing, “natural” style that was viewed as the opposite of ballet. After attending college and dancing for a few years, Ms. Robbins began teaching. A chance gig filling in for a friend was her introduction to working with children and led to a sort of epiphany.Because of her eclectic background, she has never felt the need to adhere to the rules of any one master. “I try to teach a good, honest dance technique, without a style,” she said. The students develop their own ways of moving, listening to their bodies and integrating styles they learn in other dance classes or see on YouTube: ballet, Broadway, even Pina Bausch. That way, Ms. Robbins said, “they all have their artistic signature.”Ellen Robbins Modern dance technique, improvisation and composition. 115 Wooster Street, SoHo; 69 West 14th Street, Manhattan; 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-254-0286; ellenrobbinsdance.com.Ballet School NY Affiliated with New York Theater Ballet; end-of-season and summer performances of the children’s own compositions; St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, second floor, East Village; 212-679-0401, nytb.org/ballet-school-ny.Dance Adventure Run by Jennie Miller. Students meet after school at Public School 3 at 490 Hudson Street in the West Village and head somewhere different each week; 917-816-6493.Loco-Motion Dance Theater for Children Run by Lisa Pilato; St. Mark’s Church-in-the-Bowery, 131 East 10th Street; 917-363-5413; www.lmdt.org.“Dances by Very Young Choreographers,” Saturday at 2 p.m. and Sunday at 1 and 4 p.m.; New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-691-6500, newyorklivearts.org.Advertisement