By ANTHONY TOMMASINIDEC. 3, 2015
Loft Opera aims to break down barriers between performers and audiences by presenting immersive productions in alternative spaces in Brooklyn.Immersive is certainly the word to describe this company’s compelling new production of Britten’s “The Rape of Lucretia,” which opened Wednesday night in the salonlike main room of 501 Union in the Gowanus section of Brooklyn. The harrowing climax of the story, set in Rome in 509 B.C., comes toward the end of this intense, nearly two-hour chamber opera, first performed in 1946. Lucretia, the virtuous wife of an honorable Roman general, having been raped by the tyrannical Etruscan prince Tarquinius, who treats the cowered city of Rome like the whores he frequents nightly, kills herself in the presence of her husband, her old nurse and her young maid. Overcome with shame, Lucretia blames herself for what has happened.As directed by Laine Rettmer, Lucretia, the rich-voiced mezzo-soprano Kristin Gornstein, stabbed herself and fell practically at the feet of audience members sitting in the first row of folding chairs. Her horrified husband, Collatinus (Adrian Rosas, a stalwart bass-baritone with a burnished voice), collapsed to his knees in grief. The orchestra of 13 players, just off to the side of the staging area, filled the space with Britten’s gnashing, frenzied music.The company’s young cast members give fiercely committed performances, and the staging intriguingly incorporates live video elements, with close-ups of the singers projected on a back wall. As written by Britten, with a libretto by Ronald Duncan, the story is given context by two characters: Male Chorus and Female Chorus. In this production, with costumes by Rachel Dainer-Best, the Male Chorus (the tenor Michael Kuhn) and Female Chorus (the soprano Katy Lindhart) look like an ominous, slightly goth couple. Clearly, they have told this tale before.AdvertisementIf this intimate setting lends visceral immediacy to the production, it also creates problems with balance. Under the conductor Dean Buck, the orchestra gives a bold, tautly paced account of Britten’s powerful score, which shifts from frenzied agitation to stretches of mysterious delicacy. But the orchestra frequently drowns out the cast members. Only about half of the words in the libretto come through.Because of an earlier crude bet among the military husbands, the faithfulness of various Roman wives was investigated; only Lucretia proved constant. This is what drives Tarquinius to turn up at her home one night while Collatinus is away, and attack her while she sleeps. The baritone Kevin Wetzel brings a robust voice and menacing fervor to his performance as the lascivious, bullying Tarquinius. In fits of lust he sings with full-out volume, which actually rendered many of his words even less clear.AdvertisementThis opera’s greatness comes through in the raw impact of the performances. Still, newcomers to this work will surely miss some of the specific issues and conflicts that drive this story.Loft Opera’s production of “The Rape of Lucretia” runs through Dec. 12 at 501 Union, 501 Union Street, Brooklyn; loftopera­.com.A version of this review appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: An Honorable Woman, Done In by Her Shame.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.