By ALASTAIR MACAULAYDEC. 3, 2015
PARIS — I had booked my trip to this city before the Nov. 13 attacks. Inevitably, I’ve found myself asked by friends in other countries to supply reports that will somehow reveal the shock and grief through which Paris has passed in the last weeks. There are indeed heavily armed policemen on the streets and security inspections upon entering theaters and department stores; but I had no expectations of encountering symptoms of trauma or recovery in the performances I was due to see. I began, though, with an unpleasing study in banality, choreographed and directed by Jérôme Bel, that nonetheless ended with a great Paris moment, an exhilarating sequence that was uninteresting as dance and immaterial as art but that managed to release and express the resilience of the Parisian — and the human — spirit.Though the show ran like a series of tasks, it was billed as a quadruple bill: “Ballet,” “1000,” “Gala,” “Diaporama.” One of its 19 performers was in a wheelchair, two were children, and several were at least middle-aged; the most skilled performers included Cédric Andrieux, who danced in the Merce Cunningham company earlier this century. They were given task after task to perform, each dancer after the other. So we watched all 19 do, one at a time, a short ballet sequence featuring two single pirouettes, a running diagonal including a ballet jump, a Michael Jackson moonwalk and a pair of bows to the audience.This was in large part a study of incompetence, and was designed to be, thus resembling so much reality TV and game shows. (Watch them fail!) The slight ballet sequences would be unremarkable if performed by most professional ballet dancers; here the main interest was in how the children, the wheelchair dancer and the older cast members coped with movement for which they were unequipped. On the whole we watched with charity, but there was some audience laughter at the more obvious failures.What business did this have at the Théâtre de la Ville, Paris’s most prestigious home for contemporary dance, seating a thousand? The Wednesday performance I saw was the last of three; it was sold out. Though I’m new to Mr. Bel’s work, I’m aware it has often reached New York, where “Ballet” had its world premiere this October.AdvertisementThe last section of the program was mainly the worst. An individual performer initiated a dance sequence, while the other 18 had to reproduce what she or he was doing: a baton-twirling number; a half-point version of the ballerina’s hand-clap solo from the ballet “Raymonda”; a floor-based aerobic routine led by the wheelchair dancer, now out of her chair; an uncertain vagary made up by the show’s smallest child. So we watched 18 non-baton-twirlers repeatedly drop their batons, and so forth. Since the child had little idea of the dance he was demonstrating, there was no pleasure to be found from watching the 18 who tried to echo his unclear performance.The final number came from a woman who did a coarse lip-syncing Broadway-type dance to Kander and Ebb’s “New York, New York.” This song exemplifies two of the features I dislike most about New York: its self-celebratory nature and its Ambition City fixation on big-time public success. (“If I can make it there, I can make it anywhere. New York, New York!”)AdvertisementBut the words “New York, New York” were omitted from the soundtrack so that all 19 troupers could sing out loud “Paris, Paris!” (“Paree, Paree!”) And the effect was thrilling. At a time when this city has been in shock, this motley crew of dancers was allowed to celebrate the city and the determination to celebrate Paris, survival, grit, pluck. At any time this would be a good feel-good formula; at this moment it was sensational. Dancers and audience were helped to love themselves, their city and to join in an ovation. Nothing about this show persuades me that Mr. Bel is a serious artist. He’s a canny charlatan who this once struck gold.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.