AdvertisementSupported byBy George Gene GustinesPHILADELPHIA — The exhibition “The Wrath of the Gods” at the Philadelphia Museum of Art is made up of masterpieces by Peter Paul Rubens and the 16th-century artists who inspired him, including Michelangelo and Titian. But alongside those works of art is the most surprising element in the show: an original comic book, commissioned by the museum.“It was an unusual step,” said Christopher Atkins, the museum’s associate curator of European painting and sculpture before 1900 — but perhaps not a humongous leap. The heart of the show is a giant Rubens oil, “Prometheus Bound,” boldly capturing the eternal torment of one of the Titans of Greek myth, damned by Zeus for giving fire to mankind. That 17th-century work was a collaboration with Frans Snyders, who contributed the eagle.“Prometheus in our painting is a giant figure with rippling muscles, and his powerful story is told in the most violent and dramatic way — sort of like comic books,” Mr. Atkins said. That line of thinking led him and his colleagues down a path: why not create their own comic book to honor the deity who gave humans that spark of creativity?The museum exhibition and the resulting 24-page comic-book anthology, “Prometheus Eternal,” examine the painter’s depiction, as well as his travels in creating the work. Both are “the story of artistic inspiration,” said Mr. Atkins, who tapped Josh O’Neill, the publisher of Locust Moon Press, to gather the creators for the comic. (They include Grant Morrison, David Mack and Paul Pope.)Comics and mythology, of course, have a long history. The origin of Wonder Woman, who first appeared in 1941, is steeped in Greek lore. Last month, DC Comics began publishing “The Legend of Wonder Woman,” a new digital series that explores that heroine’s earliest days and the gods who imbued her with power. Over at Marvel, the Mighty Thor, who burst into comics in 1962, was inspired by Norse mythology. And the cartoonist George O’Connor has been exploring the gods and goddesses of Greece in “The Olympians,” a series of graphic novels that began in 2010 from First Second.Though Rubens toiled on “Prometheus Bound” for seven years, and Mr. Atkins worked on “The Wrath of the Gods” for almost three years, the comic-book writers and artists had only a couple of months to compose their stories.Fortunately, Mr. O’Neill had experience putting together anthologies, including “Once Upon a Time Machine,” about fairy tales with a science fiction twist, and “Little Nemo: Dream Another Dream,” a 144-page broadsheet-size hardcover published last year that features contemporary cartoonists riffing on Winsor McCay’s “Little Nemo in Slumberland” newspaper strip, which began in 1905.“‘Little Nemo’ was such a macro project,” Mr. O’Neill said. “This one is how many people can you squeeze into this box?” The stories are varied and include Prometheus as a superhero who serves as the world’s muse. Another imagines his ruminations on his awful fate. “Rubens’s paintings are so powerful and elemental that it is cool to see how many ways there are to respond to the material,” Mr. O’Neill said.One story, by Andrea Tsurumi, melds biography with flights of fancy. Alongside the observation that Rubens wanted to be a skilled and successful artist (very much true) is an image of him determinedly doing push-ups (undoubtedly false). Another image shows Rubens upon a bed, gazing adoringly at posters of Titian and Michelangelo, with his head in a halo of cartoon hearts (not likely).“She took my 100-page catalog and created a much shorter version,” Mr. Atkins said of Ms. Tsurumi’s “Rubens Becoming Rubens.” “I’m a little jealous that she could boil it down.”The anthology, sold at the museum’s gift shops, will be available in comic stores nationally on Wednesday, three days after the exhibition closes. One hope is to make it available for sale at other museums.“I always did feel that comics were more than they were perceived culturally,” said Bill Sienkiewicz, who painted the front and back covers of “Prometheus Eternal” and whose diverse portfolio includes Friendly Dictators trading cards for Eclipse Comics, and various work for Marvel and DC Comics. His artwork had previously been shown at the National Museum of Fine Arts in Rio de Janeiro and galleries in Barcelona, Paris and Tuscany.Mr. O’Neill said he was proud of what he feels the project has accomplished: helping to attract a new audience to the museum and pushing comics even further into respectability.“There’s a level of cognitive dissonance, even looking at it,” he said. “It’s like 12 feet from a Michelangelo drawing!”­“The Wrath of the Gods” runs through Sunday at the Philadelphia Museum of Art; 215-763-8100, philamuseum­.org.Advertisement