BEIJING – China’s film market, currently the world’s second-largest, shows no signs of slowing down.Box-office earnings for 2015 reached a record high of 40 billion renminbi, or $6.2 billion, on Thursday, an increase of almost 48 percent from the same period last year, according to the state-run news agency Xinhua, which cited China’s top film and television industry regulator. Final figures for 2015 are likely to be much higher by the end of December, a popular film-going month in China.That will be the final flourish in what has already been a phenomenal year for China’s movie market, which is widely expected to overtake America’s within three years. Six films released this year have made the all-time Top 10 list of the highest-grossing films in China. The new figures also indicate that domestic films continue to dominate foreign imports. Local releases have accounted for more than 59 percent of box-office earnings so far this year, said Xinhua, compared with 54.5 percent for all of 2014.Taking the lead this year was the Chinese family film “Monster Hunt,” which has earned more than $381 million since opening in theaters in July, making it China’s top-grossing film of all time. Part live action, part computer animation, it was produced by Bill Kong (of Ang Lee’s “Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon” and Zhang Yimou’s “Hero”) and directed by Raman Hui, a Hong Kong animator and co-director of DreamWorks Animation’s “Shrek the Third.”Demand has remained strong this year for Hollywood blockbusters, with Universal Pictures’ “Furious 7” and “Jurassic World” and Walt Disney Studios’ “Avengers: Age of Ultron” breaking into China’s all-time Top 10 list. But some experts say Hollywood’s traditional pre-eminence in China may be waning.“It’s really been the local film business that has been booming,” said Rob Cain, who runs the website Chinafilmbiz.com. “People talk about the shift in audience taste as Chinese moviegoers grow tired of hitting the same old Hollywood movies.”Another factor is China’s film regulator, the State Administration of Press, Publication, Radio, Film and Television, or Sarft, which continues to maintain strict controls on foreign films in an effort to shield the domestic industry.One such policy is the foreign film quota, which allows just 34 films to be imported each year under revenue-sharing agreements that give foreign studios a cut of the box-office proceeds. (The government allows other foreign films to be screened on a flat-fee basis.) The authorities also impose blackouts on imported films during prime movie-going periods, to reserve screens for Chinese films.“Sarft and the government have become very sophisticated at managing the market, and it’s clearly been one of their most important objectives to protect the local films,” Mr. Cain said, citing “Monster Hunt,” which benefited from a prime summer release date and an extended run in theaters, as an example.“There was a strong desire to see the film outgross ‘Furious 7,’ so they squeezed, pushed and manipulated, and eventually got it there,” Mr. Cain said.Contributing to the boom in ticket sales is the growing number of movie screens in China. The country now has about 31,000 screens in more than 6,200 cinemas, compared with 2,000 screens in 1,000 theaters in 2003, according to Xinhua, which cited data from Sarft. 