By KATHRYN SHATTUCKDEC. 5, 2015
Saturday night, and on the couch? Live vicariously through Noah Baumbach and Greta Gerwig’s “Mistress America.” Roll with Will Ferrell and Kevin Hart. Then fall asleep while gazing into Ryan Gosling’s eyes on “S.N.L.”What’s StreamingMISTRESS AMERICA (2015) on iTunes. A New York gal about town takes her soon-to-be stepsister, a college freshman rejected by a prestigious literary society, on a madcap misadventure in Noah Baumbach’s screwball comedy, which he wrote with Greta Gerwig, who stars with Lola Kirke. It’s as if Carole Lombard and Jean Arthur were to meet up in, say, Martin Scorsese’s “After Hours.” But it isn’t all laughs. “It’s fair to say that ‘Mistress America’ revises and subverts this most buoyant of genres with a steady undertow of anxiety, dread and anger,” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times. (Image: Ms. Gerwig, left, and Ms. Kirke)What’s on TVIT’S A WONDERFUL LIFE (1946) 8 p.m. on NBC. Frank Capra’s enduring package of cheer, starring James Stewart as a suicidal businessman with a family and a guardian angel. Christopher Lloyd and William Shatner tweak the formula in “Just in Time for Christmas” (2015), at 8 on Hallmark, about a young woman forced to choose between marrying her hometown beau or taking a job in the Ivy League. Because she can’t have it all. (Image: Mr. Stewart, left, with Donna Reed and Thomas Mitchell)GET HARD (2015)  8 p.m. on HBO. A white financier convicted of fraud and embezzlement hires a black carwash owner to teach him how to protect himself from sexual assault in the slammer. Will Ferrell and Kevin Hart are the dueling funny guys. Still, “you can’t watch ‘Get Hard’ without laughing a few times, whether you like it or not,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. (Image: Mr. Hart, left, and Mr. Ferrell)SUNSET BOULEVARD (1950)  8 p.m. on TCM. Gloria Swanson is ready for her close-up as Norma Desmond, the faded silent-movie queen who keeps a penniless screenwriter, played by William Holden, in her clutches as she plots her comeback. Billy Wilder’s Oscar winner “is that rare blend of pungent writing, expert acting, masterly direction, and unobtrusively artistic photography,” Thomas M. Pryor wrote in The Times. (Image: Mr. Holden and Ms. Swanson)AdvertisementTHE FLIGHT BEFORE CHRISTMAS (2015) 8 p.m. on Lifetime. She thinks they’re moving in together. He wants to break up. Mayim Bialik plays a now-homeless sad sack who must share the only room in a Montana village with a looker she can’t stand when their plane is diverted.AdvertisementDOCTOR WHO 9 p.m. on BBC America. The Doctor — betrayed and trapped, with both his hearts broken — travels to the end of time.OPPOSITE FIELD (2012) 9 p.m. on Fuse. A Ugandan baseball team becomes the first from Africa to qualify for the Little League World Series.SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE 11:30 p.m. on NBC. Ryan Gosling makes his hosting debut. Leon Bridges is the musical guest.A version of this schedule appears in print on December 5, 2015, on Page C8 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Watch Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.