By BRIAN SEIBERTDEC. 4, 2015
Since 2007, when the ambitious young choreographer Andrea Miller founded her company, Gallim Dance, her work has often seemed desperate to grow up fast. The telltale signs were heavy borrowings from established choreographers and a general sense of struggling to appear mature. So it comes as a relief — and possibly even a sign of maturation — that her new piece, “Whale,” begins with young dancers behaving like young dancers.In front of a semicircle of folding chairs that could have been arranged for a school dance at the gym, the eight cast members bounce around as if on sugar highs, hurling themselves through the air, knocking one another over and singing about love. It’s kind of fun.The fun doesn’t last, alas, but what follows in the overlong work (90 minutes, including intermission) is significantly less affected and false than usual. Love is the theme, or rather intemperate desire and need. The audacious dancers hug at ramming speed. A woman humps a man’s legs the way a dog might. He looks unsure how to respond.Among theatrical devices that call to mind pieces by other choreographers is a sequence of groping set to a club beat, suggesting group sex. (The score is by Jordan Chiolis, who plays it on laptop and drums with Robert Natale.) Ms. Miller’s usual recipe of Ohad Naharin eccentricity appears to have been spiced with some Stephen Petronio eroticism. There are strobe lights. (The uncharacteristically unsubtle lighting is by Nicole Pearce.) There is nudity, though the naked man (Paul Vickers) is less sexual than infantile, nuzzling himself into pre-existing embraces as a baby might with its parents.According to the program notes, the word “whale” is what Ms. Miller’s 2-year-old son, Mateo, sings in the middle of the night. Near the end of “Whale,” she offers a less aggressive approach to expressing affection. Unhurriedly, Georgia Usborne inserts herself into the shirt Daniel Staaf is wearing, and then into his shorts. Thus cocooned, they slow dance as the other performers leap around them in soft-edged ecstasy. Love can be patient, too, and patience has its rewards.“WHALE” continues through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, Manhattan; 212-242-0800, joyce.org.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.