By NEIL GENZLINGEROCT. 6, 2015
You have to admire Bryan Cranston’s I’ll-try-anything ethic. He went from doofus dad on “Malcolm in the Middle” to Emmy-winning dramatic actor in “Breaking Bad,” and now he’s an animated superhero with a prostate problem.Mr. Cranston voices the character Titanium Rex in “SuperMansion,” a ridiculously enjoyable but mighty raunchy stop-motion animated series whose first three episodes go up Thursday on Crackle.Rex leads the League of Freedom, which also includes five other superheroes, though “leads” is a generous description, since his comrades tend to ignore him. In the premiere, for instance, none of them show up when the league is called before Congress to explain why it knocked over the Washington Monument to thwart a relatively harmless cat burglar.The list of blundering comical superheroes might be longer at this point than the list of traditional superheroes, but this fast-moving series finds a lot of new laughs in the genre nonetheless. Among the other league members are American Ranger (the omnipresent Keegan-Michael Key), who is a little behind the curve because after World War II he was, as he explains, “placed in a time tunnel until America needed me again” and has only recently re-entered the world.AdvertisementThere’s a cat (Heidi Lynn Gardner) with heightened senses and a name that’s probably best left unprinted. Brad (Tom Root) is strong and not real bright, and Black Saturn (Tucker Gilmore) prefers nighttime assignments because of his costume. (“It’s black leather,” he explains, asking Rex if he can sit out a case because of the hot sun. “It doesn’t breathe.”) Most hilarious of all is Jewbot (Zeb Wells), a robot whose name — well, you’ll have to watch the premiere.The show is from Stoopid Buddy Stoodios, whose other work includes the Adult Swim series “Robot Chicken,” and it’s full of the same quick, often crass wit. There’s even a little pathos, sort of. Is anything sadder than the sight of an aging superhero who no longer commands the respect needed to lead?Advertisement“He’s too old to get his bladder to follow orders,” someone says as Rex struggles at a urinal. “No wonder he’s lost control of his team.”A version of this review appears in print on October 7, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Hapless Heroes Who Can Barely Save Themselves.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.