By BRUCE WEBERDEC. 4, 2015
Melvin Williams, whose exploits as a drug kingpin in Baltimore informed the plot and character details of the HBO series “The Wire,” and who, after emerging from prison, played a role on the show, died on Thursday in Baltimore. He was 73.A spokeswoman for the Wylie Funeral Home in Randallstown, Md., confirmed the death, saying that the funeral arrangements were being handled by its Baltimore branch. The Baltimore Sun reported that Mr. Williams died at the University of Maryland Medical Center and, citing unidentified friends of his, said the cause was cancer.A wily criminal with authority on the street and a gift for insulating himself from his crimes, Mr. Williams, who dealt in heroin and cocaine, was a leading figure in the stubborn and virulent drug trade along Pennsylvania Avenue in the West Baltimore neighborhood that “The Wire” made notorious in its run on HBO from 2002 to 2008. He did not escape punishment; convicted of drug crimes three times and for weapons possession once, he spent more than 20 years behind bars.It was in the mid-1980s that he agreed to a series of prison interviews with a young Sun reporter, David Simon, whose five-part series about Mr. Williams appeared in January 1987. In an interview on Friday, Mr. Simon, who later created “The Wire,’’ said that growing up in a Washington suburb and attending the University of Maryland had hardly prepared him for covering the Baltimore drug trade.Advertisement“So now I’m a white reporter in a mostly black city, and the drug wars are heating up and everything you get is from the cops, so I was hearing it from one side,” he said. His talks with Mr. Williams, whom Mr. Simon described as “very sharp and very calculating,” began filling him in on the other side.Many details of the drug operation depicted in “The Wire” — for instance, the system of communication involving pay phones and beepers employed by Mr. Williams and his underlings — were described in Mr. Simon’s newspaper articles. Some reports have suggested that Mr. Williams was the model for Avon Barksdale, the drug boss on “The Wire” played by Wood Harris, but Mr. Simon said that that wasn’t accurate — that Barksdale’s character was drawn from a number of people, including Mr. Williams, as well as from his own imagination and that of other writers on the series.“He would never cop to an act of violence,” Mr. Simon said about his interviews with Mr. Williams. “But when he talked about the game” — the enterprise of running the drug business and avoiding arrest — “and what Pennsylvania Avenue was like, his eyes lit up.Advertisement“This was the life he had lived, and he had lived it at an extraordinary pace. It was the pride of a survivor, and of someone who had never gone back on his word to anybody. He had his own ethos, and he was very proud of that.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Melvin Douglas Williams was born in Baltimore on Dec. 14, 1941, the son of a cabdriver and a nurses’ aide. He was a bright child and a decent student but was drawn to the street and the pool hall — he became a skilled hustler — and dropped out of school in the 11th grade. By the time he was 21, Mr. Simon reported in The Sun, Mr. Williams had been arrested 10 times on charges including auto theft and assault.Known as Little Melvin, he was jailed on a drug charge in 1967, but he was out on bail after the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in April 1968 and the city erupted in riots. Mr. Williams stood on a Pennsylvania Avenue bench and, urging people to go home, helped quell the unrest, though several days later he was charged with threatening the patrons of a bar with a submachine gun. He was convicted of drug possession in 1969 and served his first extended sentence.The Sun reported that Mr. Williams is survived by a wife and two daughters.Released from prison for the last time in 2003 after finding religion — “Sometime in my 50s, I became aware that there was a God in charge, and not a Melvin,” he said in court — he did community service work trying to steer young people away from the kind of life he had led.As Mr. Simon told the story, he and Ed Burns, a former police detective who had helped put Mr. Williams in jail and was a writer on “The Wire,” had lunch with Mr. Williams shortly after he was freed. They settled some old scores, and through it all Mr. Williams was so polite and had such a charismatic presence that both Mr. Simon and Mr. Burns thought he might play a role on the show. He appeared in several episodes as Deacon, a neighborhood spiritual leader. In his first episode, he counsels a distraught police official who despairs that his attempts to curb the drug trade have been futile.“Oh, come on, man, you talking ’bout drugs,” Mr. Williams, as Deacon, says. “That’s a force of nature, it’s sweeping leaves on a windy day whoever the hell you are. You fought the good fight.”Mr. Simon laughed in recalling the episode.“It was an astounding inside joke if you were from West Baltimore, having Melvin Williams deliver that speech,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Melvin Williams, 73, Inspiration for ‘The Wire’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.