By BRIAN SEIBERTDEC. 4, 2015
In the program note to his new dance, “Yimbégré,” the choreographer Souleymane Badolo tells a story about taking French friends to a funeral in his native country, Burkina Faso. When they think they see dancing, he tells them it is “not the dancing they know” but instead “a codified language of movement that must be known to appreciate the messages within.”To someone not conversant in that codified language, “Yimbégré,” which had its world premiere on Wednesday at BAM Fisher, is indeed baffling.Mr. Badolo, who has lived in New York since 2009, is joined by the drummer Mamoudou Konate and by Sylvestre Koffitse Akakpo-Adzaku, a dancer from Togo. At various times, the men sing and rant and joke with one another in three African languages, plus French and bits of heavily accented English. No translations are provided.But more perplexing than these occasional verbal eruptions is the dance itself: its rhythms, the connections between one event or mood and the next. Mr. Akakpo-Adzaku begins slowly, tentatively, his head swiveling abruptly, like a wary animal’s. Suddenly his motions turn sensual as his hands burrow in the front pockets of his pants. When Mr. Badolo enters, his walk is swishy. Out of nowhere, he may playfully bump Mr. Akakpo-Adzaku or attack him or leap up onto his shoulders.AdvertisementThe men are both beautiful, supple movers. Intermittently, they dance in unison, but the relationship between them is inconsistent and confusing. So is their connection to Mr. Konate, who never leaves the stage, adroitly playing calabash gourds, some filled with water. There sometimes seems to be an inverse relation between the intensity of his music and that of their dancing, yet it’s often hard to discern any relation at all. “Yimbégré” (which means “Beginning”) is all fits and starts.Under dim lighting (by Carol Mullins), mostly from three gourd lamps hanging in nets, the dance periodically suggests secrets: Mr. Akakpo-Adzaku’s search in his pockets produces castanet-like noisemakers that he uses to accentuate his dance. Or the work hints at some private joke, as when the three men jestingly argue about one refusing to kiss another. (Publicity materials indicate that this discussion about “eating hot peppers” hinges on an idiom about gossip, but the sexual connotations are strong.)AdvertisementNot explaining itself, “Yimbégré” retains a kind of integrity but at the cost of keeping its messages concealed.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.