By GIA KOURLASDEC. 4, 2015
The door to the theater at New York Live Arts was within arm’s reach, but we were taken on a detour, directed to walk down a staircase, which veered into a pitch-black corridor. In an instant, the quotidian was washed away, replaced by a strange, uncomfortable feeling: displacement.In Pavel Zustiak’s “Custodians of Beauty,” performed Thursday by his Palissimo Company, that turned out to be the most successful gimmick in a night full of many. (Too many.) Born and raised in communist Czechoslovakia, Mr. Zustiak has long explored, however ambiguously, aspects of dislocation. His new work, set to an ominous score by Christian Frederickson, focuses on shifting perceptions when it comes to beauty.Near the start, it’s hard to differentiate the dancers — Nicholas Bruder, Emma Judkins and Justin Morrison — under Joe Levasseur’s shadowy lighting. Dressed in black, they latch onto one another, moving like a morphing jellyfish, and later they reappear — this time nearly nude — to cross the stage in slow deliberation as their limbs and torsos melt into one another.But what’s clearly meant to be a moving sculpture falls short in this production’s bland, choreographic depiction of visual art. It’s also overwhelmed with lighting cues — the blackouts are as relentless as they are unsatisfying. Even though the work features a movable wall covered in rosy-rust velvet, the stage’s vastness and depth hinders Mr. Zustiak, who was recently named the 2015 Juried Award Recipient for the New York Dance and Performance Awards. He has a way to go with stagecraft.And he tries. There is fog and, later, a curtain that the dancers pull over members of the audience, and also audience participation. At one point, Mr. Morrison asks a woman to “hold this space for us.” He meant the recently vacated stage; she complied for an uncomfortable minute and walked to the stage before retreating to the safety of her seat. Who could blame her? One basic rule of audience participation: put the participant at ease.Mr. Zustiak does have good taste in dancers and that certainly extends to “Custodians of Beauty” in which the rakish, bearded Mr. Bruder contrasts with Mr. Morrison’s more pristine elegance and Ms. Judkins’s natural, winning clarity. But there’s so much in their way. Text, projected onto the back of the stage, displays a discussion among audience members who have diverging opinions about the performance: “Did we see the same show? [Angry silence].” Instead of hypnotic, we get random, repetitive phrases. Instead of one ending, we get dozens. Beauty may be in the eye of the beholder, but that’s the show I saw.“Custodians of Beauty” continues through Saturday at New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Manhattan, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts­.org.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.