By JAMES R. OESTREICHDEC. 4, 2015
The Riverside Symphony, founded in 1981 by George Rothman and Anthony Korf, has built a solid reputation for varied, sometimes challenging programs. So “Time Travel,” its season-opening concert on Wednesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall, proved something of a disappointment from the start.Charles Avison’s Concerto No. 12 (1744), based on keyboard sonatas by Domenico Scarlatti, was presumably a nod to the notion of time travel, but its initial strains, as conducted by Mr. Rothman and played on conventional instruments, sounded sweetly sentimental. Delius’s Air and Dance (1915), which followed, is sweetly sentimental, and a new work, William Anderson’s “Djuna Barnes Settings,” did little to shake things up.After more nostalgia in Grieg’s “Two Elegiac Melodies” (1880), it was left to Bartok’s sturdy Divertimento (1939) to stir the soul. That it did, in an excellent, gritty performance, with fine violin solos (as throughout the evening) by Cenovia Cummins, the concertmaster.None of this is to denigrate any of the music (well, maybe the Delius). But it did not add up to exciting programming: If this is time travel, so is almost every other multicomposer program of classical music.AdvertisementThe Anderson work, a cycle of six songs to poems by Barnes, the poet, journalist and illustrator, was commissioned by the Riverside Symphony and arranged for string orchestra by Mr. Korf. It was sung here, attractively if not always intelligibly over the hyperactive accompaniment, by the versatile Elizabeth Farnum, with even a touch of Tibetan overtone singing.Mr. Anderson is a guitarist, and he writes, in Mr. Korf’s words, “with a special emphasis on plucked instruments.” Two players, listed simply as plectrum, wielded a variety of instruments and cemented their privileged status with a couple of backup vocals. All mildly intriguing but less than captivating.AdvertisementThe Riverside Symphony’s next program is a collaboration with the New York Virtuoso Singers on Feb. 5 at the Church of St. Mary the Virgin, 145 West 46th Street, Manhattan; 212-864-4197, riversidesymphony­.org.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.