AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenEverything that was good and bad about Lincoln Center’s underwhelming fund-raising gala timed to Frank Sinatra’s centennial, “Sinatra: Voice for a Century” at David Geffen Hall on Thursday, converged late in the evening in a moment of disturbing clarity. As the mighty New York Philharmonic orchestra, conducted by Alan Gilbert, played the funereal opening chords from Nelson Riddle’s original arrangement of “What’s New?” from the 1958 album, “Frank Sinatra Sings for Only the Lonely,” an emotional chasm opened up.The achingly gloomy music conjured a vision of a sleepless, solitary loner contemplating a lost love encountered by chance. In this brooding quasi-Wagnerian lament, wounds that have barely healed are suddenly torn open as the former lovers make small talk. After they part, the singer murmurs to himself, “Of course you couldn’t know; I haven’t changed, I still love you so.”The Sinatra surrogate who stepped to the microphone was the evening’s host, Seth MacFarlane, the architect of “Family Guy” and other puerile entertainments. Anyone familiar with Mr. MacFarlane’s television shows knows that he is a skillful vocal mimic. Technically speaking, his impersonation of Frank Sinatra may take the cake.Delivering “What’s New” in a creamy baritone with perfect pitch and effortless control, he captured every nuance of Sinatra’s phrasing from the original recording. But his performance of this and other Sinatra signature songs, including “I’ve Got the World on a String” and “Day In, Day Out,” also proved that an imitation, no matter how facile, is only that. Executed with the skill Mr. MacFarlane displayed, it can backfire and lay bare an underlying soullessness and lack of emotional commitment.Mr. MacFarlane is an adept swinger as well as a polished balladeer. His rendition of “I’ve Got the World on a String,” which introduced the world to a grown-up, more confident Sinatra after a period of decline, lacked punch, swagger and joy. Mr. MacFarlane ably went through the motions. For all the reverence he affected, it failed to camouflage an underlying attitude of disdain that attaches to everything Mr. MacFarlane does.Between numbers featuring guests who included Sting, Sutton Foster, Bernadette Peters, Billy Porter, Kyle Dean Massey, Chris Botti and Christina Aguilera, Mr. MacFarlane also delivered a glib, running biography of Sinatra, filled with half-baked hyperbole, devoid of fresh insight and peppered with snarky remarks to show how cool and detached he is.That blasé attitude infected other performers, most notably Sting, who was emotionally absent during his stiff, pompous renditions of “In the Wee Small Hours of the Morning” and “Witchcraft.” Mr. Massey (“Pippin”) tried to compensate for the thinness of his voice on “All the Way” by drawing out notes, but he was in way over his head.The singers who fared the best were Broadway and R&B-oriented performers not directly connected to the Sinatra pop tradition. Fantasia brought spritzes of sass to “On the Sunny Side of the Street” and “Learnin’ the Blues.” Ms. Foster personalized “I Fall in Love Too Easily” by softening its attitude of romantic self-pity to make it a more modern statement. Mr. Porter infused zany personality to “The Lady Is a Tramp.”Ms. Peters wrung some truth from “It Never Entered My Mind,” sung with only a trio, and arranged by the house pianist Lee Musiker. The trumpeter Chris Botti’s plaintive rendition of “Someone to Watch Over Me” was clear and unfussy. Ms. Aguilera appeared at the end to join Mr. MacFarlane for a mechanical, mildly enthusiastic “New York, New York.” There were no bravos.At least the arrangements — eight of them by Riddle and conducted by Mr. Gilbert with reasonable vigor — gave the evening a classy through-line. But throughout the show, directed by Lonny Price, I kept wishing more care had been devoted to the guest list. Where were Sinatra disciples like Michael Bublé, Harry Connick Jr. and Michael Feinstein? Where was Tony Bennett, the patriarch of the American songbook and Sinatra’s greatest champion? Couldn’t Bob Dylan have appeared to perform numbers from his haunting, iconoclastic Sinatra tribute album, “Shadows in the Night”?One answer may be that Mr. Bennett and Mr. Connick are already committed to appear on “CBS 100 — an All-Star Grammy Concert” — a two-hour centennial tribute to air Sunday. (Mr. MacFarlane is a scheduled guest.)Call “Sinatra: Voice for a Century” (to run on Dec. 18 on PBS) a bungled opportunity.Advertisement