By BEN RATLIFFDEC. 4, 2015
Scott Weiland, who died in his sleep Thursday night on tour in Minnesota, was a rock singer precisely of his time, the early 1990s: a vulnerable peacock with a fraught, hyper-masculine baritone, self-destructive but confident.He first became famous with the Stone Temple Pilots, which started in 1986 and released its first album in 1992. The band’s lyrics, mostly written by Mr. Weiland, were broody, for sure, with poetic images of death, drowning, blindness; they could be direct or macabre and under- or over-written. Jon Pareles, the chief pop music critic for The New York Times, described them in 1994 as “sullen self-pity shading into anger.” (In his autobiography, “Not Dead & Not for Sale,” written with David Ritz, Mr. Weiland noted with relish that for a time in his youth his family lived in Chagrin Falls, a suburb of Cleveland.) But the music of the Stone Temple Pilots wasn’t particularly heavy, if by heavy we mean single-mindedly dark or insistent or falling apart before your ears. The music was heavy in a different way, full of its own grandeur and dread, and somehow weighted down: perhaps with its immediate success, and perhaps — though it’s much easier to say this now — its sense of imminent demise.The Stone Temple Pilots, in its initial period, represented commercial, guitar-based rock in its final upsurge. The band was the immediate consequence of Nirvana and Soundgarden, often sounding like one or the other. And Mr. Weiland — flamboyant, emoting, dancing with hip undulations, more glam-rock than punk — was as symbolic of rock in that period as anyone. He repeatedly got in his own way with addiction, then and afterward. Yet he was there to win. “I am a tenacious drug addict,” he wrote elsewhere in the book. And then, a couple sentences later: “But I’m also a tenacious recoverer.”The band was helped greatly by radio in the 1990s, riding between the Alternative FM-radio format, which became a powerful commercial force just before the release of the group’s first studio album, “Core,” and the Mainstream rock format. The songs on “Core,” which sold eight million copies, and its follow-up, “Purple,” which sold six million, could be sorted perfectly into either format or both: stoic, riff-heavy, grunge-like with classic-rock traces, especially Southern rock. “Interstate Love Song” spent 15 weeks at No. 1 on Billboard’s Mainstream rock chart; these days it could almost pass as a country hit. At the same time, the band was sharing concert bills with left-field post-punks in bands like Firehose and the Meat Puppets, groups that had little chance of breaking through in a big way, though in the wake of Nirvana nobody was sure.All that success makes logical sense from this distance. Nirvana, skeptical and noisy and prankish, seemed as if it wanted to destabilize or overthrow rock — the history of it, the business of it, the attitudes around it. Mr. Weiland and the Stone Temple Pilots may have been singing about netherworld stuff, but aesthetically they were peacemakers, promising to make the narrative and culture of rock cohere, past and present, overground and underground. (Mr. Weiland was changeable: Through his career in bands and solo projects, he experimented with his voice, making it high or low, thin or thick, affecting different tones to fit different circumstances, and famously using a megaphone onstage.) No wonder radio was quick to embrace the band: It proposed something like a pragmatic dream of rock as a renewable and ever-popular tradition.It was likewise with Velvet Revolver, the supergroup he took part in from 2002 to 2008 with three former members of Guns N’ Roses: They were playing a swaggering ’80s-style Hollywood rock ’n’ roll that barely existed anymore, and Mr. Weiland brought his front-man charisma and his dark-side lyrics to the project, in songs like “Pills, Demons & Etc.” But there was a very pop element at the core of it, and seemingly at the core of Mr. Weiland: a willed romanticism, the flip-side of calculation.A version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Rock Voice, Symbolic and Shifting.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.