AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperIt is not just television networks that have had to grapple since the Paris attacks with when and how to present scenes of terrorism, but the Lyric Opera of Chicago as well. “Bel Canto,” a much-anticipated opera that will have its world premiere there on Monday, opens with an unexpectedly resonant scene: a musical performance interrupted by gun-toting terrorists.After the attacks — which included a massacre in a Paris concert hall, the Bataclan, as an American rock band performed — the Lyric Opera has decided to take extra steps to reassure operagoers. The usual warnings that a performance contains theatrical gunfire — standard in operas such as Puccini’s “Tosca” — will be more prominent than usual, with a reminder displayed on the theater’s supertitle screen as patrons take their seats.And Anthony Freud, the company’s general director, wrote a letter to patrons about the opera and its subject matter that will be included in all programs, noting that the company has been planning “Bel Canto,” which it commissioned, for more than five years.“We are living in troubling and volatile times,” Mr. Freud wrote in the letter. “On an almost daily basis, the news is dominated by reports of horrifying and indiscriminate violence. Through its years of planning, none of us could have known how shockingly topical ‘Bel Canto’ would be at the time of its world premiere performances.”“Bel Canto,” composed by Jimmy López with a libretto by Nilo Cruz, is based on the best-selling 2001 novel of the same name by Ann Patchett — which was inspired by a real four-month hostage crisis in Lima, Peru, that began in late 1996 when Tupac Amaru rebels stormed the residence of the Japanese ambassador there. In the opera, as in the book, a world-famous soprano named Roxane Coss, who is performing at the residence, is among those taken hostage. (In a twist, the opera was shepherded to the stage by the Lyric Opera’s creative consultant, Renée Fleming — who was seen by some readers as something of a model for Ms. Coss, though Ms. Patchett and Ms. Fleming did not meet until after the book was written.)“At the heart of both the novel and the opera is the idea that humane relationships can develop in the least likely of circumstances, with the voice of Roxane Coss, the world’s most famous operatic soprano, providing a humanizing catalyst,” Mr. Freud wrote in his letter to patrons. “Those of us who care passionately about the arts dream that, in real life, works of art offer insight and maybe even some healing in our turbulent times.”It is not the first opera this year to have to think about how it portrays violence. Over the summer, a production of Mozart’s “Die Entführung aus dem Serail” (“The Abduction From the Seraglio”) at the Aix-en-Provence Festival in France toned down planned representations of beheadings after a real beheading was carried out weeks earlier at a chemical plant near Lyon.“Bel Canto” — the first world premiere on the Lyric Opera’s main stage in more than a decade — will star Danielle de Niese as Roxane Coss and will be conducted by Andrew Davis and directed by Kevin Newbury. Mr. Freud said by telephone from Chicago that the production team had not made any changes to its staging or how it represents violence. But he said that given recent events — not just the attacks in Paris, but other violent outbursts around the world — the company would hold post-performance discussions to engage audiences. Within hours of the interview, there was a mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., that left 14 people dead.“I think in order to be relevant,” he said. “we must not shy away from dealing with topics that are relevant.”Advertisement