By VIVIEN SCHWEITZEROCT. 6, 2015
At the summertime Marlboro Music Festival in Vermont, the idea of performing with minimal rehearsal, a frequent necessity in the tightly scheduled classical music world, is sacrilegious. Instead, veteran and emerging artists enjoy the luxury of unlimited sessions to collaborate on repertory of their choosing over seven weeks. Musicians From Marlboro, the touring arm of the festival, is similarly intensive. Instead of rehearsing intently for a single concert, young musicians are given a chance to immerse themselves in a work as they perform it multiple times on tour.On Monday evening at Weill Recital Hall, Musicians From Marlboro celebrated its 50th anniversary with works by Fauré, Mozart and Earl Kim, a composer in residence at the festival in 1995. (Anniversary lineups later this season include pieces by Krzysztof Penderecki and Kaija Saariaho, other former composers in residence.)Passionate, detailed musicmaking is a hallmark of Marlboro performances, traits evident in the interpretation of Mozart’s String Quintet in E-flat (K. 614) that opened the program. The musicians played with a rich, full-blooded sound and infused the piece, one of Mozart’s last chamber works, with nuance and spontaneity. The trills in the first movement unfolded with decisive flair, the concluding Allegro sounded lithe and vigorous. Hye-Jin Kim, the first violinist, played her concerto-soloist-like part with panache, vividly partnered by her colleagues (the violinist Danbi Um, the violists Rebecca Albers and Shuangshuang Liu, and the cellist Peter Stumpf).The first half of the program also included “Three Poems in French” for soprano and string quartet by Mr. Kim, a Californian of Korean heritage who died in 1998. He studied with Modernists like Arnold Schoenberg and Roger Sessions, but didn’t hew to any particular methodology himself. Mr. Kim’s lyrical, harmonically luxuriant, sparsely textured song cycle, inspired by Debussy, is set to texts by Verlaine and Baudelaire. The soprano Hyunah Yu sang expressively, nostalgic in “Colloque sentimental,” in which the narrator recalls a past love affair, and with subtle phrasing in “En sourdine.”The evening concluded with a vivid, committed performance of Fauré’s Piano Quartet in C minor, enhanced by the sensitive playing of the pianist Kuok-Wai Lio.The next concert in the Musicians From Marlboro tour is on Thursday at the Freer Museum in Washington; marlboromusic­.org­/tours.A version of this review appears in print on October 7, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Celebrating a Milestone, With Passion and Detail Leading the Festivities.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.