By MELENA RYZIKDEC. 4, 2015
Shanice Williams had big sparkly slippers to fill when she stepped into the role of Dorothy for NBC’s broadcast of “The Wiz Live!” on Thursday night. By most accounts, she more than pulled it off, earning accolades from many critics, fans and celebrities following along on Twitter. They were all the more impressed because she’s making her professional debut at only 19, and she had to hold her own with a cast that included Mary J. Blige, Queen Latifah, and Ne-Yo. (“Your world is about to ‘change its face’ but I know where you’re going…as far and as high as you want,” Audra McDonald tweeted to her.)Ms. Williams got the part in an open casting call. For the last month, she has been living in a hotel on Long Island, near the studio where the production rehearsed and shot, and commuting on weekends back to her mother’s house in Rahway, N.J., where she grew up. On Friday morning, still at the hotel, she was in shock about the performance. “My adrenaline was going from the time I woke up,” she said of the show day. “I knew, this is going to be great, this is going to be amazing.”Her parents — Andrea Holmes, who works in the post office, and Shelton Williams, a security guard — watched their only child’s television debut from home. “My story, I feel like it’s amazing, because it shows people no matter where you come from, no matter what your lifestyle is, your dreams could still come true if you believe in yourself and push hard to do what you want to do,” Ms. Williams said.For Ms. Williams, that may mean Broadway — “The Wiz” is scheduled for a theatrical run next year and Broadway “has always been my dream,” she said. (Her newly acquired manager is in negotiations on her next project, details of which she couldn’t reveal.) But first, “I’m going to check out of this hotel and go home,” she said in a phone interview on Friday. “I’m excited to see my friends and my family and get my body back together, and relax.”AdvertisementHere are edited excerpts from the conversation.Q. Have you come down yet or are you still floating in the clouds?AdvertisementA. It’s crazy. When I got the part, it didn’t really hit me until a week later. This hasn’t hit me yet. It just feels really weird that I’m not at rehearsal right now.Q. Did you have any rituals before the show, a group talk or prayer?A. Yeeesss, oh my goodness, our director Kenny [Leon], he feels like if you’re gonna pray, don’t worry, and if you’re gonna worry, go pray, so we had a huge prayer that just touched everyone. And I feel like that prayer right there took us to another level before we got to the stage. That was like our come-up moment, and then we just gave it our all.Q. Were there any moments when you thought, uh-oh?A. There was one moment where I hit a weird note and I didn’t even know if anyone noticed — I think in “Ease on Down the Road.” But I just got back into it. I was so into my character, it was like an out-of-body experience. I told Ne-Yo, when I get onstage, I don’t even know who I am and when I come off I don’t even remember where I’ve been, because it’s just like a whole other person.Q. Was there a sense of relief when it was over, that you had made it through?A. Honestly when I finished the song, I was like, why am I not crying right now? I was like, I’m really sad this is over, but I’m not crying and then I went in the room [backstage] and everyone started clapping for me and then the tears just started falling.We had a huge party on the stage, and a lot of people were there from NBC and everyone’s friends and family. It was so cool just to be around everyone; we’re like a family.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. There was a huge response on social media to the show, did you have a sense of that during breaks?A. We definitely were staying away from social media because you don’t want that to affect your performance at all. I remember onetime, I heard one person say, “We’re trending!” And I was like, you have to push that out of your head. During breaks, I had my vocal coach, we did stretching, makeup retouches — there was no time for social media.Q. This morning you were excited to see that Audra McDonald tweeted to you, though.A. Oooh man, she’s my biggest inspiration. She called someone and they put me on the phone with her, about two weeks ago, and I was crying, like I almost had to go to the hospital. And just to see her write that, it was great.AdvertisementThere were so many funny memes, too. Like the ones about “Where’s Toto?” and all of these memes about Emerald City, whenever the celebs are wearing green and talking about getting [into] V.I.P. in Emerald City — they had us dying. It’s just hilarious.Q. Will you watch the tape of the show?A. I’m definitely gonna watch it when it comes back on. I would love to watch it with the whole cast. It’s so bittersweet, everyone’s going back to their corners of the world.Q. You were studying musical theater in college. Will you go back?A. I would really love to go back to college, if there’s any way I could to do it, and maybe minor in business. I’ve always had a huge dream of opening an animal shelter.Q. How bonded were you with your Totos?A. We had a sleepover last night. They just jump on my bed with me, and cuddle with me. If I didn’t have two dogs already, I would be the first one to try to keep them.Q. Did you take your Dorothy slippers back with you?A. I did not take them with me. We finished the party, and I went back to where they were, and all the wardrobe people were gone. I didn’t want to just take them — I definitely am going to have them sent to me, if I can have them.Q. Are you planning a vacation?A. Oh my gosh, yes! I just want to go to Disneyland. I need that a lot, to just let everything go, go on some roller coasters and have fun.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.