AdvertisementSupported byBy Wesley Morris“Empire” syndrome has now become so dire that NBC finally went and got its own lion. This one didn’t run a record label, suffer a major medical misdiagnosis, or spend an hour of television in prison alongside a cannibal.This lion just sang, danced, growled and whimpered. He was played by David Alan Grier, whose early scenes were among the highlights of NBC’s broadcast of “The Wiz Live!,” a black incarnation of “The Wizard of Oz” that was a Broadway musical in 1975 and 1984 and aired live on Thursday night.The show was three-ish hours (including commercial breaks) of two-dimensional theater. Whenever Mr. Grier was around and feeling on, it became something more complex. Mr. Grier can act (and has been doing so for decades), and on Thursday, act he did. He can hold a close-up. Whether he was in the middle of the screen or seated down in the left corner, your attention went straight to him. As Dorothy (Shanice Williams) sang him some confidence — “Be a Lion” — Mr. Grier appeared to be on the verge of tears. When his eyes locked with his co-stars, the intensity actually reached your living room. He seemed to understand the power of the space and the camera, and casually commanded them. He didn’t seem as inhibited by his costume and very good makeup, either.This was the third of these live musicals that NBC has done lately; the first were adaptations of “The Sound of Music” and “Peter Pan,” and they were ornately staged superproductions.For “The Wiz Live!,” which Kenny Leon directed, the ambition moved in the opposite direction, with a kind of minimalism, relatively speaking. But with live, televised theater, that efficiency can be tricky: How do you reduce potential stage hazards and not look like you’re putting on a school play? I don’t know that the folks behind this broadcast found an answer.To be fair, the visual result was more like something manufactured in the Children’s Television Workshop. The colors pop. Some of the costumes and hair look as if they come from the House of Wonka. And the musical arrangements were meant to be contemporary, veering into various hip-hop offshoots, but not with any sort of invention. A can was opened and out jumped these sounds.The one truly eye-opening moment came in an interlude at the Emerald City. Men and women did some serious ballroom vogueing in lighting from the House of Tron. It was progressive and inclusive, on the one hand, and deeply natural, on the other. Queen Latifah arrives as the Wiz, whose power — in her interpretation — seemed to come from her fabulous androgyny. This Emerald City was a place of conceptual ingenuity, and it made me feel greedy for more.This NBC version, courtesy of Harvey Fierstein, who revamped the book of the musical, put more expository meat on the story by William F. Brown: adding back stories and motives that had the odd effect of italicizing Dorothy’s witch-slaying. But that is scarcely actionable since she wants only to get back to her Midwest home. Her companions on the show’s yellow brick road also have desires — the Scarecrow (Elijah Kelley) would like a brain, the Tin Man (Ne-Yo) a heart, and for the Lion, courage. Mr. Kelley was likably loose, and Ne-Yo, the musician, using a country accent, was bearably stiff. Both men found earnest bubbles for themselves and never left.Ms. Williams is a teenage rookie from New Jersey, with a medium-size voice, who was stuck in an unflattering plaid skirt and was never sure how much street spunk to inject. She began one explanation by using the phrase, “What had happened was,” which meant that what had had happened was that somebody really wanted to test how many black-culture dog whistles could be blown.But somebody else involved with this show seemed to understand that a night of black corniness was in order. Pause the protests and prosecutions, and watch a projection of a house fall like a crashing screensaver, as wires yank Dorothy into the air, and dancers dressed like samurai klansmen impersonate the twister.Behold as Mary J. Blige, playing Queen Evillene, lightly hits the quan toward the end of her big number, “Don’t Nobody Bring Me No Bad News.” Witness the evident effectiveness of her I’ll-cut-you camp.There really was no bad news in this world, beyond Ms. Blige’s singing only once. (When she belts here, it was to leave a welt.) Come to NBC and feel good.The original show went up during a brief watershed for new black Broadway musicals. “Purlie,” “Ain’t Misbehavin’,” “Raisin,” “Bubbling Brown Sugar” and “Your Arms Too Short to Box With God” all happened in the 1970s. But the best-known version of “The Wiz” is the 1978 film, which Sidney Lumet directed. It was set in Harlem, had Michael Jackson as the Scarecrow, and was itself an adaptation of the original show, which committed the same neutralization of L. Frank Baum’s wonderfully weird 1900 novel.Fans of the stage show were irritated that a 33-year-old Diana Ross was cast as Dorothy instead of Stephanie Mills, the petite teenage powerhouse who had originated the part on Broadway. (Ms. Mills, who became an essential R&B star in the 1980s, now plays Aunt Em in the NBC version, and her phrasing has lost none of its musculature.) But the film was a peculiar study of urban melancholy in general and of Ms. Ross’s blackness in particular. Here was this rich, black star looking to get home to Harlem. And she was doing so alongside three black men whose bodies were missing essential organs. They were lost, numb, scared.The film was post-blaxploitation and post-black power. It was as much about communal self-belief as the stage show, but Mr. Lumet provided a touch of trauma. And its New York sense of place gave an unmatched emotional texture. The film was only a partial leap for Mr. Lumet. At the time, he was the country’s great streetview filmmaker, particularly of New York. His wide angles might misplace the music but they found, in their scope, emotion in open, empty space. The sight of Mr. Jackson and Ms. Ross easing down a yellow brick road that was the size of an airport runway was involuntarily moving. So was the climactic number, “Everybody Rejoice/A Brand New Day,” which Luther Vandross wrote and which dispelled the air of depression, turning all the ballads and minor-key songs into a major-key celebration.The soundtrack version of the song is the best, post-Motown-era studio singing that Ms. Ross has ever done. She performs with an abandon that makes me cry. It’s the joy of freedom. You feel as liberated as she does.But the film, as strange and sleepy and surrealist as it can be, is ultimately a bummer, too. By 2015, the state of cultural blackness has evolved. We’re in another watershed in which there are dozens of black people, who also feel free, creating television and appearing on it. That’s the version of “The Wiz” that NBC aired on Thursday — a balmy celebration of what should be the natural order of things: black America, unoppressed. If not on the streets, then at least on TV. Of course, black lives matter. And so does black entertainment.Advertisement