AdvertisementSupported byJessica JonesBy Simon AbramsThis episode feels like a long, slow anticlimax after the last one’s galvanizing conclusion. Hope Schlottman’s suicide makes Jessica Jones see red: Jones promises to avenge Hope’s death by murdering Kilgrave. That promise weighs on Jones throughout Episode 11, but much of that time is devoted to reassuring viewers that Jones isn’t really a killer. Through unmemorable flashbacks to Trish and Jones’s childhood, and a drawn-out confrontation with a comically unhinged Will Simpson, the episode writers Scott Reynolds and Liz Friedman hold viewers’ hands, and instantly resolve a conflict that was just introduced.Trish’s adventures with Jones are the more interesting of Episode 11’s two main Kilgrave-related narratives, but only because Trish brings some much needed optimism to the show’s otherwise grim proceedings. Trish reminds Jones of her core humanity by selflessly accompanying Jones on her hunt for Albert’s body, Jones’s only lead to Kilgrave. Her hunt for clues is the most compelling aspect of “AKA I’ve Got the Blues” thanks in no small part to Krysten Ritter’s performance. Ritter conveys Jones’s exhaustion through woozy body language, like when she clumsily sits down after hitting up the last morgue on her list, or when she shuffles like a zombie after a man in a purple suit and fancy brown shoes.Still, in this scenario, Trish only slows Jones down. She second-guesses Jones at every turn, asking her if maybe she shouldn’t change clothes, get sleep, and just generally reconsider her plan to run out and murder Kilgrave. Her character also halts the episode with flashbacks that superfluously underscore something Trish tells Jones later in the episode: Trish learned everything she knows about heroism from Jones. During these flashbacks, Jones sticks up for Trish against her mother’s abuse.The evil-show-mom quirks of Trish’s mother, Dorothy are pretty clichéd: she warns Jones to keep away from Trish since she’s not really part of their family, and even pitches a fit when nobody acknowledges how hard she works to care for Trish. Dorothy also draws attention away from the most compelling aspect of Trish and Jones’s back story: Jones made a promise to respect Trish by not trying to save her from her mom. Since Dorothy is too wrapped up in Trish’s career to care about anything else, Trish is the first person to notice when Jones first develops her super-strength. Being an angsty, but basically good-hearted teen, Jones offers to protect Trish from Dorothy. But Trish declines, and makes a deal with Jones: Jones won’t try to rescue Trish from Dorothy, and Trish won’t tell Dorothy about Jones’s powers.Let’s talk about Will’s frustrating storyline. The scene where Will confronts Jones at her office starts off strong, and is exceptionally tense. But once the scene gets going, Will’s misconceived trauma and mental health issues make the scene an emotionally uninvolving punch-em-up. As Will, actor Wil Traval delivers a tortured performance. He looks like a comically truant little boy when Jones confronts Will about Clemons, and he tries to bluff his way through a response. He says “He was a...” then trails off. After looking up at the ceiling, Mr. Traval pauses long enough to show you that he’s thinking up a lie to tell. He then finishes his sentence: “A great detective.” By amateurishly broadcasting what the character is thinking, Mr. Traval makes it that much easier to dismiss Will as a brutish, forgettable baddie.Stakeout Notes• Will to Jones, about Trish: “She’s not like us. Her heart’s too good-good.” Is repeating oneself a side effect of taking those pills?• Will to Trish: “You need the blues to live!” Ok, this pun is a bit much.• What are the odds that Will turns into a supervillain by season’s end? In the comics, he’s a baddie named Nuke. I’ll be curious to see if he goes, uh, nuclear at the end of episode 13.Advertisement