
The Affair By                     
 MIKE HALE
 
DEC. 6, 2015
If you tuned in to “The Affair” on Sunday night, you could be excused for thinking that a new episode of HBO’s “In Treatment” had magically been inserted in the Showtime schedule. For the first half-hour, we sat with Noah and his couples therapist, Marilyn, as they discussed his issues. (Alison was a no-show — more on that later.) Like the best episodes of “In Treatment,” it was intelligent, fairly engrossing — within the limits of Noah’s worldview — and a showcase for two fine actors, Dominic West and a guest star, Cynthia Nixon. It makes sense — Hagai Levi was a creator of both shows, and Sarah Treem (with whom he created “The Affair”) and Anya Epstein, who wrote the episode, were both writers and producers on “In Treatment.”The second half, an Alison chapter, was more routine, concerned with advancing the plot and, as usual, reminding us of just how hard it is being Alison. There was a touching, melancholy scene between Alison and the newly happy Cole.The present-day action had jumped one year ahead from the previous episode’s spring hurricane and the birth of Alison’s child. Noah, by his own account, had spent the year making up for his absence the night of the birth — changing a thousand diapers, learning to cook, waiting for baby Joanie to say “Dada.” Alison, meanwhile, was taking classes in preparation for medical school. Helen was exercising her independence by spending a week on safari in Africa with Doctor Vic, now her boyfriend. Noah hadn’t seen his daughter Whitney since their pervy encounter in a Hamptons Jacuzzi a year before.Noah was uncharacteristically eager to talk with Marilyn, and finally he revealed why: He had received his divorce decree several weeks before but hadn’t told Alison. He discussed his uncertainties, and his fear that he might stray again (maybe that afternoon, with Lucy, his hottest and smartest student). He called himself a “sick, bad guy,” and for the first time told the story of his father, who remained faithful to his wife but ignored her when she fell ill, leaving Noah and his sister to care for her.AdvertisementIt was, in essence, an elegantly assembled recapitulation of the comments section of these recaps, with Noah allowed to detail all the “insanity” that drives viewers crazy (while remaining largely sympathetic). His summing-up of what he’d learned in therapy could have been written by any number of you:“Even if I understand all the deep and painful reasons I did what I did, why I want what I want — I felt dismissed as a writer, I’ve held back in my marriage, I was craving acknowledgment, success — what does it mean for me to know all that if I still just end up wishing Lucy would quit talking metaphors so I could just take off all her clothes and bend her over my desk?”AdvertisementUnlike most commenters, however, Marilyn was studiously nonjudgmental, even when Noah expounded on his theory of the good man and the great man. Could one man be both, a loyal husband and father and also an alpha-male achiever? Putting himself on a spectrum with Jefferson, Hamilton, Hemingway and Gen. Omar Bradley (the subject of his next novel), he made what Noah haters likely saw as a self-serving argument for male philandering as a societal imperative. (There were no women in his power pantheon of promiscuity.) It was a male version of having it all — comfy home, loving wife and kids, guilt-free sex with limitless other women — though with one proviso: poor Noah was tired of having to lie. No one else’s feelings figure in his grand planPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He then returned to his not entirely blissful but fairly happy home life and continued to lie, not showing Alison the divorce papers.Alison’s chapter can be fairly quickly summarized. A glimpse of her and Noah negotiating childcare duties in the wee hours put the lie to Noah’s claims of devoted fatherhood. At school, she bailed out on an important class, looking back at the classroom as she left as if to say goodbye to her med school dreams. When she got home a haggard, presumably coked-up Scotty Lockhart asked her to invest in his scheme to buy the Lobster Roll, got angry when she declined and then cheered up when he noticed Baby Joanie’s resemblance to his brother Cole. This appeared to be a revelation to Alison, too. She called Cole (who now lives in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, and is officially the trendiest person on the show) and met him when she should have been at couples therapy. She told him about Scotty’s visit but not about Joanie’s square, Cole-like face. Luisa arrived and was polite but frosty to Alison, who left quickly but found herself looking back again, this time at her true love, Cole, cooing with his fiancée.After her depressing day, Alison saw Noah as the good man when she got home — cooking dinner, tending the baby. Then he lied to her — saying he’d cut short the therapy session and gone to a movie — and she lied to him, making up an excuse for missing the session. And then — surprise!— they had sex, during which Joanie, displaying good timing if not a detailed knowledge of her parentage, yelled “Da-da” from the nursery.Gottlief the lawyer popped up in the future several times to make conveniently apposite observations. In his opening argument at Noah’s trial he called his client “a good man.” Good men make better defendants than great men, apparently. And the episode ended with the arrival of the DNA results from the pacifier, to which Gottlief arched his eyebrows and said, “My oh my oh my.” The unexpected Cole? The less unexpected but still surprising Noah? Record your speculation in the comments.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »