AdvertisementSupported byThe LeftoversBy Jen ChaneyIs Kevin Garvey dead? It’s amazing that this question comes up again during the Season 2 finale of “The Leftovers,” since it seemingly gets resolved at the beginning of the episode.Early in Sunday’s finale, “I Live Here Now,” Michael confirms that Kevin was indeed dead and buried for eight hours, at which point, as previously shown, he came back to life and crawled out of his grave. Kevin then assures Michael that Virgil helped him cross over and return to Earth. With that, all matters related to whether or not Kevin has a working pulse should have been closed. Ah, but this is “The Leftovers,” a show hell-and-purgatory-bent on reminding us that life gives, but it also haphazardly takes away. Just because a man went to the other side and came back, that doesn’t mean that, mere hours later, he might not get shot and killed by John.[Interview: Damon Lindelof on ‘The Leftovers’ Finale and the Show’s Future]But by the end of the episode, following another trip to purgatory, it’s clear Kevin is not dead at all. The dream-like quality of the final moments in “I Live Here Now” — including the part when Kevin gets knocked down by yet another earthquake, then goes home to find everyone he loves in his living room — make the new reality in Jarden seem unreal. But when considered as a bookend to this season’s gonzo opening scene — the one in which a primitive, pregnant woman survives an earthquake and finds that every person in her small community has vanished — those closing seconds are telling us something important.In that opener, the woman loses everyone in her circle, but ensures that life will continue by giving birth to a child. In Sunday’s final images, Kevin realizes all the people in his circle are right here in Miracle, and that life can go on for all of them. Maybe no one is “spared.” But by being lucky enough to be together, they reside in an undeniably sacred place. The message: Nobody does it alone.Where have I heard those words before? Oh, yeah: On “Lost.” I know: even though both dramas were co-created by Damon Lindelof, they are two different shows. But as has been said before in these recaps, examining the ways in which the two talk to each other is a fascinating exercise and, in the case of this finale, illuminating.In this episode, when Kevin revives after his second trip to purgatory and finds himself bleeding out on the floor of that animal care facility, he reaches out for his dog, who has been patiently waiting for his master to return. It seems very possible Kevin will die in that moment, with his dog beside him, which is exactly what happens to Jack Shephard in the “Lost” finale. But “The Leftovers” rejects that idea; instead, Kevin gets up and heads to the Miracle Visitors Center and has a conversation that echoes one from the last episode of “Lost.”When Jack is definitely dead and in some sort of purgatory, he asks his father: “How are you here right now?” His dad responds, “How are you here?” Later, he says, “There is no now here.”When Kevin enters that visitors center, he finds Meg, basking in a post-coup-d’etat cigarette after successfully leading the infiltration of Jarden. Kevin asks: “What are you doing here?” Meg responds: “What are you doing here?” And Kevin says: “I live here now.”How is replaced by what, and Kevin says authoritatively that there is a now, and he lives in it, implying that “The Leftovers” reaches a conclusion that diverges from that of “Lost.” Our central protagonist doesn’t die, and everybody doesn’t reunite in the afterlife.When Kevin briefly revisits purgatory in this episode, he also encounters clues that suggest he will come back a second time, for good. When faced with the same clothing options from “International Assassin,” he chooses the police uniform, an ensemble that matches the person he knew himself to be before October the 14th. When he heads to the hotel bar and learns that his only way out is to karaoke himself back to life, he doesn’t sing a Juice Newton song about angels, like the woman before him. He lands on Simon & Garfunkel’s “Homeward Bound.” Another Simon & Garfunkel song “I Am a Rock” was featured at the end of the episode that precipitates Nora’s decision to leave Kevin.The trajectory from being a rock, an island, to wanting to go “where his love lies waiting” suggests a narrative choice of life over death.Speaking of which, there’s another question that must be asked: is “The Leftovers” dead? HBO has not yet confirmed a third season, and there’s no denying that “I Live Here Now” plays like a series finale. At times, it feels like the co-writers of this episode, Mr. Lindelof and Tom Perrotta, author of the novel that inspired this wonderfully mystical show, are rushing to cram in a lot of big stuff before they run out of time. The moment when Matt finally sees a now fully awake Mary is incredibly moving, for example, but we don’t even get a chance to bask in it before the episode plows forward, making us gasp as bombs almost detonate (but don’t) and babies get stolen (but then recovered).Even though it’s driving awfully fast, this episode of “The Leftovers” delivers more moments of transcendent television than some shows do over their entire run. There’s the wrenching scene where Evie refuses to respond to Erika; the dark comedy of Nora responding to a Christian talk show by smashing a radio and shouting, “Fix that, Jesus”; the way that piano version of the Pixies’s “Where Is My Mind?” softly plays as John (Kevin Carroll, magnificent in this episode) weeps over a bleeding Kevin. “I don’t understand what’s happening here,” John says. He’s talking about Kevin’s ability to survive such a shot to the gut, but it’s one of the many moments on this show when it feels like the characters are speaking on behalf of all of us who feel equally befuddled and grieved by the inexplicable insanity of this world.If “The Leftovers” ends, it will go out at its apex. I don’t want it to stop. But it would be appropriate. The show about the sudden departure — about how people can get snatched away without warning — delivers a damn near perfect second season. And then, suddenly, it departs.Advertisement