By DAVE ITZKOFFOCT. 6, 2015
“Thank you for coming, and what do you want?” Jerry Lewis said with mock impatience, addressing the 200 or so members and guests of the Friars Club who had come to see him on Monday night.Sitting in the Frank Sinatra Room of this venerable Manhattan show-business institution, in a director’s chair with his signature stitched into it, Mr. Lewis was explaining how this intimate performance was different from the shows he was once accustomed to playing.Typically, said Mr. Lewis, the 89-year-old entertainer and star of films like “The Nutty Professor” and “The King of Comedy,” he would take the stage dressed in a tuxedo and accompanied by a 33-piece orchestra.However, here at the Friars Club, where he wore a grandfatherly sweater and sipped from a goblet of Diet Sunkist soda, he said, “They don’t want to spend a quarter.”AdvertisementMr. Lewis has performed occasional shows for the past few years, but said that he wanted to play this unusually cozy setting as a way to give back to the Friars Club, where he holds the ceremonial title of abbot, and where he has been coming since at least the early 1950s.AdvertisementBut for anyone expecting a night of pratfalls and choreographed physical comedy, Mr. Lewis humbly explained that such feats were no longer possible for him.“I can’t dance anymore,” he said. “My vocal cords are still good, but my body is broken.”“I’m taking pain pills for falls I took in 1958,” he added.He further apologized for using an electronic monitor to remind him of the sequence of the show.“When you’re 89, dementia develops,” he said. “I mean, I’ve told a story onstage, and I’m telling it with a full heart and I forgot the damn punch line.”Accordingly, many of Mr. Lewis’s jokes found humor in the frustrations that accompany advancing age.For example: A police officer comes across an old man crying in a park. The man explains that his wife has died, and that he has now taken up with a younger woman who pleases him with all manner of carnal delights.So what’s the problem? asks the officer.“I forgot where we live,” the old man replies.Elsewhere in the show, Mr. Lewis laughed at himself for losing his place in the middle of an anecdote he said was about an elderly uncle and his strategies for maintaining mental acuity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s a joke about memory,” a helpful audience member called out.“Memory, right,” Mr. Lewis said, chuckling as he slipped back into the persona of this supposed uncle. “What’s that long flower with the thorns on it? Rose? That’s it, rose. Rose, what’s the name of the medication I’m taking?”Between gags and one-liners, Mr. Lewis played numerous video clips from his career: vintage TV performances with his former partner, Dean Martin, on “The Colgate Comedy Hour,” and their surprise reunion on Mr. Lewis’s telethon for the Muscular Dystrophy Association in 1976, as well as some of his balletic slapstick scenes from movies like “The Errand Boy.”AdvertisementMr. Lewis still had some nimbleness to show off in the present day, too. While a frantic Leroy Anderson orchestral composition played in the background, Mr. Lewis recreated a famous bit in which he appears to pound away at an invisible typewriter.And he sang an a cappella rendition of “Somebody,” from his 1960 comedy “Cinderfella,” with lyrics that poignantly observe, “In a cabin or a castle, even though you rise or fall/ Without somebody, you’re nobody at all.”A further test of Mr. Lewis’s endurance awaited when the show was over. For a half-hour, he remained seated onstage in his chair while he received the good wishes of his fans, gently mocking their inquiries (“What a dumb question”) and discouraging them from taking selfies with him.“It’s going to turn into an Italian wedding if you do that,” he explained more than once. “It’ll never end.”When one audience member asked, “What will you do tomorrow?” — referring to a Tuesday night event at the Museum of the Moving Image, when he is scheduled to be interviewed by Martin Scorsese — Mr. Lewis was ready with an answer.Exaggerating his fatigue, he replied, “I’m going to lie in my bed and wonder why.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.