By MARGALIT FOXDEC. 3, 2015
The Rev. Joseph F. Girzone, a retired Roman Catholic priest whose popular inspirational novels starring a Christlike figure named Joshua were lauded and condemned in equal measure for their theological perspective, died on Nov. 29 in Albany. He was 85.His death was confirmed by Gary Riggi, a colleague at Joshua Mountain Ministries, the spiritual center Father Girzone founded in Altamont, N.Y., northwest of Albany.“Joshua,” the first novel in the series, was published privately by Father Girzone in 1983 after being rejected by a string of publishing houses. (Newly retired from the pulpit, Father Girzone became a salesman for the Olivetti corporation in order to acquire a computer on which to produce it.)The novel centers on a young, poor woodworker named Joshua — the Hebrew name from which “Jesus” derives — who settles in a small town in modern-day New York State. There, he proceeds to change the lives of the townspeople through his benevolent presence and even works a miracle or two.Advertisement“I knew the book would be a tremendous help to people, because as a parish priest I saw how the people were hurting and I knew what they needed,” Father Girzone told The Chicago Tribune in 1996. “A Jesus that made sense, a Jesus that could heal, a Jesus they could fall in love with.”“Joshua,” which Father Girzone initially sold from the trunk of his ancient Chrysler LeBaron, would become a publishing phenomenon. Before three years were out, aided solely by word of mouth from readers of many faiths, he was selling a thousand copies a week. Picked up in 1987 by Macmillan Publishers, the book went on to sell well over a million copies.The novel and its many sequels — among them “Joshua in the Holy Land” (1992), “Joshua and the City” (1995) and “Joshua in a Troubled World” (2005) — have been widely translated, selling millions more copies around the world.“Joshua” was made into a relatively unheralded feature film in 2002, starring Tony Goldwyn in the title role and F. Murray Abraham as a skeptical priest.With their accessible language and themes of ecumenicalism, liberal humanism and brotherly love, the Joshua novels became a social phenomenon as well.AdvertisementReaders told Father Girzone that the books had kept them from suicide. A Hindu swami exhorted his disciples to follow their teachings. “Joshua clubs” of devoted fans sprang up across the country. Father Girzone was in demand for years as a public speaker and had to hire a fleet of secretaries to contend with the sacks of mail he received.Father Girzone, reviewers often said, was no stylist, a judgment he cheerfully accepted.“It was a quiet, sultry afternoon in Auburn,” the opening passage of “Joshua” begins. “The weather had been sticky and hot for the past few days, just like before a thunderstorm.”But while the secular press faulted his style, the religious press sometimes damned his beliefs. During his priesthood, Father Girzone’s stance on a range of issues — he gave Communion to divorced Catholics, thought the restrictions on priestly celibacy should be relaxed and favored the ordination of women as priests — had already branded him something of a theological irregular.His books, which reflected many of those views, did nothing to dispel traditionalists’ unease. As Father Girzone often said bluntly in public, organized religion of every stripe had become ossified and authoritarian, a point to which his work returned repeatedly.“All through my years as a priest I felt that religions were doing damage to people,” he told People magazine in 1989. “In the Gospels, Jesus battled with religious leaders who were so rigid that they stripped the joy and freedom from people’s relationship with God. Our religious leaders today do the same things Jesus condemned.”Reviewing Father Girzone’s 2006 memoir, “My Struggle With Faith,” a writer for Catholic Insight magazine said, “I would definitely advise Catholics not to read this book unless you would like to know how far a former priest has traveled away from the church.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Reviewing the same volume, Library Journal called it “a beautifully crafted reflection on the Christian faith and struggle.”The eldest of 12 children of a butcher and a homemaker, Joseph Francis Girzone was born in Albany on May 15, 1930. At 14, he joined the Carmelite order. He earned a bachelor’s degree in biology from St. Bonaventure University in western New York in 1953 and was ordained as a priest two years later. He also studied at Fordham University and the Catholic University of America.As a parish priest, Father Girzone served in the Bronx, where he taught at St. Simon Stock High School and worked with street gangs, and in the coal country of Pennsylvania, where he also helped workers at a Coca-Cola bottling plant form a union.AdvertisementIn 1964 he was transferred to the Diocese of Albany, where he held various positions before high blood pressure and a heart condition compelled him to retire in the early 1980s.In retirement, determined to make it as a writer, Father Girzone began work on “Joshua.” The cost of self-publishing turned out to be prohibitive, but it would be lower, he was told, if he submitted his manuscript on a computer disk.A relative urged him to buy an Olivetti personal computer — the company had come out with its first ones not long before — but that, too, was beyond his means. Father Girzone, ever resourceful, boned up on computer technology, telephoned Olivetti and had himself hired as a dealer.After several years, Publishers Weekly later reported, Father Girzone had become one of the company’s top sales representatives, “even winning a free trip to France and Monte Carlo.” He also got his computer.By 1991, Father Girzone’s books were earning him an income “well into the seven figures,” he told The St. Petersburg Times that year. Father Girzone, who lived in Altamont on the property he shared with Joshua Mountain Ministries, put much of the money into the ministry and other charitable efforts.By the time the 20th century had run its course, however, the aging of Father Girzone’s core readership had made his books less attractive properties for commercial publishers. His later writings were brought out by Orbis Books, the publishing arm of the Maryknoll Fathers and Brothers.Father Girzone’s survivors include nine siblings: James, Edward, Margaret Mary, Mary, Frances and Edmund Girzone; Lorraine Bashant; Cecelia Petrie; and Bernadette Conrad.His other books include the novels “Joshua and the Children” (1989), set in a place resembling Northern Ireland, and “The Shepherd” (1990), a non-Joshua work about a reformist Roman Catholic bishop, both of which appeared on the New York Times best-seller list; and the nonfiction titles “Never Alone: A Personal Way to God” (1994) and “A Portrait of Jesus” (1998).AdvertisementAlthough Father Girzone often expressed great joy at the number of lives his Joshua books had touched, at least one reader gave him cause for regret.In 1991, Father Girzone received a grateful letter from Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the commander of American-led forces in the Persian Gulf war that year. General Schwarzkopf told him that his conduct of the war had been guided partly by “Joshua.”“What he got from the book God only knows,” Father Girzone told The Sydney Morning Herald of Australia the next year. “I felt personally devastated when I realized what had happened after that.”A version of this article appears in print on December 6, 2015, on Page A32 of the New York edition with the headline: Joseph F. Girzone, 85; Wrote ‘Joshua’ Series of Novels .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.