By JON PARELESDEC. 2, 2015
The British producer who calls himself Sophie plugged in an Elektron MonoMachine, a laptop-size Swedish synthesizer topped with buttons and knobs, and handed me the headphones. Then he pushed its square buttons to trigger sounds. One suggested a sped-up Ping-Pong tournament played with water droplets; another was a burst of jerkily syncopated clanks. There were the nibbling, fizzing sounds that start his 2014 single “Lemonade,” and then a whoosh rising to a hiss that ended with a sudden attack — “Like a balloon popping,” Sophie said.Sounds like those — clean, brittle, changeable, often atonal but also tinged with childish glee — go zinging and swooping through the eight songs on Sophie’s debut album, “Product” (Numbers). Yet the songs also feature perky pop vocals and neatly delineated verses and choruses. The album is a head-spinning collision of manic electronic innovation and bubblegum directness that’s both high-impact and high-concept: a glossy surface with deeper implications. For Sophie, the music is not a satire or comment on pop, but a distillate of what pop could be.“A push and a focus in the Sophie music is to condense particular feelings down to the most concise, shortest form possible,” Sophie said in a rare interview on a Manhattan visit, sipping black coffee in the NoMad Hotel’s Library Room.The music is giddy fun, but it’s also an invitation to consider pop’s pleasures, structures and gender expectations, and pop’s commercial status as both a consumer item and an emotional catalyst. “Product” is being sold not only as a CD and download, but also as the download plus an object, a silicone “product” resembling a two-pronged sex toy. The first words in “Bipp,” which opens the album, are a loop repeating “I can make you feel”; it’s a pop promise with a vaguely coercive undertone.AdvertisementThe producer, whose real name may be Samuel Long, chose the name Sophie because, he non-explained, “It tastes good and it’s like moisturizer.”AdvertisementHe keeps a low public profile, shunning personal inquiries and photographs. But he’s neither taciturn nor homely. He has high cheekbones, a clear gaze and a suavely asymmetrical haircut. Conversing about music, he was cordial and thoughtful. And when poking at synthesizer buttons and turning knobs to demonstrate how many ways a tone can warp, he took on the boyish expression of a studio geek at play.“I like to keep sounds in their most flexible format,” he said. “I want the sounds to be informed and directed by sculptural ideas of materials and shapes. Everything should be in the foreground and working together to communicate the whole.”He isn’t a sculptor himself. “The silicone ‘product’ is the closest that I have come to designing something physical and sculptural,” he said. “I don’t have the need to bring any more clutter into the physical world. And I like the fact that musical data is weightless and spaceless in that way.”Sophie found early fans in the art world and has quietly gathered nearly 50,000 followers for his SoundCloud page, where briefer versions of some songs on “Product,” like “Bipp,” “Lemonade” and “Hard,” have been available for more than a year. Each track is illustrated by a differently shaped plastic water slide: colorful, sculptural, artificial, playful and designed to induce motion, like the music itself.Vocals on his early songs came from friends and acquaintances. “I would basically ask everyone I’d meet if they can sing, and try and persuade them to do it,” he said. “Often you can get much more personality coming from someone who doesn’t consider themselves a singer.”More recently, pop hitmakers have been seeking him out. Sophie is among the producers of “Bitch I’m Madonna” on Madonna’s latest album, “Rebel Heart,” and he has lately been working with, among many others, the English songwriter Charli XCX.“I really feel as though Sophie is the ultimate 2015 producer,” Charli XCX wrote via email. “The feeling I always get when I work with him is that it’s never just about the music, although of course that is a hugely important factor. The way he works is 3-D.”AdvertisementShe added, “I always think about my lyrics as painting pictures, but I’d never really thought about it that much when it came to production. Sophie’s production plays with all your senses, and I was immediately drawn to that. His music also makes me want to dance.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even in current, programmed dance music, arrangements often use drumbeats, bass lines and chords that mimic what bands used to do. Sophie’s productions set aside those conventions. He strives, he said, “to make it essentially about shapes and colors and feelings, rather than this pre-existing musical language.”In most of the songs on “Product,” high female voices chirp the words while a few synthetic sounds plink and whiz through a digital void. The music is ruthlessly stripped down and transparent, with all ornament banished. Sophie’s synthetic tones can suggest the sparkly sweetness of Japanese pop hits — he has worked with the kawaii (“cuteness”) singer and model Kyary Pamyu Pamyu — minus an explicit beat. The rhythms emerge as a pulse implied by a sporadic bass line and an occasional twitch of percussion.Sophie described his production style as a “monophonic morphing elastic composition.” The single, monophonic note might well be zooming around binaural space or spreading its overtones across the stereo panorama. “You can use the Doppler effect of something speeding in from the left to the right and moving across you,” he said. “Then it can transform into a different material and come straight down the middle. Or it can come from underneath you. I want it to feel like something physical is moving around you and guiding you. And of course you can put this object in different spaces.”Sophie is self-taught. He got started by experimenting with cheap synthesizers while appreciating both dance music and the fibrillating electronic abstractions of composers like Autechre. “Having amazing experiences with otherworldly, alien music and trying to put those experiences of sound into fun and engaging contexts is definitely a driving force,” he said. “It’s also about taking the enjoyment of pop music and feel-good music, and thinking how that could be changed and altered, distorted, disrupted.”In the aughts, Sophie settled in Berlin. There, while countless other aspiring D.J.-producers were doing solo studio projects, he performed with a more-or-less band called Motherland, playing a skewed version of electronic dance-pop. “It was not at all a traditional band,” he said. “It was more a collective of people that didn’t want to be in a band, that I forced to try and collaborate to make something that was different for that time and place.”He returned to London by 2010 and found kindred spirits at the label PC Music, a kind of parallel-universe hit factory. It’s a collective of musicians and graphic artists making its own electronic meta-pop that started releasing dozens of singles online in 2013, minting smiley pop performers with Photoshopped personas and elaborate marketing concepts. Sophie has collaborated in the studio with PC Music acts — such as QT, a starlet promoting her own QT energy drink — and he topped the bill when PC Music staged its Pop Cube showcase in Brooklyn in May. But where PC Music flaunts its visuals, Sophie has evaded the spotlight.“I don’t want to be a pop star,” he said. “It’s never been my intention or interest to be a front-of-stage vocal project. The far easier, traditional route is to show your face and build up an Internet personality or presence through the use of social media. But the way that I’m operating right now is to put the ideas as the focal point of the music.”Three months ago, Sophie moved again: to Los Angeles, a place he had been visiting for production jobs. He now splits his time between high-powered collaborations in the mainstream music business and his own solo recordings and D.J. gigs. “It’s becoming very apparent the necessity of having both strains of my music running side by side,” he said. “There is the solo individual material, when I can obsess over a sound for hours on my own and basically not sleep all night, and go into that strange head space where you’re experimenting and discovering things. And there is the other side which is the very sociable, rational side of your brain, where you’re collaborating with people on ideas in studios, working in a very focused, time-pressured environment.”Sophie would welcome mainstream pop success. “Pop should be about finding new forms for feelings and communicating them in ways which talk about the world around us right now,” he said. “There’s no need to view something commercial as necessarily bad. I believe you don’t need to compromise one percent on what you want to present, and need to communicate, to people en masse.”A version of this article appears in print on December 6, 2015, on Page AR20 of the New York edition with the headline: Synthetic Sounds That Swarm the Senses.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.