By DAVE ITZKOFFDEC. 2, 2015
He’s made his list and checked it twice, and it’s now that time of year when, if you’ve been good, a certain jolly, silver-haired gentleman might show up to spread a little extra holiday cheer: We’re talking, of course, about Bill Murray. That mischievous actor and star of “Rushmore,” “Groundhog Day” and “Olive Kitteridge” adds another surprising credit to his already unpredictable résumé with the release of “A Very Murray Christmas,” a Netflix special that casts Mr. Murray as himself, more or less, as he tries to make things merry and bright on an unusual day at the Carlyle Hotel.The project, which finds Mr. Murray in a somewhat more festive mood than he was in “Scrooged,” sees him share the screen with celebrity guests like George Clooney, Maya Rudolph, Chris Rock and Miley Cyrus. It also reunites him with Sofia Coppola, the Academy Award-winning filmmaker who directed him in “Lost in Translation,” and who directed “A Very Murray Christmas” and helped write it (with Mr. Murray and Mitch Glazer).In a recent interview, Ms. Coppola spoke about her history with Mr. Murray, the happily ad hoc creation of the Christmas special and the proud, strange tradition of TV programming that inspired it. These are excerpts from the conversation.Q. Filmmakers who have worked with Bill Murray seem to have a tale about how they first connected with him. What’s yours?A. I did spend probably a year trying to track him down. And was very relieved when he showed up in Tokyo [to make “Lost in Translation”]. I was really adamant that I wasn’t going to make that movie without him. My friend Mitch Glazer, I showed him some early drafts of the script, and he agreed that it would be something that would be good for Bill, and introduced us. I was in New York — Mitch called and said: “He’ll meet you, come to this restaurant. Can you come over right now?” I dropped everything, and Bill was in a seersucker suit. I’ll never forget that.AdvertisementDid that experience forever endear you to each other?With movies, especially low-budget, short-schedule movies, you’re thrown together, and you have to make it happen. And that bonds you, because you’re never sleeping, and you’re working crazy hours. We were sneaking around the hotel trying to not disturb guests and running through the streets. I’m like, “Run through the traffic,” and he’ll just do it. That’s one of his great assets, he’s up for anything. And he’s full of surprises. He’ll always come up with something that you didn’t think of.AdvertisementAre you still close, all these years later?I feel close to him, but he’s still a man of mystery to me. You’ll never know when he’ll pop up, but when he does, it’s always fun. Even this show, it’s always like a surprise — “Oh, yeah, Bill’s here.” I love when he just arrives in his tuxedo, because that’s my favorite version of him.Where did the idea for “A Very Murray Christmas” come from?I love going to the Carlyle Hotel, the Café Carlyle and the Bemelmans Bar. I was talking to Mitch, and I said I would love to see Bill do a one-week-only gig, singing, crooning, at the Café Carlyle, doing old standards and Chet Baker love songs. They were cooking up a TV special for something else, and it turned into, let’s shoot a show. First it was a Valentine’s Day special and then a Christmas show. I got excited by the tradition of the Christmas variety show. We all loved that they had no logic, when Bing Crosby and David Bowie are singing by the piano. We tried to embrace that and just get together all the people that we liked and wanted to work with.Did you grow up on those kinds of specials?No, they’re very exotic to me. I grew up in Napa, and we didn’t have TV reception, so I’m missing a lot of TV culture. I’ve seen little clips here and there, so there were vague memories, and they’re always surreal. I watched a bunch with Anne Ross, our production designer. We watched the Carpenters, and Dean Martin — Dean Martin looks sunburned, like he just drove through Burbank in a convertible, but it’s on this snowy Christmas set. We watched [Andy Williams], and that’s where the idea of Bill and Chris Rock in tight turtlenecks came from, because they’re always wearing matching sweaters and singing.Did you have the full run of the Carlyle Hotel while you were filming?The hotel was open, and we just closed off one of the entrances, but they were fully running. One of our [production assistants] was guarding the Madison Avenue entrance, not to let anyone in, because we were shooting in that entrance. And he turned away Paul McCartney. I was like: “Oh, my God, grab him! We could ask him to be in the show.” We were in such a frenzy. I thought it would be funny, when Bill’s desperate for a guest, if Paul McCartney just walked in the background. But we didn’t pull that off.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I’d be remiss if I didn’t ask about your big production number with George Clooney and Miley Cyrus. How did that come together?That was really inspired by the Carpenters and these other shows, where they were always on these big sets. We wanted to have a sequence with that kind of illogical pizazz. George Clooney was filming in New York, and Bill knows him, so he asked him to come. And Miley came out from L.A. and jumped in to join us. We were short a song, so I asked her if she would come up with a number to do with Paul [Shaffer]. And that’s where “Silent Night” came in. She just learned it over lunch, and she sang it live. I was just so impressed with that, that she was up for doing it and that she can really sing.Is Christmas an important holiday in the Coppola household?It’s a time when our family all comes together. Growing up, my parents — my dad especially — made it fun and made a big thing out of Christmas. Food and wine and presents. Mostly eating. At Christmas, I like being at my parents’ house, the coziness of it. We’re all just inside. You don’t have to do anything. I think it’s been fun for my dad to make it magical, ever since we were little kids. It just grew and grew. It’s a little over the top. I’m always trying to scale it back.A version of this article appears in print on December 6, 2015, on Page AR17 of the New York edition with the headline: Her Muse? Bill Murray, of Course.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.