AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasPepper Fajans is a dancer, a puppeteer, a choreographer and a carpenter, but when he was a child he performed magic. “Extensively,” he said. “I went out on the street in downtown Seattle and passed a hat.” He may have been mastering misdirection, but what he was really learning was how to engage an audience.Now Mr. Fajans (pronounced FAY-jans), 30, doesn’t need magic to do just that. He has actual tools, like hammers and nails and construction skills, not to mention the encouragement of people like Merce Cunningham, for whom he served as personal assistant in the last months of the choreographer’s life.The result: Brooklyn Studios for Dance, a space devoted to the pedagogy and practice of dance that opened in May in the gymnasium of Cadman Congregational Church, a stately if somewhat neglected Brooklyn building that dates to 1923. At the moment, it generates income through classes and performances.“I love performing, and it’s not easy to do,” Mr. Fajans said in an office he had recently cleaned out at the church, located in Clinton Hill. “I want to make an environment that allows it to be done — not more easily, but less institutionally. I think it’s the soul of what New York dance and art making is.”The way it works is this: Mr. Fajans pays no official rent (though he contributes for supplies and energy costs), but he serves as the church’s custodian. He removes debris and makes repairs, large and small. As the church sexton, he prepares the sanctuary and the building for Sunday services.“It makes a huge difference when the stairs are swept and the carpets are vacuumed,” he said on a recent walk through the sanctuary. “It glows when the light’s right.” (The church’s parlor was featured on “Boardwalk Empire” on HBO.)In exchange, he has transformed the building’s gymnasium — at 1,800 square feet and 23 feet high, it has, many dancers say, the best floor in the city — into a home for dance, featuring classes and performances. The final show of the season will be Saturday, Dec. 12, in conjunction with the church’s candlelight service for Advent. A shared dinner in the parlor will follow.The performance, organized by Kay Ottinger with other volunteers, features work by several contemporary choreographers, including Christopher Williams, Melanie Maar and Holley Farmer. It’s a group show, but Ms. Ottinger wants it to feel seamless. “In my ideal world,” she said, “no one would clap at the end of a piece.”Ms. Farmer, who teaches the Cunningham technique at the center, will present a new work featuring Mr. Fajans, who studied dance at Sarah Lawrence College. They will perform a duet in it.“He’s always been connected so centrally to the dance community, but he says that as a dancer he’s never able to be consistent in his training or practice,” Ms. Farmer said. “He said he would love to have me create something for him that would give him a measure of his abilities and that would take him to more accomplished, more challenging movement skills. So we’re going to look it as movement modules that you could test yourself against. This piece is going to utilize some of Merce’s ideas.”In many ways, the legacy of Cunningham, or something of its spirit, resides at Brooklyn Studios.Mr. Fajans was assigned the task of looking after David Vaughan, 91, the former archivist of the Cunningham company, during the company’s two-year farewell tour, which ended in 2011. They have since collaborated on “Co. Venture,” a duet about their friendship that was a hit of the 2015 Montreal Fringe Festival.“We spent a lot of time together and just became very close,” Mr. Vaughan said. “We used to have dinner most nights, and at one of those dinners he said, ‘I’m going buy a building.’”While that didn’t happen, Mr. Fajans’s determination mirrored lessons he picked up from Cunningham, who died in 2009.“Merce never let lack of money or anything stand in his way,” Mr. Vaughan explained. “He just did what he knew he had to do. If he couldn’t find a big space, he used to say, ‘You can do it in an elevator with two people, and you’ve got a full house.’”In creating Brooklyn Studios, Mr. Fajans had to cultivate the church’s congregation; he deals directly with Susan Pierce, the chairwoman of the board of trustees.“He has a very compelling personality,” Ms. Pierce said. “Also as a Congregational church, doing something in the community just seemed to be the right fit. So the space is being used, and we’re grateful for that. Hopefully, for us, people will see activity and come to an event. Maybe they’ll come and worship with us.”It isn’t the first time that contemporary dance has been welcomed into a New York church. Along with Danspace Project at St. Mark’s Church in the Bowery, Judson Memorial Church, which gave birth to Judson Dance Theater and the postmodern dance movement of the 1960s, still hosts performances organized by the experimental laboratory Movement Research.At the moment, there is no official agreement between Brooklyn Studios and the church, but Ms. Pierce said, “For the next five years, definitely, they can call Cadman home.”Mr. Fajans doesn’t mind operating in that way. “I need a deal that doesn’t look good to anybody else,” he said. “My contribution is work: I’m solving issues with their heating system and repairing rooms, and as long as I’m doing that, they’re not charging us to be here. And they won’t. ”And with that, Mr. Fajans has formed an undeniable bond with the rambling old building even, as — during a trek up and down steep staircases, which revealed a bowling alley now used as a storage space and a majestic if faded lower auditorium — he pointed out leaks and brittle walls. “There are so many parts of the building that I try to involve myself in,” he said, “scary as they may be.”The flawed heating system is his current obsession: It leaks. “What do you feel when you see that ceiling?” Mr. Fajans asked. A few uncomfortable moments passed. “It feels,” he continued, “like a nightmare.”He recalled how, a few months ago, he was at the church when the heating system was on and saw a stairwell dripping with water. He woke up the next morning and couldn’t remember if the vision, of a building seeming to melt, was just a bad dream. It wasn’t.But taking care of a melting building is worth it to Mr. Fajans, who views the Brooklyn Studios as his own art practice — an exploration of dance and physical labor.More than anything, dance needs space. “That’s the hardest thing in New York,” he said. “I can do damn near anything. I hope this serves as a model for people to learn how to build things for themselves.”Advertisement