
Snapshot By                     
 KATHRYN SHATTUCK
 
DEC. 2, 2015
Some women really know how to make an entrance. Consider Hari Nef, who had been in The New York Times offices for about 10 minutes before the Twitterverse issued an alert: “it’s been rumored that @harinef is on the fourth floor wearing those fuzzy gucci loafers.”Ms. Nef, the first transgender model to be represented worldwide by IMG, was here to discuss her latest role: Gittel, yet another Pfefferman family secret lurking in Jill Soloway’s Emmy-winning “Transparent,” whose second season streams on Amazon on Dec. 11.“I was saying it in my Instagram profile long before I was getting any work as an actress or a model,” she said of her efforts to will herself into a career. “My best friend has a phrase: In New York City, if you shout something loud and long enough, it will become true.”Ms. Nef, 23, has been doing her version of shouting about transgender issues, chatting with Lena Dunham in a “Women of the Hour” podcast and visiting the White House as part of a “Champions of Change” tribute to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender artists.Advertisement“I used to think I was a gay man with this idea of a muse in my head, like a woman that I thought was inspirational or aspirational,” Ms. Nef said, wrapping herself in a cinnamon fur-and-leather Vejas jacket. “But the woman was actually me.” Here are excerpts from the conversation.Q. You began transitioning while a drama student at Columbia. What was that like?A. That was one of the most powerful experiences. Finding my new voice and my new body and a new set of roles to play, which felt so much more authentic. I always joke that I’m a better actress than I am a male actor.How did you end up on “Transparent”?Faith Soloway, Jill’s sister, who writes for the show, was my camp counselor at Charles River Creative Arts Program in Dover, Mass. Jill was in New York being honored at a gala, and she emailed me out of the blue, “Do you want to be my date to this thing?” So I showed up, we hit it off, and she wrote me a part.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.You play Tanta Gittel, who was mentioned in Season 1. She died in the Holocaust and left behind an heirloom ring.The family doesn’t know that Gittel was born Gershon and that she lived her life as a [cross-dresser] in Berlin. Season 2 of “Transparent” sheds light on the previous generation of Pfeffermans: sibling intimacy boundary issues and gender dysphoria.What is the show’s atmosphere like?My experience with “Transparent” has completely spoiled me because it was the safest, most transpositive set ever. I didn’t have to worry about all the usual things — like when people have a vision of your transness that you’re not comfortable with. When they don’t know the correct gender pronouns by which to refer to you. When the clothes don’t fit because your body’s different.AdvertisementYou’re big on statistics. What are a few?Transpeople are unemployed at twice the national average. In 32 states, you can be denied housing and employment on the basis of being trans; 41 percent of trans teens are going to attempt suicide before the age of 18. It’s so hard for many of these girls. I want to say “us.” But how can I even say us when I’m so lucky and so privileged in the grand scheme of things?In what way?I have a family that supports me, I’m financially stable, I have access to hormones.What has been your biggest challenge?I was romantically socialized as a gay man, and now that I am, for most intents and purposes, a heterosexual woman, I have to learn how to talk to straight men, which is the scariest thing I’ve ever done. Being a woman means that my male privilege seeped out of my body. I’m a 2-year-old girl on a crash course.A version of this article appears in print on December 6, 2015, on Page AR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Willing Her Way Into Showbiz.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »