AdvertisementSupported byFargoBy Scott TobiasA couple of weeks ago, FX gave the green light to a third season of “Fargo,” further extending an enterprise that was originally intended as a 10-episode limited series. Coincidentally or not, Monday’s episode introduced a misguided framing device (narrated by Martin Freeman, from the show’s first season) that casts the events of Season 2 as the bloody middle chapter in a much broader crime story.That story, a book titled “The History of True Crime in the Mid West,” chronicles events that “took place in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Iowa, Nebraska, and North and South Dakota from 1825 to the present,” it reads, which adds over 150 years and a couple of states to the territory the series has covered already. That’s good news for fans of the show, but a troubling sign of mission drift as well: Can “Fargo” keep opening up without losing its identity?But that’s a question for later. (Noah Hawley, the series creator, has been talking about the Midwestern true-crime book concept for a while, it should be noted.) The chapter I’d like to read after tonight’s episode is “The History of the U.F.O. in the Writer’s Room.” The U.F.O. subplot had its origins in the real story of Val Johnson, a Minnesota sheriff who had a close encounter while driving down a country road in 1979.“Fargo” has been teasing the U.F.O. all season long, from its appearance at the Waffle Hut in the first episode to the wooden sign at the convenience store Monday night in which Hanzee shot the clerk and peeled off in his Eldorado. From the beginning, I’d been concerned about grafting supernatural elements onto a show that’s essentially a crime thriller, however eccentric it likes to get. My faint hope was that it would remain a quirky accent on the season, no more consequential than the other ’70s bric-a-brac that’s been outfitting the show.Instead, the U.F.O. reveals itself as a giant deus ex machina, appearing just in time to help Lou Solverson to get the better of Bear Gerhardt. It seems highly unlikely that the writers introduced the U.F.O. subplot for the express purpose of getting Lou out of a jam during the season’s big shootout, but it certainly plays that way. Because what else has the subplot brought to “Fargo”? Between the U.F.O. and the framing device, “The Castle” was a prime — and unfortunately timed — example of the show’s weakness for being too clever by half. Mr. Hawley and his team have gotten more confident in both the plotting and the direction of “Fargo” this season, but all that swagger can spill over into excess. Sometimes less is more, even on a show this extravagantly stylized.We’re at a point in the season where there’s little left to learn about these characters, in part because so many of them have died off. But it’s a shame, after last week’s terrific episode, that the writers felt they needed to speculate openly in the narration about why Hanzee suddenly turned on the Gerhardts. As a rule, a work of art should never interpret itself, but it’s particularly galling for “Fargo” to unpack the mysteries of the Hanzee character one week after suggesting possible answers so thoughtfully. We all have our opinions about when Hanzee took a turn — I cited a scene at the bar, but you could reach back long before or to the moment when Dodd insulted him as “half-breed” at the cabin — and we might have formed some additional opinions about why Hanzee continues to pursue the Blumquists at the end of this episode. We don’t need a narrator to help.With those complaints out of the way, “The Castle” did deliver a humdinger of a shootout at the Motor Motel, as the South Dakota police turn a dangerous situation into a bloody debacle. Under the best of circumstances, Dodd Gerhardt would still be alive and Ed Blumquist might have miraculously engineered a peaceful exchange with Mike Milligan, who could then have the drop on the Gerhardt family and perhaps make good on his promise to take the heat off the Blumquists. But Dodd is dead, and the Keystone Kops are on the case. Lou sees through their terrible plan to put on a wire on Ed and get Milligan to incriminate himself, but they have the arrogance to ship him back to Minnesota for offering his opinion. (Given the politics on “Fargo” this season, it’s probably no accident that the architect of this boneheaded operation is named Captain Chaney.)The spectacle of multiple cruisers pulling into the Motor Motel in the middle of the day dooms the mission before it starts and hands Hanzee a golden opportunity to send the remaining Gerhardt crew into the wasp’s nest. The astonishing stupidity of the operation proves a durable running joke: cops “going undercover” by wearing the same white T-shirts and jeans, the self-appointed “observer” pointing out that an ice machine is busted, a guy confessing that he likes “pissing in the pool.” By the time the Gerhardt cavalry arrives — which catches the cops by surprise, because they’ve gone “radio silent” — they almost deserve what’s coming to them.“The Castle” increases a body count that’s been outrageously high all season, nearly to the point where the Gerhardts and the Kansas City syndicate have closed the case by wiping each other out. All the Gerhardts are gone now save for Charlie, who’s safely in jail, and Hanzee, who’s defected, but the death of Floyd Gerhardt deserves a special citation. The entire ensemble has been superb from top to bottom this season, but Jean Smart’s performance as Floyd is the standout. There’s ample evidence to suggest that Floyd wasn’t interested in carrying on the family business as her husband would have. She wanted to strike a deal with Kansas City, whereas Otto would have gone out guns-a-blazin’.She wanted to protect her children and grandchildren’s future while projecting the strength and resolve to fight if necessary. She was a woman trying to operate in a world of men but was ultimately crushed by their destructive impulses, starting with those of her own son. It may not be right to say that Floyd doesn’t deserve to die at the end of Hanzee’s blade — the family business isn’t dry cleaning, after all. But in the words of Clint Eastwood in “Unforgiven,” another tale of pitiless violence, “Deserve’s got nothing to do with it.”• “I say we use the lemons we got and use the juice to catch these big fish.” Captain Chaney may be inept, but he’s great at mixing metaphors.• More voice-over on Milligan’s playing a “dangerous game” in pursuing the Dodd Gerhardt exchange: “He sought to rout the Gerhardt family once and for all.” Was that unclear without the narration?• Nice detail in having Hank tell Captain Chaney about the occasionally virtues of defying top-down leadership. His lieutenant told Eisenhower to “go to hell” for his plan to send troops to the slaughter. “I send that man a card every Christmas because I can,” Hank says.• One great exchange in the flying saucer scene. Ed pauses from fleeing the motel to witness this incredible alien spectacle. Peggy, fully actualized: “It’s just a flying saucer, Ed. We gotta go.”Advertisement