The Park Avenue Armory announced Monday that it would use its cavernous 55,000-square-foot Wade Thompson Drill Hall in March for the North American stage premiere of “De Materie” by the Dutch composer Louis Andriessen, directed by Heiner Goebbels and featuring the International Contemporary Ensemble and a large cast that will include a flock of sheep.At the other size extreme in the armory’s 2016 lineup, its acclaimed recital series, held in the intimate, opulent Board of Officers Room, will expand, and a new series will feature jazz and other modern music in its newly restored Veterans Room, whose interior was designed by Louis C. Tiffany and Company. It is scheduled to reopen in February.“The Armory strives to provide its audiences with the opportunity to experience masterful and thought-provoking works that are in dialogue with the sweep of the Armory’s unique spaces,” Pierre Audi, its new artistic director, said in a statement. Other highlights of the season include “Circle Map,” two evenings of Kaija Saariaho’s music performed in October by the New York Philharmonic and conducted by Esa-Pekka Salonen; a “site-specific absurdist installation” by the artist and musician Martin Creed; and a new work by Taryn Simon that will incorporate performance, sculpture, architecture and sound. The programs of Ms. Saariaho’s work will feature four works, including “Circle Map,” a piece for orchestra and electronics based on poetry by Rumi, and “D’om la Vrai Sens,” a musical exploration of the senses written for, and performed by, Kari Kriikku, the clarinetist, and directed by Mr. Audi.The expanded recital series in the Board of Officers Room will feature 10 programs, including Sally Matthews singing art songs, Roderick Williams singing Schubert’s “Schwanengesang,” Roomful of Teeth performing works by Elliot Cole and Michael Harrison, and, in a concert that might have been designed to try the souls of copy editors who struggle to uphold proper capitalization, the JACK Quartet playing “FLiGHT” by Roger Reynolds. The program for the new series in the Veterans Room, which is being called the Artist’s Studio Series and is being selected by the jazz musician Jason Moran, will be announced later.When “De Materie,” a work for chorus, soloists and orchestra, was given a concert performance in 2004 at a Lincoln Center Festival dedicated to the music of Mr. Andriessen, Anthony Tommasini described it in The New York Times as “an ambitious, sprawling four-movement work from the mid-1980s that might be called the composer’s anti-symphonic ultrasymphony.” The staged version coming to the armory in March is directed by Mr. Goebbels, who also directed “Delusion of the Fury” at the Lincoln Center Festival last summer. Both of the productions by Mr. Goebbels originated at the innovative Ruhrtriennale festival in Germany.A version of this article appears in print on 12/08/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Park Avenue Armory to Welcome Sheep.