
Ask a Showrunner By                     
JEN CHANEY

DEC. 7, 2015
Once mostly anonymous, the producers who oversee top television series have sometimes become as well known as the actors who star in them. On occasion, The Times will pose questions from readers (and some of our own) to notable show runners, and post their responses. Previously: Sarah Treem of “The Affair.”This week, Damon Lindelof of HBO’s “The Leftovers” discusses the Season 2 finale, the lessons of “Lost” and how the “Leftovers” character Patti Levin became a voice for Mr. Lindelof’s inner troll.This interview contains spoilers for Sunday night’s episode of “The Leftovers.” Read our recap of the finale here.Q. I suspect there’s going to be some conversation about what the ending of the finale meant. Is Kevin dead? Is Kevin alive? I’m assuming you deliberately left that open to interpretation.AdvertisementA. In terms of whether he’s dead or alive?Yes. Or am I just crazy and it should be very obvious?I don’t think you’re crazy, but I also don’t want to get cutesy in terms of saying what our intentionality was. Are you saying from the moment Kevin finishes his karaoke song and then sits up in the kennel, everything that happens from that point until the very end of the episode feels a little bit dreamlike?AdvertisementYes.That was completely and totally intentional. The intentionality is more like the real world has become almost just as strange as this quote-unquote unreal world he’s just left. Again, I don’t want to say, like, “You have to read this interview to get clarity on it,” because I love the fact that the debate is happening. But I am here to tell you, by all definitions, Kevin is just as alive in the moment where he walks into the room and is surrounded by his entire family as he is when he’s jogging in the beginning of the pilot.Will there be a season three of “The Leftovers”?At the moment I do not know. We’re starting to have preliminary conversations with HBO. I think that I’m a pragmatic individual. I understand that television is a business first and foremost, and the ratings — I don’t want to use the phrase “apocryphally bad.” But let’s just use that phrase.HBO’s response to the creative of the show has been overwhelmingly positive and they’ve been immensely supportive in letting us do some pretty wacky stuff. I think that I definitely want there to be more show, and hopefully we’ll have some clarity as to whether or not that’s going to happen in the coming weeks, before the new year.If HBO said, “We want to make a Season 3,” do you know where you’d go with it?The short answer to that question would be yes. When we first sat down to design the second season of the show, it was like, “This is going to be the plan, independent of how well we do. If the ratings are really, really bad, or if the show is basically rejected by the fandom or the critical community, we’re still pretty much going to do this plan.” And the plan from the get-go was, let’s treat the second season like a novel, like Tom [Perrotta] basically wrote another “Leftovers” book, but there is no book behind that yet.I do think we made a very calculated effort that, hopefully, we achieved. But we’ll know [after the season finale airs] whether it feels like, “Oh my God, you’ve left me dangling.”I thought it felt like a series finale.That makes me very happy that that was your response. I certainly felt that way about the end of the first season, which was: I think that I could leave these characters here. But at the same time, I was sort of like, where would they go next? And is that an interesting story worth telling?I feel like I don’t know what the next novel is, but I know that there is a team in place from this amazing writers’ room that we have and the production team led by Mimi Leder in Texas, who’s basically capable of executing it. I know that I can gather that team again and come up with something cool, because I have nuggets of cool ideas that feel like they don’t betray the sensation that you’re experiencing now, which is, oh, that kind of felt like the end.I found myself curious during episode nine if Liv Tyler knew when she signed on (prior to season one) that Meg’s trajectory was headed to such a dark place. When you pitch to an actor in hopes of them coming on board, do you spell out a character trajectory for them? Or are they completely surprised with each new script? — Tim Nicolai, Brooklyn, N.Y.AdvertisementThe way that I do this job is, I very rarely communicate to the actors what’s going to happen to them, because in real life, nobody knows what’s going to happen to them and I want you to play what’s right in front of you. If something has happened to Meg in her past that’s very relevant to her character that you need to know, I’m going to tell it to you. So Liv certainly knew about the fact that her mother died the day before the departure, and we made that explicit in the first season. But she started doing things — like, for example, the way she was chopping down the tree at the end of the second episode in season one. That was a choice Liv made as an actress and I was like, “I’ve never seen Liv Tyler do this before. I think this character’s dangerous.”That’s an interesting thing to start writing to, and I became increasingly more interested in the idea of radicalization inside nascent religions. There’s a passivity to the Guilty Remnant that was very difficult to write. I myself as a writer was asking, “Why are they so passive?” Meg basically became the voice of that, and I think a lot of it was a byproduct of all the questions Liv was asking as an actress: “Why am I smoking? Why am I not talking?”Between Seasons 1 and 2, when it came time to tell Liv what her arc was, I was like, “I would like you to just read the script for episode three, which is going to be the first episode Meg appears in. I want you to see what she does and how she behaves, and then we’ll talk.” And she was like, “O.K., cool.” That’s kind of the way we managed it. She knew we wouldn’t see Meg again until toward the very end of the season, bolstered by an episode that would be wall-to-wall Meg, really explaining a lot of these missing pieces. And she embraced all that stuff and completely and totally went with it, in my opinion, to incredible effect.I’ve noticed that, while Kevin is still the closest the show has to a main character, the show’s women really became dominant this season. Was this a conscious choice or did it happen organically as part of the story you wanted to tell? What are you trying to explore with the show in terms of gender roles and the family? — Angela, Vienna, Va.It wasn’t a conscious choice in the sense of, we all came into the writers’ room and we said we’re going to explore gender roles and the family and we’re really going to get into them. I’m oversimplifying it by saying that there’s a Mars/Venus to the show, in terms of, we talk a lot about the way men, in general, would handle living in a post-departure world, and the way women, in general, would handle the post-departure world. Again, I’m oversimplifying but men, for the most part, are going to say, “Well, that happened. That sucked. Let’s get on with it. And if I can go and break stuff and hit things, that will probably help me move through this.” Whereas women are more likely to say, “I’m processing this thing emotionally on a level that is much more intense,” and we’re going to dramatize it that way. But the more that we talked about that, the more that it felt like we were selling both genders short, and wouldn’t it be interesting to bleed one thing into the other.I’ve always had a lot of difficulty writing women, because my experience has been as a man and I’m nervous that I’m going to [mess] things up or offend someone or, most importantly, present a female character in an inauthentic way. To that sense, we’ve got an amazingly powerful female presence in the room, personified first and foremost by [the writers] Jacqui Hoyt who was on both seasons; Kath Lingenfelter, who was on the show in its first year; and then Monica Beletsky, who was a “Friday Night Lights” writer, who was also on the staff this year. But then most fundamentally by [the executive producer and frequent director] Mimi Leder, who is another show runner in many ways, in addition to myself and Perrotta. And the actors. That’s really what it boils down to. I look to them to really give me guidance as to how I design those characters.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I just feel like, for some reason, because of what the subject matter of this show is, the women are really interesting to me in terms of the way they process this world and deal with it.Who selects the diegetic music in “The Leftovers”? [The songs characters listen to in a scene that are also audible to the audience.] Certain scenes from the series are so effective and memorable because of the use of this technique. — em em seven, Peoria AdvertisementIt’s coming from a variety of sources. A lot of the times it’s in the script. Olivia Newton-John’s “Magic” was in the script, “Let Your Love Flow” was in the script. So we had these unique pieces of music in the back of our brains. Then Liza Richardson, our music supervisor, I’m in constant conversation with her, saying, “Can you get me some choices for this scene in terms of what they would be listening to?” I’ll get an email a couple of hours later with twelve amazing pieces that we’ll play against picture and decide which one to use. Then sometimes, like in the case of “Let Your Love Flow,” that came from Jacqui Hoyt, where we had the idea that some kind of cheesy song that Matt was a fan of had been playing at the time that Mary woke up, and so he keeps playing that song over and over again.That’s the other part of it, which is we try to select music that the characters would be listening to. Oh yeah, Kevin Garvey definitely listens to The Pixies. So when we chose “Where Is My Mind?” — before “Mr. Robot” used it — we were like, this feels like an on-the-nose music choice but also something that is fair in the world of Kevin Garvey’s taste.I thought the “wardrobe” choices available to Kevin in “International Assassin” were fascinating. Can you tell us more about the meaning of the characters he passes in the episode who were dressed as the priest and the police officer? Do they represent others in this purgatory who “adorned” themselves differently and then failed in their individual missions? — Steve, TexasThis is the one question where I think that we had a very specific intention but I feel like I wouldn’t want to take away from the audience’s interpretation. I will give some suggestions, though, which is: if you have the time to watch the episode again you might want to listen to what the Latina woman is saying throughout the episode. She appears twice: once in the episode before Kevin gets in the car with Virgil and then again after the fire alarm is pulled, before Kevin approaches the man with balloons. If you speak Spanish or know someone who does, what she’s saying very specifically pertains to the question asked. I think that I’ll probably just leave it at that.It seems you’re exploring similar themes you laid out in “Lost.” The similarities were most pronounced in “International Assassin,” which felt like a mash-up of “Inception,” “The Sopranos,” “Clockwork Orange,” and the “Lost” finale. Why choose an afterlife/purgatory setting when you’ve spent season six of “Lost” doing that? Was there something itching inside you that motivated you to explore frameworks of trauma and recovery in such a similar metaphysical plane? — Bentham, San FranciscoThe short answer is yes, of course. I mean, I am probably unnaturally interested-slash-obsessed with the afterlife.When you mention these other ideas, like “The Sopranos,” which obviously we were paying homage to in terms of the Kevin Finnerty episodes, where Tony was in the space between life and death and he didn’t remember who he was, but there was this kind of mundane feeling to the place he was. That was deeply fascinating to me. I love Christopher Nolan more than I can say, and the idea of “Inception” — when are you dreaming and when are you awake? The fact that that debate rages on and Christopher Nolan’s end cut before the top stopped — I love that kind of storytelling.But I am really interested and really curious as a human being about what’s going to happen to me when I die and what happened to the people who I love that are already dead. That fascination is something I’m unpacking via the stories I am drawn to. It is an itch that will never be scratched until I am dead, and I will find ways to explore it and, hopefully, improve upon it.AdvertisementI personally find it hard to watch “The Leftovers” without relating it back to “Lost.” Is that something you’re conscious of as you’re working on the show?I’m not in a place to give a critical analysis of my own work because I’m too inside it, but if I read someone saying like, “‘The Leftovers’ is Lindelof’s reaction to ‘Lost,’ not just the story of ‘Lost’ but how the story of ‘Lost’ was told and received” — like, of course it is. I’m still interested in the same stuff and I’m aware of the same things that the audience is. So I do feel like the things that worked I want to do again, and the things that didn’t work, I want to fix. And mystery is just the thing that I am most fascinated by. I love it. It’s what draws me in, and I think I’m not alone in this pursuit.“The Leftovers” is not an apology for “Lost.” I’m really proud of “Lost,” and of course I acknowledge and have acknowledged many times that mistakes were made. How could they not have been? And I’ve stopped beating myself up for those mistakes because that was useless. But what is useful is learning from them and trying to make better work in full observance of those mistakes. And guess what? I’m going to make more mistakes. Just so we’re all clear.At times this season it felt like the Patti Levin character was expressing things you thought the audience or fans might say, allowing you to preemptively respond to it. Was that the case?That voice was not the fans’ voice, that voice was my own, internal voice. Because it is very rare where the fans say something that my own internal voice hasn’t said to me, you know? Including the most abusive things. So that idea that Patti is trolling Kevin and on a meta-level, Patti is trolling the audience — the genesis for what’s coming out of Patti’s mouth is that I am trolling myself.So, I was like, ‘Oh, this’ll be cool. I’ll just let Patti start articulating these ideas.’ And it’s not a defensive maneuver, it’s an acknowledgment of: I’m telling you exactly what you’re thinking, in the moment you are thinking it, because I’m thinking it, too. I don’t want the fans to ever feel like they’re being trolled by me. I want them to feel like we’re all in this together.What is the best show on TV right now and why? What’s your favorite show on TV now and why?If you said to me, “O.K., Damon, for the next year, you can only watch the next season of this show. You have to pick one ...” It would be “Rick and Morty.” It is so good. It is so funny. It’s next-level. I’ve seen every episode like three times. It’s my favorite show.The best show on television is a very, very close horse race between “Mr. Robot,” “Fargo” and “The Americans.” If I had to pick one of those three, I would probably pick “The Americans.” It is so consistently great. They have never made an episode that is not great.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »