AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeIn the summer of 2014, the Irish mezzo-soprano Tara Erraught got what every young singer wants — international attention — but probably not for the reason she would have chosen. Appearing at the Glyndebourne Festival in England as Octavian in Strauss’s “Der Rosenkavalier,” she faced a flood of catty criticism about her weight  that might better have been directed at the designer of her unflattering costumes.The resulting kerfuffle — yes, opera is a visual medium, but no, theatrical effectiveness is not synonymous with a certain physical appearance — got Ms. Erraught widely noticed. But her prominence had already been growing since she jumped, at late notice, into a leading role at the Bavarian State Opera in Munich in 2011. She appeared on Friday, with the pianist Henning Ruhe, at Weill Recital Hall, the New York recital debut of a graceful artist.Her voice cool and silky in songs by Liszt, Brahms and Strauss (and, to mix it up slightly, a sleepy English set by Delius and Roger Quilter), Ms. Erraught had an unflustered, easy presence. She showed the kind of patience that let the serene lines of Liszt’s “Oh! Quand Je Dors” unfold, unpressured.But she could seem poised to a fault: her diction precise, her smile engaging, but the overall effect pleasant yet faceless. The Brahms set, not without energy, lacked a certain degree of character and mood in a vigorous song like “Juchhe!” or a melancholy one like “Wie Melodien Zieht es Mir.” These pieces wanted more grandeur, not necessarily of volume or tonal fullness, but of dramatic conception.Most effective was the closing set of Strauss songs, in which the lightness of Ms. Erraught’s voice cut to the heart of musical lines that can easily turn leaden. “Zueignung” was not the usual room-shaking oration, but a sober prayer. “Morgen” was similarly calm and intimate, and “Ständchen” opened with delicately silver tone. If “Cäcilie,” at the end of the written program, didn’t overwhelm as it should, it was because Ms. Erraught’s voice can reach high notes but doesn’t really bloom at the top of its range.Eager to encore, she returned for two arias — one from Rossini’s “La Cenerentola,” the other from a Rossinian “Falstaff” by the 19th-century Irish composer Michael William Balfe —Advertisement