By SIOBHAN BURKEDEC. 6, 2015
Robert Battle has joked that dancing his work is like “doing battle”: You need to be quick and tough. Combat comes to mind while watching his new piece for Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, “Awakening,” which had its premiere on Friday at City Center, and not just because of John Mackey’s portentous score, music that wouldn’t be out of place in an action movie.The 12 dancers in the work — Mr. Battle’s first for Ailey since becoming the company’s artistic director in 2011 — seem to be fighting or fleeing something. Is it hiding in the wing, the one that they keep running toward and swiveling away from? Or descending from the distant point they keep gazing up at while huddled together? Or chasing after them as they scuttle on their stomachs along the floor, like soldiers through the trenches? Forces of evil are lurking, and the dancers, all in white, are here to rise above them.Dance as ritual is Mr. Battle’s forte, but the ritual in “Awakening” remains puzzling, and not in an ultimately illuminating way; the pieces, polished as they are, amount to a tenuous whole. At its center, splintering off from the mostly tight-knit ensemble, is the towering Jamar Roberts, who winds up trapped in a circle of his companions, or perhaps exalted by them, like the Chosen One in “The Rite of Spring.” (At times it seems as if the razor-sharp Jacquelin Harris, also set apart in tempestuous solos, might be on the same path, yet she merges back into the group.) In spite of Mr. Roberts’s gargantuan elegance and full-bodied commitment to the role — along with tension-raising devices like the backdrop of multiplying, intensifying lighting constellations designed by Al Crawford — it’s hard to feel invested in his journey.Solidarity was also a theme in Rennie Harris’s potent “Exodus,” which returned on Thursday following its June premiere. Mr. Roberts plays a key part here, too, a savior-like figure who begins as the only one standing among a sea of fallen bodies. Early on a gunshot rings out, a grim suggestion of how those bodies got there. In one corner of the stage, Hope Boykin, a lone mourner, kneels over the motionless Matthew Rushing, silently sobbing, as Mr. Roberts walks toward them in slow motion.AdvertisementWhat ensues is a kind of euphoric, if melodramatic, resurrection conveyed through the fleet-footed idiom of house dance. Mr. Harris excels at telling stories through that style, though his symbolism can be blunt, like the costume change halfway through from colorful street clothes into billowy white. Still, that doesn’t detract from the urgency of the dancing itself, a blur of scissoring legs, flicking wrists and grinding hips to tracks including a house version of “Swing Low Sweet Chariot.”Violence lingers, but as something surmountable. At the end, with all 16 companions gathered behind him, Mr. Rushing steps tentatively out beyond them. When another gunshot sounds, he falls, but Mr. Roberts is there to catch him, and he rises back up just as the lights go down.AdvertisementThat message of hope surfaces again and again in the Ailey repertory, and certain dancers can really drive it home, like the soulful Belen Pereyra in Mr. Rushing’s “Odetta” on Thursday, and just about everybody in Friday’s irrepressible “Revelations,” including the excellent live chorus and band. Friday’s program also included Christopher Wheeldon’s “After the Rain Pas de Deux,” danced by the wife-and-husband duo Linda Celeste Sims and Glenn Allen Sims, and Talley Beatty’s “Toccata,” a fast-paced, high-kicking study in old-school jazz, black leather jazz shoes and all. Created in 1960, “Toccata” is a respectful nod to the past, but this is the rare case in which the Ailey crew looks more stressed than enthused.Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater performs through Jan. 4 at City Center; 212-581-1212, nycitycenter­.org.A version of this review appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: United by a Sense of Fight-or-Flight.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.