By NEIL GENZLINGERDEC. 6, 2015
If you’re a maker of television series and want to raise awareness about North America’s severe werewolf infestation, the later your show is on, the better. Humans become more vulnerable to werewolf attacks as any given night goes along, because they get drunker, sleepier or just generally less attentive. A prime-time series like MTV’s “Teen Wolf” or Syfy’s “Bitten” is swell, but what you really want is for your werewolf show to be on at midnight.Adult Swim, the late-night block of brash comedies, has recognized this with its scheduling of “Neon Joe: Werewolf Hunter,” a five-part mini-series that begins as Monday blends into Tuesday and continues in that slot all week. Besides the public-awareness aspect, another benefit to having your werewolf show on this late is that you can make it as crass as you want, and Jon Glaser, who both created the series and plays the title character, has made his fairly crass. In Episode 1, for instance, Neon Joe begins his hunt for a Vermont town’s werewolf by demanding pubic hair samples from every resident.But let’s back up. The series opens wittily as a noted celebrity (the “who” is part of the fun) turns up in the fictional town of Garrity, Vt., for a little R&R, making the classic busy person’s mistake of throwing away his cellphone so he won’t be bothered. But, alas, he is bothered, and rather severely.In short order Neon Joe, whose mission in life is to hunt werewolves, turns up to help the town with its problem, bringing some unorthodox weaponry and an accent that’s part Southern sheriff, part indecipherable something-or-other. The cast around Mr. Glaser includes Stephanie March (“Law & Order: Special Victims Unit”) as the mayor of the town, which has some peculiar secrets, as most towns troubled by werewolves do.The werewolf-parody subgenre has produced popular mainstream movies (“An American Werewolf in London”), quirky web series (Joe Avella’s “Wheelchair Werewolf,” which went up last year, is a retro gem) and everything in between. “Neon Joe” has a slapdash feel — Mr. Glaser has said the series is a result of an offhand joke he made during an appearance on “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon” — but if it helps even one Adult Swim viewer avoid being bitten, it will have served its purpose.A version of this review appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Adult Swim Fires Off a Late-Night Silver Bullet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.