By GIA KOURLASDEC. 6, 2015
With 21 dancers in tow, the German choreographer Sasha Waltz whirled into the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Friday to transform the Howard Gilman Opera House from dark to light. It was no quick switch: her two-part “Continu” rambled on — especially the dark half, which clocked in at around 90 minutes. Then, strangely, the second half, at 30 minutes, seemed longer. (Why does that happen?)There were captivating moments. Ms. Waltz knows her way around a stage; her lithesome dancers are individuals. In “Continu,” they’re also elegantly costumed by Bernd Skodzig, whose sleek designs could constitute a collection. But the bigger problem is that the two halves — one bombastic and expressive and the other, quieter, cooler and brighter — never quite form a whole. And while they’re stand-alone dances, neither is a standout.For the production, Ms. Waltz incorporates choreography from two previous works for museums in Berlin and Rome. The industrial set — three walls designed by Thomas Schenk, Pia Maier Schriever and Ms. Waltz — hints at a prison. The opening is just as arresting: seven women roll their shoulders, gradually sending ripples through their bodies as the percussionist Robyn Schulkowsky, performing a score by Iannis Xenakis, pounds her drums while focusing intently on the dancers’ serpentine flow. Before a blackout, they spin slowly, as if winding down the pulse.When the others enter the stage, the music shifts to Edgard Varèse’s “Arcana,” and the subject becomes the individual against the group. Here, the pace is frenetic as clusters of dancers dash from one side of the stage to the other and soloists break free, with ever-reaching arms and stretched fingers. The turbulence of the first half, which ends with an execution scene and two performers running down the theater’s aisles, is followed by a sense of tranquillity in the second, to music by Claude Vivier and Mozart.Dancers with paint on their feet draw swooping lines on the white stage. A duet between Hwanhee Hwang and Idan Yoav is all curves and lifts; the dancers standing behind them hold up the floor, now covered with scribbles, and suddenly it’s a backdrop. Later, Edivaldo Ernesto picks up a corner of it and races across the stage until it swallows him like a wave. It’s a return of the mad dash, shown at the conclusion of the first half, and it feels superficial. So what if the endings are connected? It’s still not enough to bind these worlds into one.A version of this review appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Work of Stark Contrasts,  Not the Sum of Its Parts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.