By ANTHONY TOMMASINIDEC. 6, 2015
One would think that by this point in his career there are not many standard-repertory operas that James Levine has not conducted. But he had never led a complete three-act performance of Johann Strauss Jr.’s “Die Fledermaus” until Friday night, when Jeremy Sams’s 2013 staging returned to the Metropolitan Opera. (He had conducted the festive second act in special gala programs.) Mr. Levine drew a lithe and stylish account of the work from the responsive Met orchestra, an appealing cast and the dependable house chorus.As originally planned, however, Mr. Levine was to have conducted Berg’s “Lulu” on Thursday night, as well, the final performance of the company’s stunning new production by William Kentridge. That would have made an unusual two-day lineup. Though Strauss and Berg were both Viennese, it’s hard to think of two works more different than Berg’s wrenching 12-tone masterpiece, left incomplete at his death in 1935, and Strauss’s breezy operetta, first performed in 1874.In early October, however, Mr. Levine, still grappling with health problems and committed to the company’s fall revival of Wagner’s “Tannhäuser,”withdrew from the entire run of “Lulu,” a work he has long championed and, at his best, conducted brilliantly. The run was shared by two top-notch substitutes: first Lothar Koenigs, then Derrick Inouye, who led Thursday’s final performance compellingly, revealing special sensitivity for the Mahlerian richness and searching lyricism of this daunting score. The soprano Marlis Petersen was again astonishing as Lulu, a signature role that she has now put aside: This was her final Lulu.Mr. Levine seemed encouragingly energetic during “Die Fledermaus.” Over many years, Mr. Levine favored a less-is-more approach to technique, with focused cues and no extraneous gesticulating. More recently, even as injuries limited his upper-arm mobility, he has developed a penchant for making big, loose, sweeping motions with his arms, gestures that would seem hard for the orchestra to follow.AdvertisementOn Friday, during the elaborate “Fledermaus” overture there were moments of shaky coordination; a few accelerandos started out tentatively before settling into a groove. Over all, however, the playing throughout the evening had waltzing vitality, warmth and confidence.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The appealing cast includes the suave baritone Paulo Szot as Dr. Falke, the robust tenor Toby Spence as Gabriel von Eisenstein, the bright-voiced tenor Dimitri Pittas as Alfred and the versatile veteran mezzo-soprano Susan Graham in the trouser role of Prince Orlofsky. (On Thursday, the tireless Ms. Graham gave a compelling performance as the lesbian Countess Geschwitz in “Lulu.”)As the perky maid Adele, Mireille Asselin, a young Canadian coloratura soprano with a light, sweet voice and abundant charm, substituted for Lucy Crowe, who was ill. The soprano Susanna Phillips, as Eisenstein’s feisty wife Rosalinde, brought plush sound and alluring presence to the role, though her performances was marred by strained top notes.AdvertisementMr. Sams’s production, which evokes images from Klimt in its lavish scenic designs, presents the work in English translation. The lyrics are sung in Mr. Sams’s mostly rhymed couplets, a playful translation only occasionally too cute. The same cannot be said of the newly written spoken dialogue by Douglas Carter Beane, filled with groan-inducing sexual innuendo, crude jokes about cross-dressers, even a tossed-off line about “The Death of Klinghoffer” that should be dropped.Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Monday with an opera review of “Die Fledermaus,” at the Metropolitan Opera, referred incorrectly to the cast member Susanna Phillips. As the review correctly noted, she is a soprano, not a mezzo-soprano.“Die Fledermaus” runs through Jan. 7 at the Metropolitan Opera, 212-362-6000, metopera­.orgA version of this review appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Breezy Strauss Operetta in Full, a First at Last for the Met’s Levine.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.