By BRIAN SEIBERTDEC. 6, 2015
Clothes make the man, people say, and as Martha Graham understood, a big dress can make a big impression. The choreographer Anneke Hansen knows this, too, and at the end of her new work, “2hymn vb,” which had its debut last week in the ballroom-like expanse of the Irondale Center in Brooklyn, the dress she slipped into was nearly large enough to span the room.The dress was a parachute, actually, or more than one. Before she spread it out and climbed a ladder to clamp it to rigging and stepped into a hole in its middle to cinch it around her, it lay in a pile for the work’s less striking earlier sections.The first was an enigmatic solo for Ms. Hansen. Down and up she went, spiraling, moving the parachute around restlessly, stopping for long and ruminative pauses. She meandered but also expressed agitation, as she repeatedly thrust her arms downward like a matador stabbing a bull or obsessively rocked back and forth, the joints of her back foot popping in the silence.Then came the four men wearing red Greek dresses, sleeveless and sheer, with nothing on underneath. To a recording of Tammy Wynette singing “Help Me Make It Through the Night,” they danced like followers of Isadora Duncan, languid and graceful (especially Austin Selden) in ways traditionally considered feminine.This challenge to rigid gender roles was gentle, not insistent. The wanness set up a contrast with the final part’s force. Bare-breasted in her parachute, Ms. Hansen was a figurehead on the prow of a ship, with great waves of fabric billowing around her. Back and forth she walked into those waves, bravely greeting them as she might greet a lover. She seemed at once in control of her dress and trapped by it, enlarged by it and exhausted by it. This was potent theater.One more dancer, Belinda He, remained obscured by what she wore. Throughout the work, she slowly inched across the space, spreading the fabric that enshrouded her. She seemed a reminder of something, and Ms. Hansen’s rocking in the parachute recalled her earlier rocking, one a premonition or memory of the other. But what stays in a viewer’s memory is the image of Ms. Hansen in that dress.A version of this review appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Gown as Parachute and Enigmatic Star.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.