By DAVID ALLENDEC. 6, 2015
The wave of young pianists breaking onto the scene has quickly become a tsunami. This autumn, both Daniil Trifonov and Benjamin Grosvenor have been in New York. Igor Levit is about to take over the Park Avenue Armory, with a little help from Marina Abramovic. In the spring, Yuja Wang and Khatia Buniatishvili will make prominent concerto appearances. Not one of them has turned 30.Amid all that flash, in the clang of competition trophies and the prestige of notable debuts, the subtlety of Behzod Abduraimov should not be lost. The Uzbek pianist, who was born in Tashkent in 1990, has had a banner year, appearing with the Mariinsky Orchestra at Carnegie Hall and making his solo bow there, too. Even so, his presence has been somewhat covert. His recital in Manhattan at Washington Irving High School on Saturday evening, part of the valuable, affordable People’s Symphony series, proved why he should be on any must-hear list.Not that there was anything that daring about the program: Schubert, Liszt, Mussorgsky — the usual fare. And certainly there were moments when the room for future growth was obvious, particularly in a slightly stolid account of Schubert’s D. 935 Impromptus. Even in those, though, one could enjoy a strong left hand, smart voicing and immaculate scales that never sounded as if they had made perfection their sole aim.In demeanor and musicianship alike, here is a pianist who is no-nonsense, yet never nondescript. Some of Mr. Abduraimov’s peers might see Liszt’s “Mephisto Waltz” as a chance to pose, but he abjured, calm and confident enough not to add unnecessary spark to an already heated work. As elsewhere, in that piece’s devilish torrents of notes there was a clarity of balancing that showed an ability to give each note its due and no more than that, yet to let you hear them all nonetheless.Mussorgsky’s “Pictures at an Exhibition” had plenty of character to them, too, and a rare sense of the gallery as a whole: The concluding peals of “The Great Gate of Kiev” were glimpsed in the especially bell-like tone found for the opening “Promenade.” If “Bydlo” lumbered heavily, “The Ballet of the Unhatched Chicks in their Shells” had crisp delicacy. And while “The Old Castle” could have done with a little more mystery, “The Hut on Fowl’s Legs” had a ferocity that still, frighteningly, seemed to hold something in reserve.A version of this review appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: With Calm and Clarity, a Young Pianist Gives Each Note Its Due and No More.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.