AdvertisementSupported byScream QueensBy Neil GenzlingerThe identities of the killers in “Scream Queens” haven’t really mattered since about the third episode, when it became clear that the show was mostly interested in milking caricatures and seeing how many pop-culture references it could cram into every hour. But for the record: Hester did it. And Boone. And Pete. Yet Chanels 1, 3 and 5 (Emma Roberts, Billie Lourd and Abigail Breslin) took the rap.We learned all this in Tuesday’s two-hour season finale, which dragged at times but finished with a flash-forward that at least varied the pace a bit.The first hour featured an apology tour by Chanel No. 1, some dissing of Nickelback and a can’t-scrub-it-from-my-mind scene in which Grace’s father, wearing only his briefs, seduced Dean Munsch. The first half ended with all fingers pointing at Hester, who threw the investigation off by stabbing herself in the eye with a stiletto heel. You gotta admire the woman’s commitment to what turned out to be a very long-range plan to get revenge.Hour 2 began in the future, specifically January 2016, with Hester not in jail at all, but instead standing alongside Grace and Zayday, the new leaders of the Kappa sorority, as they welcomed a winter pledge class. And then we spent most of the hour flashing back to show how Hester framed the other three Chanels. Let’s look at a few “bests” from the finale:Best MomentChanel No. 1, unaware that a jury was about to find her, No. 3 and No. 5 not guilty, talked all three of them into a conviction with a tirade aimed at the jurors. She claimed her right to be tried by a jury of her peers had been violated because the jurors were beneath her social standards. Only she said it much more bluntly.Best Thing That Could Come of This ShowFox has yet to decide whether “Scream Queens” will be renewed — the social media following has been great, but the ratings have been soft. Throw your own opinion in the comment section, but I’ve seen enough; what was occasionally cute and witty once would be hard-pressed to be either a second time. I do, however, want to see a spinoff show, “The Radwells Plus Eight.” In the second hour Tuesday we saw the overprivileged Chad and the daffy Denise, who had become lovers, decide to break up. These two were the best thing about this show; give them eight kids and put them in a sitcom.Most Likely Thing That Could Come of This ShowThe Chanels were sentenced not to prison but to the Palmer Asylum for the Insane. If “Scream Queens” does get a renewal, we could be looking at a subtitle: “Scream Queens: Asylum.” What’s that you say? It’s already been done?Anyway, goodbye for now to this brash, sometimes offensive, sometimes funny, reference-heavy series. Which ended, of course, with a reference: “Don’t You (Forget About Me),” the Simple Minds song identified with “The Breakfast Club.” Reference-dropping, apparently, is the new originality.Advertisement