AdvertisementSupported byJessica JonesBy Simon AbramsThe second-to-last episode of the first season of “Jessica Jones” climaxes with Jessica fighting a Kilgrave-controlled Luke Cage. But that’s not the episode’s best scene. Rather, it’s Cage’s romantic dedication to Jones that lands the biggest punch.By this point, Cage and Jones have already reunited, and set out to find Kilgrave together. They’re reluctant companions, but that tension lessens — it doesn’t completely go away — when Cage apologizes to Jones.Mike Colter, the actor who plays Cage, delivers his lines like a man who knows he’s doing the right thing by apologizing, but still has to swallow his pride one line at a time. He doesn’t sound fully committed when he says “I was wrong for blaming Reva’s murder on you.” Something holds him back when he adds,” For calling you what I called you.” But Mr. Colter fully commits when Cage makes like Luther Vandross, and tells Jones that he’ll be by her side from that point forward: “I forgive you ... for everything. And I’ll say it for as long as you need to hear it.”Mr. Colter’s performance is sneakily good here, but it wouldn’t amount to much if his declaration, alternately soulful and bombastic, wasn’t met with a tense acknowledgment from Jones. All due praise to Hilly Hicks Jr. and Billy Gierhart, the episode’s writers, for resisting the temptation to make Jones and Cage kiss and make up. Instead, the actors just look at each other. They don’t exchange doe eyes either, but rather the wary looks of two people who clearly care about each other, but don’t have enough energy to add anything but: What now?That refusal to give viewers what they want is crucial in light of the brawl that caps the episode. If Cage and Jones were able to reconcile their differences, the betrayal wouldn’t sting as much. When Kilgrave brainwashes Cage, he does so after ruining everything else that made Jones feel safe, including her childhood home and the lives of her friends. With Cage, he’s removed Jones’s last safety net. You can feel her heart sink when Kilgraves boasts about putting words into Cage’s mouth.Trish’s confrontation with her mother is about as satisfying as Cage and Jones’s heart-to-heart since it also doesn’t end with a quick-fix solution to decades-long tension. Dorothy tries to get Trish to lower her defenses twice, but Trish isn’t ready to accept her formerly abusive mother’s help just yet. Rebecca De Mornay makes you believe that Dorothy is sincere when she says she wants “a relationship with my daughter. Any relationship.” But the fact that Trish ends both encounters with a flat “I’d like you to go now” is satisfyingly anti-climactic. A hospital visit, and some fresh dirt on IGH, the mysterious company that paid for Jones’s childhood medical bills, can, and should not fix anything.Even Robyn and Malcolm’s hallway powwow is fairly moving. Robyn has been treated callously by the show’s writers until (and sometimes during) Episode 12. But as perfunctory and predictable as it may be, the scene where actress Colby Minifie breaks down and speaks frankly with Malcolm about how unhinged she has felt after her brother’s death is potent. “AKA Take a Bloody Number” asks big questions that thankfully can’t be answered as soon as they’re posed.Stakeout Notes• Robyn does a great job of redeeming herself in Episode 12, but she’s also toxically quirky in the scene where she laments “I hope they have free express shipping in heaven.” Hopefully Ms. Minifie’s character gets a much-needed overhaul in Season 2.• While the hand-held photography and action choreography during Cage and Jones’s fight isn’t as bad as it is in some other superhero shows (cough “Arrow” cough), this scene still felt over-edited. Action filmmakers: put the camera down, and let your stuntmen, actors and choreographers convey how violent the scene is. Please.• Big unintended laugh when Jones tails Kilgrave’s messenger, and the messenger shoves gardening shears in his mouth, but only after the shears’ owner yelps “Hey! Hey, you can’t take those.” New York: the only city where the first thing you say to a suicidal stranger is “Stop touching my stuff!”• Mr. Colter’s line-delivery is equally commendable when he exasperatedly tells Jones “There’s ... something between us.” You can tell that those aren’t the words he wants to be saying in that moment, but that he also knows he doesn’t have the right to be more pushy.Advertisement