At San Francisco State in the 1960s, Daniel Halpern was such an indifferent student of literature that he enrolled in a class called Dumbbell English. His professor warned him that he would probably flunk, and urged him to drop the course. But Mr. Halpern passed, and a few years later, he founded Ecco, an independent press. He went on to shape the careers of some of the country’s most celebrated authors, among them Joyce Carol Oates, Richard Ford, Robert Stone, T.C. Boyle and Louise Gluck. On Tuesday night, Mr. Halpern will receive the Maxwell E. Perkins Award for Distinguished Achievement in the Field of Fiction from the Center for Fiction, in a ceremony that will be attended by some of his most prominent authors, including Anthony Bourdain, Charles Frazier, Russell Banks and Ms. Oates. Ms. Oates and Mr.  Banks will serve as the masters of ceremony. The award, which is named for the famed editor of Ernest Hemingway and F. Scott Fitzgerald, is one of the few literary honors that goes to editors, publishers and agents in recognition of their behind-the-scenes influence on groundbreaking works of fiction. In an interview, Mr. Halpern described how a chance meeting with Paul Bowles inspired him to move to Tangier, Morocco, and start a literary magazine, Antaeus, and how writing poetry has shaped him as an editor. Below is an edited transcript. What made you want to found your own imprint? It started with a literary magazine. It was Paul Bowles who put up the money. I met Bowles at California State Northridge. I was invited to a party and I was asked to drive him home, and he told me about Tangier. I spent two years there. And he said, “Do you want to do this magazine?” I was trying to raise money for the magazine, and I ran into Drue Heinz, the wife of Jack Heinz (of Heinz Ketchup). She said, “I will back Antaeus if you will consider starting a small press called Ecco.” She chose the name? Yes, her favorite dog was called Ecco. What sort of books were you looking for in the early days? We began by doing paperback reprinting. We would buy books for nothing. I paid $250 for “The Sheltering Sky” by Paul Bowles. We bought the paperback rights to Cormac McCarthy, and he really caught on, there was a big audience for him in paperback. We started doing that, and we started doing poetry, because that’s what we could afford. We never paid more than $3,000 for a book, for years. We did books that were not taken in other places. We did Tobias Wolff’s first book of short stories. The books that we were interested in, nobody else was interested in. Then the bigger houses started casting a wider net, and started offering advances of like $15,000, which we couldn’t afford.  How did things change when you sold Ecco to HarperCollins? In 1999 when I got to HarperCollins, it was weird. They put me in an office, and I really didn’t know what to do. I had some money then to buy books and we started making some good acquisitions. Our deal is, “Leave me alone, and if I (mess) it up, fire me,” and it’s worked out really well. You write poetry and have published nine poetry books. How has that shaped your work as an editor? In terms of editing, I hear the language in the way I would write poetry. Some fiction writers write like poets, (Richard) Ford is one of those. Others are more plot oriented. Poetry is a whole different kind of editing. You cut poems, change lines, change endings, fix line breaks.  Are you planning to publish any more of your own poetry? I don’t think I would publish another book of poetry. I’d rather just write it for myself. What’s the hardest project you’ve edited over the decades? The hardest book I ever had to edit was a book on physics by Lisa Randall. I told her that I failed physics in high school. I marked the page every time I didn’t understand something.