“Hamilton,” the smash Broadway musical about America’s first Treasury secretary, will have an open-ended production in Chicago starting next fall, the show’s lead producer said Tuesday.The Chicago production will be the first outside New York for the show, which had a sold-out run Off Broadway at the Public Theater this year, and which has been a tough (and costly) ticket on Broadway since opening at the Richard Rodgers Theater in August. The Chicago production will be at the PrivateBank Theater (now Bank of America Theater).“Chicago is the best theater market in the country after New York City, with the greatest population base of passionate theatergoers, and the city can accommodate a big Broadway show for a long time,”  the producer, Jeffrey Seller, said in a telephone interview from Chicago. He noted that “Wicked” and “Jersey Boys,” among others, had previously established long-running productions in Chicago.“It is financially viable to finance a show just for Chicago,” he said.  “We know that we can run here, we can recoup here, and we can make a reasonable profit here. We will be here a long time — as long as Chicago wants us.”Mr. Seller said that the Chicago production would match the New York production, with the same creative team and the same set, including the two turntables. The Chicago theater, with 1,930 seats, is larger than the New York theater, which has 1,344 seats. But Mr. Seller said the house is configured to provide a “100 percent equal” experience. The Chicago production will begin previews Sept. 27, 2016; tickets will go on sale early next year.Mr. Seller said he is continuing to work on plans to produce the show in other American cities, and in London, and that he expects to make announcements about those plans next year.“Hamilton” has attracted attention for many reasons, among them the use of Hispanic, African-American and Asian-American actors to play the Founding Fathers and the women in their lives. Mr. Seller said that the cast in Chicago “must look like America” and that “whenever we produce the show, we are going to take steps to ensure that the cast looks like the country we live in.” He said the cast would be chosen by Lin-Manuel Miranda, who wrote the show’s book, music and lyrics and stars in the Broadway production; Thomas Kail, the director; Alex Lacamoire, the music director; Oskar Eustis, the artistic director of the Public Theater; and Mr. Seller. He said that Mr. Miranda would ultimately decide any parameters on who could be cast in licensed professional productions mounted by others (such as those at regional theaters), but that such productions are years away.