By ALASTAIR MACAULAYDEC. 8, 2015
Alina Cojocaru and the Romanian BalletIs there a ballerina today held in more widespread affection than Alina Cojocaru? This Romanian-born dancer was trained in Kiev but spent most of her professional career in London. She embodies the frailness and lightness of Giselle and the heart-catching radiance of Aurora (“The Sleeping Beauty”) with technique and style that have illumined many other roles. As an occasional guest of American Ballet Theater, she has often shown qualities that even the more dazzling Natalia Osipova and the more gorgeous Diana Vishneva have not equaled.For 15 years she was a luminary of the Royal Ballet; since 2013 she has danced with English National Ballet. Her longtime fiancé, Johan Kobborg — a star of the Royal Danish Ballet whose career was also in London with the Royal, often partnering Ms. Cojocaru — is now artistic director of the Romanian Ballet. The single performance on Wednesday night at the Rose Theater stars both of them and members of the Romanian company, with Tamara Rojo (another former principal, who is now English National’s artistic director) and Ulyana Lopatkina (a senior principal of the Mariinsky Ballet) are guest stars. Though it’s billed as “Alina and Friends,” it seems chiefly intended to make New Yorkers aware of the Romanian Ballet. It’s to be hoped that this gala-style evening contains choreography that showcases both the dancers we know and those we don’t.Liz GerringWhen I first went to see work by the choreographer Liz Gerring at the Baryshnikov Arts Center in 2010, hers was a name of which I knew nothing; it was a quiet week, and I was curious. I was so excited by what I saw that I returned the very next evening. Since then her work has been seen at the Joyce Theater and Jacob’s Pillow (she won the festival’s Dance Award this year), and in San Francisco; I have invariably found it compelling. This week, from Thursday to Sunday, she presents “Horizon,” her latest creation, in the Peak Performances series at Montclair State University in New Jersey. Since her work seems to me to be still evolving, I won’t categorize it, but she has worked on the overlap between formal modern dance, pedestrian movement and postmodern dance. She is a choreographer who has always made me admire both her dancers and her choice of vocabulary.Soledad Barrio and Noche Flamenca’s ‘Antigona’Ms. Barrio, appearing with the company Noche Flamenca, is a New York fixture. This summer she presented “Antigona,” her treatment of Sophocles’ “Antigone,” here; its success was such that the production now returns for a six-week season (Dec. 11- Jan. 23) at the West Park Presbyterian Church (165 West 86th Street, Manhattan).The Hard Nut and Mark MorrisBoth beloved and controversial, “The Hard Nut,” Mark Morris’s 1990 version of “The Nutcracker,” has not been seen in New York for five years. It returns to the Howard Gilman Opera House at the Brooklyn Academy of Music Dec. 12 to Dec. 20. There’s much to say of this modern retelling, with its American narrative, its Charles Burns cartoon designs, its “Wizard of Oz”-style switch from black-and-white to color and its unsurpassed snow scene.Of all the many “Nutcracker” productions I’ve seen, this is one of only two (with Alexei Ratmansky’s for American Ballet Theater) to play Tchaikovsky’s score complete in the correct order; and (unlike Ratmansky’s) it has a live choir for the wordless snowflakes sequence.An earlier version of this article misstated the given name of a designer whose work is featured in “The Hard Nut.” He is Charles Burns, not Howard.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.