By KATHRYN SHATTUCKDEC. 8, 2015
Asif Kapadia ponders the cost of celebrity in his documentary about Amy Winehouse; the Huangs pad Santa’s biography in “Fresh Off the Boat”; and the Victoria’s Secret angels strut their stuff in next to nothing.What’s StreamingAMY (2015) on iTunes. What price fame? The dazzling rise and shattering downfall of the Grammy Award-winning, drug-addled singer Amy Winehouse (who died of alcohol poisoning in 2011 at the age of 27), are filtered through the lens of Asif Kapadia. The home videos, concert footage, publicity interviews and recording sessions coalesce into “an intensely intimate experience, which is delightful as you’re getting to know her early on, when she’s all shy, charming smiles and having her first successes,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. She added, “The documentary becomes progressively more difficult to watch as Ms. Winehouse falls apart, and as its intimacy, which earlier felt nice and cozily warm, starts to feel uncomfortably intrusive.” (Image: Ms. Winehouse)THE MINDY PROJECT on Hulu. The season takes a breather after this flashback episode, which rewinds to Mindy’s first day at Schulman and Associates to clock the metamorphosis of her relationship with Danny.What’s on TVWHO’S AFRAID OF VIRGINIA WOOLF? (1966) 8 p.m. on TCM. Because marital discord is timeless: Edward Albee’s soul-sucking academics — Richard Burton as a professor; Elizabeth Taylor as his wife, a college president’s daughter; and George Segal and Sandy Dennis as the young faculty couple they’ve invited over — are adapted by Mike Nichols, in his film directorial debut, “without pussyfooting,” Stanley Kauffmann wrote in The Times. (Image: Taylor and Burton)SCREAM QUEENS 8 p.m. on Fox. Hurry up, already. The Red Devil is unmasked and the killer revealed in this two-hour season finale.AdvertisementFRESH OFF THE BOAT 8:30 p.m. on ABC. Jessica and Louis decide that Santa could use a better back story. As in, he’s actually a scientist with multiple postgraduate degrees from Princeton and a profound love for his mother. (Image: Ian Chen)THE VICTORIA’S SECRET FASHION SHOW 10 p.m. on CBS. Earthly beauties like Adriana Lima, Alessandra Ambrosio, Behati Prinsloo, Candice Swanepoel, Kendall Jenner and Gigi Hadid sashay down the runway in angel wings and skimpy lingerie to the strains of Selena Gomez and Ellie Goulding. Lily Aldridge slinks about in a $2 million fantasy bra and belt encrusted with diamonds, blue topaz, yellow sapphires and pink quartz, as the Weeknd serenades her with “Can’t Feel My Face.” (Image: the Weeknd)BORN THIS WAY 10 p.m. on A&E. Seven young adults with Down syndrome dream of jobs, romance and independence.AdvertisementSINATRA & THE JACK PACK 10 p.m. on Reelz. The friendship of Frank Sinatra and John F. Kennedy, and its collapse.A version of this schedule appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.