By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMDEC. 7, 2015
The soprano Diana Damrau likes a good challenge. Over the past decade at the Metropolitan Opera, she has sung her first performances of difficult roles, played both Pamina and the Queen of the Night during a single run of “The Magic Flute” and turned cartwheels onstage in Bellini’s “La Sonnambula.”The song recital Ms. Damrau presented on Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall, with the pianist Craig Rutenberg, appeared to be born of a different dare: How much personality, how much dramatic fire, can you fit into the narrow dynamic range between pianissimo and mezzo piano — between really quiet and pretty quiet — and still project to the last row of the 2,800-seat Stern Auditorium?A great deal, as it turns out. The first half of the program consisted of songs by Schubert and Strauss that deal mostly with secret love. With meticulous coloring of her buoyant, silky soprano, Ms. Damrau brought out a wealth of different emotional states. In the Schubert selections, there were the hopeful mysticism of “Ständchen,” in which a lover confides his longing to nature; the first dizzying butterflies experienced in “Gretchen am Spinnrade”; the fit-to-burst passion of “Heimliches Lieben”; and the coy glee, in “Geheimes,” that comes from having information everyone else is guessing at.The Strauss songs, too, spoke of love jealously guarded from the outside world. Vocally, all of this contained passion requires prodigious breath control from a singer. Often, Ms. Damrau allowed her sound to taper off, even as the musical line rose, and in the way she reined in certain climactic notes, she was able conjure feelings from fear to head-in-the-clouds dreaminess and aching sensuality.AdvertisementThe concert’s second half opened with songs by Poulenc, “Fiançailles Pour Rire,” that expressed more guarded and ambivalent emotions. Ms. Damrau, supported by the sophisticated playing of Mr. Rutenberg, appeared just as comfortable in almost-static sound paintings like “Dans l’Herbe,” in which she shaped wispy, vaporous phrases over softly billowing piano chords.Still, Ms. Damrau’s vivacious temperament and disarmingly goofy sense of humor would only brook so much containment. In selections from Manuel Rosenthal’s “Chansons du Monsieur Bleu,” a group of irreverent children’s observations, her comic instincts came to the fore. Dvorak’s spirited “Gypsy Songs,” sung with their original German texts, rounded out the program by calling forth much brighter shadings from Ms. Damrau — but wanting, here and there, just a little more wildness.Advertisement A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Versatile Soprano Deepens Her Range.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.