By GIA KOURLASDEC. 7, 2015
The word “crowd” brings immediate images to mind: furious protesters, exhausted refugees and, now, trapped concertgoers. Throughout his career, the veteran choreographer Tere O’Connor has been waging a vehement battle against assigning meaning to dance. But in “The Goodbye Studies,” he veers toward it — on his own terms.In this new work, being performed by 12 stellar dancers at the Kitchen, Mr. O’Connor makes the idea of the crowd his subject. Even so, individuals are discernible throughout, and meaning, formulated by Mr. O’Connor’s uncanny sense of structure, is attained not from story but from sensation. You watch, you listen to the steps, you wait: Inevitably, among the fragments — some soft and fuzzy, others jagged — a picture emerges.Mr. O’Connor’s crowd builds slowly. Lauren Vermilion, looking angelic in a printed romper, is the first to appear. She pads onto the stage, stands and shifts slightly before exiting and returning. Others follow her pattern until the stage is full of performers, looking out with expressions that signal gradations of empathy, dread and hope.Without mirroring each other, Eleanor Hullihan and Tess Dworman are a support system as they drift side by side, with brushing feet and drifting arms; later, Lily Gold and Oisin Monaghan, caught in an embrace, roll on the floor as the others watch — fondly, casually — from the side. In other moments, dancers cross the stage in steely demi-point walks, as if wearing invisible high heels, or prance in profile. Mr. O’Connor’s constantly unfolding scenes have the feel of a needle dropping randomly on a record; it’s the same band but different songs.Like floating particles, the dancers converge and scatter through Mr. O’Connor’s deft pathways: Duets and trios suddenly morph into loops and clusters. While the meditative grandeur of “The Goodbye Studies” is occasionally broken with moments that border on camp — as when the dancers lean forward and open their mouths in dismay — harmony is found in its ever-changing structure.The rich lighting by Michael O’Connor (he is not related to the choreographer) shifts subtly, so that the space can appear empty or confined. And while James Baker’s crackling score is enhanced with a mostly understated mix of sounds — birds, bells, a choir — the choreography, which already has a rhythm to its swirling patterns and purposeful steps, could be shown in silence. “The Goodbye Studies” is a dark beauty, and it doesn’t need any distractions.­“The Goodbye Studies” runs through Saturday at the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Manhattan; 212-255-5793, Ext. 11; thekitchen­.org.A version of this review appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Kaleidoscope of Bodies in a Continually Changing Crowd.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.