AdvertisementSupported byBy Saphora Smith and Joe CoscarelliPARIS — Eagles of Death Metal, the California rock band that was onstage at the Bataclan when assailants opened fire on the crowd last month, appeared in Paris on Monday night, playing with U2 near the end of its show at an arena a few miles from the Bataclan.“There’s nothing left but to introduce you to some people whose lives will forever be a part of the life of Paris,” Bono, the U2 frontman, said of Eagles of Death Metal. “These are our brothers. They were robbed of their stage three weeks ago, and we would like to offer them ours tonight.”The bands, performing at the AccorHotels Arena, then joined together in a rendition of Patti Smith’s “People Have the Power,” which Ms. Smith performed with U2 on the same stage Sunday night.U2 then left the stage to Eagles of Death Metal for a performance of its song “I Love You All the Time.” After the terrorist attacks in Paris, the group called on musicians of all genres to cover the track, from its album “Zipper Down,” promising to donate the proceeds to victims of the attacks.Monday’s U2 concert, one of two originally scheduled for Nov. 14 and 15 that were postponed after the attack, was being shown Monday night on HBO. U2’s shows, which were rescheduled for Sunday and Monday, are the biggest concerts in Paris since the Nov. 13 tragedy.Eighty-nine people were killed at the Bataclan concert hall, part of coordinated terrorist attacks in Paris that left 130 people dead. The members of Eagles of Death Metal escaped, although Nick Alexander, the band’s merchandise manager, was killed.“We felt the biggest and the only real contribution we can make at a moment like that is to honor the people of Paris, who brought us the concept of liberté, égalité, fraternité,” Bono said in an interview. “ISIS and these kinds of extremists are a death cult. We’re a life cult.”He added that he had spoken to two members of Eagles of Death Metal, Julian Dorio and Jesse Hughes, after the attack, offering them the use of the band’s plane and providing them with cellphones. The Edge, U2’s guitarist, said this week that his band was working to bring special guests onstage that would honor the recent events.Mr. Hughes, Eagles of Death Metal’s singer, said in an interview with Vice last month, in his first comments since the attack, that he was ready to perform again.“I cannot wait to get back to Paris,” he said. “I cannot wait to play. I want to come back. I want to be the first band to play in the Bataclan when it comes back up. Because I was there when it went silent for a minute. Our friends went there to see rock ’n’ roll and died. I want to go back there and live.”Saphora Smith reported from Paris, and Joe Coscarelli from New York.Advertisement