AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony TommasiniThroughout the adventurous program he played on Sunday night at Weill Recital Hall, it was clear that the prodigious 26-year-old cellist Jay Campbell performs music of our time not out of obligation but because it excites him so much.A student at the Juilliard School, Mr. Campbell was appearing as the latest winner of the school’s Leo B. Ruiz Memorial Recital Award. He could have chosen to demonstrate the rich colors he elicits from his instrument by performing Debussy’s Cello Sonata, or shown a probing grasp of structure with a Beethoven work. Instead, Mr. Campbell brought those qualities and more to performances of five challenging new and recent works.He began with a compelling account of Elliott Carter’s “Figment I” from 1994, the oldest piece on the program. At first this seven-minute work sounds like a series of separate musical gestures: short squiggly figures; fragments of languid melodic lines; bursts of pizzicato wildness; skittish filigree. As played by Mr. Campbell with complete command and cool control, the music seemed an episodic yet tautly dramatic narrative. For such a slight-framed young man, Mr. Campbell has a robust sound, though the delicacy in his playing was just as captivating.He was then joined by the brilliant pianist Conor Hanick, a Juilliard graduate and new-music champion, for David Fulmer’s “Original Wood,” composed this year. This nearly 10-minute, single-movement work alternates stretches of lacy writing for both instruments with bursts of pointillist passagework and intricate crisscrossing lines.Mr. Campbell gave the premiere of Jason Eckardt’s “Practical Alchemy” for solo cello. The composer describes the piece, which nods to medieval experiments with alchemy, as going through metastatic processes that alter the properties of its materials. It begins with short, minimal gestures — plucked tones, rustling sounds, barely audible sustained tones, bow scrapes — separated by daring silences. Slowly, the gestures coalesce into segments, phrases and, eventually, near-frenzied episodes. Mr. Campbell played it commandingly, especially the silences.Matthias Pintscher’s atmospheric, free-flowing “Janusgesicht” (2001) for viola and cello was another work that evolves in sketchy spurts and gestures, played vibrantly by Mr. Campbell and Mr. Fulmer, on viola. In a theatrical, and also amusing, touch, they performed the piece sitting back to back on a single piano bench.After all these episodic compositions it was gratifying to end with Charles Wuorinen’s “An Orbicle of Jasp” (1999), a pulsing, restless work for cello and piano, rather reminiscent of Schoenberg’s Neo-Classical 12-tone pieces, but with a feisty American energy, especially as played by Mr. Campbell and Mr. Hanick.There was a big ovation at the end but no encores, the right choice by Mr. Campbell after such an absorbing program.Advertisement