By DAVID ALLENDEC. 7, 2015
Near the end of Caroline Shaw’s “Entr’acte” (2011), a halting, Haydnesque minuet and trio for string quartet, Ms. Shaw asks the musicians to play notes that seem to fall away — to make a sound, as she writes in the score, “like a little sigh.”It’s a reminder of just what can make her music so charmingly imaginative. “Entr’acte” is replete with modest flourishes — kinks of tuning, slips of rhythm — that resist formal structures, that keep pulling the music along new avenues. Played gracefully by the young Tesla Quartet during Sunday’s Schneider Concert at the New School Auditorium, those little sighs weren’t dejected or lonely, but rather tranquil, like the mewing of a contented cat. They brought laughs, but they also seemed to show the piece its way home.Ms. Shaw remains best known for her brilliant “Partita for Eight Voices,” written for the group Roomful of Teeth and the winner of a Pulitzer Prize in 2013. Or at least she was, until “Say You Will,” her recent, much publicized collaboration, full of quirky Shavian touches, with Kanye West. Her success has given new prominence to her other works, all in her distinctively welcoming, playful style.“Entr’acte” was part of a pair of Shaw pieces on Sunday, along with the equally lovely “Punctum” (2009, revised in 2013). Here, the inspiration is not Haydn but Bach, in the form of a chorale from the “St. Matthew Passion,” heard first as “Erkenne mich, mein Hüter.” Everything in “Punctum” seems to build toward a full statement of that hymn, from hovering single pitches to pizzicato intimations of the tune and obsessive glosses on its intervals. Yet just when it finally arrives, it doesn’t quite resolve, as if the Bach in its entirety were never quite the point, but just the bits of it that stick in the memory.The Tesla members — Ross Snyder and Michelle Lie, the rotating violinists; Edwin Kaplan, violist; and Serafim Smigelskiy, cellist — presented Ms. Shaw’s pieces with conviction. They also gave elegant performances of a sonata by Johann Friedrich Fasch and a quartet by Haydn: not the one that prompted “Entr’acte” (the second of the Opus 77 set), but the dark F minor slice of Opus 20. Beethoven’s great C sharp minor Quartet, sadly, was a struggle.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Composer Who Finds the Soft Sighs in Haydn.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.