By CHRISTOPHER D. SHEADEC. 7, 2015
LONDON — The architecture and design collective Assemble was awarded the Turner Prize, Britain’s leading contemporary art award, on Monday. The group was nominated for a project in which it refurbished derelict Victorian-era houses with the help of residents in a working-class neighborhood in Liverpool.It is only the second time in the Turner Prize’s 31-year history that it has gone to more than one individual. (The artist duo Gilbert & George won in 1986.)The prize is granted annually to a British artist under 50 and comes with a cash award of 25,000 pounds, or about $38,000. It was announced on Monday night at a ceremony at the Tramway, an arts center in Glasgow where works by the four 2015 nominees are on view.In a statement, the prize jury said of Assemble: “They draw on long traditions of artistic and collective initiatives that experiment in art, design and architecture. In doing so they offer alternative models to how societies can work.”AdvertisementThe ongoing Liverpool project, Granby Four Streets, involves saving rowhouses from demolition by converting them into dwellings that can be rented or purchased by local people. The collective is also recruiting young residents to work on site, training them in job skills with the goal of founding enterprises in the area that will keep them employed.AdvertisementAt Tramway, Assemble is showcasing handmade household items that its members made with the residents as part of a tandem project, the Granby Workshop. The works on view are available for sale, and proceeds will benefit the Liverpool residents.In a brief speech on Monday, the Assemble member Alice Edgerley said that winning the award in Glasgow was particularly meaningful because of the collective’s ties to the city, where it created the Baltic Street Adventure Playground. Joseph Halligan, another member, called the group’s experiences since being nominated “super surreal.”Related projects by the group include “Folly for a Flyover,” an arts space that it opened beneath a highway overpass in East London, and “Yardhouse,” a shed that features studio spaces that are rented cheaply to artists.This year’s Turner Prize contenders drew broad praise for being more accessible to the public than some past nominees, although the nomination of Assemble drew sharp scrutiny and some ridicule in the British news media. Reviewing the exhibition in The Scotsman newspaper, Moira Jeffrey wrote, “Assemble don’t think of themselves as artists, and so the question is, why should we?”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Others were more admiring. In The Guardian, Adrian Searle praised the group’s altruism. “It sure beats the obscenity of the art market,” he wrote of the group’s mission and its installation at the Tramway, adding: “Will it win the Turner prize? Perhaps it should.”The three other nominees included Bonnie Camplin’s “The Military Industrial Complex (Patterns),” an installation that includes stations at which viewers can don headphones and hear about alien abductions and displays of books about conspiracy theories, hypnosis, religion and trance states; Nicole Wermer’s “Infrastruktur,” an installation that explores the intersection of art, design and consumer culture with objects like fur coats sewn onto steel chairs; and “DOUG,” an operatic cantata by the artist Janice Kerbel, whose protagonist navigates a landscape of imagined disasters.The Turner, Britain’s most prominent art award, has regularly drawn criticism as well as intense news media attention. It has been faulted at times for championing the esoteric or overly theoretical, or for anointing art viewed as unabashedly obscene.Last year the Irish artist Duncan Campbell won the prize  for “It for Others,” a video artwork that blends old-fashioned educational films with dance footage choreographed by Michael Clark.In an interview before the award was announced, Lewis Jones, an Assemble spokesman, said of the prize: “It’s not make or break for us at all. It’s not like we are going to increase our fees if we win.”Roslyn Sulcas contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A London Collective  Wins the Turner Prize.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.