AdvertisementSupported byBy Robin PogrebinIn a major coup for Sotheby’s, the auction house has stolen away Marc Porter, a central player for over 25 years at its archrival, Christie’s.Mr. Porter, chairman of Christie’s Americas, executed important sales, including the $157 million auction of Elizabeth Taylor’s jewelry in 2011.Mr. Porter is resigning from Christie’s and, after a noncompete period of about a year, will join Sotheby’s in a high-ranking business position that has yet to be announced but is expected to involve international client development.“He will take on a role that will empower him to bring his decades of global experience in fine art to bear on the needs of our most valuable clients around the world,” said Tad Smith, Sotheby’s chief executive, in a statement.Thanking Mr. Porter “for his exceptional contribution to Christie’s over many years,” Jussi Pylkkanen, Christie’s global president, said in a statement that Mr. Porter’s responsibilities would be assumed by Brook Hazelton, president of Christie’s Americas.The news, first reported by Marion Maneker of Art Market Monitor, comes after the November auctions in New York, in which Sotheby’s gained back market share, having trailed Christie’s in the most competitive area of postwar and contemporary art.Sotheby’s has also just completed a round of voluntary buyouts that achieved the company’s required cost savings. That means the auction house will not have to resort to layoffs, a spokeswoman said.Mr. Porter’s resignation took the art world by surprise, given that he has been a mainstay of Christie’s since he joined that company in 1990 and was expected to finish out his career there.Edward Dolman, who formerly ran Christie’s and is the chief executive of the auction house Phillips, said, “It’s obviously a loss to Christie’s,” adding, “I’m sure he’ll be an asset to Sotheby’s.”But in an interview on Monday, Mr. Porter suggested he felt he had no choice but to go. “I left because of my own feelings about what kind of business I want to lead,” Mr. Porter said.Having been international head of private sales from 2012 to 2015, Mr. Porter was particularly frustrated by Christie’s decision to devolve that division into individual departments; he stepped down from that post this year.“It was a project I loved, pulling together our private sale group, building our galleries,” he said. “I did not want to go back to just being the chairman in the U.S. I liked the complexity of this other job.”Trained as a lawyer, Mr. Porter, 55, is perhaps best known for his effective negotiating skills as the principal dealmaker for major collections, securing large consignments, including many of the most important artworks sold during the past decade.In 2010, for example, he helped broker a deal in which the Philadelphia Museum of Art and the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts were able to match the $68 million asking price for Thomas Eakins’s 1875 masterpiece, “The Gross Clinic,” which allowed the painting to stay in that city.Mr. Porter came to the attention of Mr. Smith at Sotheby’s through the auction houses’ competition for the collection of A. Alfred Taubman. Although Sotheby’s ultimately prevailed — largely because it guaranteed the Taubman family $515 million — Mr. Porter impressed those working on the deal, several sources said.People who have worked with Mr. Porter describe him as the kind of straight-shooting “good guy” many see as increasingly rare in the auction business. “He’s not full of the usual hyperbole often associated with auctioneers,” said Paul Gray of the Richard Gray gallery in Chicago, who has often dealt with Mr. Porter on consignments. “I trust him.”Mr. Porter has been chairman of Christie’s Americas since 2009 and served as president of Christie’s Americas for six years, starting in 2003, filling that role again on an interim basis from January to June of this year.He has also been on the board’s executive committee, president of Christie’s Japan and a board member of Christie’s International.He started a global private sales division that delivered $1.5 billion in sales in 2015 — or 20 percent of Christie’s business — and was instrumental in transforming Christie’s into an international enterprise as sales grew to $8.4 billion from $2 billion since 2004.His achievements include overseeing the Andy Warhol online sale, increasing Christie’s market share and helping with the restitution of stolen art.Whatever his strengths, analysts say, Mr. Porter has his work cut out for him at Sotheby’s. “There’s a lot going on in the markets for assets and the containing of financial risk that the auction houses have not understood or have ignored,” said David Kusin, who runs the consulting firm Kusin & Company. “Their basic business model is 18th century, and they are struggling to come to grips with the 21st century.”Steve Blitz, the director and chief economist at ITG Investment Research, added that auction houses can no longer afford to live “in the land of Oz.”“It’s a business,” Mr. Blitz said. “And it’s got to show returns.”Last month, the company’s third-quarter results showed that commissions from Sotheby’s auction sales during the period were $56 million, a decrease of 12 percent from the same period in 2014. On Monday, its stock fell 2.49 percent to $26.99, down from a 52-week high of $47.28.But financial experts say one should not make too much of Mr. Porter’s defection. “Talent moving around is something consistent about the art world,” said David Schick, a managing director at Stifel Financial, a brokerage and investment banking firm, who follows Sotheby’s. “This is the big leagues. The Yankees and Mets are always getting people and losing people. That’s the way the business works.”Advertisement