By BEN SISARIODEC. 7, 2015
Kendrick Lamar, Taylor Swift and the Weeknd are the top contenders for the 58th annual Grammy Awards, leading a crop of nominees that is dominated by young hitmakers in pop, rap and R&B.Mr. Lamar, a 28-year-old Los Angeles rapper whose album “To Pimp a Butterfly” was one of the year’s most popular and critically adored releases, is up for nine awards, more than any other act, it was announced on Monday by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. “To Pimp a Butterfly,” dense with themes of black identity and social conflict in America, was nominated for album of the year, and “Alright” for song of the year.Ms. Swift, 25, a Grammy darling since her years as a Nashville ingénue, was nominated seven times for “1989.” That album, which cemented her role as a pop-culture juggernaut, is up for album of the year and best pop vocal album, and her “Blank Space” is up for both record and song of the year. Abel Tesfaye, the 25-year-old Canadian musician who performs as the Weeknd, received seven nods for “Beauty Behind the Madness,” the album that transformed him from Internet oddity to full-blown pop star.“Beauty Behind the Madness” is a contestant for album of the year, and its song “Can’t Feel My Face” for record of the year. In a sign of the Weeknd’s crossover success, he scored nominations in both pop and R&B genre categories, including best pop solo performance for “Can’t Feel My Face” and best R&B performance for “Earned It,” from the “Fifty Shades of Grey” soundtrack.AdvertisementThe other contenders for album of the year are the Southern rock band Alabama Shakes, with “Sound & Color,” and Chris Stapleton, a shaggy-bearded country bard who had one of the year’s more unusual comeback stories with “Traveller.” Last month, after his album had disappeared from the chart, “Traveller” rocketed back to No. 1 after Mr. Stapleton’s surprise wins at the Country Music Association Awards.AdvertisementThe Grammys have often been criticized for venerating age and experience at the expense of younger stars. But for the next awards, to be held in Los Angeles on Feb. 15 and broadcast by CBS, the nominees lean heavily toward youth.Ed Sheeran, a baby-faced British singer who has become a star with heartfelt guitar ballads, is up for both record and song of the year with his soul-inflected track “Thinking Out Loud.” Even best rock album, a category usually populated by graying baby boomers, this year doesn’t date back farther than the 1990s, with Death Cab for Cutie, Slipknot, Muse, James Bay and Highly Suspect.In an interview on Monday, Diplo, who is up for producer of the year for his work with Major Lazer, Madonna and Jack Ü, remarked on his surprise at the 2009 awards, when M.I.A.’s song “Paper Planes,” a track he co-produced, lost record of the year to Robert Plant and Alison Krauss’s sepia-toned “Please Read the Letter.”“Since then, it’s like, ‘O.K., we gotta make this a little bit more current,’” Diplo said of the Grammys. “That’s why more rap music is going to be on there. We need a lot more rap artists like Kendrick Lamar taking chances and going with their gut.”Jack Ü’s album, “Skrillex and Diplo Present Jack Ü,” is up for best dance/electronic album, and its song “Where Are Ü Now,” featuring Justin Bieber, was nominated for best dance recording.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For record of the year, which recognizes a single recording, Ms. Swift, the Weeknd and Mr. Sheeran will compete against Mark Ronson’s “Uptown Funk,” featuring Bruno Mars, a track that notched 14 weeks at No. 1; and D’Angelo’s “Really Love,” from “Black Messiah,” the R&B singer’s first album in almost 15 years.Ms. Swift, Mr. Lamar and the Weeknd were widely expected to dominate the nominations. But if there is one surprise this year it is the extent to which the Grammy voters have celebrated Mr. Lamar, a move that some may see as compensation for his snubs at the 2014 awards. That year, Mr. Lamar was up for seven awards but won none, bringing accusations of racial bias among the voters. The award for best rap album that year, for example, went to Macklemore & Ryan Lewis, a white act. (Mr. Lamar has already enjoyed some consolation: At the 57th Grammys, earlier this year, he took home two prizes.)As vast as the list of nominations are — there are 83 categories this year — no Grammy announcement is complete without some criticism of who has been left out.AdvertisementFor best new artist, nominations went to Tori Kelly, a pop singer who began her career on YouTube; the country singer Sam Hunt; Mr. Bay, a British singer-songwriter; Courtney Barnett, an alternative rock singer and guitarist from Australia; and the pop singer Meghan Trainor. (Last year Ms. Trainor’s “All About That Bass” was nominated for both record and song of the year, but according to Grammy rules in place since 2010, she can still be nominated for best new artist.)But commentators noted the absence of Fetty Wap — a New Jersey rapper whose song “Trap Queen” was a huge hit on streaming services — as well as Hozier, Leon Bridges and the saxophonist Kamasi Washington. “Trap Queen” did get nods for best rap performance and best rap song.But Mr. Washington, who played on Mr. Lamar’s “To Pimp a Butterfly” and released a widely hailed solo album, “The Epic,” was not so fortunate. Not only did he miss out on best new artist, but to the surprise of many jazz fans, he was shut out of the jazz field entirely.Among the odder contests this year is best traditional pop vocal album, in which Seth MacFarlane, best known as the creator of the TV comedy “Family Guy,” will compete against Bob Dylan, Josh Groban, Barry Manilow and the formidable duo of Tony Bennett and Bill Charlap. For best spoken word album, Amy Poehler will go up against Patti Smith, Dick Cavett, Jimmy Carter, and Janis Ian and Jean Smart.And in another nomination that led to some head-scratching, Paul McCartney got a nod for best rap song, as one of the 19 songwriters credited on Kanye West’s “All Day.”The awards recognize music released between Oct. 1, 2014, and Sept. 30, 2015, meaning Adele and her record-breaking album “25” were not eligible this year.Joe Coscarelli contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Younger Voices Rack Up Grammy Nods.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.