By JAMES R. OESTREICHDEC. 6, 2015
Subtlety may not be the word that springs to mind when you think of Christmas concerts. But if you listened cold to the Tallis Scholars’ captivating program at the Church of St. Mary the Virgin on Saturday evening, unaware of the title, “Christmas Across Centuries,” you might have missed the theme.Unless, that is, you are intimately familiar with the chant “Puer Natus Est Nobis” (“Unto Us a Boy Is Born”) and the ways in which Thomas Tallis insinuated it into his “Missa Puer Natus Est Nobis” of 1554. For the concert, which also included works of Tallis’s contemporary John Sheppard and our contemporary Arvo Pärt, was assembled around movements of that Mass setting.The subtlety was built into the music, too, in each case a sublime mix of simplicity and complexity, and also carried into the performances, led by Peter Phillips. Perhaps the quality Mr. Pärt most shares with those ancients is imperturbability, in music that hovers above the text in its own world of sound and contemplation.Bach, for example, in his great Magnificat, showed what rich opportunities the words present for tone painting: strong downward thrusts for “deposuit,” deposed the mighty; gentle lifts for “exaltavit,” exalted the humble. Mr. Pärt, in his Magnificat here, like his 16th-century counterparts, couldn’t be bothered with such mundane detail in his meditative state.AdvertisementIn his Seven Antiphons and elsewhere, he uses dissonance sparingly but effectively, sometimes sustaining it at length. His forerunners used it too — Sheppard, in his “Sacris Solemniis” and “Gaude, Gaude, Gaude” offered some particularly pungent junctures — but covered it over quickly in good 16th-century style.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The main interest in Tallis and Sheppard generally lies in the middle, in the thick of the contrapuntal play. In Mr. Pärt’s music it often lies at the top and bottom of a spaced-out texture, a contrast that showed tellingly near the end of the program.Late in Mr. Pärt’s “I Am the True Vine,” the strong basses droned statically against beautiful pealing high notes from the sopranos. Tallis, in the concluding Agnus Dei, set up a cascading pattern of imitation that emerged fluidly, obliterating the distance between high and low.AdvertisementMr. Philips, who founded the Tallis Scholars in 1973, led a crack a cappella contingent of 10 here, in a program presented by Miller Theater at Columbia University. That these excellent singers performed with superb blend and balance, as expected, is no excuse not to have listed them by name somewhere in the program.A version of this review appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Bridging the Centuries, With a Timeless Weave of Sublime Contemplation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.