
Jessica Jones By                     
SIMON ABRAMS

DEC. 10, 2015
“AKA Smile” is a fittingly unsensational conclusion to Marvel’s darkest, most psychologically complex and thoughtfully character-driven superhero adaptation. The show’s cynical outlook has sometimes been hard to stomach. But the show’s first season finale is down-to-earth and true to the series’s bleak, but cautiously optimistic ideas about heroism and guilt.Jones’s growth as a character isn’t the focus of the episode She doesn’t learn important life lessons, nor does she fix anything by snapping Kilgrave’s neck. Viewers can feel immense relief knowing that Kilgrave dies, and that Luke Cage, who was left unconscious at the end of last episode, pulls through with the help of “Daredevil” supporting character Claire “Night Nurse” Temple (Rosario Dawson). But these climactic plot developments are thankfully not the focus of “AKA Smile.” Season one ends where it started: in Jones’s office where she reluctantly accepts the idea that she is, in the eyes of the people she’s saved from Kilgrave, a hero.The smallness of the finale’s final scene is what makes it such a note-perfect conclusion. Jones doesn’t have greater peace of mind at this point, but rather a sense that she must fake it until she makes it. Kilgrave is right to single Trish out as Jones’s most constant companion. And when Jones tells Trish “I love you,” the all-clear phrase that Jones uses to secretly reassure Trish that she’s not been brainwashed by Kilgrave, she’s telling herself that she isn’t the monster that Kilgrave made her into but rather, as Malcolm tells her in Episode 2, a good person.Scott Reynolds, the series writer, and the co-writer and series creator Melissa Rosenberg establish the notion that Jones’s biggest hurdle in “AKA Smile” is her own self-loathing through an effective early conversation. Temple tells Jones that she has to stop feeling guilty for actions that put Cage, who Jones describes as a “good man,” in the hospital since guilt won’t help him. This is after Jones defensively confesses to Temple that she’s responsible for knocking Cage out. Jones’s confessions comes in three parts. At first, she tells Temple “I didn’t have a choice.” She almost immediately changes her mind: “I did have a choice. And I chose to survive.” Moments later, before she and Temple move Cage to Jones’s apartment, Jones forces herself to say: “I’m not guilty. It’s not my fault.” Krysten Ritter nails this line: she doesn’t sound entirely convinced of what she’s saying. But she says it because her character’s blood is up, and if she doesn’t fake it now, she may never make it.AdvertisementJones’s conversations with Temple, Trish and even an unconscious Cage are foregrounded throughout the episode. These dialogue scenes eclipse the episode’s relatively tame major set pieces. It’s telling that the most striking scene of violence in Episode 13 is the scene where Jones goes looking for Kilgrave, and finds his father Albert lying in a pool of his blood.AdvertisementThis sequence is way more thrilling and tense than the listless action scene in which brainwashed cops shoot at Jones after she finally catches up with Kilgrave. When Jones stumbles on Albert, she creeps up to him. She sees one dead body with drain cleaner and a syringe. Then she sees Albert’s armless body, and a bloodstained cleaver next to him. Finally, she finds Justin Boden, the only other living person in the room, stuffing Albert’s arm into the garbage disposal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The distinction between guilt as a passive feeling and responsibility as an active ideal has always been central to Jones’s fight with Kilgrave. And in “AKA Smile,” Jones dispatches a major enemy without shifting blame to anyone else. Jones is a good person, but she has to learn to accept that. Thankfully, the show doesn’t force Jones to believe in herself as soon she murders Kilgrave, and starts to be treated like a community hero. Instead, Jones stews in her office, and forces herself to accept the idea that sometimes, being responsible means being bigger than your low self-image. Hopefully there’s a lot more where “Jessica Jones” came from.Stakeout Notes• Jones to Hogarth: “...doing something good ... it helps with the self-loathing.” This is a crucial line, and one that goes a long way toward establishing the finale’s ending. It’s also one of the rare blunt lines of dialogue that’s both showy, and immediately satisfying.-Was anyone else hoping that Kilgrave’s final injection would turn his skin purple like in the comic books?• Also, isn’t it surprising to see that neither Matt Murdock, nor Danny Rand makes a cameo appearance in this episode? They hint that Murdock might show up, but it’s probably a good thing he doesn’t. This is Jones’s moment, not a team effort.• Kilgrave’s soliloquy is abysmal. It’s his last big moment in the show, but it just feels perfunctory. Actor David Tennant is terrific as usual, but his big pre-showdown scene feels interminable.• Nice to hear Sleigh Bells’s “Demons” playing on Trish’s MP3 player when she faces off with Kilgrave.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »