The art media properties controlled by Peter Brant, including the century-old magazine Art in America and ARTnews, will be consolidated online at ARTnews.com by the end of the year, the publishing company announced Thursday.The move comes months after a deal in which Mr. Brant, the contemporary art collector and publisher, agreed to sell Art in America to ARTnews’s parent company, ARTnews S.A., for about $17 million. In that deal, Mr. Brant’s media company, BMP Media Holdings, also acquired a majority stake (60 percent) in ARTnews S.A..Additional media holdings controlled by Mr. Brant will also be consolidated online, including magazines  Antiques; Art & Business; Modern; and Skate’s Art Market Research. ARTnews S.A. is also one of the largest shareholders in artnet.com, with approximately 9 percent ownership interest in the company.“We thought that this would make a very good consolidation for us,” Mr. Brant said in an interview. “This made us a more complete company, a more international company.”He added that the editorial operations of Art in America and ARTnews would remain separate, though “we’re going to try to join forces as a group.”Despite the challenges facing print publications nationwide, Mr. Brant said there was still a place for magazines, particularly those that cover art. “We are committed to staying in that world,” he said. “These are art publications — they’re visual. You can go overboard on the digital side.”Art in America, which was founded in 1913 and has struggled recently, will continue its publication schedule of 11 issues a year. Mr. Brant said that ARTnews will come out about four times a year, continuing its popular themed editions such as the annual list of “The World’s Top 200 Collectors.”The audience for art-related publications — whether online or in print — Mr. Brant said, remains strong. “Interest in art is growing,” he said. “We’re living in a much more artistic world.”Artnews S.A. will continue to be listed on the Warsaw Stock Exchange with its primary operations in New York, and will be run by Izabela Depczyk.A version of this article appears in print on 10/09/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Art Magazines Combine.