Sam Mendes is withdrawing as the director of the Broadway-bound musical “Charlie and the Chocolate Factory,” allowing the producing team free rein to rework the commercially successful but critically divisive  show before it opens in New York. Mr. Mendes will remain a part of that producing team — his company, Neal Street Productions, is mounting the musical alongside Warner Bros. Theater Ventures and Langley Park Productions. The show has been running at the Theater Royal, Drury Lane, in London’s West End since 2013. “I loved directing ‘Charlie and the Chocolate Factory’ and I’m really proud it’s having such great run at Drury Lane,” he said in a statement on Wednesday. “But I knew I couldn’t marry the time commitment to make a Broadway production with the development of my next projects for Neal Street.”Mr. Mendes is a much-honored figure in the entertainment business — he won an Oscar in 2000 for directing “American Beauty,” and he has won Tony awards as a producer of “The Real Thing,” “Take Me Out” and “Red.” But the musical adaptation of “Charlie” has drawn mixed reviews: In Britain, reception was  generally positive, but critics from American publications were largely underwhelmed. (Here are reviews from The New York Times, The Los Angeles Times, and Variety.)Mr. Mendes acknowledged that the musical would change as it transfers from the West End to Broadway, describing the next chapter as a period in which “the show evolves for its new life in the U.S.” The producers are planning to bring the show to Broadway during the 2016 to 2017 season.“Charlie,” based on the beloved novel by Roald Dahl, features songs by Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman. A leading candidate to succeed Mr. Mendes as director is Jack O’Brien, who previously collaborated with the same songwriters on “Hairspray,” which won all three men Tony Awards in 2003. A spokesman for “Charlie” said the show was not ready to announce a new director. Mr. Mendes described himself as “involved in the process of handing over the keys to the factory” and promised “further news early in 2016.”A version of this article appears in print on 12/11/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Mendes Pulls Out of u2018Charlieu2019.