AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom MashbergLeonardo A. Patterson, a globe-trotting antiquities dealer who is called a canny treasure hunter by friends and a tomb raider by detractors, has long excelled in two areas: acquiring pre-Columbian artifacts and confounding investigators.Across four decades, Mr. Patterson, 73, has been investigated multiple times by the F.B.I., Interpol, and the police in Mexico, Spain, Peru and Germany. Even when he has been convicted, it has been for lesser offenses for which he served little or no jail time.Now, in one of the most serious cases brought against him, a court in Munich, where Mr. Patterson lives, found him guilty last month of two crimes — dealing in fakes and possessing looted artifacts.He was sentenced to probation and home confinement for three years, and fined about $40,000. He was also ordered to return two genuine ancient Olmec wooden head carvings to Mexico, valued at $53,000 apiece, and his passport was confiscated. If he fails to comply, he could face imprisonment of 15 months.Robert A. Kugler, a lawyer with the German-based firm Höly, Rauch & Partner who is representing Mexico as it attempts to reclaim other items from Mr. Patterson, called the rulings “milestone verdicts.”Mr. Patterson’s lawyer, Peter von Borch, said by telephone Tuesday that his client would appeal the fraud case. “He will never accept that incorrect judgment,” Mr. von Borch said.For now, though, he said Mr. Patterson would return the two wooden figures, part of his sprawling collection of at least 1,029 Aztec, Mayan and Olmec artifacts. Although there are questions about whether everything in Mr. Patterson’s collection is genuine, officials in Mexico, Peru and Ecuador are pursuing additional claims against him that hundreds of the items are both authentic and stolen. Peru is also seeking to extradite him to face antiquities smuggling charges there.That Mr. Patterson, a Costa Rican orphan who rose from clawing artifacts out of Central American yam fields to holding multimillion-dollar exhibitions of pre-Columbian treasures in Manhattan and Munich, would be simultaneously found guilty of possessing authentic objects and trafficking in forgeries epitomizes the buccaneering style that made him notorious in the antiquities trade.He arrived in the United States near penniless in the 1960s, but within a decade was deeply involved in the artifacts business. In 1984, the F.B.I. charged him with trying to sell a fake Mayan fresco to a dealer in Boston. A year later, while on probation, he was arrested at the Dallas-Fort Worth airport and later convicted of illegally importing a pre-Columbian ceramic figure dated between A.D. 650 and A.D. 850. He also had with him 36 sea turtle eggs in violation of an international endangered species convention — items he claimed were part of his health diet.Mr. Patterson moved to Germany in the 1990s and began holding large exhibitions and sales in France and Spain, where they drew visits from leaders like Oscar Arias Sánchez, a former president of Costa Rica, and the Guatemalan Nobel Peace Prize winner Rigoberta Menchú. But some curators raised suspicions about the authenticity or provenance of a number of his items and Mexican officials ultimately said they had linked more than 200 of his objects to a deceased forger of Meso-American and pre-Columbian artifacts named Luis Bianchi.Spanish officials then sought to hold the so-called Patterson Collection in their country while the claims were ironed out, but in 2008 Mr. Patterson was able to send much of it home to Germany, a transfer that Spanish officials viewed as illegal. A Spanish court later ruled that the removal did not violate Spanish law because the items were of Latin American rather than Spanish ancestry.Mexican officials say objects in the Patterson Collection, valued in the millions, include terra-cotta, basalt stone and limestone busts; terra-cotta kettles and urns; obsidian and stone projectile tips and knives; braziers and incense burners; obsidian ornaments; stone seals; incense holders; cases; and necklaces and strings.Mr. Patterson narrowly escaped extradition to Peru last year from Spain, where he was held briefly in jail after Peruvian officials accused him of smuggling because some of his collection originated in Peru. Because of health concerns, Spanish officials released him in January 2014, a few months before the Spanish Supreme Court ordered his extradition to Peru. By then, Mr. Patterson had returned to Germany.The authentic Olmec heads he is accused of stealing from Mexico are among 20 prized wooden busts found between 1986 and 1988 at a major site known as El Manatí. They date to 1200 B.C., and under Mexican law the items belong to the government.The objects, about two and a half feet high, were well preserved because they had been wrapped in fibrous mats and ritualistically buried in a bog, experts said. They were carved in a so-called elongated-man style, an Olmec form previously only known from ceramic and stone pieces.At Mr. Patterson’s recent trial in Munich, officials presented a witness, a potential Dutch buyer, who testified that Mr. Patterson told him that he had obtained the busts from local villagers in 1987. Mr. von Borch said his client produced two witnesses of his own who offered a different version but that “unfortunately they could not corroborate that he obtained the items legally.”In a rare interview with The Associated Press in 2008, Mr. Patterson denied involvement in any illicit dealings. “All of that stuff, I got it in Europe,” he said of his collection. “I don’t traffic pieces.”But Mr. Kugler, the lawyer pursuing items for the Mexican government, said the recent conviction in Germany presented a more accurate vision of Mr. Patterson’s behavior.“We are only talking about one first but important step in the process of fully investigating the origins of the many objects traded illicitly over the years by Mr. Patterson,” Mr. Kugler said. “So, a lot of work remains to be done.”Advertisement