By ANTHONY TOMMASINIDEC. 8, 2015
CHICAGO — Many timid American opera companies have opted to commission comparably timid Neo-Romantic composers.Not the Lyric Opera of Chicago, which took five years to develop “Bel Canto,” the much-anticipated new opera by the Peruvian-born American composer Jimmy López and the Cuban-American playwright Nilo Cruz. Adapted from Ann Patchett’s justly acclaimed 2001 novel, “Bel Canto,” which was loosely based on a 1996 terrorist hostage-taking in Peru, the opera had its premiere here on Monday night. The Lyric Opera said that Renée Fleming, an inspiration for one of the novel’s characters, curated the project in her capacity as the company’s creative consultant, proposing the book as a subject and helping to line up the composer and librettist. There were extensive workshops and a long rehearsal period for this, the company’s first new main-stage opera in 10 years.In some ways, all the preparations paid off in this uneven yet grimly compelling work, directed by Kevin Newbury. The novel sets the story in an unspecified South American country, where terrorists burst into a party at the vice president’s lavish home and hold dozens of guests hostage, including Roxane Coss, a world-renowned American soprano. Mostly hewing to that plot, the operatic version arrives at an unsettling time, given the recent terrorist attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, Calif.Though not without flaws and too prone to sweeping, melodramatic outbursts that become predictable, even cloying, the opera is theatrically and musically effective. The score by Mr. López, 37, is fairly tough stuff. At its best, especially in the brutal episodes in which the terrorists storm the house, unhinged by resentment and hostility, the music is fraught, gnashing and blazingly orchestrated. Andrew Davis, the Lyric’s music director, led an assured and colorful performance.AdvertisementMr. Cruz has written a compact yet poetic libretto that, true to the mixed nationalities of the characters, is written in several languages, including Spanish, English, Japanese, Russian and indigenous Quechua. That he took liberties with the novel was understandable. Mr. Cruz, who won a Pulitzer Prize in 2003 for his play “Anna in the Tropics,” was faced with adapting a complex story of a hostage takeover lasting more than four months, during which the terrorists and party guests form uneasy but strangely close relationships. The cast, headed by the luminous and lovely soprano Danielle de Niese as Roxane, is consistently strong, with many young, gifted artists giving their all.AdvertisementStill, one crucial element of the novel resisted adaptation. The terrorists, having taken control of the vice president’s home (depicted with vivid detail in the set, by David Korins), become captives, too. Government troops surround the compound. The hostages and the terrorists, confined together, start merging routines of daily life. We see them sharing meals and playing chess. The terrorists even have rowdy games of soccer in the living room. Mistrust and threats of violence hover over the scene, but the house still becomes almost a utopian community.The novel makes clear that this growing sympathy is fostered by Roxane’s wondrous singing. She had been engaged, at a hefty fee, to perform at the affair: a birthday party for Katsumi Hosokawa, a Japanese electronics mogul who is being celebrated in the hopes that he might build a plant in Peru. (The opera specifies that the setting is Lima and identifies the terrorists as members of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement.)In time, the novel’s Roxane discovers that one of the guests, another Japanese executive, is a good amateur pianist. She begins a daily morning routine of practicing, including warming up with scales and working on pieces by Bellini, Rossini, Puccini and other composers. Her public practicing becomes a moving event for many of her listeners, even some of the terrorists.Obviously, Mr. López was not eager to fill his score with pastiches of Rossini during Roxane’s practice sessions, which are missing from the opera. His solution is to give Roxane elaborate arias written in his own voice, moments in which she is supposed to beguile her listeners magically. But these are the weakest, most generic sections of the score, starting with the first, “You Were Destined to Come Here,” which she sings at the start of the party in the opening scene. The music, thick with shimmering orchestral writing and languid melodic lines, is overwrought, almost mawkish.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In other scenes, Mr. López and Mr. Cruz draw upon operatic conventions tellingly. Over many weeks of confinement, Roxane finds herself falling for Mr. Hosokawa, who is married, with a family in Japan. He has long adored her as an artist and considers it almost a blessing to be held captive with her, let alone invited into a romance.The bass-baritone Jeongcheol Cha brings a mellow voice and quiet dignity to the role. Mr. Hosokawa’s polyglot translator and aide, Gen Watanabe, sung by the appealing, rich-toned tenor Andrew Stenson, winds up intensely in love with Carmen, a rough, weapon-wielding terrorist, sung by the plush-voiced mezzo-soprano J’nai Bridges, who sees in Gen a good man who can teach her languages and unleash her femininity.In a tour de force scene, the two couples are shown simultaneously in the middle of the night: Roxane and Mr. Hosokawa, in the bedroom she has been given upstairs; Carmen and Gen, stealing passionate moments in the kitchen storage room. The duets eventually come together in a restless, pungent quartet. Only in opera can you compress the stories of two love affairs into a single ensemble piece.If the opera has melodramatic touches, Mr. López and Mr. Cruz have written some fleshed-out roles that clearly inspire these committed singers, including the tenor William Burden as the valiant vice president; the tenor Rafael Davila as the volatile Alfredo, the leader of the terrorists; the bass-baritone Bradley Smoak as the hotheaded General Benjamin; and the baritone Takaoki Onishi as Father Arguedas, a kindly young priest. The baritone Jacques Imbrailo has found depth and earnestness in Joachim Messner, the representative of the Red Cross, who becomes the government’s negotiator. The countertenor Anthony Roth Costanzo was wonderful as the adolescent terrorist César, who has a fine natural voice and is given lessons by Roxane.I hope it will not take the Lyric Opera another decade to present a new work.“Bel Canto” runs at the Lyric Opera of Chicago through Jan. 17; 312-827-5600, lyricopera.org.A version of this review appears in print on December 9, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Story, Years in the Making, Arrives at an Unsettling Time  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.