AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe CoscarelliIn the five years since Jeremih last put out an album, his slinky voice has been everywhere. A radio fixture since his debut in 2009, the Chicago R&B singer has had four Top 10 Billboard hits, including the platinum-selling “Don’t Tell Em,” which in June 2014 became the first official release from his new album and peaked that fall at No. 6.But “Late Nights: The Album” didn’t come out then. Or this summer. No fewer than six potential release dates were floated in the music press. Each came and went without a record.It’s strange then, or strangely fitting, that when “Late Nights” was finally released on Friday via Def Jam, it came without warning — a welcome surprise for hungry fans, sure, but also a crash landing for a long-planned project.Not quite a secret drop, à la Beyoncé, because of years of false starts and a slew of advance singles, “Late Nights” received the “perfect ghetto rollout,” Jeremih said the next day with a mix of resignation and good humor. “You’re talking about somebody that ain’t got no videos for any of my platinum singles,” he said of the lack of promotion. “You can’t ride around New York and see my face on a poster, and my album’s out.“Truth is, I know people are responsible to do that,” he continued. “The label is responsible to do that.”Late Saturday night, at a show celebrating the album’s release at S.O.B.’s in Manhattan, Jeremih had a surrogate in 50 Cent, the rap superstar turned industry ombudsman. Taking the stage as a hypeman alongside Jeremih, the rapper carried on about the young singer’s obvious talent. “Def Jam wasn’t sure,” he said. “Then they got with it.”The next morning, though, 50 Cent doubled down. “What Def Jam has done to Jeremih is so foul,” he wrote on Instagram and Twitter. “They have dropped the ball in so many ways.”Jeremih retweeted the mini-rant with added commentary: “Sabotage City.”Yet on Saturday, Jeremih, 28, had not been content to only point fingers, citing his own personal challenges and business naïveté for the delays. “I’m a child to the game still — I have a lot more to learn,” he said, referring to fatherhood and changes in management. “But I do know that certain things are necessary and should be handled right now. And they’re not.”Faisel Durrani, an executive vice president and the general manager at the label, said in a statement on Monday that Def Jam was “elated to release ‘Late Nights.’” He added, “The release strategy — developed in lock step with Jeremih and his management team — has been a surprise delivery of the album that allows for an unveiling and for future discovery.”Adding to the exasperation of Jeremih’s supporters is that the typical unspoken reasons for major-label delays — a lack of buzz, flopping songs — did not afflict the man born Jeremih Felton on Chicago’s South Side: He is a proven singles artist, both lead and featured, with the buoyant “Planes,” a January release since retitled “Planez,” also reaching platinum status and earning a Grammy nomination on Monday for best R&B performance. (His biggest hit of 2015 is a guest spot on “Somebody,” Natalie La Rose’s song invoking Whitney Houston, which reached No. 10.)Acknowledging his own chart success, Jeremih seemed legitimately bewildered by his place in the music ecosystem. The store he visited to see the finished product had stocked only seven copies, he said, and they were overpriced. “I could only imagine if I had the support that I see my peers have,” he said. “Even to go to the store and see that the album was 20 bucks was like, damn,” he added, rounding up. “It’s $18.99! Rihanna, Beyoncé, Kanye’s albums would never be $18.99.”Industry frustrations aside, the mood was celebratory among Jeremih’s tight-knit crew members, who arrived in New York from Chicago on Saturday for a night of back-to-back performances. The group rented a $3,750-a-night multilevel Airbnb penthouse in SoHo, complete with a hot tub in the master bedroom, while filling the place with soul food and shopping bags from Barneys and Saks Fifth Avenue. “Late Nights: The Album,” the only appropriate soundtrack, blasted from upstairs.“I’m just glad it’s out,” Jeremih said during a van ride to his first appearance, a Hot 97 holiday concert on Saturday at the Prudential Center in Newark that featured some of hip-hop’s biggest names. “I feel like it’s a huge burden off my shoulders.” Alluding to his contract, he added, “I had an obligation with Def Jam to turn in one more.”“Late Nights: The Album” bears no signs of behind-the-scenes turbulence. Conceived as the spiritual follow-up to his mold-breaking self-released 2012 mixtape, “Late Nights With Jeremih,” the album is gleefully debaucherous, with a hip-hop edge in place of any R&B sappiness.Jeremih — self-taught as a pianist and drummer and never trained as a vocalist — uses melody in rhythmic bursts, turning his naturally thin voice, underdeveloped on the appealing but generic early hits “Birthday Sex” and “Down on Me,” into an airy, dexterous instrument. Favoring warm production with snaps and empty space, Jeremih finds pockets in a beat as a rapper might, but also has a sweet falsetto.“I’m a percussionist, so that’s most of what I know when I attack a record,” he said. “Melodically, knowing the keys — my first love — that makes the perfect blend.”The producer Mick Schultz, an early collaborator who has worked on Jeremih’s biggest singles, said of the album: “There were a lot of back-and-forth issues getting it out,” but added, “Jeremih always seemed to channel his energy back into the music, which is why you kept hearing him on features and constantly on the radio, even without his own project out.”More than serviceable as a radio hook man, Jeremih raised expectations for himself with intimate, cohesive projects like the “Late Nights” mixtape and his subsequent work with the more alternative electronic producer Shlohmo. Like those Internet-based projects, Jeremih said he expected the new album to spread via word of mouth. “Hopefully it’ll be a forest fire,” he said.The simmering label drama may not hurt in the attention department. Jeremih previously lashed out, earning plenty of blog headlines, late last year on a one-off track: “Would I have signed to Def Jam if I knew they was deaf?” he asked with more aggression than usual. “Nah.”His aim now is to make his name as well known as the sound of his voice. “That’s my ultimate goal: to get people to say my name right,” said Jeremih (pronounced JAIR-uh-my). “They’re still saying it wrong.” That goes for some of his peers, too: Not long after receiving a congratulatory embrace backstage from the hip-hop godfather Puff Daddy, the night’s M.C., Busta Rhymes, introduced the singer to the Hot 97 crowd as “Jeremiah.” (The rapper 2 Chainz made the same mistake.)Visibly irritated after his appearance, Jeremih could only fume briefly on the drive back to Manhattan for his second show. “On to the next one,” he said.Taking the stage at S.O.B.’s directly from the van after a rallying shot of Patrón, his mood seemed lifted by the show of support, including the 50 Cent cameo, at his headlining event. By the end Jeremih was giddy, filling the stage with his friends and collaborators for the new marijuana anthem “Pass Dat.” The team sang and bounded in unison as if the track were an old favorite — to them, maybe it was. Now, at least, everyone else could learn the words.Advertisement