AdvertisementSupported byTransparentBy Rachel SymeThis recap contains spoilers. If you haven’t watched the episode yet, you might want to read our critic’s notebook on the season instead. In the opening shot of season two, you learn everything you need to know about the emotional states of the various Pfeffermans by watching them try to pose for a family photo.Sarah, who is about to marry her brassy, bossy partner, Tammy, looks less like a blushing bride and more like an advertisement for anxiety medication. Josh, who has gotten Raquel pregnant (a secret that he spills moments later; classic Josh), is jittery but ebullient playing a new dad, both to his unborn child and his newly discovered teenage one. He pulls Colton (the product of an affair with his nanny when he himself was just a child) into the frame. With one hand on Raquel’s belly and the other around his strapping son, Josh is trying to serve as the new Pfefferman patriarch after Maura’s transition, but he looks like he is trying a bit too hard to fill the role.Ali, with a new shaggy undershave haircut, wears a baggy men’s suit that is just slightly the wrong shade of white for the occasion, and finds herself immediately annoyed with the wedding photographer’s goofy demands. Shelly, as the original matriarch, is overbearing and loud, back-seat art directing the picture, as pushy as any mother-of-the-bride has ever been.And then, there is the other mother of the bride, Maura, whose haughty, vain, self-regard comes to the forefront when she stops the photographer to ask about her best angle, then takes umbrage when called “Sir,” choosing to exit the photograph. Maura is fully herself this season, and won’t stand for discrimination from anyone, not even if it means ending a photo shoot on her own daughter’s wedding day. Welcome to season two.The decision by Jill Soloway, the show’s creator, who wrote and directed this episode, to start the season with a four-minute long single shot takes guts — the scene is claustrophobic. But Ms. Soloway knows that this is exactly how being inside a family can feel, especially on major occasions in which everyone’s personality is heightened and on full display.The wedding creates a lot of room for group interactions but also for meaningful private asides. There’s the scene where Josh spills the beans about his new baby to his sister, which results in a domino effect. Josh tells Ali about the new baby because he is excited, but also because he cannot seem to function as an adult without familial approval. Raquel wants to be his first priority, but for Josh, nothing feels real until he drags his siblings into it. He cannot break away. Later, when Raquel learns that he gabbed and he uses the excuse that he wanted Ali to be nicer to her, she says: “Please don’t do that, betray me and then tell me it’s a gift.” Raquel knows what she wants, and how she wants it, and she doesn’t want to be attached to a man-child who cannot keep a secret from his own family. And yet, now that she is pregnant, she is bound to the Pfeffermans.Kathryn Hahn is the quiet M.V.P. of “Transparent,” and she does some of her best work here, particularly in the scene in which Sarah realizes that she can back out of her wedding vows because no legal document has been filed. As Sarah squats on the toilet and squeals with glee — “I’m not married! I’m not married!” — you can see Raquel’s face begin to fall. She is a rabbi; she takes marriage seriously. And yet, here she is, jumping into a family that rallies so deeply around protecting its own that it schemes to break up Sarah’s marriage before she has even danced to “Hava Nagila.”About Sarah and Tammy: The way Ms. Soloway films Sarah’s woozy breakdown during her vows is a perfect pairing of camera movement and a character’s mental instability. She continues to film the wedding with an exaggerated lens, creating a kind of glitterbomb of nauseating excess: the overlined lips of the chanteuse, the bouncing of the dancing crowd, the kind of sickly yellow light cast over the whole party.The way that Josh and Ali rally around Sarah in her moment of need is noble, but also predictable: They want to rescue their sister from Tammy (who they have never really liked), but they also just want to help her take the easiest path. The Pfeffermans, for all their risk taking when it comes to gender and sexual expression, often do not like to take risks involving commitments. They all feel better when they are floating, looking around, refusing to land on any one decision or partner or obligation. Perhaps this comes from growing up in a house where their father never felt at home in his own skin, where the most comforting place was one of active discomfort. But whatever it is, commitment-phobia it is a trait that all three siblings share and keep returning to over and over. As long as the Pfeffermans come back to each other, they feel safe.In the middle of the wedding, Bri’s “strange boy” (I have a feeling we have not seen the last of Bri, and that this season will touch on the hidden pain that has kept Maura from seeing her mother Rose for many years) begins dancing in wild circles, and suddenly we are transported to the past. “Transparent” has featured flashbacks many times but we have never gone as far back as Berlin, 1933.In this small snapshot of a party from that time, we catch a glimpse of the newcomer Hari Nef, playing a transgender beauty who revels at a dance full of misfits. Though we do not yet know how Nef’s character fits into the Pfefferman story, there is a sense that she is most connected to Ali.The last shot of the episode, when she reappears, just for a moment, sitting with Ali on the balcony, is a gut punch. Ali stares out across the Palm Springs desert, totally alone. She is the solo voyager of the family, the one who wanders off farther than anyone else, trying to find the forces that shaped her. And here is one of those forces, in the form of a beautiful ghost, trying to speak to her from another time. The trauma that seems to haunt all of the Pfeffermans has deeper roots, roots that go all the way back to Hitler’s Germany, and this season promises to be about untangling and unmasking the source of all this family pain.This is what Ms. Soloway is trying to say with the episode title, “Kina Hora” (which means “evil eye”): The curses that befall families often go farther back than just one generation. There is a lot to unpack here — several lifetimes, in fact. L’chaim.Advertisement