Following a sold-out show at a Paris arena on Wednesday night, Madonna took to the streets to play some more. “Im singing some songs in place de la republique,” the pop star wrote on Twitter after her concert. “Meet me there now.”The Place de la République has in recent weeks become a place of tribute for the victims of the Nov. 13 terrorist attacks that killed 130 people, including 89 at the Bataclan concert hall.Joined by the guitarist Monte Pittman and her 10-year-old son, David, Madonna led the crowd in impromptu acoustic versions of her song “Ghosttown” — “Let’s just hold onto each other/when it all falls, when it all falls down” — as well as “Like a Prayer” and John Lennon’s “Imagine,” according to reports on social media.“Everybody knows why we’re here,” the singer said. “We just want to sing a few songs about peace, just to spread love and joy, and to pay our honor and respect to the people who died almost four weeks ago.“And to spread light,” she added. “We all need it.”Madonna’s official show on Wednesday night was one of two in Paris that she had scheduled before the attacks as part of her “Rebel Heart” tour. She plays the AccorHotels Arena again on Thursday.Madonna’s Paris shows follow two at the same arena earlier this week by U2, which closed with an appearance by Eagles of Death Metal, the American group that was playing the Bataclan during the terrorist assault last month.Onstage at the arena on Wednesday, Madonna wrapped herself in a French flag to sing “La Marseillaise,” The Guardian reported.“We will not bend down to fear!” she told the crowd. “The heart of Paris and the heart of France beats in the heart of each city.”Madonna previously addressed the events in Paris at a concert the night after the attacks in Stockholm. “I feel torn, like why am I up here dancing and having fun when people are crying over the loss of their loved ones?” she said. “However, that is exactly what these people want to do. They want to shut us up. They want to silence us. And we won’t let them.”