The Ojai Music Festival in California has an unusual model. It hands the reins to a new music director each year. For 2016 the task has fallen to Peter Sellars, the opera and theater director, who announced Wednesday that the 70th festival this June would include works by Kaija Saariaho, Caroline Shaw and Tania León, among others.The festival, which will be held from June 9 to 12, will feature the American premieres of the chamber version of “La Passion de Simone” and “Only the Sound Remains,” by Ms. Saariaho, a Finnish composer. Mr. Sellars will stage “Only the Sound Remains,” her setting of a sequence of adaptations of two Japanese Noh plays in versions by Ezra Pound, in an outdoor amphitheater.Julia Bullock will be featured in the world premiere of “Josephine Baker: A Personal Portrait,” by Tyshawn Sorey. Dina El Wedidi, an Egyptian singer, and Aruna Sairam, an Indian Carnatic singer, will make their Ojai debuts. And, for the first time, the festival will present free events for families, including the new work by Ms. León — which will be performed by the Youth Orchestra of Los Angeles and the International Contemporary Ensemble.Mr. Sellars’s involvement with Ojai dates back to 1992, when he directed Stravinsky’s “Histoire du Soldat” when the music director was Pierre Boulez. In 2011, when Dawn Upshaw was the music director, he directed George Crumb’s song cycle “The Winds of Destiny.”“The valley has both a grandeur and a human scale that inspire and allow the deepest human questions to resonate, and create a setting for the most personal search for answers,’’ Mr. Sellars said in a statement, praising the unique setting of the festival, the Ojai Valley. Thomas W. Morris, the festival’s artistic director, said in a statement that “Peter brings exactly the breadth of vision, spirit of innovation, and profound energy that are all so firmly rooted in Ojai.”A version of this article appears in print on 12/11/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Ojai to Feature Premieres.