
American Horror Story By                     
E. A. HANKS

DEC. 10, 2015
“We are never so defenseless against suffering as when we love.”The residents of the Hotel Cortez have shown this Freud quote to be true: to love The Countess is to inevitably hate her — then love her again, or maybe just hate loving her?This week’s episode neatly brought together two of the season’s most perplexing and neglected plot lines: the revenge triumvirate of Iris the concierge, her son Donovan, and Ramona Royale, and the herd of murderous children Alex accidentally spawned when she infected one of her young patients with vampirism.At the center of this bloodthirsty mess is the Countess, reunited with her lover, maker, and the reason so many of these pretty young things look exactly alike — Valentino. Due to be married to Will Drake, fashion designer and the new owner of the Cortez, the Countess has a plot: murder Drake as soon as possible, pocket his sizable fortune, and live happily ever, ever, ever after with her lover (as soon as she also murders the third part of their threesome, Natasha.) “We are so close to recapturing what we once lost,” the Countess coos. “I am about to come into a great deal of money. We can use it, to turn the Cortez into a fortress against the modern world, a world I hate.”Wait, the Countess hates the modern world? What was all that fanfare about her best days being as a disco queen, then? Or do the 1970s count as ancient history?AdvertisementMeanwhile, Donovan, who hasn’t recovered from being dumped for Tristan, fools Ramona in a double cross, leaving her locked up in the Cortez’s newly refurbished hidden torture chamber, a wedding gift from Mr. March, the Countess’s still besotted (and dead) first husband.AdvertisementDuring the wedding ceremony, Alex leaves the hotel and attempts to wrangle the vampire children, now so desperate they’re feeding on a pizza delivery boy, but it’s full on “Lord of the Flies,” and they refuse to follow her back to the Cortez.The honeymoon is cut short for Drake and the Countess, as Ms. Evers, the maid, predicted. A jealous March shows off his son by the Countess, deformed (demonic?) Bartholomew; Drake’s aghast revulsion lands him in hot water alongside Ramona. The Countess watches gleefully as Ramona slits the former Mr. Countess’ throat. Viewers should be wary though — a slit throat does not mean death — or a resolved plotline, for that matter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bereaved bartender Liz Taylor is not taking the death of her lover Tristan laying down. Sure, her rebellion might get her own throat slit, but that won’t stop her from showing her own moxie: as witness to the Countess and Drake’s vows, she cannot hold her peace: “[The Countess] is a bitch with no conscience, no mercy, no soul.” Liz’s righteous anger is helped by how truly fantastic Denis O’Hare looks in a be-jewelled turban.“She Wants Revenge” returned to one of this season’s most interesting themes — how love and hate can be bedfellows. There’s Iris’s resentful obsession with her son, Sally’s distraught and disturbed connection with John, March’s vengeful fixation. Even Liz’s gratitude for the Countess freeing her from her former (male) life has soured. The most intense example of the dynamic, in this episode at least, was Donovan’s love for his maker, deep and twisted enough to push him betray both Ramona (whose exposition-heavy back story served as mostly a distraction) and his own mother. “It’s a horrible feeling to have a craving that you can never satiate — it’s an addiction,” Tristan says helplessly.It’s unfortunate that the character is so shallow — the only thing we know about him really is that he was a junkie, was turned by the Countess (because of his resemblance to Valentino) and has been obsessed with her ever since. This is merely what has happened to him, not who he is, but the same can be said for the majority of the characters this season, in particular the Countess herself.This episode began with some narration from the Countess explaining, “The last 100 years of my immortal life have been a lie; the illusion of control. In fact, I have controlled nothing. [...] I will not be roped, I will not be managed.” But isn’t the fact that the Countess is so powerful, so in control the thing that is alluring to all of her lovers, victims and employees? Of course, she was duped by March back in the ’30s when he separated her from Valentino, but everything about the Countess, from the clothes she wears to the lovers she allows to live, is about control.While Mr. March came very close to having the best line of the night (“Our dinners my sole comfort in this Stygian heap!”) let’s all be thankful to Iris who put her finger right on the button:“I got nothing against pornography; when it’s done right.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »