AdvertisementSupported byBy Joshua BaroneThe violist Nadia Sirota, the daughter of a composer, was born into the world of contemporary music. At Juilliard, she set aside Bach’s sonatas in favor of commissioning pieces from classmates like Nico Muhly. And now she has made an entire career — a sustainable one, at that — of championing new work.“I just find it terribly exciting that you could be around for the birth of something that might have legs for 200 years,” Ms. Sirota, 33, said during a recent interview. She was in a studio at New York Public Radio, taking a break from working on her podcast, “Meet the Composer,” for Q2 Music, WQXR’s online arm devoted to new work.The show concludes its second season of five episodes on Friday with a finale about Mr. Muhly, a close friend and frequent collaborator. Since the first episode aired last year, “Meet the Composer” has become steadily more popular, with listeners in more than 70 countries and numbers of downloads that outpace the (admittedly meager) sales of classical music records.In “Meet the Composer,” Ms. Sirota sells new music by selling the composers themselves and demystifying their process. A typical hourlong episode blends informal journalism and biographical details with musical interludes. The backbone is a long interview with the show’s guest. Those who have been on the podcast include the Pulitzer Prize winners John Luther Adams and Caroline Shaw, and Andrew Norman, whose piano concerto, “Split,” will have its premiere this weekend at the New York Philharmonic.Mr. Muhly compared the show to “This American Life,” widely regarded as the paragon of public radio. Listening to that program, he said, “you start to see the quotidian things of life in new ways. Nadia’s show is this sort of musical equivalent.”Ms. Sirota is a bit more humble. “It’s all stuff I like and telling people why I like it,” she said.New music became central to Ms. Sirota at an early age — even younger than that at which many musicians begin formal training with the classical repertoire. When she was 4, her father, Robert Sirota, wrote her a chamber opera based on the Beatrix Potter story “The Tailor of Gloucester.” A teacher she had in childhood had students play music written by their peers. Cozying up with the composition students at Juilliard was a natural fit, and becoming friends with Mr. Muhly was even easier: Her dad’s and his mother’s families came from the same Ukrainian shtetl.“She’s comfortable with the extremes of her instrument,” Mr. Muhly said. For one of their first collaborations, he wrote music for her that was physically impossible to play. Seeing what he was trying to accomplish, she offered alternatives that made more sense, and they revised the score together.In October Ms. Sirota performed with the Detroit Symphony Orchestra, playing the American premiere of a concerto Mr. Muhly wrote for her. She fits “Meet the Composer” duties into a jam-packed schedule of commitments, many with her ensemble, yMusic, which include a residency at New York Live Arts, a concert at Carnegie Hall and touring with Ben Folds. “The way I’ve organized my career, it’s just project after project after project after project,” she said. “I’ve always been a bit of a racehorse.”She and Alex Overington, the producer for “Meet the Composer” and a composer himself, met in 2012 when she was recording her album “Baroque” (which contains, for the record, only contemporary music) in a studio in Reykjavik, Iceland, where he was an intern. Both were unfamiliar with radio storytelling when they began experimenting with what would eventually become “Meet the Composer.” Ms. Sirota had been doing some hosting on Q2 Music, but the podcast was new territory. “We both sort of learned how to make radio together,” Mr. Overington said.That first episode was created over nearly a year. (Now each installment takes about 90 to 100 hours.) Ms. Sirota and Mr. Overington’s dynamic in the studio is, by turns, silly and efficient. During a recent interview with Peter Gelb, the Metropolitan Opera’s general manager, about Mr. Muhly, the host and the producer exchanged nods and thumbs ups every time Mr. Gelb said something especially quotable.Mr. Overington produces with what Ms. Sirota called “a very musical thread.” They said it was as if each episode were conceived as a self-contained composition. That approach caught the attention of Jad Abumrad, a host of the popular program “Radiolab,” who last year rebroadcast on his show the episode of “Meet the Composer” devoted to John Luther Adams.“The music, the sound, the textures wove together in a kind of counterpoint,” Mr. Abumrad said in an interview. “I was blown away.”His support gave “Meet the Composer” a significant boost. Tens of thousands of people now listen to the show each month, not insignificant when even major classical record releases sometimes sell in the hundreds. But Ms. Sirota has tried not to devote too much attention to her growing audience; after all, once the Nico Muhly episode airs, it’s time to start thinking about Season 3.There are still more composers to profile — Thomas Adès and Trent Reznor, she hopes — and new storytelling techniques to explore, like focusing entire episodes on a single piece of music. For now, she said, “I’m just excited that something I care about as a passion project has legs.”Advertisement