AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinAt the very least, the War on Christmas is not being waged on television.As streaming and technology tear apart so many rules that governed television for decades, one tradition has endured, and might be stronger than ever: With December here, viewers are getting a regular dose of all things holiday. Frosty and Rudolph are still plugging away, as is Bill Murray in a Christmas song-and-dance special recently released on Netflix. Many of the networks, NBC chief among them, may as well wrap their network logos in holly and poinsettias.There’s a reason for this, particularly for the broadcast networks. Many prime-time series have finished their first-half runs for the season, and advertisers are desperately trying to get their commercials on the air. If there’s one thing that people still reliably tune in to, and those ad folks pay for, it’s holiday television.NBC’s December prime-time lineup is dominated by holiday fare — standbys like the tree lighting at Rockefeller Center, a prime-time “Saturday Night Live” Christmas special and a Michael Bublé special — and family-centric programming, like an Adele concert and the musical “The Wiz Live!,” which the network says does particularly well when Christmas trees and menorahs are all lit up.“We started talking about it a couple of years ago,” said Robert Greenblatt, the chairman of NBC Entertainment. “It was jump-started by ‘The Sound of Music,’ where we went, ‘Oooh, there’s a big audience available for special stuff when you’re near the holidays.’ We know that Thanksgiving specials and Christmas specials — Rudolph, Charlie Brown — rate really well, so a couple of years ago, we started building up that strategy.”Last week, 11.5 million viewers watched  “The Wiz Live!,” NBC’s third live musical in three years. That was more than two million viewers better than the audience for last year’s live musical, “Peter Pan,” and it was NBC’s biggest non-football-related viewership night since September. (“The Sound of Music” was the network’s first live musical installment and fared the best with 18.6 million viewers).On Thursday, NBC will air “Coat of Many Colors,” a TV movie featuring Dolly Parton. The plot does not revolve around Christmas, but the network only considered airing it in December, and a trailer for the movie shows Ms. Parton decked out in red and sitting in a sleigh. As she put it at a media event, “I’m just hoping that during the holiday season, this will be my great gift to the public to say, ‘Hey, do sit down with your family, do watch this show.’”ABC has “The Great Holiday Baking Show,” an adaptation of the popular “The Great British Bake Off,” that airs on Monday nights for four weeks. The network’s other holiday-specific limited series, “The Great Christmas Light Fight,” had an audience three times larger than a Fox special on Monday night, “TV’s Funniest Animated Stars.” On Wednesday, Fox had its own music special, “Taraji and Terrence’s White Hot Holidays,” featuring Taraji P. Henson and Terrence Howard, the stars of the network’s hit “Empire.”Some of the holiday fare is a byproduct of necessity. The networks have mostly stopped airing reruns for regularly scheduled shows because of poor ratings. As a result, many popular prime-time shows reach their midseason breaks earlier than they used to. NBC’s new hit “Blindspot” had its fall finale right before Thanksgiving; ABC’s Thursday night lineup of “Grey’s Anatomy,” “Scandal” and “How to Get Away With Murder,” ended in mid-November. So what to put on in December?“You got to keep the lights on every single month,” Mr. Greenblatt said.December is a critical month, he explained, in which to promote January premieres. And though viewership is gradually receding as the year winds down, the month remains “one of the biggest in terms of advertising dollars,” said Brad Adgate, a former executive at Horizon Media, a media buying company.Enter the specials, and the holiday programming, some of it decades old. ABC’s broadcast of “A Charlie Brown Christmas” on Nov. 30 had 7.3 million viewers, its highest total in three years.“Even in an era of fragmented television, you don’t have to market those shows,” Mr. Adgate said. “When someone says Charlie Brown’s on, it resonates with millions of viewers.”(Mr. Greenblatt boasted about how NBC stole “How the Grinch Stole Christmas” “very stealthily” from ABC this year. It had 5.6 million viewers on Dec. 2.)The popularity of holiday programming is, of course, not limited to the broadcast networks. The Hallmark Channel’s December lineup is dominated by Christmas specials, and on Dec. 4, Netflix rolled out “A Very Murray Christmas.” Directed by Sofia Coppola and starring Bill Murray, the special features a slew of cameos (Miley Cyrus, George Clooney and Amy Poehler, among others) and endless holiday songs (“Baby, It’s Cold Outside,” “Silent Night,” “Sleigh Ride” and “Fairytale of New York” are just a sampling).Netflix is not the only streaming service with the holiday spirit. At a media event earlier this year, Mindy Kaling, the star of Hulu’s “The Mindy Project,” said, “Maybe it’s getting old-fashioned, but I love a Christmas episode airing in December.” And that’s what her viewers will be getting. Hulu rolls out episodes on a weekly basis, as opposed to Netflix’s binge-inducing, drop-it-all-at-once method, and “The Mindy Project” Christmas episode reached the service on Tuesday.The show, however, is a bit of an outlier. As one-off specials and traditional holiday programs increasingly populate the December TV landscape, holiday-themed episodes like Ms. Kaling’s for regularly running shows are no longer de rigueur. NBC is without a holiday-specific episode for any of its series; Fox will have just two in December, in “The Last Man on Earth” and “Brooklyn Nine-Nine.”ABC will run holiday episodes for several comedies, while CBS will do it for almost half of its series, including dramas like “Scorpion” and “NCIS: Los Angeles.” For that show, the holiday theme will include a North Korean spy being hit by a truck carrying Christmas trees.“We usually request our shows do it,” said Kelly Kahl, a senior executive vice president for prime time at CBS. “It’s a thank you to the fans, a nod to the people who tune in every week.”Or, as television executives are quickly figuring out when it comes to anything holiday, every year.Advertisement