AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichIt’s kind of like the lighting of the Christmas tree at nearby Rockefeller Center: For many New Yorkers of a classical bent, the holiday season officially begins with the two performances of Handel’s “Messiah” at St. Thomas Church Fifth Avenue, featuring the St. Thomas Choir of Men and Boys and the period-instrument band Concert Royal.The first major presentations of the work in most years, to be followed by any number of others, these were eminently reliable and often inspired, if not entirely predictable, affairs during John Scott’s eventful decade as the church’s choirmaster. But with Mr. Scott’s sudden death in August, you had to wonder what would come next.No successor to him has yet been announced, but the early-music specialist Gary Thor Wedow has taken over the “Messiah” performances this year, and the first, on Tuesday evening, was a war horse of a different, brighter color.Mr. Wedow was a much more active and excitable presence on the podium than Mr. Scott ever was, to the point of knocking over the lamp on his desk in the “Hallelujah” chorus. In the process, he sought out greater drama in the music, with mighty crescendos and exquisite pianissimos. He even indulged in a few guilty pleasures: notably, thundering timpani flourishes at the end of “Hallelujah” and the final chorus.His control of the forces was generally good, though right after intermission, the strings went astray (like Handel’s sheep, soon to follow), and Mr. Wedow had to restart “Behold, the Lamb of God.” He allotted several short angelic pronouncements to boy trebles from the choir — John Dominick Mignardi, Leif Christian Pedersen, Adrian Alexander Castellanos and Sehjin Jo — and it was lovely to hear the individual piping voices in their varied colors.The adult vocal soloists — Elizabeth Weisberg, soprano; Meg Bragle, mezzo-soprano; Isaiah Bell, tenor; and David Grogan, bass — were excellent. Ms. Bragle and Mr. Bell were especially strong, pliant and communicative.Mr. Scott would undoubtedly have scratched his head at a number of interpretive matters, but he could only have been proud of his choir, which he left at the top of its form and which has been superbly maintained by Stephen Buzard, the acting music director, and Benjamin Sheen, the acting organist, who took part in the performance. A fine memorial to Mr. Scott.This performance will be repeated on Thursday evening at St. Thomas Church, Fifth Avenue at 53rd Street; 212-664-9360, saintthomaschurch.org.Advertisement