By BRIAN SEIBERTDEC. 9, 2015
If Paul Taylor can do it, why not Larry Keigwin? Mr. Taylor shocked the dance world in 2014 by announcing that after six decades of presenting only his choreography, his company would also present works by others. Mr. Keigwin is one of the first three choreographers chosen to create new pieces. His will debut in March, but before that happens, he is reversing roles, inviting younger artists to choreograph for his own 12-year-old troupe, Keigwin & Company.On Tuesday at the Joyce Theater, Keigwin & Company debuted Loni Landon’s “Wait Nearby.” (A second program this week features the debut of Adam Barruch’s “Drop” instead.) At the start of Ms. Landon’s work, one dancer swipes at the head of another, who ducks. The choreography is rooted in such scooping, buckling motion, sending the body off-kilter. It’s excitingly of the moment, unawkwardly borrowing from contemporary street dance. But it’s also too much of the moment, skirting cliché in its vague sense of threat, a problem abetted by Jerome Begin’s violin-and-electronics score, played live by the composer and String Noise.Still developing her voice, Ms. Landon already appears a little stuck. Inviting her is one way for Mr. Keigwin to offer variety without escaping his own ruts. His “Exit Like an Animal,” created last year for Juilliard students, is typical. A big party piece, it shows Mr. Keigwin’s unsurpassed mastery of traffic control, but the featherbrained cuteness of its conceit — a carnival of the animals that’s also a fashion runway — is a reminder of why it can be hard to take him seriously as an artist.His “Sidewalk” makes a stronger case. Created in 2009 for the odd contours of the Guggenheim Museum and now cleverly adapted to the stage and aisles of the Joyce, it finds in a twisted sideways walk and running in circles a near-perfect corollary for Steve Reich’s “Double Sextet.”Mr. Keigwin is 43. In a T-shirt, shorts and socks for “3 Ballads,” a new tripartite solo performed to love songs sung by Peggy Lee, he looks comfortable in his own skin, a consummate showman pleasing himself (and us) by noodling around in the studio. Every so often, there’s a flash of something deeper, something less easily accessible. He is good enough to disappoint by falling short of great. In the words of Oscar Hammerstein II, as sung by Lee,He will not always say What you would have him say But now and then he’ll say Something wonderful.Keigwin & Company continues through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, Manhattan; 212-242-0800, joyce­.org.A version of this review appears in print on December 10, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Giving Rising Talents a Break.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.