By BEN RATLIFFDEC. 9, 2015
You don’t need to know that R. Kelly wrote, by his own count, 462 songs in preparation for “The Buffet,” his 13th album, to understand that he is a protean character. (It’s nice to know it, though: 462 is a comical number.) The spirit of not getting stuck is an integral part of Mr. Kelly’s work, even more than his specialization in super-sexed subject matter.As singer, songwriter and producer, he runs efficiently through short-order metaphors and conceits, and, more cautiously, through styles. He applies finesse in measured amounts, like a road-line painter, and doesn’t linger. You can imagine his ticking an item off the list before he’s finished, thinking about the next one. The thing about people like this: They eventually become boring.The concept for “The Buffet,” he has explained in several interviews, is, unsurprisingly, breadth. As of his last record, “Black Panties” in 2013, he has gone back to the lewd stuff, after two relatively sweet throwback soul records that followed his acquittal on child-pornography charges in 2008. So now he’s mixing it up — sleaze and sentimentality.His subjects include uncomplicated leisure time (“Backyard Party,” in which a barbecue is only a barbecue) and the love of a father for a daughter (in “Wanna Be There,” sung with his actual 17-year-old daughter, who goes by Ariirayé).AdvertisementAnd sex — sex as poetry, sex as a public disturbance, sex as a marching-band performance. In the song “Marching Band,” there’s the album’s most memorable simile: tuba-playing as fellatio. If you suspect that there will be a sex-as-buffet metaphor at some point, you will be right. It occurs in “Poetic Sex,” with the phrase “all I can eat.”To describe the record is to make a list. There is grand and stirring R&B from the ’70s, and minimal, atmospheric R&B of the present; the continuation of his relaxed, midtempo Chicago-stepping style, one of his strong suits; some near hip-hop, with the barked, staccato flow of the new Atlanta rappers (in “Switch Up,” with Jeremih and Lil Wayne as guests); and, interestingly, functional country and blues (“Barely Breathin’” and “Sufferin’,” tracks on the disc’s deluxe edition.)AdvertisementThe point is that all of these songs are capable, and one is not much better than another. The track that most shows what Mr. Kelly is able to do with his voice, in light trembles and agile phrasing, is “Get Out of Here With Me,” evoking Marvin Gaye ballads. But it does so mechanically, even coldly, with entreaties that aren’t very sexy.A version of this review appears in print on December 10, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Sentiment and a Lot of Sex.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.