AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon Pareles“Untamed”(Arista Nashville/RCA)The crickets, the lonesome harmonica, the faraway train whistles and the plinking banjo that open “Untamed,” the title song on Cam’s debut album, declare allegiance to country’s rural roots. So do the lyrics, about “making Memory Lane out of old back roads.” But the thumping tom-tom beat and handclaps also make Cam — a Californian transplanted to Nashville, whose fuller name is Camaron Ochs — a 21st-century radio-ready performer. It’s a combination she executes skillfully throughout the album, which includes a song nominated for the Grammy award for best country solo performance: “Burning House,” the only 500,000-selling country single released by a woman in 2015.“Burning House,” an acoustic (but elaborately produced) ballad with crackling-fire sound effects in the background, is a lost-love song, an apology to an ex and a dream of life-or-death devotion that couldn’t work out; it’s the gentlest moment on the album. “Wish that we could go back in time/And I’d be the one you thought you’d find,” Cam sings.Cam wrote all the songs on “Untamed” with various collaborators; the wordplay is taut, and the sentiments are rarely sugary. Cam presents herself as a lover who’s scrappy when she needs to be; she’s clearly an admirer of the Dixie Chicks and Miranda Lambert. She flashes unbridled anger — as furious as Adele in “Rolling in the Deep” — in “Runaway Train,” a turbocharged banjo tune directed at someone who betrayed her. “Hungover on Heartache” suggests one aftermath, a reconciliation tarnished by bitter memories: “I get sick when you mention her name.” Elsewhere, the honky-tonk-tinged “Half Broke Heart” mocks someone who’s trying to let her down easy — “I need my space is still goodbye”— while “My Mistake” asserts her right to a barroom pickup and one-night stand.In “Country Ain’t Never Been Pretty,” Cam flaunts farm-gal bona fides, deftly contrasting high heels on a red carpet with manure-seasoned boots. But for all the banjo picking on the album, Cam isn’t pledged to traditionalism. The tracks are punched up, with spacious mixes and hefty drumbeats, by Cam’s two fellow executive producers and co-writers: Tyler Johnson, who’s responsible for much of the electronic programming in the background, and Jeff Bhasker, a producer known for pop hits by Fun., Bruno Mars and Alicia Keys. All the better; Cam’s voice is strong enough to seize the foreground, and her songs deserve the push.Advertisement