Lighthearted ads that both aimed to promote the 2013 documentary “The Muslims Are Coming!” and tolerance toward American Muslims should start appearing in dozens of the city’s subway stations in the near future, following a district-court ruling on Wednesday that reversed a decision by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority to reject the ads.Dean Obeidallah, one of the film’s directors, said in emails that he won’t know for sure if and when the ads will run because the M.T.A. could appeal the decision, but that he and the film’s other director, Negin Farsad, were “ecstatic” about the judge’s decision.The M.T.A. said it was reviewing the decision.Last fall, Mr. Obeidallah and Ms. Farsad, two Muslim comedians based in New York City, purchased ad space from the M.T.A. The humorous posters, which were supposed to go up in April, featured tongue-in-cheek “warnings” — e.g., “The ugly truth about Muslims: Muslims have great frittata recipes.” — seeking to counter anti-Muslim propaganda by a pro-Israel group that had appeared on the subway and also to alert people to their film.But the M.T.A. found that the posters violated a new policy banning ads of a “political nature” on the subway, and refused to run them. Mr. Obeidallah and Ms. Farsad sued for breach of contract and freedom of speech violations, and Judge Colleen McMahon of United States District Court in Manhattan ruled in their favor, calling the decision to ban the ads “utterly unreasonable.”There is no plan to expand the ad campaign, but Mr. Obeidallah said they would be happy to share their designs with people in other cities.In an email after the decision, Ms. Farsad called it “a victory of reason and freedom of speech over ridiculousness. When you’re trying to make art that matters and promote comedy that matters, it’s hard to measure results. This is one instance where we can say, ‘We fought, we comedian-ed hard, and we won.’ It’s a concrete victory, and it’s great news for a community that doesn’t get much of that these days.”