By DAVID ALLENDEC. 9, 2015
There was a time, not all that long ago, when a program called “The Baroque Keyboard” would have meant a recital played on anything but the piano. Works of the 17th and 18th centuries were, at the height of the early-music movement’s influence, the preserve of harpsichordists.Thankfully, the debate over original instruments is no longer as obstinate as it once was. So, as part of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center’s miniature Baroque Festival, the soloist Konstantin Lifschitz could play at a Steinway on Tuesday at Alice Tully Hall without fear of reproach.This was no censored pianism, either — no attempt to make the piano sound “period.” All three pedals were deployed, though modestly. Mr. Lifschitz’s crouching, spidery technique could draw chords as fierce as any in Stockhausen in toccatas by Frescobaldi, or swoon through a melody with coy ease in “La Ménetou” from François Couperin’s Order No. 7 in G.The result, though, was a curiously homogeneous vision of the Baroque, played with such freedom that the lines between composers blurred. Ornamentation was elaborate yet natural, though not always ideal in separating out the stylistic differences between Louis Couperin, whose “Chaconne et Passacaille” in C was weighed down by floridity, and Bach, represented by the C minor Partita.Even within selections from a single composer, Mr. Lifschitz’s playing was disorienting. An array of 14 of Scarlatti’s more than 500 sonatas was often breathtaking, but, played with barely a break between them and in the same key, they merged into a seamless muddle. And while Rameau’s “Les Cyclopes” had urgency and his “Tambourin” a steamy heat, his more deliberately characterful pieces were wrapped in uneasy intensity. Here were birds preening beyond their humble station in “Le Rappel des Oiseaux,” and a hen gussied up as a peacock in a hammered-out “La Poule.”More persuasive were the encores. Bach reappeared in Brahms’s literalist left-hand transcription of the “Chaconne” for violin (slightly embellished by Mr. Lifschitz himself) and in two movements, gentle and poised, of his Toccata in G.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.