By JAMES PONIEWOZIKDEC. 8, 2015
“What is being queer if not questioning everything?” asks Ali Pfefferman (Gaby Hoffmann), during an argument with her lover. Ali, who may be attracted to another woman, argues that she wants to avoid forcing a “heteronormative” model on their relationship. Her lover suggests that Ali, who only recently came out, is being perhaps a little self-serving. “Listen to yourself,” she says. “You’ve been queer for, like, 30 seconds.”Question, and expect to be questioned: This is as good a mission statement as any for the second season of “Transparent,” Jill Soloway’s magnificent comedy-drama about the sexual and personal evolutions of the Pfeffermans of Los Angeles. They love, but they don’t love easy. They make bold and selfish choices. They argue, because they care.Season 1 of “Transparent” focused on Maura Pfefferman (Jeffrey Tambor), who, having lived most of seven decades as Mort, came out to her adult children as a transgender woman, going from Dad to “Moppa.” (Hence the pun of the series title.) Mr. Tambor was a revelation — afraid and determined, warm and prickly — and it would have been understandable for Season 2 to simply build a bigger showcase for his deservedly Emmy Award-winning performance.Instead, Season 2, whose 10 half-hour episodes begin on Friday on Amazon, broadens its focus to the vast extended Pfefferman mishpocheh: children, in-laws, exes and long-gone ancestors. And it’s all the richer for it.AdvertisementThis season begins with the clan posing for a photo at the wedding of the eldest daughter, Sarah (Amy Landecker), to Tammy (Melora Hardin). This scene is a little tour de force of reintroduction that sets up in miniature the story lines of the season. Sarah is already having doubts about marriage. Her brother, Josh (Jay Duplass), has been forced to grow up fast after discovering that he has a teenage son, Colton (Alex MacNicoll). Maura is growing comfortable in her identity, walking off when the photographer calls her “Sir.”AdvertisementMs. Soloway writes the Pfefferman family as if she were born into it, infusing each line with personality and history. It would be technically accurate to call this season an ensemble work. But really, it treats the family itself as a protagonist, an organism that maintains collective quirks and personality even as its members evolve and transform, are born and grow old.To be a Pfefferman, for instance, is to have particular issues around secrecy and openness. Family members hide and overshare; they blab massive confidences within minutes and conceal life-changing secrets for years. They fight, they conspire, they keep score. Plenty of family shows set holiday episodes on Christmas or Thanksgiving. “Transparent,” fittingly, sets its on Yom Kippur, the day of atonement.The idea that family is memory — that ancestral experiences and trauma are passed down like heirlooms — comes through in the season’s most daring device, a running flashback to the family’s roots in Weimar Germany, whose flowering of intellectual and sexual freedom is about to be quashed by the Nazis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The new season also opens up to perspectives beyond the Pfeffermans’. Cherry Jones is magnetic as a charismatic radical-feminist poet whom Ali seeks out as a mentor; Alexandra Billings (one of several transgender cast members) deepens her role as Davina, who had a rougher road than her privileged friend Maura. (“Transparent” is very conscious of the dollars-and-cents costs of transitioning.)This Los Angeles tour of sex and identity is as intersectional as a 405 interchange, and it could all play like a graduate gender studies seminar if it weren’t so overtly funny. The show finds comedy in a shaman at a “wimmin’s music” festival (“Some of you I know from my drumming away racism group”) and in the culture clash when the Pfeffermans meet Colton’s conservative Christian adoptive family. (The paterfamilias greets Maura as “Colton’s Mee-Maw.”) Yet the show respects each character’s sincerity. Its spirit is that anything can be funny, but nothing is risible.“Transparent” is one of a rare few socially conscious television series — “The Wire” is another — whose sense of message and responsibility heightens rather than burdens it. It’s powered not by theory but by specificity: It is specifically bourgeois Los Angeles, specifically progressive-Jewish, specifically feminist.And it lets its art do the talking. In Episode 3 (directed by Marielle Heller, “The Diary of a Teenage Girl”), Ali meets some lesbian friends in a bowling alley, and the camera flits around the room from woman to woman — laughing, drinking, nuzzling, flirting, being. That gaze is as much a character in “Transparent” as any of the people.Maybe the greatest accomplishment of “Transparent” is that any Pfefferman can be, at the same time, your most and least favorite. (For instance, Maura’s ex-wife, Shelly, played by Judith Light, is both comically self-centered and a deeply sympathetic survivor.) Even the core story, Maura’s transition, is entree to a larger philosophy that life and people are complicated and that is what makes both beautiful. Gender and sexuality are continuums, “Transparent” says, but so are many things.Late in this season, Maura gives Ali a little unsolicited, Moppa-ly advice: Be skeptical of those who are overly certain, as comforting as absolute answers and clear binaries can be. “I suggest it’s always wise to steer clear of people who are overly attached to dogma,” she says. She pauses for a moment. Then she adds, “But that’s me.”A version of this article appears in print on December 10, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Family Retains Its Bond.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.