
The Knick By                     
 MIKE HALE
 
DEC. 11, 2015
“The Knick” took a 2,000-mile detour at the beginning of this week’s episode, opening — disconcertingly — not on 1900s New York but on a somnolent jungle landscape that was soon identified as 1894 Nicaragua. There John Thackery, hired to stop a smallpox outbreak, first met the shipping magnate Capt. August Robertson, handcuffed to a post and accused of causing the outbreak.Thackery contained the smallpox and bargained for Robertson’s release, and in a bookending Nicaragua scene at the end of the episode, we saw that this was the origin story of “The Knick.” Feeling indebted, Robertson offered Thackery a position at the hospital he financed in New York. “Isn’t that where Christiansen is?” Thackery asked, referring to the mentor who would kill himself in the pilot episode. And a medical drama is born.In the show’s present, however, Robertson’s outcome wasn’t as happy, and the two most dramatic scenes in the episode both involved fathers receiving harsh treatment at the hands of their daughters. Cornelia Robertson met her father at the nearly completed new location of the Knickerbocker Hospital and accused him of causing plague outbreaks to save himself money — ironic echo of the Nicaraguan accusation! — and of having the health inspector Speight killed. As August hotly denied her charges, the lower floors of the hospital exploded in flames. Cornelia escaped with her father’s help but the captain was trapped and last seen jumping from a high window, fate unknown. (Was the 9/11 echo there intentional? Probably not.)Two questions in the aftermath: Was the fire set or paid for by Herman Barrow, who needs the revenue stream from construction graft to continue now that his suddenly militant wife is blackmailing him? And more important, were the Captain’s seemingly sincere denials an indication that the real criminal is Henry, his son and Cornelia’s beloved brother? It’s not too great a leap given Henry’s general glibness and his fondness for filming naked nurses with his motion-picture camera.AdvertisementThen there was the Rev. A.D. Elkins, father of nurse Lucy, whose even more grim experience constituted the episode’s most unsettling scene. Locked in silent paralysis, he was forced to listen to his daughter give a full recitation of her sins: sex with Thackery after he had basted his penis in cocaine, foot-play with Ping Wu for $100 a shot. She would do what it took — which currently means seducing Henry Robertson — to get what she wanted, she told him, and she would not be treated like the family mule, Moon Flower (source of the episode’s title). “I just wanted you to know everything before you went,” she said before injecting him with something. Was it a lethal dose? Presumably we’ll find out next week. If so, how does that leave us feeling about the increasingly scary Lucy Elkins?AdvertisementElsewhere:Thackery, along with Algernon Edwards, has been unduly sidelined during the latter stages of the season (while more time is given to less interesting characters like Cornelia and Sister Harriet). He was consigned to moping over Abigail’s death, which caused him to miss the formerly conjoined twins’ bittersweet departure from the hospital, and being examined at Mt. Sinai by Zimberg, who appeared to have invented a very early precursor of arthroscopy. Thack’s bowel was ischemic (not getting enough blood), but he refused to let Zimberg operate, saying he wanted to try “other things.” With the season finale coming next week, it’s beginning to look like another season may end with a personal-health cliffhanger for Dr. Thackery.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Edwards, meanwhile, brought Gallinger before the medical board over the vasectomies he performed at the “idiot house” but an all-white panel of doctors absolved Gallinger and its leader endorsed the “science” of eugenics. Edwards then challenged Gallinger to a fist fight, in an odd and not very credible scene that ended with Gallinger sucker-punching him and exposing his true racist soul.In the weekly Cleary-Sister Harriet comic relief, the fearless condom merchants made their first sales expedition, and Harriet moved her entire supply by selling to the prostitutes rather than their customers. Meanwhile a subplot was tied up when Gallinger learned that Dr. Cotton had been poisoned by the sons of one of his victims, and not by Eleanor Gallinger. You might think that this would make Gallinger feel a little guilty about having her committed, but apparently this wasn’t the case, since we soon saw him coming home to his sister-in-law, Dorothy, and having sex with her on the dining room floor.Amid all the rattle and hum, the best and most moving scene of the episode was its quietest. It opened with the camera focused on the legs of Zoya and Nika, getting out of bed still side by side. They walked together to the door of their room, and then, as Edwards, Lucy Elkins, Bertie Chickering and Nurse Ryan watched, they turned in opposite directions and walked unsteadily but separately down the hall, giggling with delight at their new freedom. The nurses and doctors applauded, like proud parents at a first recital.Let us know what you thought of the penultimate episode of Season 2. Am I the only one who immediately thought, “It’s Henry”?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »