Various shows
Rijksmuseum.
To the spring.The Dutch researcher Frans Grijzenhout has picked through historical archives to determine the real location of Vermeer’s painting “The Little Street.” The results of his research — he pinpointed the image’s location as a quiet street in Delft — are on view in an exhibition through March 13. It is one of three shows running at the museum. “Asia > Amsterdam,” through Jan. 17, features “treasures” transported from Asia to the Netherlands in the 17th century, and explores the craze for Asian art that resulted. “Anish Kapoor & Rembrandt,” through March 6, places three new Kapoor paintings that resemble layers of raw, bloody meat alongside late work by the master. An Homage to Korean Architecture: Wisdom of the Earth
Leeum, Samsung Museum of Art.
Through Feb. 6.Photographs of Korea’s most elegant temples, palaces and government buildings are on view here alongside artifacts from the monuments, old maps and high-tech animations that show their internal structures. The exhibition uses mixed media to examine the styles of and innovations in Korean architecture. Photographers showing their work include Joo Myung-duck and Bohnchang Koo. Some parts of the exhibition focus on major architectural icons, while others spotlight modest private homes. Vec Makropulos
Wiener Staatsoper.
Dec. 13-23.Janacek’s 1926 “The Makropulos Affair” centers on the youthful singer Emilia Marty, who has the voice of an angel, and is nearly 337 years old. The action hinges on her crisis over what to do when she runs low on the elixir of life that has kept her going. This new production is directed by Peter Stein and stars the American soprano Laura Aikin as Emilia. The production is part of the Staatsoper’s “Janacek Cycle,” which continues in April with productions of the composer’s “Jenufa,” and “The Cunning Little Vixen.” A roundup of performances.Tchaikovsky’s “The Nutcracker” first appeared at the Mariinsky Theater in St. Petersburg in 1892. No fewer than three productions of the ballet will appear there this winter: a classic version, choreographed by Vasily Vainonen, an adaptation of the tale by the edgy interdisciplinary artist Mihail Chemiakin and a staging of Vainonen’s version by students from the Vaganova Academy of Russian Ballet. Beyond St. Petersburg, the New National Theater in Tokyo will perform the ballet, as it does every odd year (in other years it shows “Cinderella”). Traditional productions will be staged at theaters in major European capitals: London’s Royal Ballet, Berlin’s Staatsballett and the Teatro dell’Opera in Rome.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Élisabeth Louise Vigée Le Brun
Grand Palais.
Through Jan. 11.The portrait painter Vigée Le Brun began her career as an artist in her teens and by her early twenties had become a favorite of Queen Marie Antoinette. The queen commissioned around 30 portraits from the artist, who fled France during the Revolution because of her ties to the royal family. The exhibition includes work from across Vigée Le Brun’s career, including imagery featuring Marie Antoinette, and some of the artist’s self-portraits, which explored the tensions between motherhood and career. Nakajima Kiyoshi
Yokohama Museum of Art.
Through Jan. 11.The artist Nakajima Kiyoshi (1899-1989) melded traditional Japanese “Nihonga” painting techniques with modern subjects, like pop singers and city street scenes. This retrospective traces the evolution of the artist from the early days of his career, when he built his reputation by submitting his work to art competitions, to old age, when he had become an established member of the progressive city of Yokohama’s art scene, with a small but influential international reach. Firenze Capitale 1865-2015
Galleria d’Arte Moderna.
Through April 3.In 1865, the capital of the Kingdom of Italy moved from Turin to Florence. The exhibition takes place in lavish recreations of the king and nobility’s quarters in the city, many of which have been opened to the public for the occasion. In addition to a wide selection of objets d’art from the period, the show includes oil paintings that the king commissioned from a small group of young Italian artists whose work he admired. PinchukArtCentre Prize; “Patriots, Citizens, Lovers … ”
PinchukArtCentre.
Both through Jan. 10.The sixteen young, mostly unknown artists shortlisted for this year’s PinchukArtCentre Prize are showing their work in this exhibition. The show focuses primarily on installation and video art by the nominees, who hail from Ukraine. Alongside their work is the solo exhibition “Patriots, Citizens, Lovers … ,” which features an installation by the New York artist Carlos Motta. In 2014 he won the center’s Future Generation Art Prize, another, more internationally-focused art award bestowed by the museum. Mr. Motta’s video work shows interviews with Ukrainian gay activists, who face persecution for their politics and sexual identity. 