AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck“Transparent” begins a second glorious season with bigger issues than ever; Miley Cyrus acts like a baby in her latest video; and Emma Stone and Bradley Cooper face off in “Aloha,” a Cameron Crowe flick that may be more enjoyable than it is good.What’s StreamingTRANSPARENT on Amazon. Maura Pfefferman and her ever-evolving clan — children, in-laws, exes and long-gone ancestors — return with even more baggage: romantic dissatisfaction, gender dysphoria, radical feminism and sibling intimacy boundary issues. “And it’s all the richer for it,” James Poniewozik wrote in The New York Times about Season 2 of Jill Soloway’s Emmy-winning comedy-drama, which just earned Golden Globe nominations for best television series, musical or comedy, and for its stars Jeffrey Tambor and Judith Light. (Image: Kathryn Hahn and Jay Duplass)What’s on TVJULIE & JULIA (2009) 3 p.m. on Lifetime. Meryl Streep and Amy Adams whisk up a froth as the chef Julia Child and the blogger Julie Powell, who works her way for one year through “Mastering the Art of French Cooking.” (Child was one of the authors.) “By now this actress has exhausted every superlative that exists,” A. O. Scott wrote in the Times about Ms. Streep, “and to suggest that she has outdone herself is only to say that she’s done it again.” (Image: Ms. Streep)VICTOR/VICTORIA (1982) 5:30 p.m. on TCM. Julie Andrews stars as a struggling cabaret singer in 1930s Paris who bolsters her career by pretending to be a man working as a female impersonator. James Garner is the gangster who loves him. Or is it her? In The Times, Vincent Canby called Blake Edwards’s farce “so good, so exhilarating, that the only depressing thing about it is the suspicion that Mr. Edwards is going to have a terrible time trying to top it.” (Image: Ms. Andrews and Mr. Garner)MILEY CYRUS’S BB TALK VIDEO 7 p.m. on MTV. Ms. Cyrus dons a layette’s worth of baby outfits in this premiere of “BB Talk,” the latest video from “Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz.”AMAZING RACE 8 p.m. on CBS. After five continents, 10 countries and more than 34,000 miles, the three remaining teams hasten to Long Island for the $1 million prize.ALOHA (2015) 9 p.m. on Starz. Emma Stone and Bradley Cooper spar and spark as a fighter pilot and her charge — the right-hand man of a billionaire about to launch a private rocket from a Hawaiian base — on a ceremonial mission. But things keep getting in the way — mostly, his former girlfriend (Rachel McAdams). “Let me say right up front that I will always root for Cameron Crowe,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times about the film’s director. And yet, “everybody is too eager to forgive, forget and move on. I guess that goes for me too.” (Image: from left, Ms. Stone, Mr. Cooper and Ms. McAdams)THE KNICK 10 p.m. on Cinemax. The link between Thackery and Captain Robertson is revealed. And a medical board hearing on Gallinger’s sterilizations of disabled men takes his conflict with Edwards to the next level.Advertisement