AMC has renewed “Halt and Catch Fire,” its excellent drama about the nascent personal-computer and Internet businesses in the 1980s, for a third season. I’m delighted; in my previous life as TV critic for Time magazine I championed the show, repeatedly. And I’m stunned, because for all my verbiage (and the verbiage of other critics), few people actually watched.I’ll tell you more about why you should join those few closer to when the third season arrives next summer. (In short: because the show evolved in its second season from a “Mad Men” knockoff about moody antiheroes into a fascinating story of women entrepreneurs creating the social Internet—an origin story, really, for the virtual world we enter through our phones daily.) But right now the news makes me think of something else: that the fact we are blessed with so much good TV right now is a direct result of the simple fact that we have so much TV, period.The announcement crossed my desk this morning while I was chatting with other TV critics on Twitter about “peak TV”— the concept, which has crystallized in the past year or so, that scripted TV has proliferated to an unsustainable level. As we keep hearing, the business is on track to produce over 400 original scripted series this year. For you, that means your DVR is straining at its seams. For some people in the TV business, it means a bubble ready to burst.At the Television Critics Association press tour this year, the FX Networks head John Landgraf — a big-picture thinker who has forgotten more about his industry than I will ever learn — sounded the alarm about the situation. His particular concerns, from the standpoint of someone who runs a network, are that 1) the business model may not be able to sustain this level of output forever and 2) the number of options is making it harder for good shows to get attention. And of course, more shows means smaller individual audiences — at least until someone adds more hours to the day — which threatens traditional advertising revenue.Fair enough, and Mr. Landgraf knows his own ledgers much better than I do. But for a consumer, peak TV is still a pretty good deal. The number of competing outlets needing to fill up hours means that some shows that once wouldn’t have stayed on the air — or might never have been made at all — now get to survive. (FX airs some of them, like “Louie,” which is a work of genius but not exactly “Seinfeld” commercially.) A show like “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt,” which once would have died unaired at NBC, can now go to Netflix with a two-season commitment.I’m not privy to the thinking behind AMC’s decision on “Halt and Catch Fire” but the network is, in a way, a poster child for peak TV. A decade ago, it was a movie-rerun channel, and now it airs original dramas year-round — some ratings hits (“The Walking Dead”), others critical darlings (the recently departed“Mad Men”). Some combination of a need for programming, critical praise and an upswing in quality led them to renew a show that, in another time, probably would have died fast. Instead, “Halt and Catch Fire” got another year to get great, and now it’s getting a third year to continue.Of course, given the TV surplus, you may not have the time to watch it. But it’s a terrific show, and now at least you have the option. If peak TV is the apocalypse, I, for one, am glad to have something to watch while the world catches fire.