AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel GraeberThe Museum of Modern Art is offering children a new way to play: Instead of pretending to be, say, Batman or Katniss Everdeen, how about imagining yourself as Ellsworth Kelly or Louise Nevelson?Ellsworth who? MoMA answers that question — and many others — at its Art Lab, intended not only to acquaint young visitors with its works but also to help them relate to the methods and meanings behind them. Created in 2008, the 672-square-foot space, staffed with trained facilitators, is now open 10 months a year, during which it explores a theme. Through August, the focus is the artist’s process.“You take an idea that touches on many aspects of the collection,” said Elizabeth Margulies, the museum’s director of family programs and initiatives.To minimize mess, MoMA stocks the lab’s art stations with colored pencils and crayons rather than paint. It obtains artwork fodder from the Manhattan organization Teaching Beyond the Square.“We go there and collect bottle caps and golf balls and test tubes and toilet paper rolls,” Ms. Margulies said. “Every time you come to the lab, the assortment is different.”A sign at one station tells visitors to “combine these materials to make something new.” Another area displays a sculptural still life of papier-mâché fruits and flowers for children to draw. “We want them to think about where they get their creative ideas, and where the artists may get their own,” Ms. Margulies said.In one corner, they can watch brief videos of artists, listening on headphones as Kiki Smith discusses printmaking, or William Kentridge wryly describes how he creates a work, then decides what it means.But the most intriguing stations recreate artists’ methods. Mr. Kelly derived the gridlike design of his painting “Colors for a Large Wall” by randomly arranging colored paper squares. The lab invites children to roll a die that has a colored dot on each side; if the die turns up purple, for instance, they must place a purple magnetic square on a metallic sheet. After repeated rolls of the die, they’ll have their own Kellyesque pattern.Nevelson’s “Sky Cathedral,” consisting of black wooden scraps arranged within stacked black boxes, has inspired another project. The lab provides small versions of her materials and lets children reimagine the sculpture, above.One area that lures even young adults is “Design a Chair,” where visitors can sketch, create, label and display a miniature model. My favorite: the “Jurassic Chair,” whose 11-year-old designer, Melissa wrote, “It will walk away with you.”(Art Lab: Process runs through Aug. 31 in the Cullman Research and Education Building; 212-708-9805, moma.org/family.)Alvin Ailey Family Matinee Series (Saturday) Children can take their first steps as dancegoers by following the leaps and bounds of the members of Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater in these programs, which are followed by question-and-answer sessions with the dancers. Each family matinee concludes with Alvin Ailey’s own “Revelations,” the troupe’s signature work, inspired by spirituals. (Through Jan. 2.) Saturdays at 2 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Continuing) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing Middle Eastern artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (around 1900) where young archaeologists can dress in costume and portray early-20th-century immigrants to Palestine. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.Baby Got Bach: ‘Principally Percussion’ (Saturday) The pianist Orli Shaham, a mother of twins, draws on her musical and her maternal talents as the host and artistic director of this concert series, intended for ages 3 through 6. One big draw: Little ones don’t just hear instruments played; they also play with them during a preshow exploration. This weekend’s concert concentrates on percussion, with composers including Bach and Steve Reich. At 3 p.m., Weill Art Gallery, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org/babygotbach.‘Ballerina Swan’ (Saturday through Wednesday) A lot of dancers compete for the opportunity to dance the lead in “Swan Lake,” but Sophie has special qualifications: She’s actually a swan. Revived by New York City Children’s Theater, this production is based on the picture book of the same title by Allegra Kent, former principal with New York City Ballet. Geared to ages 3 to 8, it tells the story of Sophie, who resides in Central Park but has bigger dreams. The 50-minute show features Tchaikovsky’s music, choreography by Michael McGowan, a book by Barbara Zinn Krieger and puppetry from Phantom Limb. (Through Jan. 3.) Saturdays and Sundays at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m.; Mondays through Wednesdays at 11 a.m.; Theater 3, 311 West 43rd Street, Clinton, 646-250-1178, nycchildrenstheater.org.‘Beauty & the Beast’ (Saturday and Sunday) The music of Jules Massenet accompanies this version of the French fairy tale, adapted by Nicolas Coppola, artistic director of Puppetworks. While most of the characters are played by marionettes, the Beast is appropriately huge and intimidating: He’s a grown-up. The show also promises some interesting effects, including animated vines in the enchanted wood that close in on the Prince while he’s traveling there. (Through Dec. 20.) At 12:30 and 2:30 p.m., Puppetworks, 338 Sixth Avenue, at Fourth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-965-3391, puppetworks.org.Best Friends Animal Society’s Super Adoption Event (Friday through Sunday) What could be a better holiday present than one that provides unconditional love? Best Friends Animal Society, an animal welfare organization, sponsors this free event, which will offer more than 650 dogs, cats and rabbits that need good homes. (Adoption fees start as low as $25, and all new pet owners will receive goody bags.) The festivities will also include food, holiday items for sale and visits each day from Santa Claus (though no reindeer are up for adoption). Friday from 4 to 8 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m.; Altman Building, 135 West 18th Street, Chelsea, bestfriendsny.org/super.Blessing of the Animals (Sunday) You don’t have to be religious to enjoy this spectacle. All families are invited to take their pets — dogs, cats and other creatures — to Christ Church for a special nod from members of the clergy. The free ceremony is ecumenical, with the church’s senior minister, Stephen Bauman, and Central Synagogue’s senior rabbi, Peter J. Rubinstein, officiating. New pet toys will be accepted as donations for New York City Animal Care and Control. At 2 p.m., 524 Park Avenue, at 60th Street, 212-838-3036, christchurchnyc.org/Calendar; seating is limited, first come first served.‘Brooklyn Sewers: What’s Up Down There?’ (Through May 29) When it comes to subterranean infrastructure projects, New York City’s subway system seems to get all the attention. But a group of teenage curators at the Brooklyn Historical Society would like to introduce you to another underground marvel: Brooklyn’s sewer system, one of the city’s oldest and most extensive infrastructure projects. This exhibition explores engineering conundrums and courtroom battles and tells the story of the sewer system through photographs, drawings and maps. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.‘A Charlie Brown Christmas’ (Friday through Sunday) Linus, Lucy and the rest of the “Peanuts” gang have returned — but to a new location — for what has become an annual tradition: the Pig Brooch Theater Company’s staging of the musical “A Charlie Brown Christmas.” The troupe’s production of this tale, in which Charlie learns the real meaning of the holidays, is a live re-creation of the original “Peanuts” television special and includes a jazz trio playing Vince Guaraldi’s score. (Through Dec. 20.) Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 1, 4 and 7 p.m.; Redwood Studios, 55 Ninth Street, near Smith Street, Gowanus, Brooklyn, brownpapertickets.com/event/2433028. Advance purchase is recommended.Children’s Winter Potions Party (Saturday) If children haven’t received their invitations yet to study at Hogwarts, this may be the next-best thing. Gallow Green, the rooftop restaurant at the McKittrick Hotel, has revived this series, welcoming children ages 4 through 10 to learn all about herbal potions — and, in this case, make a snow globe, too. An English tea — with pink lemonade for young guests — will be served, and each participant may bring a favorite stuffed animal or doll. (Each adult attending must be accompanied by at least one and no more than three children; each child should bring a recyclable bottle for concoctions.) (Also on Dec. 19.) At 10 a.m., 542 West 27th Street, Chelsea, 212-564-1662, events.mckittrickhotel.com/winterpotions. Reservations required.‘A Christmas Carol’ (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) It’s time to haunt old Ebenezer again. Literally Alive Children’s Theater, which turns books into shows, takes on a holiday classic in this musical production, by Brenda Bell and Michael Sgouros (with additional music by Mr. Sgouros’s daughter, Emily). Before accompanying Scrooge on his travels with the Ghosts of Christmas Past, Present and Future, children can participate in a preshow workshop on Sundays to learn more about the literary source and make a related craft. (Through Dec. 30.) Friday and Thursday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 3 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, literallyalive.com.‘Connected Worlds’ (continuing) Human choices and actions have an impact on the world’s ecosystems, but people usually can’t see the effects as they happen. That isn’t true in this new permanent exhibition in the renovated Great Hall of the New York Hall of Science. Consisting of huge screens (one is 38 feet tall), the show depicts six interconnected environments with a shared water supply. With the help of technology that responds to gestures, “Connected Worlds” allows children to use simple motions to plant, harvest, cut trees, create clouds and make other changes in the projected landscapes — and see how the native flora and fauna fare. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.‘The Discovery of King Tut’ (Through May 1) The Egyptian pharaoh Tutankhamen died when he was only a teenager, but the magnificent riches of his tomb have made him immortal in the public imagination. This touring show at Premier Exhibitions 5th Avenue recreates Tut’s tomb as it was when the British archaeologist Howard Carter discovered it in 1922. The display includes reconstructions of the tomb’s three chambers and reproductions of more than 1,000 treasures and ritual objects, accompanied by video documentaries and texts. 417 Fifth Avenue, at 38th Street, tutnyc.com.Doktor Kaboom: ‘Science of Santa’ (Saturday) A comedian who plays with chemistry and physics, Doktor Kaboom believes in greeting the holidays with a bang. In this show, he’ll try taking a scientific approach to explaining how Santa Claus operates. The doktor may not be able to levitate a sled with reindeer, but he can demonstrate some fascinating experiments, principles and chemical reactions. Theatergoers — the show is for ages 5 and up — are invited to take a photo with Santa and Mrs. Claus after the performance. At 1:30 p.m., TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, Borough of Manhattan Community College, 199 Chambers Street, near Greenwich Street, 212-220-1460, tribecapac.org.Dress Up, Dreidel Down Hanukkah Disco Party! (Sunday) Holiday lights won’t be the only glitter and glow at this event; it is, after all, a family disco extravaganza. Featuring a set by DJ Alden, 9, an experienced spinner of tunes, this fund-raiser for the Jewish Museum will also offer balloon art, crafts workshops, Hanukkah goodies, a photo booth and, of course, a menorah lighting. Young guests are encouraged to dress up for a chance to walk the museum’s red carpet, be interviewed and have their pictures taken by “paparazzi” from the staff. From 3 to 5 p.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3264, jmhanukkah.eventbrite.com.‘Evergreen Express’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) There’s a lot of locomotion going on in the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden at the New York Botanical Garden, and it’s all centered on trees. In this celebration, part of the botanical garden’s Holiday Train Show, children can investigate trails in search of evergreen trees and shrubs. At the Discovery Center Depot, they can investigate evergreen plant parts, make pressings of a conifer specimen and create a miniature pine sachet. Other activities include making an evergreen puppet, patterned after the work of the master artisan Ralph Lee, and putting on puppet shows in the Woodland Theater. (Through Jan. 24.) Weekdays (except Mondays), 1:30 to 5:30 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 6:30 p.m.; Sundays, 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.‘Fancy Nancy: Splendiferous Christmas’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company, which gave eager young audiences “Fancy Nancy: The Musical,” is now reviving its other show starring that inimitable little diva. Based on the book written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, “Fancy Nancy: Splendiferous Christmas” deals with Nancy’s fancy expectations for the holiday season. With a book by Cara Lustik, music by Randy Klein and lyrics by Matthew Hardy, the production revolves around Nancy’s purchase of a grand decoration for the top of the Christmas tree, and what ensues when her dreams don’t turn out quite as planned. (Through Dec. 27.) At 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., Theater at St. Jean, 184 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org. (Tickets are limited at the 1 p.m. shows.)‘Fashion Academy, the Musical’ (Sunday) Vital Theater Company’s latest show for children over 7 is closing this weekend. It focuses on a middle-schooler, MacKenzie Williams, known as Mickey. When her colorful and completely original style doesn’t go over well at her new school, Fashion Academy of Brooklyn, she decides to make over not only her wardrobe, but also herself. Based on the book “Fashion Academy,” by the mother-daughter team of Sheryl Berk and Carrie Berk, this adaptation, by the elder Ms. Berk and Sabrina Chap, asks whether Mickey’s new persona, Kenzie, is really worth the sacrifice. At 3:30 p.m., Theater at Blessed Sacrament, 152 West 71st Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Frolic!’ at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan✓ (Through Dec. 31) You’re never too young to rock — and this space proves it. A new pop-up installation at the museum, “Frolic!” uses rock music and a themed décor to stimulate sensory play and learning in visitors ages 5 and under. In addition to a stage, a pretend ticket booth and ’70s-style props — including a Volkswagen mini-van to climb into — the 1,500-square-foot area has programs of workshops and live performances to help little ones get into the groove. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’ (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Thursday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.Rennie Harris RHAW (Saturday) RHAW stands for Rennie Harris Awe-Inspiring Works, and that’s just what this noted hip-hop choreographer has planned for this program, featuring the young dancers in his training company and presented as part of the Just Kidding series at Symphony Space. Mr. Harris goes deep into the roots of street dance, often combining hip-hop with more classical dance forms. He’s also known for eclectic blending in pieces like “Bohemian Rhapsody,” a coming-of-age production done to the music of Queen. At 11 a.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.‘The Humans of “Sesame Street”' (Sunday) Yes, they spent their careers often being upstaged by Big Bird, Elmo, Oscar, Grover and a host of other fuzzy stars. But you won’t catch these human actors complaining. At this event at the Museum of the Moving Image, recommended for ages 8 and up, many of the people who have populated “Sesame Street” — including Bob McGrath (Bob), Sonia Manzano (Maria), Emilio Delgado (Luis), Roscoe Orman (Gordon), Alan Muraoka (Alan) and Alison Bartlett (Gina) — will share their memories in a presentation filled with music and video clips. Craig Shemin, president of the Jim Henson Legacy, will moderate. At 1 p.m., 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us. Advance purchase is advised.‘The Hunger Games: The Exhibition’✓ (Through Jan. 3) What enterprising 12- or 13-year-old wouldn’t like to foment a little rebellion? Such a visitor can do so vicariously at this attraction at Discovery Times Square, stepping into the role of Katniss Everdeen, the teenage heroine of “The Hunger Games” and the ultimate leader of the resistance against her nation’s totalitarian government. Based on the Lionsgate film adaptations of Suzanne Collins’s novels, the show includes costumes and artifacts from the movies, as well as re-creations of Katniss’s journey and interactive, role-playing elements like a gamesmaker’s table and a chance to learn and practice stunt choreography. 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com, thehungergamesexhibition.com.‘If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home’ (Through Jan. 17) Maps present facts, but they can also engage the imagination. This new exhibition at the Children’s Museum of the Arts explores the intersection of cartography and art, showing work that expands upon, redefines or simply refers to maps. Among the eight artists represented are Matthew Cusik, who makes collages from map fragments; Joyce Kosloff, who layers images and textured paint onto maps; Loren Munk, who adds plaques of color and information to street maps; and Nikki Rosato, who subtracts from maps, cutting away all but roads and rivers. In the museum’s Cynthia C. Wainwright Gallery, 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.‘Jean-Michel Cousteau’s Secret Ocean’✓ (Through Jan. 10) Ever encounter a goby or a blenny? How about a Christmas tree worm? These small marine species, often unnoticed and uncelebrated, are among the stars of this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History. Filmed by Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau, and Holly Lohuis, a marine biologist, the film captures 30 species that are among the tiniest to inhabit the seas. Daily schedule: Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘Judy & the Maccabees’ (Sunday) Yes, that’s Judy, not Judah. In this feminist retelling of the Hanukkah story, Judy is a teenage girl who seeks out Judah and his band of Maccabees, eventually coming up with the plan to outwit the evil King Antiochus and restore religious freedom for the Jews. A musical by Sean Hartley, the show, for ages 4 through 10, will be presented by the Poppy Seed Players, who involve the audience in celebrating the Hanukkah miracle. At 11 a.m., Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, kaufmanmusiccenter.org.‘Keith Michael’s the Nutcracker’ (Friday through Sunday) Spider-Man may not be flying over New York audiences anymore, but this version of “The Nutcracker,” from New York Theater Ballet, offers something just as intriguing: a luminous owl that sweeps overhead. Other attractions include clockwork imps and a Mouse Queen with an 18-foot tail. Choreographed by Keith Michael for children 3 to 8, this version, back for another weekend of holiday performances, lasts just an hour. Friday at noon; Saturday and Sunday at 11 a.m. and 1 and 3:30 p.m. (Tickets are limited.) Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, nytb.org.‘LARD: Life’s a Real Dream’ (Saturday) This show about LARD, the concept, has nothing to do with lard, the substance. An acronym for “Life’s a Real Dream,” “LARD” is the title of a rollicking musical production starring Lard Dog, who also happens not to be a dog. The alter ego of the multimedia artist Steven Erdman, Lard is a gregarious out-of-this-world character who has flown in from the planet Belopio on a giant pretzel. He and his Band of Shy perform this hourlong entertainment, which includes cartoon graphics and a pretzel toss. Shows this month also feature a holiday singalong and surprise giveaways for children. (Through Jan. 2.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, houseoflard.com.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’ (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.Music in Motion (Saturday) That motion is the gentle rocking of a boat for this series of family neighborhood concerts presented by Bargemusic, the floating barge at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge. As always, the material — announced just before the performance — is chamber music, but these programs differ in important ways from the regular Bargemusic fare: With unreserved seating, they last only an hour, include a post-show question-and-answer session with the musicians and are free. (Through March 26.) At 4 p.m. (doors open at 3:45), Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org.‘NYC + Me: A Little Bite of the Big Apple’ (Through Jan. 18) There’s one place where little citizens can safely run loose on the streets of New York: the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. This new interactive 3,000-square-foot gallery is a city microcosm for small visitors, allowing them to pretend to be taxi drivers, bus drivers, construction workers, street performers and, most impressively, the mayor. Activities include directing traffic, erecting a skyscraper, “ice skating” in their socks and investigating urban tales on the steps of the New York Public Library. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Pedal Punk’ (Friday through Sunday) Forget about those daring young men on a flying trapeze — how about those daring young people on a flying bicycle? This circus show, presented by the troupe Cirque Mechanics at the New Victory Theater, takes place aboard the Gantry: a huge, Rube Goldberg-style contraption consisting of bicycle parts. It can be pedaled and ridden, but it can also be a platform and a series of devices for aeralists, contortionists, clowns and dancers, as this company of nine demonstrates. (Through Jan. 3.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at noon, 2 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 5 p.m.; 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.‘Peter & the Wolf’ (Friday through Sunday) Prokofiev’s classic may seem to be common children’s fare at this time of year, but there’s nothing ordinary about this version. Given its premiere eight years ago as part of the Guggenheim Museum’s Works & Process series, this production, closing this weekend, combines performing arts with sets by renowned artists. Once again, Isaac Mizrahi, the story’s narrator, has designed the set and costumes and directed the tale, which has become a full theatrical production, with a cast of actors and choreography by John Heginbotham. At 2:30 and 4 p.m., 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3575, worksandprocess.org. Seats are limited.Preservation Detectives: ‘When Mindy Saved Hanukkah’ Treasure Hunt (Sunday) The Museum at Eldridge Street, the 1887 landmark synagogue where many Jewish immigrants worshiped, holds many stories within its walls. According to Eric A. Kimmel’s children’s book “When Mindy Saved Hanukkah” (Scholastic), it also harbors a miniature family there, the Kleins. In the story, these tiny humans need a candle for Hanukkah, and it’s up to Mindy, the enterprising daughter, to find it, the synagogue cat notwithstanding. In this program, part of the Preservation Detectives series, in which children 4 to 10 can view artifacts and sleuth their way into the past, participants will imitate Mindy in a scavenger hunt. They’ll also make an art project and edible dreidels. From 11 a.m. to 1 p.m., 12 Eldridge Street, between Canal and Division Streets, Lower East Side, 212-219-0302, eldridgestreet.org/visit/family. Space is limited, and reservations are required.Quiet Clubbing Family Dance Party (Sunday) Isn’t a quiet dance party an oxymoron? Not when you’re wearing headphones. At this free event, each participant will receive a pair of wireless headphones with adjustable volume and an opportunity to switch among three live D.J.s playing family-friendly Top 40 tunes and rock, pop and hip-hop. Headsets show which D.J. is being listened to, so everyone can find like-minded souls to boogie with. From 1 to 5 p.m., 230 Vesey Shops at Brookfield Place, 230 Vesey Street, near West Street, Lower Manhattan, artsbrookfield.com/quietclubbing; space is limited and an R.S.V.P. is required.‘Seven in One Blow, or the Brave Little Kid’ (Friday through Sunday) In the Grimm fairy tale “The Brave Little Tailor,” the title character dispatches seven flies with one swat but allows the gullible public to believe that he has really whacked seven enemies. In its annual holiday production for children 4 and older, written and directed by Randy Sharp, Axis Theater has adapted the story to feature a clever New York boy. He triumphs over adversity, thanks to his wits and a lot of help from theatergoers, who are asked to shout lines and even sing. (Through Dec. 22.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 3 p.m.; Axis Theater, 1 Sheridan Square, off Seventh Avenue, West Village, 212-352-3101, axiscompany.org.‘Skippyjon Jones Snow What ' (Saturday) Skippyjon Jones, a Siamese cat, has always thought that he’s really a Chihuahua; the question this time is whether he can also convince himself that he’s a fairy tale prince. This production from Theatreworks USA adapts the latest entry in Judy Schachner’s book series about the conflicted Skippyjon into an hourlong musical for children 4 and older. A wry sendup of the “Snow White” fairy tale by Kevin Del Aguila and Eli Bolin, who did Theatreworks’s first Skippyjon adaptation, this show is every bit as clever, comical and boisterous. At 2 p.m., Kingsborough Performing Arts Center, Kingsborough Community College, 2001 Oriental Boulevard, at Decatur Avenue, Manhattan Beach, Brooklyn, 718-368-5596, onstageatkingsborough.org.‘A Taste of Magic’ (Friday and Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various Manhattan restaurants through Jan. 29, the presentation includes acts like mind-reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a three-course meal. Friday at 8 p.m. at Docks Oyster Bar & Seafood Grill, 633 Third Avenue, at 40th Street. Saturday at 8 p.m. at Ben & Jack’s Steakhouse, 225 Fifth Avenue, between 28th and 29th Streets. Information and registration: atasteofmagicnyc.com.‘The Three Bears Holiday Bash’ (Friday through Thursday) There’s no word on whether Goldilocks is invited to this seasonal celebration, but Santa Claus definitely is. An annual production from the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, this puppet musical centers on a variety show put on by the Bears, in which Baby Bear asks Santa to star. The fun draws on Hanukkah and Kwanzaa, as well as on Christmas. (Through Dec. 30.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional 2:30 p.m. performance on Wednesday; weekends at 1 p.m.; Swedish Cottage, 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org. Reservations required; some shows are sold out.‘Time Keepers: Story of the Loon’ (Saturday and Sunday) How did time begin? This explanation doesn’t concern the Big Bang theory, but it does involve the stars. Written by Rachel Sherk, with a score by Aaron Rourk, this fantasy show with puppets and live music tells the tale of a loon that travels between the Land Under the Sun and the Land Under the Moon. The loon encounters the Time Keepers, magical beings who live in the stars and build the first clock, giving birth to time. (On Saturday only, at 2 p.m., the Y will also present “Pause/Play,” an afternoon of Shabbat programming that will include a klezmer/Gypsy Hanukkah concert, an interactive performance of the story “Hershel and the Hanukkah Goblins” and a concluding Hanukkah party at 5.) “Time Keepers” is at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m., 14th Street Y Theater, 344 East 14th Street, East Village, 646-395-4310, 14streety.org/timekeepers.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’ (Continuing) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. And through Monday, the museum will hold its Hanukkah Art Festival, which will feature not only “Soil to Oil,” a workshop in producing olive oil and using it to light a Hanukkah lamp, but also silk-screening, doughnut decorating, a game show and, on Sunday, the lighting of a grand menorah. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.WeBop Family Holiday Party (Saturday) Everyone bops at the rousing celebrations offered by the WeBop band of Jazz at Lincoln Center, whose educational programs introduce this vibrant American music to the youngest of potential fans. (Recommended ages are 8 months through 8 years.) In this concert, Mr. Tim and the band will offer a holiday-themed interactive concert. Think of it as swinging with Santa. At 11 a.m. and 1 and 3 p.m., Agnes Varis and Karl Leichtman Recording Studio, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-721-6500, jalc.org.‘Young Charles Dickens’ (Saturday and Sunday) New York City Children’s Theater is no longer called Making Books Sing, but it is still bringing young people’s books to musical life through its theatrical adaptations. Its latest show, inspired by Deborah Hopkinson’s book “A Boy Called Dickens,” focuses on Dickens’s childhood experiences and how they shaped his art. With a book and lyrics by Barbara Zinn Krieger and a score by Charlie Greenberg, this musical, recommended for ages 8 and up, explores the year that Charles, 12, had to help support his family, which included working on Christmas Eve. (Through Jan. 3.) At 1 and 4 p.m., Theater 3, 311 West 43rd Street, Clinton, 646-250-1178, nycchildrenstheater.org.Advertisement