AdvertisementSupported byBy Joshua BaroneInformation on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Friday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events.American Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (continuing) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out infection. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.American Museum of Natural History: ‘Dark Universe’ (continuing) With the return of the Hayden Planetarium, which closed in August for renovations, comes the latest space show, “Dark Universe.” Narrated by Neil deGrasse Tyson, the film explores mysterious dark matter and dark energy, and how scientists are working to better understand these phenomena. Every half hour from 10:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. on weekdays; to 5 p.m. on weekends, Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.American Museum of Natural History: ‘The Secret World Inside You’ (continuing) In recent years, the microbiome — the roughly 100 trillion bacteria living inside and on human bodies — has been a popular talking point for science journalism. With ever-evolving research into this mysterious area of study, there’s still plenty left to explore. Now, it’s getting the exhibition treatment in this look at what scientists are learning about the role bacteria plays in health. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Brooklyn Americans: Hockey’s Forgotten Promise’ (through March 27) The New York Islanders may be new to Brooklyn, but the borough isn’t new to hockey. This exhibition tells the story of its first National Hockey League team, the Brooklyn Americans. The team wore red, white and blue jerseys and represented Kings County at the height of World War II and in the early days of the N.H.L. Still, as the exhibition shows, the team was unsuccessful and ultimately financially doomed. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Center for Jewish History: ‘After the War: Recovery, Relief, and Return, 1945-1949’ (through Jan. 15) This exhibition commemorates the 70th anniversary of World War II’s end with a look at its bleak aftermath. Photographs from the International Center of Photography’s Roman Vishniac Archive, as well as artifacts from the American Jewish Historical Society and Leo Baeck Institute, tellhow the war led to mass destruction and displacement, and how Europe and the United States moved on toward revitalization. 15 West 16th Street, Flatiron district, 212-868-4444, cjh.org.‘The Discovery of King Tut’ (through May 1) The king himself won’t make an appearance at this exhibition; the focus is the wealth of treasures from his tomb, along with the history of what happened when the British archaeologist Howard Carter discovered it in 1922. Replicas of the artifacts will be on display with explanations about how excavation and preservation work were carried out. Premier Exhibitions at 5th Avenue, 417 Fifth Avenue, between 37th and 38th Streets, Midtown South, 646-979-4120, tutnyc.com.Frick Collection 80th Anniversary (Wednesday) Admission to the Frick — that small, decadent treasure on Museum Mile — normally costs as much as $20. To celebrate 80 years of open doors, the Frick is throwing out the cost of admission for one day, leaving it up to visitors to pay what they wish. Tours and activities are scheduled throughout the day, including gallery talks (at 2:30 and 3:30 p.m.) and sketching in the museum’s Garden Court (from 4 to 6 p.m.). 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, 212-288-0700, frick.org.‘Global Citizen: The Architecture of Moshe Safdie’ (through Jan. 10) This touring exhibition, a retrospective of Mr. Safdie’s career of more than 50 years, makes its way to New York with new material based on the architect’s recent work related to dense urbanism in Asia. Donald Albrecht from the Museum of the City of New York organized the material in this show, which also explores Mr. Safdie’s design philosophy that buildings should be extensions of their physical, historical and cultural contexts. National Academy Museum, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-369-4880, nationalacademy.org.Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum: ‘On the Line: Intrepid and the Vietnam War’ (continuing) Visitors familiar with this museum are likely well aware of its flight deck, perhaps even some of its wartime history. During the Vietnam war, the Intrepid served three tours overseas between 1966 and 1969. Now, in an exhibition set in the space where the crew lived and worked, the museum tells their stories with artifacts, film clips and photographs. Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.Museum of Chinese in America: ‘Sub Urbanisms: Casino Urbanization, Chinatowns and the Contested American Landscape’ (through March 27) Stephen Fan, an architecture professor and curator, examines the trend of Chinese casino workers in Connecticut converting suburban homes into multi-family communities. This exhibition is both creative and historical; it takes the present to imagine the future of housing design while looking back on the events that created the trend of suburban migration. 215 Centre Street, between Howard and Grand Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-619-4785, mocanyc.org.Museum of the City of New York: ‘The New York City Marathon: The Great Race’ (through March 8) At the beginning of the month, more than 50,000 runners made their way through all five boroughs of New York, starting on Staten Island and ending in Central Park. This annual race — a spectacle for anyone watching along the course — began modestly in 1970, with 127 people running laps around Central Park. City Museum’s timely exhibition tells the story of how the New York City Marathon became the world-class race it is today, including photos from amateurs and professionals on display. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘How Cats Took Over the Internet’ (through Feb. 21) Even people who hate cats can’t easily get through an hour of browsing online without coming across some kind of feline clickbait. This exhibition takes a critical look at and tells the story of how we, as a society, got to this point. Yes, there are cat GIFs. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.National Museum of the American Indian: ‘Meryl McMaster: Second Self’✓ (closes next Friday) Meryl McMaster, an artist from Canada and a Plains Cree member of the Siksika Nation, shows her “Second Self” photography series, which uses portraiture to explore the complex ways in which identity is constructed. 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.New York Hall of Science: ‘Gingerbread Lane’ (through Jan. 9) In recent years, the chef Jon Lovitch has worked every holiday season to break his own record for the world’s largest gingerbread village. He locked in Guinness World Records in 2013 and 2014. He’s back to do it again: 500 edible square feet with more than 1,050 houses and structures including a department store and a double-decker carousel. Flushing Meadows Corona Park, 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Holiday Express: Toys and Trains From the Jerni Collection’ (through Feb. 28) Toys of yore are on view in a mountainous landscape for trains and scene-setting trinkets pegged to the holiday season. This massive display also incorporates theatrical lighting and soundscapes, including a multimedia installation designed to make it feel like the museum’s 77th Street entrance is in the midst of passing trains. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Superheroes in Gotham’ (through Feb. 21) New York is safe as long as its long roster of comic-book heroes stick around. It’s been this way for nearly a century as these characters have defended the city in books, TV shows, movies, video games — even the Broadway stage. New-York Historical Society’s latest exhibition tells the story of how super heroes became a cultural staple for all ages and media. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Public Library: ‘100 Years of the Picture Collection: From Abacus to Zoology’ (through May 15) The library celebrates the centennial of its Picture Collection with a sort of greatest-hits exhibition chosen from nearly 1.5 million images. (Lined up, the length of the photos surpasses even the height of the Empire State Building, which is of course included in the archive.) Subjects in the collection are organized alphabetically and number about 12,000. Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman; free.New York Transit Museum: ‘Bringing Back the City’✓ (continuing) This new exhibition comes three years after Hurricane Sandy took a swipe at the city’s infrastructure. But what of the people who put the pieces back together? “Bringing Back the City” tells the stories of everyday services — like electricity and mass transit — that become extraordinary in times of crisis. Boerum Place, at Schermerhorn Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-694-1600, bringingbackthecity.com.Rubin Museum of Art: ‘Sacred Spaces’ (continuing) This exhibition’s premise is a question: What is a sacred space? It could be the museum’s Tibetan Buddhist Shrine Room, an immersive look at a traditional space for prayer and meditation. Or it could be a panoramic vista among the Himalayas. It could even be a video installation about Jain devotional rituals. All are on view in this exploration of veneration and its venues. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org.‘Sea Level: Five Boroughs at Water’s Edge’ (through Dec. 31) In its first pop-up exhibition for the Seaport Culture District, the American Institute of Architects presents a water’s eye view of the city through photos by Elizabeth Felicella and accompanying essays by Robert Sullivan. The panoramic view of New York starts at New York Harbor and makes its way along the East River, showing the shore of each borough along the way. Center @ the Seaport, 181 Front Street, South Street Seaport, Lower Manhattan, 212-683-0023, cfa.aiany.org.African Diaspora International Film Festival (through Dec. 13) For 22 years this festival has presented films from and about Africa and the African Diaspora. The lineup includes world premieres, as well popular and classic films, whose screenings are typically followed by talks with filmmakers and academics. The festival’s lineup is at nyadiff.org. At various times and locations, 212-864-1760.Bronx Museum Holiday Market (Saturday and Sunday) This museum joins forces with FromtheBronx.com, the South Bronx Farmer’s Market, the Point and the Bronx Beer Hall to present two days of free programs and holiday shopping for crafts and novelty fare, like a 2016 calendar of New York taxi drivers. The museum is open throughout the weekend, with gallery tours and performances like one from Flamenco Vivo Carlota Santana II (Saturday at 5 p.m.). The lineup of vendors and the event schedule are at bronxmuseum.org/events/bronx-museum-holiday-market-weekend. From 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., 1040 Grand Concourse, at 165th Street, Morrisania, the Bronx, 718-681-6000.‘Dearly Beloved: The Music of Prince’ (Friday and Saturday) Ben Williams, the Grammy- and Thelonious Monk Competition-winning jazz musician, pays tribute to Prince with a concert made up of new arrangements and compositions. Joining him onstage are guests from the worlds of funk, classical music, dance and more: the singers Goapele, Frank McComb and Christie Dashiell; the choreographer and tap dancer Jason Samuels Smith; the poet and vocalist W. Ellington Felton; and additional performers to be announced. Saturday’s performance will be preceded by a free talk in which Mr. Williams shares his creative process for reworking the songs of Prince as well as other artists. At 7:30 p.m.; talk at 6 p.m., Harlem Stage Gatehouse, 150 Convent Avenue, at 135th Street, Hamilton Heights, 212-281-9240, harlemstage.org.December Town Hall (Thursday) The Asian American Arts Alliance takes its regular town hall event — gatherings for Asian-American people in the arts — and turns it into a holiday pop-up market. Handmade crafts, design, fashion, books and jewelry are among the offerings, along with food. The artist lineup is at decembertownhall2015.eventbrite.com. From 6:30 to 9:30 p.m., W83, 150 West 83rd Street, near Amsterdam Avenue, Upper West Side, 212-941-9208; free.Garment District Holiday Market (through Dec. 24) Urbanspace, the group behind the holiday markets at Columbus Circle and Union Square, brings its brand of shopping to the Garment district with this new project. Vendors offer a variety of food and wares, including Beijing street crepes, macarons, empanadas, jewelry, artwork and wristwatches. From 11 a.m. to 8 p.m., Broadway, between 41st and 39th Streets, 212-529-9262, urbanspacenyc.com.Jazz Age Tea Dance (Sunday) Webster Hall takes a trip back in time for this homage to the colonial British tradition of the afternoon tea dance. Tea — cocktails are also available — will be served with finger sandwiches and scones while Michael Arenella and his Dreamland Orchestra provide musical entertainment. At 3 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events.‘Joy’ (Tuesday) The series Reel Pieces with Annette Insdorf brings in the director David O. Russell for a preview screening of his latest film, the biopic “Joy,” starring Jennifer Lawrence as the Miracle Mop inventor and home goods entrepreneur Joy Mangano. After the screening, Ms. Insdorf will interview Mr. Russell and Isabella Rossellini, who in the film plays a wealthy widow courted by Ms. Mangano’s father (Robert De Niro). At 7:15 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org.Merry Tuba Christmas (Sunday) Among Rockefeller Center’s holiday traditions — in addition to the tree lighting — is this boisterous take on caroling. Hundreds of tuba players from around the country come together on the center’s plaza, under the direction of Chris Wilhjelm of the Goldman Band, to present a concert of holiday favorites. Audience members are welcome to join by singing along. At 3:30 p.m., 30 Rockefeller Plaza, Midtown, 212-332-6868, rockefellercenter.com; free.New York Motorcycle Show (Friday through Sunday) The tour of Progressive International Motorcycle Shows stops in New York for three days of giving powersports fans a peek at the latest models of street bikes, dirt bikes, cruisers, scooters and A.T.V.’s, as well as gear and accessories. Friday from 2 p.m. to 9 p.m.; Saturday from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Sunday from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, 655 West 34th Street, Manhattan, motorcycleshows.com/city/new-york.Night at the Museum (Saturday) No, not the Ben Stiller movie — not even the same museum. MoMA PS1 stays open late for this celebration of its exhibition “Greater New York,” a showcase of local, emerging artists. Also extending its hours is the museum’s cafe, M. Wells Dinette, and the VW Dome will act as a pop-up lounge with music. From 8 p.m. to midnight, 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org.A Night of Kyogen with Mansaku Nomura and Mansaku-no-Kai Kyogen Company (Friday and Saturday) About 50 years ago, Mansaku Nomura and his father, Manzo, came to New York from Japan to present the art of kyogen, a traditional style of comedic theater that dates back to the mid-14th century. It’s a counterpart to the dramatic noh plays, replacing tragedy with exuberance in exaggerated facial expressions and mime.Mr. Nomura is now in his 80s and is joined onstage by his son Mansai — known outside the company as a film and television actor. (They’re just a sample of the family’s theatrical lineage for the past 250 years.) Together with other members of the company, they’ll perform three pieces from the vast kyogen canon: “Nasu no Yoichi no Katari” (“The Tale of Yoichi of Nasu”), a solo with Mansaku Nomura based on an episode from the Japanese classic “The Tale of the Heike”; “Akutaro” (“Akutaro Reforms”), starring Mansai Nomura; and “Bonsan” (“The Dwarf Tree Thief”), a farce.Each night, Carolyn Morley, a professor of Japanese literature at Wellesley College, will give a pre-performance lecture. At 7:30 p.m.; lecture at 6:30 p.m., Japan Society, 333 East 47th Street, Manhattan, 212-832-1155, japansociety.org. (Joshua Barone)‘Santasia’ (Tuesday) This holiday musical comedy takes both a snarky and sentimental look at Christmas and family. Written by Shaun and Brandon Loeser, with choreography by Tania Pearson-Loeser, the show incorporates songs, sketch comedy and even Claymation movies. Tuesdays through Dec. 22 at 8 p.m., with 2 p.m. Wednesday matinees on Dec. 16 and 23. St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, between Eighth and Ninth Avenues, Clinton, 212-239-6200, santasia.com.23 Days of Flatiron Cheer (through Dec. 23) Presented by Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership Business Improvement District, December brings theatrical performances and group fitness to the Flatiron Public Plaza. Programming extends to the immediate neighborhood, and there will also be a scavenger hunt and a food drive, and Flatiron-area businesses will offer happy hours throughout the month. At various times, Broadway at 22nd Street, 212-741-2323, flatirondistrict.nyc.Union Square Holiday Market (through Dec. 24) If you can brave the nearly constant crowd, this can be a one-stop shop for holiday gifting, recognizable by the red- and white-striped tents that take over the park. The pop-up shops include craft vendors, as well as established stores like Strand Book Store. Food (and wintry drink) vendors, like Momofuku’s Milk Bar, are scattered throughout the market grounds as well. East 14th to East 17th Street, Broadway to Fourth Avenue, urbanspacenyc.com/union-square-holiday-market.‘Unsilent Night’ (Saturday) Phil Kline’s participatory music composition — a reliable holiday tradition at this point — has spread to more than 35 cities since its premiere more than 20 years ago. It returns to its flagship venue, Washington Square Park, for a performance in which audience members are given one of four tracks on a cassette, CD or digital file. On cue, participants turn on their music, creating an outdoor soundscape in a sort of New Age caroling party. At 7 p.m., Washington Square Park, Fifth Avenue and Waverly Place, Greenwich Village, unsilentnight.com; free.Videology Presents Movie Trivia✓ (Tuesday) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videologybarandcinema.com.Winter Village at Bryant Park (through March 6) The ice rink is back. Admission is free if you bring your own skates; if you don’t have any, they’re available for rent. Through Jan. 3, the park will also host an open-air market for holiday shopping with about 125 vendors. Avenue of the Americas, at 40th Street, 212-661-6640, wintervillage.org.‘World’s Largest Menorah’ (through Sunday) For every Hanukkah since 1985, the Chabad of Park Slope, in Brooklyn, has erected its 32-foot-tall menorah, which the group says is the largest in the world. Any bigger, and it would violate Jewish law. Lighting it every night during Hanukkah requires the help of a Con Edison cherry picker; the ceremony, which inevitably draws attention, is open to everyone. The menorah will be lit at 6 nightly through the eighth night of Hanukkah, Sunday, with the exception of 7 p.m. on Saturday. 646-298-9909, largestmenorah.com.Civic Grandeur: Preserving Public Buildings (Monday) A panel of experts on architectural history and preservation discuss how to reconcile 21st-century demands and the heritage of New York’s civic buildings, many of which are beloved landmarks. Erica Avrami, a professor at Columbia University, moderates the talk, which includes Michael Adlerstein, former assistant secretary general for the Capital Master Plan Project; Randall Mason, chairman of the University of Pennsylvania’s historic preservation program; and Robert Pigott, author of “New York’s Legal Landmarks.” At 6:30 p.m., Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org.The Humans of Sesame Street (Sunday) Over the summer, Sonia Manzano — who played the beloved character Maria on “Sesame Street” for more than 40 years — released her memoir “Becoming Maria,” a powerful reminder that behind family-friendly TV characters are rich personal stories. Many longtime cast members of “Sesame Street,” Ms. Manzano among them, gather for this talk moderated by Craig Shemin, president of the Jim Henson Legacy. (Also speaking are Bob McGrath, Emilio Delgado, Roscoe Orman, Alan Muraoka and Alison Bartlett.) Their reminiscences will include music and video clips. At 1 p.m., Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.McNally Jackson Live (Thursday) This bookstore’s variety show returns with a roundabout holiday theme: Among the guests is Annie Baker, whose most recent play, “John,” took place at a bed-and-breakfast in Gettysburg during Christmastime. The novelist Lynne Tillman will be there, too, along with Emily Stokes, an editor at T Magazine. The evening’s lineup includes readings of Nabokov and Rilke, as well as excerpted performances from “John.” At 8 p.m., McNally Jackson, 52 Prince Street, between Lafayette and Mulberry Streets, SoHo, 212-274-1160, mcnallyjackson.com.Sharon Olds and Cynthia Nixon (Friday) This fall, the New York Public Library joined forces with the Academy of American Poets for a series of talks that paired poets with other creative minds. The latest installment brings together Ms. Olds, the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet and author of the collection “Stag’s Leap,” and Ms. Nixon, the Tony- and Emmy-winning actress, who has also dabbled in directing. At 7 p.m., Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, New York Public Library, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman.Out by Ten (Friday) The latest installment in this performance series, produced by the writer Susan Seliger, can be summed up by its subtitle, “Humor, Holidays, Heartbreak & Happiness: Funny Storytellers and Musicians Wonder How Much Misery It Takes To Be Happy.” Guests include the singer-songwriter Honor Finnegan, and two previous Moth Slam storytellers: Neil Genzlinger, a critic for The New York Times, and James Braly, star of the Off-Broadway play “Life in a Marital Institution.” At 8 p.m., John Strasberg Studios, 555 Eighth Avenue, at 38th Street, Midtown West, outbyten.com.Long Island City Tours: Queens Cool Uncovered (Sunday) The idea behind this tour is that Queens is due for more attention, starting with Long Island City. The tour includes highlights of the neighborhood’s history and arts scene, with stops at galleries and crafts and food vendors. The meeting location is given at registration. At 1:30 p.m., 212-209-3370, bqetours.com.City of Dreams Tour (Friday, Monday and Thursday) This tour covers the East Village, Bowery and Little Italy and follows the immigrant histories that shaped New York. Stops include a drink at McSorley’s Old Ale House — established in 1854, it’s one of the city’s oldest — and a trip to a Jewish bakery and an Italian store for food samples. Historical anecdotes feature a variety of famous characters, like Peter Stuyvesant and Jimi Hendrix. The starting point, which is available upon registration, is near Astor Place in the East Village. (Through Jan. 1.) Friday and Monday at 10 a.m., Thursday at 2:30 p.m., Astor Place, East Village, 347-464-9335, cityroverwalks.com.Flatiron District Walking Tour✓ (Sunday) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.Historic TriBeCa (Sunday) Past the modern-day headlines of TriBeCa as a posh bubble and the New York home of Taylor Swift, this neighborhood has rich history that has involved numerous reinventions over more than 350 years. Highlights of this walking tour include the location of the first Columbia College (now uptown in Morningside Heights), Washington Market and sites associated with famous people of yesteryear (Cornelius Vanderbilt) and today (Robert De Niro). The tour meets at Bogardus Triangle, at the intersection of West Broadway and Hudson and Chambers Streets. At noon, 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.History of Wall Street Tour✓ (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.Save the Village (Saturday and Tuesday) Last year the Steven Kasher Gallery in Chelsea put on an exhibition with the photography of Fred W. McDarrah, who documented the changing scene of Greenwich Village since the 1960s. Now, the spirit of that show has taken the form of this walking tour, which includes stops at the places McDarrah captured on film: locales like Washington Square Park and the Stonewall Inn. At 10 a.m.; the tour meets at Christopher Park, Stonewall Place, at Seventh Avenue, West Village, savethevillagetours.com.Snug Harbor Neighborhood Holiday House Tour (Sunday) Participants in this tour will have a rare chance to see the interiors of historic houses near Staten Island’s botanical garden and the waterfront. Registration begins at 1 p.m. at the Unitarian Church of Staten Island, 312 Fillmore Street, in Randall Manor. Tours of houses — turn-of-the-century exemplars in suburban style — run from 2 to 4 p.m., with refreshments back at the church between 3:30 and 4:30 p.m. 718-980-1551, preservationleagueofstatenisland.org.Union Square: Crossroads of New York✓ (Saturday) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.Victorian Christmas: Origins of Christmas Traditions (Saturday and Sunday) This tour, presented by Discovery Walking Tours, has an eye toward New York’s Christmases of the past and includes three Victorian-era neighborhoods: Gramercy Park, Chelsea and the former Ladies’ Mile, known now as the Flatiron district. Among the highlights are the places where O. Henry wrote “The Gift of the Magi” and Clement Clarke Moore began “A Visit From St. Nicholas” (“’Twas the night before Christmas”). The meeting location is available upon registration. At 2 p.m., 212-465-3331.Advertisement