AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon ParelesIt was throwback Wednesday when the Arcs, led by Dan Auerbach, played a packed Terminal 5. Mr. Auerbach, who has been the guitarist and singer of the Black Keys since 2001, situates the Arcs somewhere near the end of the 1960s, as a kind of rock and soul revue that can knock out Motown beats, fuzz-toned boogies or slow-grooving R&B. The time frame is similar to the one Mr. Auerbach visits with the Black Keys, but the spirit is different: simultaneously, and paradoxically, more communal and more desolate.Instead of the Black Keys’ skeletal two-man lineup, the Arcs mustered two drummers, a bassist, a keyboardist and three members of Flor de Toloache, an all-female mariachi band based in New York City. Most of the songs are by Mr. Auerbach with the Arcs’ keyboardist, Leon Michaels. The twist is that with all that support, the Arcs’ songs are full of paranoia and isolation, placing the singer in a world of unfinished journeys, people out to get him and lovers he can’t necessarily depend on. “I had a cold companion/I was her net to land in,” he sang in “Chains of Love.”In and out of the Black Keys, Mr. Auerbach savors vintage sounds. The album the Arcs released this year, “Yours, Dreamily” (Nonesuch), reconstructs slightly warped memories of spaghetti-western soundtracks, garage rock, psychedelia and early reggae. There’s a sense that every timbre, every amp setting, is both a homage and an inside joke.But the studio versions of the songs are studied, compared with what the Arcs did with the same material onstage. The two drummers bore down on the beat; the women from Flor de Toloache sang backup with girl-group enthusiasm and sometimes used their instruments — trumpet, violin or vihuela (a small Mexican guitar) — to tease the arrangements toward Mexico. Mr. Auerbach was an unshowy frontman, but he let the music put him into motion. He switched off between two eccentrically shaped guitars — one like a rocket that brought out distortion, one like a teardrop that supplied rounded reverb — and used the band’s momentum to carry him into extended solos that never overstayed.Since the Arcs have only one album and a few singles, Mr. Auerbach showed his oldies connoisseurship with upbeat, downhearted covers: of the Bristols’ “Little Baby,” about a girl the singer wants back; and of Gary U.S. Bonds’s “I Wanna Holler,” about small-town claustrophobia. The band revved up rockabilly and Bo Diddley beats, and Mr. Auerbach’s voice was perched, not at all precariously, between desperation and defiance.Advertisement