AdvertisementSupported byAntiquesBy Eve M. KahnMoriah Galleries, one of Manhattan’s oldest purveyors of Jewish ritual objects and art, has closed after six decades and sold its inventory to one of the newest Judaica stores in New York, Menorah Galleries. In three basement rooms at the Manhattan Art & Antiques Center on Second Avenue, Menorah Galleries has set up Jewish antiques — many of them salvaged from destroyed synagogues and decimated communities — that are rarely the subject of exhibitions and sales.What quickly became apparent during a preview this month is that each item has “a fantastic story” associated with it, as Menorah’s owners, Avi Girshengorn and Mier Appel, often said before explaining the international sources of their material.Menorah has reunited a pair of Torah finials made in Vienna around 1855; the silver ornaments were separated sometime in the 20th century, possibly by family members who were fleeing to different continents. One finial turned up in an American collection, and its mate surfaced in Israel, where it was about to be melted down before a Menorah Galleries supplier rescued it.Mr. Girshengorn said that he “couldn’t believe” that both pieces had ended up in his gallery after decades and thousands of miles of separation.The gallery’s stock (with prices for items ranging from a few hundred dollars to six figures) at times reveals the resourcefulness of worshipers living in small towns and surviving wartime hardshipsA 17th-century Polish pointer used for reading prayer scrolls is shaped like a hand, its wooden fingers worn to stubs. Hanukkah lamps from Morocco are pieced together with brass plates and bits of colored glass. Christian inscriptions along the back of a Hanukkah lamp, made in the Netherlands in the 1600s, show that the artisan recycled a church offering plate into a reflective backdrop for oil burners.A mezuza (a prayer scroll and container meant to be attached to a doorway), wrapped in delicate brass wire, was probably produced in Germany in the late 1800s. Wires are bent into a tiny Hebrew inscription, embedded in the gossamer layers. “It was clearly made by somebody who knew how to sew and weave,” Mr. Girshengorn said.A creamy stone candlestick was carved in the form of the word “Zion” in 1947 by a Jewish prisoner in an internment camp in Cyprus. A silver Torah crown made in Poland, covered in sculptures of stags and eagles, was exported around 1912 to a synagogue in China. During World War II, it was used in services by European Jews who had escaped Nazi persecution.Menorah Galleries is also offering luxurious silver plates that adorned Torah scrolls in 18th-century Italy, and porcelain dinnerware from the 1850s emblazoned with the coat of arms of the Sassoons, a family of Jewish merchants that originated in Iraq and operated throughout Asia. A porcelain goblet for Passover was painted in the 1880s by Vilmos Fischer, a Jewish aristocrat whose family owned Hungary’s renowned Herend ceramics factory.The inventory also demonstrates how Jewish artisans worked alongside colleagues of different religions, all catering to similar regional traditions and tastes. Ritual objects from North Africa and the Middle East have motifs of Moorish arches and domed pillars that resemble minarets and mosque interiors. Spice boxes from Central Europe are shaped like Roman Catholic and Protestant church steeples.Mr. Appel and Mr. Girshengorn are planning exhibitions centered on particular themes and rituals, such as birth celebrations. They have found a few wooden couches and benches that were used during circumcision ceremonies; one seat, carved in the 1870s for a Hebron synagogue, turned up in a barbershop. At some point, the bench’s scalloped back, flared sides and carvings of Holy Land landscapes were slathered in aqua-colored paint. It is now slated for restoration. Underneath the paint, Mr. Girshengorn said, “there is a golden gesso.”The Hebron bench had long been on view and for sale (for around $180,000) at Moriah Galleries, which opened in 1957. Moriah had various Manhattan locations over the years, and it helped build private collections of objects that have been donated or sold to institutions like the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. After the closing and acquisition, Menorah sold about 500 items from the Moriah stock in October at Westport Auction in Connecticut. The sale’s ritual objects were designed for every phase of life.A Persian parchment scroll ($550) was inscribed in the 19th century with prayers for the protection of newborns. Images of medieval walled towns are etched onto Russian silver cups used in wedding ceremonies ($850 for a pair). Funeral mourners are painted on a green water pitcher ($400) that Bohemian Jews used to cleanse their hands after burials. A stone grave marker with Hebrew inscriptions, made in Spain around 1395 ($1,500), had been excavated in Italy, where it formed part of a cellar wall.The auction also included matzo cutters with serrated wheels ($700 for a pair) and Hanukkah lamps and dreidels made in Europe, as well as in Tunisia, Iraq, Yemen, Syria and New York. Several lots had been acquired at other auction houses as recently as last year.Michael Ehrenthal, an owner of Moriah, has become a private dealer in Queens; his father, Peter, who founded the company, is 95. “It was the right time to close the brick and mortar,” Michael Ehrenthal said. He added, “I can still travel the world and look for the special things.”Advertisement