By DAVID ALLENSEPT. 30, 2015
There was only one possible criticism of the trombonist Steven Parker’s wonderful performance of Luciano Berio’s “Sequenza V” (1966) on Tuesday evening, part of a Pop-Up concert at Miller Theater: a sorry lack of clown shoes.Let me explain. Most of Berio’s “Sequenzas,” the seed of much contemporary writing for solo instruments, are about the instruments themselves, about revealing their previously unimagined capabilities. That’s true of “Sequenza V,” too. The trombonist is called upon to produce all manner of extended techniques and unexpected sounds, whether that’s vocalizing through the tubular frame, or recalling the sputtering whir of an airplane’s propeller, or mimicking the roar of a muscle car’s engine.But “Sequenza V” is also a tribute to Berio’s childhood neighbor, the great Swiss clown Grock, whose humor often relied on musical understanding. At the work’s emotional core lies the clown’s catchphrase: The trombonist stops (“bewildered,” as the score notes) and asks, “Why?”It’s as if Berio were interrogating his own dedication to virtuosity. Answering his own question, the trombonist, having pranced comically around the stage, begging for applause, then sits, taking on a more forlorn mood. And he does it all in costume, in Mr. Parker’s case, a checked purple jacket, a skew-whiff spotted bow tie, a dreary floppy hat and, amusingly, a standard dress shirt.AdvertisementThere’s no need to query Miller’s superb series of short and perpetually satisfying Pop-Up concerts. An audience of the young and the brave sits on a stage strung with Christmas lights and scented with the malodor of the popular (and free) craft beer. Tuesday’s was the first of five fall programs, three of which feature the musicians of Ensemble Signal taking on solo roles. This one was called “Theatricals,” though beyond the Berio, the drama was of a less obvious kind.Another work, Luca Francesconi’s “Animus I” (1996), was a struggle between breath and what it produces, as a puffing, rumbling, snorting trombone line battled its constant, often brutal transformation in electronics, directed by Paul Coleman. Adrián Sandí’s precision in Mr. Francesconi’s “Tracce” (1986), for bass clarinet, showed the composer in his teacher Berio’s lineage, experimenting with extremes of volume.AdvertisementMost spellbinding of all was the cellist Lauren Radnofsky’s desolate account of Kaija Saariaho’s “Près” (1992), a work in three movements that refers to Paul Gauguin’s “Fatata te Miti” (“By the Sea”), evoking the rolling and ripping of waves in layers of prerecorded and live electronics.The next Pop-Up concert is on Oct. 27 at Miller Theater in Manhattan; 212-854-7799, millertheatre­.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.