AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Roberta SmithThis exhibition provides a rare look at the discombobulated kinetic sculptures of the Swiss artist Jean Tinguely (1925-1991), a prominent member of the postwar European avant-garde. Tinguely’s found-object assemblages contributed vocally to his generation’s turn away from figurative sculpture. He is probably best remembered in the United States for his Dadaist “Homage to New York,” a self-destructing junk sculpture cobbled together from scrap metal and mechanical elements that he activated in the Museum of Modern Art’s sculpture garden in March 1960. Since its demise was halted by the fire department, a surviving fragment is in the museum’s collection. The 19 pieces here, from 1954 to 1990, form the first New York show devoted to Tinguely in four decades. He took early inspiration from Russian modernism, evidenced by a 1954 black relief with three white elements that rotate like the arms of a nonsensical clock. A more characteristic looseness is visible in the charming little tangle of white wire, circa 1955-59, that turns like a dancer on a stage.Hereafter, the jerry-built machine parts and an extensive range of found objects dominate, with the sounds of the enabling motors as important as the moving parts. Twirling feathers and colored lights are recurring motifs; wheels of all kinds are constants. In one piece, a chunk of driftwood spins while the jaws of a large animal skull snap open and shut. In another, artificial flowers are in effect tended by bars of rusted iron. The most strung-out, attenuated pieces are best — especially the large “L’Odalisque No. 2” (1989), which reaches from ceiling to floor in big loops and isolated elements. A large sheet of aluminum, for example, emits regular metallic pops as it slowly revolves; several other pieces, including another hanging work, function nominally as lamps. With their flourishes, overextensions and surprises, Tinguely’s creations bring a jubilant, wisecracking energy to a phrase from the relatively sedate realm of abstract sculpture: “drawing in space.”Jean TinguelyGladstone530 West 21st Street ChelseaThrough Dec. 19Advertisement