AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Holland CotterIt’s hard to know where to begin with the self-described intersex artist Vaginal Davis, because there’s so much there. Born in Los Angeles in the 1960s, she’s a performer, writer, editor, composer and painter, and her solo show at Invisible-Exports adds sculptor to the résumé. The exhibition’s 16 wall reliefs, while modest in size, give the term multimedia a serious stretch, each piece having being made from — and I quote the exhibition’s checklist — “clay, stucco fragments, wet n wild brickhouse nail varnish, neon nail lacquer, Rival de Loop nylon nail enamel, hydrogen peroxide, glycerin, witch hazel, Pam, Aqua Net extra-strength hair spray and Jean Naté perfume.”The resulting forms suggest faces or masks, exposed intestines, genitals and knots of musculature. Feminized in their materials, the works are epical in their titles, which include “Sabine Women,” “Horn of Roland,” “Proper Butch Goddess Freya” and “Temple of Baalshamin at Palmyra.” Each title derives from a narrative that accompanies the show. Bracingly feminist, prophetically anti-patriarchal — it promises that “sexist racist lackeys of the imperial ruling circles will be vanquished during open revolt” — the text is (very, very faintly) recited by the artist on a vinyl LP played at the gallery.Ms. Davis’s distinctive way with language was also evident in a libretto she wrote for a transformed and politically corrected version of Mozart’s “The Magic Flute,” presented at New York University’s 80WSE Gallery last week. Directed by Susanne Sachsse, with a score by Jamie Stewart of Xiu Xiu and designs by an artist-team led by Jonathan Berger and Jesse Bransford, the opera was grandly serio-comic in spirit — “alpha passiv,” to quote her exhibition material — and her little sculptures might be taken the same way. (“The Magic Flute,” incidentally, will have an afterlife as a film by Michel Auder to be screened at 80WSE Gallery next summer. Do see.)Vaginal Davis ‘Come On Daughter Save Me’Invisible-Exports89 Eldridge Street, Lower East SideThrough Dec. 20Advertisement