
Weekend Miser By                     
 JOSHUA BARONE
 
DEC. 10, 2015
Brookfield Place, the former World Financial Center, has in the past year become a food-lover’s paradise, a pop-up art space and a shopping mall. (For the holiday season, it even has its own Santa Claus accepting Christmas wish lists.) Now Brookfield is also a nightclub of sorts.On Saturday it will host a free Quiet Clubbing Party in its Winter Garden atrium, where guests will wear headsets tuned to live D.J.’s while an installation, “Luminaries,” lights the dance floor. It’s like “Rockin’ Around the Christmas Tree,” only the tree has been replaced by a secular holiday canopy of 650 lanterns.The headsets let dancers adjust the music and the volume. Three D.J.’s will put on concurrent sets with Top 40 hits, hip-hop and favorites from decades past. Partygoers can even control the installation, which features “wishing stations,” touch-sensitive miniature monoliths that send colors to the lights above.If you have free time beforehand, Brookfield Place has other flashy entertainment. The Museum of Feelings, which opened last month and closes on Tuesday, is a kaleidoscopic manifestation of emotions decorated entirely by the visitors passing through it.AdvertisementThe ambient exterior changes color based on New York’s collective mood, based on data culled from social media posts.AdvertisementThere isn’t much here in the way of a museum; the exhibitions, while dazzling, are not educational. With Glade as its sponsor (each room has specific scents), the show has the feel of an advertisement. Still, it’s a novel, Instagram-ready playground — picture a photo of yourself looking like Drake in his James Turrell-inspired music video for “Hotline Bling” — that is free.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Quiet Clubbing is on Saturday from 7 to 11 p.m., 230 Vesey Street, Battery Park City; R.S.V.P. at artsbrookfield.com/quietclubbing. The Museum of Feelings continues through Tuesday and is open daily from 11 a.m. to 9 p.m., to 7 p.m. on Sunday; themuseumoffeelings.com.The performance artist Wynne Greenwood is perhaps best known for her band Tracy & the Plastics, a feminist trio that toured from 1999 to 2006. The catch was that the band members — Tracy, Nikki and Cola — were all personas of Ms. Greenwood, who interacted onstage with projected videos of herself. Over the past two years, she has reconstructed and recorded these performances for the New Museum, where a collection of them are part of the exhibition “Wynne Greenwood: ‘Kelly,’” through Jan. 10.As part of a six-month residency with the museum, Ms. Greenwood has also organized a concert series called “Temporary Arrangements.” For these musical pop-ups, a band gets together for its first and only time, reflecting the haphazard yet emotionally revealing spirit of Tracy & the Plastics. The series wraps up on Friday with two performances by Ms. Greenwood. It’s hard to know what to expect. But if this is anything like her past work, audience members are in for an evening that is by turns challenging, funny and touching.Friday at 7 and 9 p.m.; 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side; 212-219-1222; newmuseum.org; $12; 7 p.m. show is sold out.A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page C34 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘Quiet Clubbing’ and Revisiting Tracy & the Plastics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »