AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Roberta SmithFor nearly 60 years, the Minimalist painter Robert Ryman has had few equals when it comes to doing more with less. White has been his primary, if not quite his only, color, the square his typical format. And yet within these seeming limitations a remarkably fecund and resonant body of work has evolved, as demonstrated by a small but comprehensive exhibition at Dia:Chelsea on West 22nd Street.Succinct, beautifully installed and bathed in natural light, this show is a great way for the Dia Art Foundation to re-enter the curatorial life of the New York City art world, which under its new director, Jessica Morgan, it seems intent on doing.There is far more to Robert Ryman’s work than first meets the eye. Here are some things to look for.This is Dia’s first exhibition in Chelsea since 2004, when the financial debacle of its grandiose new outpost in Beacon, N.Y., forced the foundation to close (and eventually sell) its main exhibition space in Chelsea and rent out the other, where Ryman is now installed. Since then, Dia has had two directors and started to raise money for a new building in Chelsea. But soon after Ms. Morgan’s arrival, Dia shelved these plans, rightly deciding to make do with the spaces it already owns and get on with the shows.In truth, Mr. Ryman, who turned 85 in May, has not exactly devoted himself simply to square all-white paintings. As seen at Dia, his works are full of hints and tints of color made all the richer by the surrounding paleness. His whites are many and his paint-handling often lush in a deadpan sort of way. He has also taken broad liberties with materials — which add their own colors — using so many different ones, sparingly, that he’s a veritable maximalist in this regard.As the works here confirm, he has painted not only on canvas and linen (stretched and unstretched) but also on fiberglass, Plexiglas, handmade paper and aluminum. (His first aluminum work, which dates from around 1964 is here: a 14-inch square that he burnished, creating a brushy turbulence before applying thick patches of white over dark blue paint.)To these various surfaces, Mr. Ryman has applied oil and acrylic as well as casein, enamelac and a vinyl polymer, using all manner of brushes and other tools. Usually his fields of paint flirt with, but never reach, the edges: What lies beneath is always visible. In several works here, he exposes the underlying material by pushing the painted field into one corner or another. This is clearest in an untitled 1973 work, in which five 8-inch squares of copper, each with a white square of enamel baked onto the upper right corner, reveal fat L’s of oxidized metal.Despite the variety of materials, Mr. Ryman has remained true to the basic definition of a painting as a flat surface with four corners to which paint or something like it is applied. That this surface is then traditionally attached to a larger flat surface — the wall — has also not escaped his attention.So the Dia show includes a stretched canvas held a few inches in front of the wall by steel fasteners and an unstretched canvas stapled directly to it. “Finder” from 1976, is a painting on Plexiglas attached with black bolts. Next to it, “Post,” on aluminum-polyethylene, uses nearly identical bolts, except they’re plain.In an unusually extreme move, Mr. Ryman affixes “Pair Navigation,” a painting on fiberglass perpendicular to the wall, supporting its outer edge with short metal rods, evoking a very low foldout table. Peering down at its whiteness, you know that there’s nothing about this medium that the artist has not pushed out of whack. Consistent with this all-out scrutiny, his signature is often a prominent part of the whole.Mr. Ryman was born in Nashville in 1930 and took up painting rather suddenly in 1953. After serving in the Army, he went to New York intending to be a jazz saxophonist, studying with Lennie Tristano. But he needed to support himself and landed a job as a security guard at the Museum of Modern Art. There he evidently fell under painting’s spell, especially the big canvases of American Abstract Expressionists like Jackson Pollock, Mark Rothko, Philip Guston. One day he went to an art supply store near his apartment, bought some paint and canvas, and went to work.This is Mr. Ryman’s first museum exhibition in New York City since his big retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art in 1993. Its 22 works suggest that his undertaking may be clearer in smaller, not larger, amounts. This modest number feels comprehensive, because it does not have to account for a typically linear development from Point A to B and onward.In effect, Mr. Ryman has spent his career circling Point A, proving that there are an infinite number of ways to meet painting’s basic requirements. The works here range in date from 1958 to 1985. They have been selected and arranged unchronologically in telling pairs and trios by Courtney J. Martin, the adjunct curator at Dia and an art historian at Brown University, working with Megan Holly Witko, Dia’s assistant curator.It didn’t take Mr. Ryman long to understand his art as the exploration and exposé of the perhaps timeless basics of painting, restated in materials both traditional and new, even industrial. In the first work here — “Untitled #17” from 1958 — the textured white oil paint recalls abstract Guston, while a faint line of blue fissuring down the surface is reminiscent of Clyfford Still’s craggy abstractions. Along one side, a strip of canvas is sliced off, revealing the bright orange of the wood stretcher. (The sides of Mr. Ryman’s works often show unexpected signs of attention. They don’t necessarily match; they have odd touches of paint.)On the opposite wall, an untitled painting made four years later, in 1962, shows Ryman at full force. A field of juicy white strokes, clearly applied one at a time, partly cover ones of blue and rust red, which glimmer through, along with the raw linen beneath them all. The totality is wonderfully alive, recalling Pollock, van Gogh and Monet.It helps to think of Mr. Ryman as a kind of philosopher-carpenter with an inborn, almost mystical love of paint as paint. He wants us to understand its sensuousness while he demonstrates that paintings are in effect “built” from scores of decisions and details, and then proceeds to challenge our definition of his medium. “Is this a painting?” “Is that a painting?” could be taken as the main credo of his art. He doesn’t always provide easy answers.Among the least assuming, yet most challenging paintings is “Catalyst III,” from 1985, a small work of anodized aluminum, nearly two feet square, that seems almost machine-made. Its meager painted elements consist of thin, mechanically crisp lines and bars of blue enamel, mostly along the edges but also trisecting the surface horizontally.Looking at these divisions and the unpainted gaps along the edges, it is possible to imagine that the golden section determined the intervals. Except that the upper horizontal line is notched clear across with quick tiny strokes of white that suggest sharp, crazed little teeth. They disrupt the painting’s perfection but recede, almost like a hallucination, as you pull away.Each of Mr. Ryman’s paintings is a riddle of physical facts, choices and details as well as optical experiences. The more you look, the more you see, and learn about the way an artist’s mind works, how it moves around a painting — front, back and sides — touching and considering every point no matter how small, and leaving little signs. Ryman was here; you were, too.“Robert Ryman” runs through July 29 at Dia:Chelsea, 545 West 22nd Street, Chelsea; 212-989-5566, diaart­.org.Advertisement