AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasBefore Tuesday’s performance began at the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, Robert Battle, the company’s artistic director, appeared onstage with four suited gentlemen. “These are my lawyers,” Mr. Battle said jovially, before adding quickly, “The times are strange.”They may have looked like lawyers, but actually they were outgoing board members being honored as part of Ailey’s City Center season. (Cheeky and real is not easy to pull off, but Mr. Battle has a way.) On Tuesday, the company also presented two new productions of Ailey solos, “Love Songs” and “Cry.” Wednesday’s program featured the premiere of Kyle Abraham’s “Untitled America: First Movement,” which explores some of what Mr. Battle was alluding to with his “times are strange” remark: racial injustice. It’s a theme that Mr. Abraham, a 2013 MacArthur Fellow, has taken on in recent dances.As the first installment of a work that will eventually become a three-part piece addressing the effect of the prison system on individuals and families, “Untitled America” is a slight beginning. This trio for Ghrai DeVore, Jamar Roberts and Chalvar Monteiro, a former member of Mr. Abraham’s company, is a snapshot of a family told in a single song: Laura Mvula’s raw, emotional “Father Father.” In the roughly four-and-a-half-minute piece, in which each dancer, arms extended, exits by disappearing into the darkness of the back of the stage, the lyrics of Ms. Mvula’s song hint at the loose narrative of a man (Mr. Roberts) leaving a woman (Ms. DeVore) and a son (Mr. Monteiro). After Mr. Roberts twitches his back and arms, folding in on himself like an accordion, he retreats to the lyrics “Father, please don’t let me go.”Ms. DeVore departs next — one hopes she will have more to do in Part 2 — leaving Mr. Monteiro, who has a velvety way of stringing phrases together. After a few sudden turns and changes of direction, he follows. In this instance, presenting dance in an installment form doesn’t seem an exciting risk, just yet another shapeless dance attached to an affectingly tragic song.Of the two solos on Tuesday, “Cry” — Ailey’s classic dedicated to “all black women everywhere — especially our mothers,” came first in 1971 as a tour de force for Judith Jamison. “Love Songs” was created a year later for Dudley Williams, the Ailey veteran who died in June. Though it’s performed by the spectacular Matthew Rushing, it is not a spectacular dance; compared to “Cry,” this look at anguish, love and hope is minor fare.As he extended his body in lingering bends and attitude turns, Mr. Rushing, wearing a blue unitard designed by Ursula Reed, instilled the solo with rapid fluctuations of delicacy and abandon. Set to three songs, performed by Donny Hathaway and Nina Simone, the dance explores deep friendship; though it doesn’t come close to capturing the richness or emotional arc of “Cry,” it encapsulates longing.In three sections, “Cry” explores physical hardship, emotional suffering and — to the Voices of East Harlem’s “Right On Be Free” — boundless joy. Structurally, it builds to an emphatic release; for Linda Celeste Sims, a dancer able to blend lightness with force like few others — and to infuse moments of stillness with shimmering life — the solo was less a performance than a sweeping journey.Wearing a white leotard and a long ruffled skirt, Ms. Sims used her supple back to give her crossings a liquidity that seemed directionless or, rather, led by emotion rather than muscles. At the same time, she was never indistinct. In the final section, power surged from her hips and shoulders; in a traveling jump, she kicked a leg to her face with the force of an exclamation point. Right on cue, Ms. Sims was utterly free.Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater performs through Jan. 3 at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan; 212-581-1212, alvinailey­.org.Advertisement