AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Luciana Achugar (through Dec. 19) Last year Ms. Achugar presented “Otro Teatro” at New York Live Arts, exploring what it would mean to “grow ourselves a new body.” Since that ecstatic, anarchic ritual of a performance, she has continued the investigation of pleasure, desire and dance as an agent for change. The next and perhaps final phase is “An Epilogue for Otro Teatro: True Love,” which takes over a studio at Gibney Dance’s downtown location for three hours at a time. Thursdays through Saturdays at 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Siobhan Burke)★ Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater (through Jan. 3) For a New York holiday tradition without the Sugar Plum Fairy, get thee to City Center for Ailey’s month-long winter season. After four years of shepherding the company into exciting artistic territory, the artistic director Robert Battle contributes a new work titled “Awakening” to the repertory. Also new this year are premieres from Rennie Harris, Ronald K. Brown and Kyle Abraham. A Paul Taylor work also joins the lineup, along with works by Talley Beatty, Hofesh Shechter and Christopher Wheeldon, among others. And, of course, “Revelations” will be on repeat. At various times, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, alvinailey.org. (Brian Schaefer)Monica Bill Barnes (Wednesday) Karaoke night meets office party in “Happy Hour,” the latest concoction from Ms. Barnes and Anna Bass, best known these days as the dancers — alongside the radio personality Ira Glass — in the touring revue “Three Acts, Two Dancers, One Radio Host.” The new gig, which wraps up this week, features the cheeky duo playing two guys playing their everyday selves, as Ms. Barnes continues her love affair with awkwardness, failure and physical comedy. The audience gets drinks, prizes and the chance to sing. At 6:30 p.m., Studio G, Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, monicabillbarnes.com. (Burke)★ Company XIV (through Jan. 17) If the traditional “Nutcracker” evokes the transition from childhood to adolescence, then Company XIV’s “Nutcracker Rouge” might be the subsequent crossover into adulthood and the accompanying sexual awakening. The choreographer Austin McCormick combines a strong dose of burlesque, baroque and ballet with glittered pasties and G-strings for a charmingly sensual and playful holiday romp. Tchaikovsky never sounded so scandalous. Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., Sundays at 5 p.m., Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-745-3000, companyxiv.com. (Schaefer)Brendan Connelly and Scotty Heron (through Saturday) It’s been about 75 years since Martha Graham and Aaron Copland joined forces to create “Appalachian Spring,” an instant hit about life on the American frontier. Mr. Connelly and Mr. Heron, a contemporary composer-choreographer duo, offer a more chaotic collaboration — and possibly a more dystopian view of America — with “Appalachian Spring Break,” a noisy evening-length work involving sound-generating objects and references to the Ken Burns mini-series “The Civil War.” Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 8 and 10:30 p.m., Jack, 505 ½ Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Burke)Dance Theater of Westchester (Sunday) After hanging with the Founding Fathers in “Hamilton” on Broadway, revisit Revolutionary War-era Yorktown with Dance Theater of Westchester’s “Colonial Nutcracker.” This production is designed for young audiences, ages 5 to 10, and features the classic Tchaikovsky score paired with 18th century-inspired costumes, including a red-coated mouse army as a stand-in for the Brits. At 2 p.m., Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org. (Schaefer)Dances Patrelle (through Sunday) For two decades, Francis Patrelle has presented “The Yorkville Nutcracker,” set in Manhattan’s Upper East Side of 1895, when it was filled with German immigrants and much less affluent. The production’s festive opening party is set in Gracie Mansion, while the famous snowflake scene moves to a frozen pond in Central Park. Joining Mr. Patrelle’s troupe this year are the New York City Ballet principal dancers Abi Stafford as the Sugar Plum Fairy and Adrian Danchig-Waring as her Cavalier. Friday at 7 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m., Sunday at noon and 5 p.m., Kaye Playhouse, Hunter College, East 68th Street, between Lexington and Park Avenues, 212-772-4448, dancespatrelle.org. (Schaefer)★ Andy de Groat & Catherine Galasso (through Saturday) In the 1970s, before Ms. Galasso was born, her parents were members of the Byrd Hoffman School of Byrds, a company founded by the avant-garde director Robert Wilson. It was there that they met the choreographer Andy de Groat, with whom her father, the composer Michael Galasso, went on to collaborate. Honoring this artistic lineage, Ms. Galasso remounts several works by Mr. de Groat and offers her own response to his pedestrian yet convoluted movement. The evening, titled “get dancing,” also includes “Rope Dance Translations,” a film accompanied by live performance. At 8 p.m., St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)East Village Dance Project (Thursday through Dec. 20) The themes of escape and self-discovery found just under the surface of “The Nutcracker” take fresh, poignant form in the East Village Dance Project’s production of “The Shell-Shocked Nut Project,” which sets the action amid East Village landmarks and follows the journey of a war veteran. The cast of 50 is split between students and professionals, and Tchaikovsky’s score shares airtime with Stevie Wonder, Duke Ellington and original music played live. Thursday through Dec. 19 at 8 p.m., Dec. 19 and 20 at 3 p.m., La MaMa, 66 East Fourth Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, lamama.org. (Schaefer)Gelsey Kirkland Ballet (through Dec. 20) It’s worth seeing this company’s “Nutcracker” not just for a well-constructed production of the Christmas classic, but also for a glimpse of the troupe’s new Brooklyn home, at what used to be St. Ann’s Warehouse. Founded in TriBeCa by Ms. Kirkland, a former American Ballet Theater principal, the company attracts promising young dancers from around the world, who will be joined by 70 students and alumni from the affiliated Gelsey Kirkland Academy of Classical Ballet. Thursday and Fridays at 7:30 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Sundays at noon and 5 p.m., GK Arts Center, 29 Jay Street, near John Street, Dumbo, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, gelseykirklandacademyofclassicalballet.org. (Burke)Bill T. Jones and Dianne McIntyre (through Saturday) In its shift toward more multigenre programming, New York Live Arts has been presenting a series of concerts by the contemporary classical music ensemble yMusic. To go with that music, the last installment includes some dancing by two luminaries of modern dance: Bill T. Jones, the artistic director of Live Arts, and the divine Dianne McIntyre. Each artist offers a new solo, Mr. Jones on Friday, Ms. McIntyre on Saturday. At 7:30 p.m., 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Burke)★ Juilliard Dances (Friday through Tuesday) Though still in school, the talented dancers of the Juilliard conservatory could fool you for professionals. In their winter showcase, “New Dances: Edition 2015,” they are paired up, by academic year, with well-respected contemporary choreographers in original works. The first-year dancers perform Helen Simoneau’s “Strange Garden” and the second years tackle Aszure Barton’s “return to patience,” with both works set to music played by other Juilliard students. The third-year dancers team up with Zvi Gotheiner and the fourth years collaborate with Kyle Abraham. Friday, Saturday, Monday and Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, Lincoln Center, 155 West 65th Street, events.juilliard.edu. (Schaefer)Keigwin + Company (through Sunday) With a new plan for his company, Larry Keigwin is not so much passing the choreographer’s torch as he is sharing it with a younger generation. For his troupe’s return to the Joyce Theater, he has commissioned new works by the rising dancemakers Adam Barruch and Loni Landon, while creating two new pieces of his own and bringing back his 2009 “Sidewalk,” set to Steve Reich’s “Double Sextet.” The Keigwin vibe is relentlessly fun, and some fresh voices should only amplify that. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)★ Mark Morris Dance Group (Saturday through Dec. 20) After a five-year hiatus, Mark Morris’s “The Hard Nut,” a rollicking, cheeky take on “The Nutcracker,” returns to Brooklyn. The narrative hews closely to E.T.A. Hoffmann’s original story, but the show is a welcome departure from tradition – and propriety. Mr. Morris plants his party in the suburbs of the 1970s and visits a world inspired by Charles Burns’s noirish Pop Art. Mr. Morris’s snowflakes blur gender lines while his characters crack open their inhibitions. It’s wacky fun. Saturday and Wednesday through next Friday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 1 and 6 p.m., Dec. 19 at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Dec. 20 at 1 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schaefer)★ New York City Ballet (through Jan. 3) Of the dozens of “Nutcracker” productions in town, none match the scale of City Ballet’s “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker,” or the giddy sense of childlike awe it inspires. Pantomime dominates the first half but Act II culminates in a breathtaking pas de deux for the Sugar Plum Fairy and her Cavalier. After all, this is a duet for Balanchine and Tchaikovsky, too, and it’s magical. At various times, David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.org. (Schaefer)New York Theater Ballet (Friday through Sunday) Returning for its fifth year, “Keith Michael’s The Nutcracker” trims Tchaikovsky’s score to a brisk and efficient hour so as to keep the attention of the little ones. (The show is recommended for children as young as 3.) Mr. Michaels, a longtime choreographer for this company, sets his version in 1907 and takes inspiration from the colorful and energetic Art Nouveau movement that by then had swept Europe. Friday at noon, Saturday and Sunday at 11 a.m., 1 and 3:30 p.m., Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, 212-355-6160, nytb.org. (Schaefer)★ Noche Flamenca (Friday through Jan. 23) Traditional Spanish dance and ancient Greek theater are an unlikely but well-suited pair in Noche Flamenca’s sharp production “Antigona,” based on Sophocles’s famous tragedy. The dance lights a fire under the play while discovering in itself a knack for narrative drama. In the title role, the powerhouse Soledad Barrio is both fierce and fragile. The century-old church where the performance takes place is filled with striking sets, darkly amorous music played by a live band and a ferocious Greek chorus of dancers. Mondays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., with an additional performance at 3 p.m. on Dec. 26 (no performances on Dec. 24 and 25), West Park Presbyterian Church, 165 West 86th Street, Manhattan, 866-811-4111, nocheflamenca.com. (Schaefer)★ Tere O’Connor (through Saturday) A news release for Tere O’Connor’s new work, “The Goodbye Studies,” said it will “embrace tangent and anomalous structural conceits.” Head scratching though that may be, Mr. O’Connor consistently manages to turn such esoteric ideas into surprising and satisfying dances of substance. Here, he employs his strong sense of drama and a knack for meaningful gestures to examine his group of 12 dancers as a single entity rather than individual beings — which is quite a task since individually, they’re captivating. At 8 p.m., the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org. (Schaefer)Peridance Dance Company (Friday through Sunday) Igal Perry’s contribution to the seasonal dance staple is “The Nutcracker — A Contemporary Look.” Ballet is one of several styles – like hip-hop and contemporary dance — integrated into his version, which features nearly 100 dancers from his company and affiliated school. Tchaikovsky is there, of course, but so is Strauss, as well as other modern musicians. The costumes range from traditional to psychedelic; the show’s idea of a “contemporary look” is an eclectic one. Friday at 8:30 p.m., Saturday at 6:30 p.m., Sunday at 4 and 7 p.m., Peridance Capezio Center, 126 East 13th Street, East Village, 212-505-0886, peridance.com. (Schaefer)★ Urban Bush Women (through Saturday) John Coltrane’s groundbreaking album “A Love Supreme” turns 50 this year, and Urban Bush Women, the powerful all-female troupe founded by Jawole Willa Jo Zollar, turns 30. “Walking with ’Trane,” choreographed by Ms. Zollar and Samantha Speis in collaboration with the company, salutes those anniversaries through a dance structured like a jazz record, with an A-side and a B-side. The composers George Caldwell and Philip White take inspiration from Coltrane in their original score. At 7:30 p.m., Harvey Theater, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Burke)Works & Process: ‘Peter and the Wolf’ (Friday through Sunday) Thankfully, neither “The Nutcracker” nor Tchaikovsky has a monopoly on your holiday season. In a clever bit of counter programming, the Guggenheim Museum’s performance series presents its annual production of “Peter and the Wolf,” Prokofiev’s playful adventure. The fashion designer Isaac Mizrahi is responsible for the look and direction of this short and sweet show for children, while the choreographer John Heginbotham makes it move. At 2:30 and 4 p.m., Peter B. Lewis Theater, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, worksandprocess.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement