AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayAt the end of the World Ballet Stars gala-style event on Wednesday at the Rose Theater, the ballerina Alina Cojocaru, who had danced in four of the 15 items on the program, made a speech that epitomized the endearing spell she casts. She scarcely spoke about herself; she was all gratitude and admiration for others. Her voice (like her dancing) expressed youthfulness, fragility, radiance, courage. It is easy to care for her, easy to want to cry because of her, easy to admire her.Her words immediately enlarged the achievement of the evening, which, despite its charm and excitement, should have been better organized. What were we watching, and why were we there? Some advance publicity called the event “Alina and Friends” (accurately, as it proved). The program called it “World Ballet Stars” (also accurately — it featured leading dancers from many countries). Speeches by Marina Sturdza and Ms. Cojocaru (both native Romanians) said it was in honor of the ballet of the Bucharest National Opera House.Ms. Cojocaru’s  fiancé, the Danish-born dancer Johan Kobborg, has been artistic director of that company since January 2014. He is said to have transformed it. Most touchingly, Ms. Cojocaru said he had succeeded where she herself, in previous efforts for her homeland (she left these unspecified), had failed. Eight of the other dancers on Wednesday were from this troupe; two of the items danced were by the Romanian choreographer Edward Clug.So this was a benefit for the Bucharest ballet, but that was not made clear until well into the evening. You had to figure out afterward which dancers represented the Bucharest company; you had to check the program’s small print to see that Ms. Cojocaru, who dances internationally and is a principal of English National Ballet, is a “guest artist in residence” in Bucharest; you were never told which of the pieces we saw were excerpts from works danced back home in Romania. More information, please!Most ballet galas need editing. This one had too many fouetté turns (the grand pas de deux from “Le Corsaire” and “Swan Lake”), too many courtesans (Manon, in Kenneth MacMillan’s treatment; and Marguerite Gautier, with Ms. Cojocaru dancing scenes from both Frederick Ashton’s “Marguerite and Armand” and John Neumeier’s “Lady of the Camellias”), too many bare-chested men in black trousers.Though Ms. Cojocaru is a superb artist, she’s a nonstarter as a courtesan. She also overemploys her adorable vulnerability across the board; I never saw a ballerina so enchantingly talented at playing the victim. The pas de deux that she and Mr. Kobborg danced from Liam Scarlett’s “No Man’s Land” looked dismayingly like the 2014 “Funérailles” made by Mr. Scarlett for New York City Ballet (both are to Liszt); though Ms. Cojocaru is unlikely to have seen “Funérailles,” the resemblance lets New York see Mr. Scarlett’s self-repetition.Even so, Ms Cojocaru’s sheer pluck — she began the event by going straight into the Rose Adagio from “The Sleeping Beauty” — set the standard for the evening. Among the guest artists (who included the Mariinsky’s Uliana Lopatkina, English National Ballet’s Tamara Rojo, American Ballet Theater’s Daniil Simkin, New York City Ballet’s Daniel Ulbricht and Stuttgart Ballet’s Friedemann Vogel), the young Mexican star Isaac Hernandez registered with particular glory. His innocent, almost childlike blaze brought heart and flair to the “Corsaire” and “Swan Lake” pas de deux.Of the Bucharest dancers, Dawid Trzensimiech (a Polish dancer who left Britain’s Royal Ballet to join this troupe) made an excellent impression — stylish, handsome, intelligent — in the “Manon” and “Marguerite and Armand” excerpts. Other Bucharest artists — Bogdan Canila, Robert Enache, Bianca Fota, Alexandra Gavrilescu, Shuhei Yoshida — came across as distinct and appealing individuals. In her speech, Ms. Sturdza mentioned her hopes that this would be the first of a series of Romanian ballet events at the Rose Theater. If sequels build on the better aspects of this event, I add my voice to those hopes.Advertisement