DEC. 10, 2015
The classical music team of The New York Times shares its favorite albums of the year below. Also read our list of the best classical performances.The classical recording industry continues to founder, and yet every day the critics for The New York Times receive more CDs than they know what to do with, from labels large and small, featuring star artists and unknowns, performing the work of composers long dead or still young. An astonishing, inspiring number of these albums are excellent, making it difficult for each writer to choose just five for this list of 25 of the year’s most memorable.The best thing about this litany of bests? Its variety. While there is a great deal of piano here — and why not? — there is also a range of vocal, chamber and orchestral music. (Though, interestingly, there is nothing that could be called a symphony, at least not in the conventional sense.)The standard repertory is not ignored: Besides Beethoven, Mozart and Brahms, the choices below include not one but two fresh versions of Bach’s “Goldberg” Variations, each one serious and luminous, each one a demonstration of an established masterpiece’s possibilities. But for me the core of the list is in vital recordings of new music, including instant classics like Ted Hearne’s “The Source” and Andrew Norman’s “Play” and works by John Luther Adams, Anna Thorvaldsdottir and others. Just as the contemporary repertory should be at the heart of live performance, so should it be central to what is immortalized on disc. ZACHARY WOOLFEAdvertisementJOHN LUTHER ADAMS: ‘THE WIND IN HIGH PLACES’ JACK Quartet; Northwestern University Cello Ensemble (Cold Blue). Taking inspiration from the icy vistas and bracing breezes of his beloved Alaska, the Pulitzer Prize-winning composer John Luther Adams has written a string quartet of dazzling stillness and quiet complexity. The excellent JACK Quartet makes its glassy harmonics sing. In “Dream of the Canyon Wren,” its cooing glissandi imitate birdsong with uncanny economy; a fine reading of the “Canticles of the Sky,” by the Northwestern University Cello Ensemble, directed by Hans Jorgen Jensen, rounds out this mesmerizing disc. CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMAdvertisementBACH: ‘GOLDBERG’ VARIATIONS Alexandre Tharaud, piano (Erato). This admirable French pianist took a nine-month sabbatical to hone his interpretation of Bach’s “Goldberg” Variations. Beginning with a spacious Aria, Mr. Tharaud offers imaginatively ornamented renditions of each movement, his playing — full of contrasts — spirited and poetic by turn. VIVIEN SCHWEITZERBACH, BEETHOVEN, RZEWSKI Igor Levit, piano (Sony). After acclaimed accounts of Beethoven’s last sonatas and Bach’s partitas, Mr. Levit shows no sign of slowing down. In this smart set, Bach’s “Goldbergs,” Beethoven’s “Diabellis” and Frederic Rzewski’s “The People United Will Never Be Defeated!” become a triptych of three centuries of pianistic history: a total of 99 variations, each played with intellectual rigor and uncommon fire. DAVID ALLENBEETHOVEN, HAYDN, MOZART: SONGS Mark Padmore, tenor; Kristian Bezuidenhout, fortepiano (Harmonia Mundi). My admiration for Mr. Padmore, a British tenor, just keeps growing. On this astutely chosen program, Mr. Padmore, accompanied by the elegant fortepianist Mr. Bezuidenhout, gives richly expressive, crisp accounts of songs by Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven, as well as a Mozart cantata and Beethoven’s pioneering song cycle “An die Ferne Geliebte.” ANTHONY TOMMASINIBRAHMS: PIANO TRIOS Christian Tetzlaff, violin; Tanja Tetzlaff, cello; Lars Vogt, piano (Ondine). These three musicians, who perform together often as the Tetzlaff Trio, bring polish and passion to three classic works. The start of the Adagio of Trio No. 1 is especially memorable, its hushed, fragile strings alternating with a piano line played by Mr. Vogt with both softness and grandeur. ZACHARY WOOLFEMORTON FELDMAN: ‘PIANO, VIOLIN, VIOLA, CELLO’ Aleck Karis, piano; Curtis Macomber, violin; Danielle Farina, viola; Christopher Finckel, cello (Bridge). Played here with masterly focus, Feldman’s final work, from 1987, is a 75-minute quartet, austere even by this composer’s daunting standards. Dissonance sometimes creeps into the chords, which are cushioned by a sense of wide open space that these players handle with nearly endless patience and sensitivity. ZACHARY WOOLFE‘FIAMMA DEL BELCANTO’ Diana Damrau, soprano; Orchestra of the Teatro Regio Torino; Gianandrea Noseda, conductor (Erato). In this survey of Verdi, verismo and bel canto arias, Ms. Damrau’s singing is more than just beautiful. Her impeccable technique is wielded to potent, expressive effect in trademark roles like Violetta from “La Traviata”; excerpts from Donizetti’s “Rosmonda d’Inghilterra”; and selections by Bellini, Puccini and Leoncavallo. VIVIEN SCHWEITZERHAHN: WORKS FOR ENSEMBLE Julien Vern, flute; François Lemoine, clarinet; Frank Sibold, bassoon; Julien Desplanque, horn; Nicolas Chalvin, conductor; Ensemble Initium; Orchestre des Pays de Savoie (Timpani). While Reynaldo Hahn’s art songs are well loved, his instrumental works are little known. His lyrical gift is sure throughout this lovely recording, especially in works (like the 1905 suite “Le bal de Béatrice d’Este” and the piquant “Divertissement pour une fête de nuit,” from 1931) that look to the past with cleareyed nostalgia. ZACHARY WOOLFEHANDEL: ‘PARTENOPE’ Il Pomo d’Oro; Riccardo Minasi, conductor (Erato). The period orchestra Il Pomo d’Oro performs Handel’s score with irresistible energy and elegance. The superb cast includes the bright-voiced soprano Karina Gauvin in the title role and the countertenor Philippe Jaroussky as Arsace, as well as the soprano Emoke Barath as Armindo and the mezzo Teresa Iervolino as Rosmira. VIVIEN SCHWEITZERAdvertisementTED HEARNE: ‘THE SOURCE’ Mellissa Hughes, Samia Mounts, Isaiah Robinson, Jonathan Woody, singers; Nathan Koci, conductor (New Amsterdam). Hurling from propulsive small-ensemble chamber rock to eerie Auto-Tuned ruminations, Mr. Hearne’s oratorio about Chelsea Manning and WikiLeaks doesn’t aim to score easy political points. Instead it does what great art should: It pushes you to think and feel about the world in new ways. Even without Daniel Fish’s sober staging, “The Source” (with a brilliant collage libretto by Mark Doten) is remarkable and essential. ZACHARY WOOLFE‘HEAVY SLEEP’ Bruce Levingston, piano (Sono Luminus). Tender, sparse and painfully private, this exquisite disc links a series of preludes, fugues and fantasies by Bach (arranged by Max Reger, Alexander Siloti and Gyorgy Kurtag) and two meditative contemporary works, “Heavy Sleep” by Timo Andres and “El Male Rachamim,” by Mohammed Fairouz, in a solo recital that shimmers with Mr. Levingston’s mastery of color and nuance. CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIM‘LIAISONS: RE-IMAGINING SONDHEIM FROM THE PIANO’ Anthony de Mare, piano (ECM New Series). For this ambitious project, the pianist Mr. de Mare, a contemporary music champion and Stephen Sondheim fan, commissioned composers from all camps of new music — Steve Reich, Wynton Marsalis and Tania Leon among them — to write solo-piano pieces inspired by favorite Sondheim songs. He plays the 36 fascinating results on this three-disc set. ANTHONY TOMMASINIMOZART: PIANO SONATAS, VOL. 4 Christian Blackshaw, piano (Wigmore Hall Live). This last release of Mr. Blackshaw’s Mozart cycle, recorded live, is another welcome demonstration of his immaculate tone, delicate way with pacing and exquisite taste in articulation. In four sonatas taken from across the composer’s life, there is never a note of hurry or haste, and nothing that fails to enchant. DAVID ALLEN‘NESSUN DORMA: THE PUCCINI ALBUM’ Jonas Kaufmann, tenor; Orchestra and Chorus of the Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia; Antonio Pappano, conductor (Sony). With its smoky sheen, earthy colorings and heft, the German tenor Jonas Kaufmann’s voice may not seem born to the red-sauce Puccini idiom. But he brings abundant lyricism and exciting ardor to this intelligent program of arias and scenes from almost every Puccini opera, including seldom-heard excerpts from “Le Villi” and “Edgar.” ANTHONY TOMMASINIPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ANDREW NORMAN: ‘PLAY’Boston Modern Orchestra Project; Gil Rose, conductor (BMOP/sound). Barely anyone has heard “Play” live, but with this hyperactive issue from the Boston Modern Orchestra Project — released last December, shortly after our 2014 best-of list was published — Mr. Norman’s 2013 work has become a sensation. At its most kinetic, it sounds like a video game character bounding around an orchestra, in an unpredictable yet effortlessly structured way. DAVID ALLENRACHMANINOFF: VARIATIONS Daniil Trifonov, piano; Philadelphia Orchestra; Yannick Nézet-Séguin, conductor (Deutsche Grammophon). As if a sumptuous, tender account of the “Rhapsody on a Theme by Paganini” were not enough, Mr. Trifonov offers uncannily fine interpretations of Rachmaninoff’s variations on themes by Chopin and Corelli. Buried in the middle is “Rachmaniana,” the pianist’s own, lush impressions of hearing his countryman’s music. DAVID ALLENRAMEAU: ‘THE SOUND OF LIGHT’ Nadine Koutcher, soprano; Alexei Svetov, bass; Music Aeterna; Teodor Currentzis, conductor (Sony). Far away, in the Siberian city of Perm, Mr. Currentzis, a Greek conductor, has gathered a special group of musicians around him. After several memorable Mozart recordings, they take on the music of Rameau here, bringing the same startling zest for innovation and untamed dynamism to a dazzling selection of vocal and instrumental selections from his operas. CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMREICH: ‘MUSIC FOR 18 MUSICIANS’Ensemble Signal; Brad Lubman, conductor (Harmonia Mundi). Steve Reich’s 1974-76 classic sounds newly radical in this homage from one of New York’s most vital contemporary music groups. Clarity is key, as rhythms collide and colors drift through the ears. In no other recording of this work is there such attention to timbre, such a sense of ceremony, such an intensity of transition. DAVID ALLENAdvertisementSCHUMANN: PIANO CONCERTO AND PIANO TRIO NO. 2 Freiburger Barockorchester, Pablo Heras-Casado (Harmonia Mundi). There is no shortage of recordings of the popular Schumann Piano Concerto, but this period instrument version is notable for its textural transparency and for Alexander Melnikov’s deeply expressive playing on fortepiano. He is joined by his frequent collaborators, the violinist Isabelle Faust and the cellist Jean-Guihen Queyras, for a vivid rendition of Schumann’s Trio No. 2. VIVIEN SCHWEITZERTCHAIKOVSKY: ‘THE NUTCRACKER’ Stewart Goodyear, piano (Steinway & Sons). A piano arrangement of Tchaikovsky’s beloved ballet score “The Nutcracker” may sound like a gimmick. Take my word for it: Mr. Goodyear’s faithful, detailed and quite ingenious piano arrangement is delightful and revealing. Without the orchestral colors, you hear details in the music freshly. And his playing is superb. ANTHONY TOMMASINIANNA THORVALDSDOTTIR, ‘IN THE LIGHT OF AIR’ International Contemporary Ensemble (Sono Luminus). The meditative, texturally rich landscapes of “In the Light of Air” for viola, cello, harp, piano, percussion and electronics by this young Icelandic composer are haunting, beautiful and unsettling by turns. The sonic possibilities of the cello are explored in the intense “Transitions,” powerfully rendered by Michael Nicolas. VIVIEN SCHWEITZER‘VARIATIONS’ Benjamin Hochman, piano (Avie). This outstanding Israeli-born pianist explores the theme-and-variations genre here. He gives lucid, exciting performances of variations by Oliver Knussen, Luciano Berio, George Benjamin and Peter Lieberson (all composed between 1982 and 2003), then ends with an exhilarating account of Brahms’s Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Handel. ANTHONY TOMMASINIVERDI: ‘AIDA’ Anja Harteros, soprano; Jonas Kaufmann, tenor; Ekaterina Semenchuk, mezzo; Ludovic Tézier, baritone; Erwin Schrott, bass; Orchestra and Chorus of the Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia; Antonio Pappano, conductor (Warner Classics). A stellar cast gathers around Mr. Pappano for this fluid and elegantly dramatic reading of Verdi’s hard-to-pull-off classic. Mr. Kaufmann, in excellent voice, offers a poetic “Celeste Aida”; Ms. Harteros is touching in the title role. But it’s the orchestra, airy and alert, that carries this fresh and invaluable new recording. CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMWOLF, GRIEG, JANACEK: QUARTETS Amphion String Quartet (Nimbus). It’s a crowded field for ambitious young string quartets. The Amphion burst on the scene this year with a propulsive debut recording that marries exuberance, drama and uncompromisingly crisp playing, whether in Wolf’s joyous “Italienische Serenade,” Grieg’s epic String Quartet in G minor or Janacek’s crackling String Quartet No. 2. CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMJOHN ZORN: ‘HEN TO PAN’ Jay Campbell, cello; Stephen Gosling, piano; Michael Nicolas, cello; Chris Otto, violin; Tyshawn Sorey, drums (Tzadik). Mr. Campbell, a young champion of new music, is the one constant in this feverishly joyful recording of recent Zorn chamber works, including three versions of the frenetic “Ouroboros,” the piano trio “The Aristos” and “Occam’s Razor” for cello and piano. ZACHARY WOOLFEMore highlights from the year, as chosen by our critics:Movies, Television, Pop Music, Classical, Dance, Theater, Art, Books and PerformancesA version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Tasting Menu for the Audiophile.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.