By ZACHARY WOOLFEDEC. 10, 2015
Among its many gifts to New York’s cultural life, the Manhattan School of Music has provided valuable opportunities to revisit modern American operas that never quite became standards. The school’s opera program, under the artistic leadership of Dona D. Vaughn, has offered revivals of works like Virgil Thomson’s “The Mother of Us All,” Thomas Pasatieri’s “The Seagull” and Lee Hoiby’s “A Month in the Country” and “Summer and Smoke.”On Wednesday it turned to Conrad Susa’s “The Dangerous Liaisons,” based on the Pierre Choderlos de Laclos novel about malicious games of love among the aristocracy, which was a scandalous sensation when it was published in 1782. (Who could forget Glenn Close and John Malkovich glowering at each other in Stephen Frears’s 1988 film version?)The opera had its premiere in San Francisco in 1994, and in 2008, a reduced version was published, making the work more appealing to conservatories like the Manhattan School. In the Wednesday performance, conducted by George Manahan, even the pruned score retained the portentous, seething lushness of the music in a Douglas Sirk melodrama, with expressive touches of dissonance. Only occasionally did it gum into thickness.Mr. Susa, who died in 2013, and his librettist, Philip Littell, dealt with the novel’s epistolary format by devising a series of scenes that shift among different characters and locations. Ms. Vaughn’s production, dotted with smoothly moving strips of walls, was appropriately fluid.What the performance lacked was heat. Not commitment: This was shown by everyone in the talented cast, including the soprano Janet Todd (her voice confident as the clueless Cécile), the soprano Abigail Shapiro (fervid as the saintly, doomed Madame de Tourvel) and the tenor Oliver Sewell (plangent as the misled Danceny). The mezzo-soprano Noragh Devlin and the soprano Brittany Nickell were both imposing as the matriarchs who watch helplessly as the plot’s machinery churns forward.But while Timothy Murray has a firm, flexible baritone, he was merely affable as Valmont, without the sensuality — not to mention the raw sexuality — that is key to this rake’s complicated appeal. The soprano Anna Dugan sang the wicked Madame de Merteuil with haughty relish, and was powerful in her final scene of defiance. There was force aplenty; in shorter supply was electric charge.“The Dangerous Liaisons” continues through Sunday at the John C. Borden Auditorium, Manhattan School of Music, 122nd Street and Broadway; 917-493-4428, msmnyc.edu.A version of this review appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page C12 of the New York edition with the headline: Aristocrats Behaving Badly.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.