AdvertisementSupported byFor news about comedy, including critical commentary: nytimes.com/arts. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Brooklyn Comedy Festival’s Annual Winter Wonderlandia Holiday Variety Show (Friday) This event promises to be “everything you wish your company’s holiday party was but isn’t.” The show features music, Santa Claus and performances by Jo Firestone, Connor Ratliff, Mikey Erg, David Carl, Rebecca Vigil and Evan Kaufman, among others. The event also serves as a coat drive — anyone who donates a gently used coat will be entered into a raffle. At 8:30 p.m., Knitting Factory, 361 Metropolitan Avenue, at Havemeyer Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 347-529-6696, bk.knittingfactory.com. (Elise Czajkowski)‘The Cast’ (Saturday) Each week, this talented cast of improvisers premieres the on-and-off stage antics of a completely spontaneous theatrical show; this week’s “genre” is “Star Wars”. At 10:30 p.m., Magnet Theater, 254 West 29th Street, Chelsea, 212-244-8824, magnettheater.com. (Czajkowski)★ Jim Gaffigan (Saturday) Mr. Gaffigan occupies a special niche in modern stand-up: a completely clean comic who is equally at home in massive stadiums, late-night comedy clubs and quirky alternative rooms. With past hit specials like “Mr. Universe” and “Beyond the Pale,” he brings his new act, “Yeti in the City,” to Madison Square Garden. At 8 p.m., 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Czajkowski)★ ‘Oh, Hello’ (through Dec. 20) Nick Kroll and John Mulaney bring their memorable characters Gil Faizon (Mr. Kroll) and George St. Geegland (Mr. Mulaney), two Upper West Side gentleman with a fondness for Alan Alda and pranks involving tuna fish, to the stage. The duo have been part of the “Oh, Hello” show for more than a decade, having appeared in a web series before being prominently featured in Mr. Kroll’s Comedy Central sketch series, “Kroll Show”. At 9:30 p.m., Sundays at 7 p.m., Cherry Lane Theater, 38 Commerce Street, at Bedford Street, West Village, 212-989-2020, cherrylanetheatre.org.Sean Patton (Sunday through Dec. 19) Mr. Patton remains one of the most enjoyable live performers in the comedy scene, with a knack for long, joke-filled stories that are deeply personal and always hilarious. He performs here as part of the “Week at the Creek” series. At 7 p.m., the Creek and the Cave, 10-93 Jackson Avenue, Long Island City, creeklic.com; free, seating is first come first served.‘Powerhouse’ (Sunday) Aaron Glaser and his house band host this strong, eclectic variety show, with performances from Sasheer Zamata, Ophira Eisenberg, Corn Mo, Jo Firestone, Reformed Whores, Jess Dweck, Andrew Law, the Heavenly Creatures and Erik Bergstrom. At 8 p.m., Union Hall, 702 Union Street, at Fifth Avenue, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-638-4400, unionhallny.com. (Czajkowski)★ ‘A Show for Christmas’ (through next Friday) Daniel Kitson, an always captivating comedian and storyteller, returns to New York for a short run of this Christmas-themed show, which, according to his website, will include “traditional seasonal concerns of loneliness,” “a brief scuffle in a newsagents” and “magic.” At 8 p.m., with additional performances at 3 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday, and at 10 p.m. on Wednesday and Thursday, no show on Monday, Connelly Theater, 220 East Fourth Street, East Village, danielkitson.com. (Czajkowski)‘The Talent Show’ (Wednesday) Elna Baker and Kevin Townley host this unique variety show, which reinvents itself each month with a new theme. For December, the show is “(Your Company Name Here) Office Holiday Party,” and performers include Eugene Mirman, Sarah Kay, Lucy Wainwright Roche and Mehran Khaghani. At 7 p.m., Joe’s Pub, at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com. (Czajkowski)‘Yum’s the Word’ (Tuesday) Robin Gelfenbien hosts this holiday-ish edition of her monthly show that’s part storytelling, part birthday party, and always serves up plenty of ice cream cake. This month’s theme, “Happy Challahdays!,” features stories from Jason Biggs, Adam Wade, Kambri Crews and Constance Shulman. At 7:30 p.m., Le Poisson Rouge, 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich Village, 212-505-3474, lepoissonrouge.com. (Czajkowski)Advertisement