AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.‘The Barber of Seville’ (Wednesday) The Tony Award-winning director Bartlett Sher’s debut production for the Metropolitan Opera was an inventive and animated staging of Rossini’s “The Barber of Seville.” Audiences seem to love it. The show returns to the house with an enticing cast, headed by Isabel Leonard as Rosina, David Portillo as Count Almaviva and Elliot Madore as Figaro. Anthony Walker conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)‘La Bohème’ (Saturday) Franco Zeffirelli’s colorful fairground ride of a production returns with a mild-mannered cast led by the affable soprano Barbara Frittoli and the efficient tenor Ramón Vargas as the ill-fated pair of lovers. A charismatic group of singers made up of Ana María Martínez, Levente Molnar, Alexey Lavrov and Christian Van Horn portrays their bohemian friends. The conductor Paolo Carignani is a steadfast guide through Puccini’s classic melodrama; the Met’s chorus and children’s chorus in fine form. At 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ ‘Die Fledermaus’ (Monday) Though it’s hard to believe, James Levine is conducting his first complete performances of Strauss’s “Die Fledermaus” with this revival of Jeremy Sams’s 2013 production at the Metropolitan Opera. On opening night, he drew a lithe and stylish performance from the orchestra, chorus and an appealing cast, headed by Paulo Szot, Susanna Phillips, Toby Spence and Susan Graham. This operetta is performed in Mr. Sams’s playful English translation of the lyrics. But Douglas Carter Beane’s new spoken dialogue trades in lame, topical jokes. At 7:30 p.m., Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (David Allen)★ ‘La Donna del Lago’ (Friday and Tuesday) Michele Mariotti, who made a strong impression last season conducting Paul Curran’s production of Rossini’s “La Donna del Lago,” will be in the pit again when the superb American mezzo Joyce DiDonato reprises her role as the beautiful Scottish title character. There will also be vocal fireworks and gorgeous singing from the tenor Lawrence Brownlee as her suitor King James V, in disguise for much of the opera, whose plot is inspired by a poem by Sir Walter Scott. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)Mannes Opera (Friday and Saturday) The young singers of Mannes Opera have a chance to demonstrate their vocal and comic gifts in Donizetti’s “L’Elisir d’amore,” presented in a fully staged production directed by Joseph Colaneri. Friday at 7:30 p.m. and Saturday at 1:30 p.m., Gerald W. Lynch Theater at John Jay College, 524 West 59th Street, Clinton, jjay.cuny.edu. (Schweitzer)★ ‘The Rape of Lucretia’ (Friday and Saturday) The adventurous Loft Opera, which aims to break down barriers between performers and audiences by presenting immersive production in alternative spaces in Brooklyn, fulfills its mission with this gripping, up-close staging of Britten’s wrenching chamber opera. The courageous and committed cast is head by the mezzo-soprano Kristin Gornstein in the title role, the tragically faithful wife of a devoted Roman general. The orchestra under Dean Buck plays with intensity but often overpowers the singers in this intimate space. At 8 p.m., 501 Union, 501 Union Street, between Bond and Nevins Streets, Gowanus, Brooklyn, loftopera.com. (Allen)‘Rigoletto’ (Saturday and Thursday) The dramatic baritone Zeljko Lucic takes on the title role as the soprano Nadine Sierra steps into the role of Gilda in this fresh and confident revival of Michael Mayer’s production, set in a Las Vegas casino. The callow Duke of Mantua is sung by the Polish tenor Piotr Beczala on Saturday and by the French tenor Jean-François Borras on Thursday; the bass Dimitriy Ivashchenko and the mezzo Nancy Fabiola Herrera round out the cast as the assassin Sparafucile and his sister Maddalena. Roberto Abbado conducts. Saturday at 1 p.m. and Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Igor Levit & Marina Abramovic (Monday through Dec. 19) There is much talk these days of mindfulness, “being present” and the need to disengage from digital distractions. Those attending a performance of Bach’s magnificent “Goldberg Variations” by the superb pianist Igor Levit, part of an installation by the artist Marina Abramovic, will be required to deposit their electronic gadgets in a locker before entering the vast drill hall, where they are expected to sit in meditative silence before Mr. Levit begins to play. Monday at 7 p.m. and Tuesday through Thursday at 8 p.m., Wade Thompson Drill Hall, Park Avenue Armory, 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org. (Schweitzer)American Symphony Orchestra (Thursday) Works by four Russian Jewish composers make up this intriguing evening. Anton Rubinstein is perhaps best known, and his Cello Concerto No. 2 will be played by Istvan Vardai. But there’s also Aleksandr Krein’s “The Rose and the Cross,” Mikhail Gnesin’s “From Shelley” and Maximilian Steinberg’s Symphony No. 1. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center (Friday, Sunday and Tuesday) Along with the “Messiah” and “Nutcracker” performances that fill up the holiday calendar every year, the Chamber Music Society’s annual performances of Bach’s complete “Brandenburg” Concertos, performed in entirety on several evenings, have become a seasonal staple. Friday and Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 5 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Schweitzer)Counter)Induction (Saturday) This virtuosic and omnivorous new-music ensemble, led by the violinist Miranda Cuckson, pays tribute to the composer Lee Hyla, who died last year, with a program of works by him. At 8 p.m., National Sawdust, 80 North Sixth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Simone Dinnerstein (Sunday) This thoughtful pianist is always looking for connections, and this program is no different. There’s Bach, from the violinist Tim Fain, and Schumann, from Dinnerstein herself. But the focus is work by the composer Philip Lasser, represented by his “Bruegel Suite” and “Chaconne Variations.” At 7 p.m., National Sawdust, 80 North Sixth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org. (Allen)Evgeny Kissin (Wednesday) For all his virtuosity and flair, the superb pianist Evgeny Kissin seems awkward on stage. He is not prone to chat with audiences. This program, which he has presented to acclaim, is the exception. Mr. Kissin, who values his Russian Jewish heritage, will play rarely-heard works by the Jewish composers Bloch, Veprik and Krein, interspersed with readings of Yiddish poetry. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)Metropolitan Museum of Art (Friday) Apollo’s Fire, the Cleveland Baroque Orchestra, gives its “Celtic Christmas Vespers,” a program that weaves Celtic folk, Gregorian chant and dancing. Jeannette Sorrell conducts the orchestra, joined by the Ensemble La Nef and the soprano Meredith Hall. Before you go to that, check out Byzantine Pop-Ups in the Medieval Scripture Hall, featuring hymns and carols from performers in the Eastern Orthodox tradition. Apollo’s Fire at 7 p.m., Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium; Pop-Ups at 4, 6 and 8 p.m., 212-570-3949, metmuseum.org/events. (Allen)★ Lisa Moore (Thursday) An avowed commitment to the contemporary is put in context with this recital from this superb pianist. While pieces by Philip Glass, Martin Bresnick and Frederic Rzewski are her regular fare, those by Scriabin, Janacek and Bartók are more unusual finds on her programs. At 1 p.m., Thalia Theater, Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org. (Allen)New York Philharmonic (Friday and Saturday) James Gaffigan is at the helm on Friday and Saturday, conducting Beethoven’s Symphony No. 4; Strauss’s tone poem “Till Eulenspiegel’s Merry Pranks”; and the premiere of Andrew Norman’s “Split, ” with the pianist Jeffrey Kahane (who inspired the composition) as soloist. At 8 p.m., David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Schweitzer)★ Tenet (Saturday) This ensemble, a leading light on the early-music scene, joins forces with the Dark Horse Consort and Bach Vespers at Holy Trinity Lutheran Church for a Christmas concert of spiritual music by Michael Praetorius and other Renaissance composers. At 7 p.m., Central Park West and 65th Street, 212-222-4066, tenet.nyc. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Advertisement