By JOSHUA BARONEDEC. 10, 2015
YOU could see all four operas in Wagner’s “Ring” cycle for less money than it takes to go to a single Taylor Swift concert.Lincoln Center may come off as intimidating — the grand architecture, abounding formal wear, foreign titles like “Die Entführung aus dem Serail” — but its theaters are trying to shed that image by attracting and grooming future audiences with discount programs that appeal to adults who are no longer students, yet not quite established professionals.These discounts break out of the traditional age-specific model of offering reduced tickets to children, students and seniors. There’s no law that prohibits tinkering with ticket prices based on age; the new programs push the qualifying age for discounts as far as 40. And they come with catchy names, even alliterations like Fridays Under 40 and Philharmonic Free Fridays, ready-made for an ad campaign.Fridays Under 40, introduced at the Metropolitan Opera this season, also includes a preshow party and a later curtain to sweeten the deal for young professionals who want to turn a night at the opera into a social event. (The Met continues to offer $25 rush tickets to the general public.) Themes for these monthly parties are always pegged to the opera of the night, which so far has included tuneful favorites of the repertory: Verdi’s “Otello” and “Rigoletto,” and Puccini’s “Tosca.”AdvertisementPeter Gelb, general manager of the Met, said, “It’s essential for all venerable institutions to shed their elitist image, but also embrace younger audiences.” He added, “That has colored virtually everything we do.”AdvertisementWhy age 40? (The Met’s neighbors usually cap the discount at a younger age: 29 at New York City Ballet and 35 at Lincoln Center Theater.) Partly, Mr. Gelb said, the phrase Fridays Under 40 just sounds nice. There is some strategy in the decision, though. One of the program’s goals is to bring in people who could one day replace this opera house’s ever-graying audience of donors or subscribers. That requires money, and there aren’t as many affluent professionals right out of college. This strategy allows for some breathing room.The three opera parties included a blend of first-timers, students and professionals who bought tickets in groups. The audience has grown each time: 119, 131, then 212 people. Part of the allure, for them, is the production. A group of four — two of whom were doctors — went to “Rigoletto” because they were intrigued by the Las Vegas casino setting in Michael Mayer’s flashy production. At the party, themed martinis were served and chorus members dressed as showgirls roamed the room to be photographed with audience members. The Met posted a photo of that group of four on its Instagram account with the hashtag #Fun40.At a November party for “Tosca,” a decades-old televised performance with Maria Callas was projected on the wall as people sampled Italian wines. Among these partygoers were two recent college graduates and musicians, Emily Ariese and Russell Johnson, who were also at the party for “Otello” in September. They said their friends outside the music world were put off by institutions like the Met because they seemed expensive or their performances difficult to understand. But, as fans of Jay Z and Leos Janacek, they don’t see why their friends aren’t more open to classical music, especially given Lincoln Center’s affordability.Mr. Johnson said, “I always tell people, ‘Actually, it’s cheaper than a pop concert,’” adding “and it’s always a surprise.”The other Lincoln Center venues don’t hold parties, but they offer new ticket discounts that they hope will remove barriers, real or imagined, to their concert halls. New York City Ballet’s $29 tickets for those age 29 and under are back for a second season, as are Free Fridays at the New York Philharmonic, open to those ages 13 to 26.Karen Girty, City Ballet’s senior manager of marketing and media, said this program created “a lot of buzz on Twitter” and quickly drew new audience members to the house. And the Philharmonic’s free tickets are usually claimed within an hour of becoming available.In the inaugural season of Philharmonic Free Fridays, nearly 40 percent of the 2,000 tickets available went to people between the ages of 21 and 26. Their seats were spread around the house at David Geffen Hall, allowing them to rub shoulders with subscribers. The older audience members seemed to really like it, said Matthew VanBesien, the orchestra’s executive director. “The more young people, the more energy,” he said.AdvertisementMr. VanBesien added that the Philharmonic was speaking to specific donors about bankrolling more free seats for future seasons.Fridays Under 40 is too young to declare a success or failure, but Mr. Gelb is certain that programs like it must continue. “No performing arts company can survive without replenishing its audience,” he said.Here’s how these programs work:Metropolitan Opera The Met’s efforts to make opera affordable have been a work in progress; tweaks over the past decade have fixed technical inefficiencies and have kept a small group of people from hogging the small pool of rush tickets. Rush tickets are sold online on a first come first served basis, regardless of age, but there is a limit to how often individuals can buy tickets this way. The price is $25 for up to two seats near the back of the orchestra section.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fridays Under 40 tickets, by contrast, cost $60 to $100 for seats in the orchestra and grand tier that normally start at $80 and $90. The accompanying party, where free food and drinks are served, begins at 6:30 p.m., ahead of an 8 p.m. curtain. Up next, on Dec. 18, is Johann Strauss Jr.’s farcical operetta “Die Fledermaus,” conducted by James Levine.New York City Ballet Tickets for one of the world’s finest ballet companies normally start at $30, though the seat locations — to the far right and far left of the house — reflect the low price. The $29 for 29 tickets, with a limit of two per customer, are for typically better seats spread throughout the house and can be picked up at the box office the day of the performance. Availability for each week is posted on City Ballet’s website on Mondays. But don’t count on using this discount for “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” (though tickets for that start at $35). This discount is only for repertory seasons; the next one begins on Jan. 19, with a program that includes choreography by Peter Martins, Jerome Robbins and Balanchine.New York Philharmonic On select Fridays, the Philharmonic gives away 100 tickets to concertgoers between the ages of 13 and 26. Reservations are open beginning at noon the Monday before; the tickets are usually gone by 1 p.m. Seats are scattered throughout David Geffen Hall. Also spread around the house are some of Lincoln Center’s least expensive student rush tickets: $16, up to two per customer, usually available more than a week in advance. Acoustics in the hall can be fickle, so rushers would be wise to avoid the corners and far rear seats. Rush tickets are available for Tuesday’s performance of Handel’s “Messiah.” The next Free Fridays concert, a mix of Strauss and Wagner with the “Ring” cycle veteran Eric Owens, is on Jan. 8. Tickets to this performance otherwise cost $29 to $99.Lincoln Center Theater Discount tickets for all ages to see Kelli O’Hara in Bartlett Sher’s acclaimed Broadway revival of “The King and I” are not available at same-day ticket booths like TKTS; they are available for select performances at the Zucker Box Office, tucked inside the David Rubenstein Atrium at Lincoln Center. When available, tickets can be purchased on performance day. (Full-price tickets to this show cost between $87 and $182.)For theatergoers who prefer to secure seats ahead of time, Lincoln Center Theater’s LincTix program is open to those 21 to 35 years old. The $32 tickets are limited to one per customer, though people can add friends’ LincTix user IDs to their order to allow everyone to sit together. This may be the least expensive way to see “The King and I,” as well as Ivo van Hove’s production of “A View From the Bridge” offsite at the Lyceum Theater on Broadway. (Full-price tickets to this show are $30 to $135.)Carnegie Hall Though not part of Lincoln Center, this former home of the New York Philharmonic has offered discounted tickets for decades. To celebrate its 125th season, Carnegie has lined up performances from some of the world’s greatest orchestras and soloists, including the pianist Evgeny Kissin, who recently announced that after this season he won’t perform in the United States until 2018. Tickets are sure to sell out. Never fear: Carnegie keeps a reserve of $10 rush tickets even for sold-out concerts, available the day of performances when the box office opens. All tickets are for the balcony, a nonissue for the hall’s impeccable acoustics. Waiting for the box office to open at 11 a.m. could be a challenge for people stuck at work. But there are worse places to spend a winter morning than at the historic lobby of Carnegie Hall.A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page C34 of the New York edition with the headline: Mixing Martinis and Social Media With ‘Rigoletto’  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.