AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate ChinenLAST Friday, Jason Stein, a bass clarinetist ensconced in the Chicago jazz avant-garde, found himself in a familiar situation: playing a gig with his trio, Locksmith Isidore. But where they were playing was out of the ordinary: to a crowd of about 14,000 people at the BMO Harris Bradley Center, home of the Milwaukee Bucks.The following night, they did it again at the Consol Energy Center in Pittsburgh, where the Penguins play. They’ll be working on comparable stages this weekend — and a handful of other dates, including June 23 at Madison Square Garden — as an opening act for Amy Schumer, the stand-up comedian, writer-producer and “Trainwreck” star.Mr. Stein is Ms. Schumer’s older brother, though that alone doesn’t explain how he came to be part of her arena tour: She has always been one of his biggest fans. “I’ve grown up watching my brother play clubs,” Ms. Schumer said by phone this week, “sometimes to a good nine people that the whole band knows.”They have shared a stage before, notably this summer at the Chicago jazz club Constellation, where Ms. Schumer worked out new material and Mr. Stein doubled as opening act and M.C. Still, their sibling relationship isn’t common knowledge, even in the close-knit jazz scene, partly because of Mr. Stein’s instinctive guardedness about seeming like an opportunist.“I really asked him to do this,” said Ms. Schumer, who recently had her own stint as an arena opener, for Madonna. “He tried a bunch of times to be, like, ‘Really?’ And I’m like: ‘Yes. Yessss.’”Technically they’re half-siblings, though neither gives much thought to that distinction. Mr. Stein, whose parents divorced when he was 2, lived with his mother and stepfather, Amy’s father, on Long Island. (His own father, with whom he spent weekends, died when he was 10.)“We grew up in the same house,” Mr. Stein said, “starting from Day 1, when Amy was born.” Their younger sister, whose married name is Kim Caramele, is known to comedy fans as Amy’s writing partner, associate producer and co-conspirator, on “Trainwreck” as well as the sharply satirical Comedy Central series “Inside Amy Schumer” and the HBO special “Amy Schumer: Live at the Apollo.”They had a suburban upbringing, playing varsity sports — Jason was a basketball star, Amy was serious about volleyball — and sharing a barbed sense of humor. “Jason is very funny and dry and sarcastic,” Ms. Schumer said, “and I am very bad musically. I tried, I think, four instruments. I tried! The cello was what I played the longest, and my teacher asked me to stop taking it.”Mr. Stein had a more encouraging musical path, especially once he committed to the bass clarinet, becoming one of the few working jazz musicians to make it his sole instrument. He moved to Chicago a decade ago, quickly becoming a fixture of its experimental scene. His next album, “Hearts and Minds,” due out on Astral Spirits in February, will feature Paul Giallorenzo on piano and synthesizer and Frank Rosaly on drums.Locksmith Isidore, which includes the stalwart Chicago bassist Jason Roebke and the dynamic New York drummer Mike Pride, had been on hiatus for several years before this tour. “I always had the intention to do more with this group,” Mr. Stein said, “and had been waiting for the right situation to present itself.” The band’s arena set list has drawn from each of its three albums, with an emphasis on Mr. Stein’s more energetic originals — like “Amy Music,” whose frisky melodic intervals recall Eric Dolphy, and whose title is self-explanatory.Ms. Schumer said she’d heard virtually no gripes about her opening act, at least so far. “I feel very lucky that there is a demand for comedy,” she said, “because my shows are well attended, while the supply-and-demand scenario for free jazz isn’t what it used to be.” She added, “I’m sure many of the people at these shows have never seen any jazz live, if they’re not at an Easter brunch.”Mr. Stein, whose own comic disposition suggests a fatalistic deadpan, said he wasn’t aware of how many Locksmith Isidore albums were sold last week. “I’m sure there were people who were absolutely not paying attention,” he said, “and other people who were really into it.”His aim is to write new music for the trio, which raises the possibility that some new tunes might have their debut at that Madison Square Garden show. “I always figured we’d wind up playing there,” Mr. Stein said dryly. “So it’s just nice that this is the way it happened.”Jason Stein’s Locksmith Isidore opens for Amy Schumer on Friday at the Bridgestone Arena in Nashville and on Saturday at the BB&T Center in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; jasonsteinmusic­.com.Advertisement