AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleYou can count on the Golden Globes to throw a few curveballs when it comes to television, and this year’s nominations were no exception. An Amazon comedy came out of nowhere, while a PBS war horse and previous Globes favorite was ignored as it approaches its final season. And a two-time Emmy nominee who was considered a lock in the supporting-actress category wasn’t nominated, proving that even Cersei Lannister doesn’t frighten the nominators.SurpriseAmazon’s “Mozart in the Jungle,” released almost a year ago, ignored by the Emmys and the subject of virtually no prenomination conversation, was a stunning nominee for comedy series. Perhaps the foreign press liked the presence of the international star Gael García Bernal, an equally surprising nominee for comedy actor. Its presence meant that four of the six comedy nominees were from Amazon (“Transparent”), Hulu (“Casual”) and Netflix (“Orange Is the New Black”), with only two HBO series (“Silicon Valley” and “Veep”) representing nonstreaming television. (Though HBO GO and HBO Now are slowly turning that premium cable network into one.)Snub“Downton Abbey,” a Globe winner in the mini-series category and a three-time drama-series nominee, got no love there as it heads into its final season. “House of Cards” also dropped out of the drama-series category after two straight nominations.SurpriseEva Green received unexpected and deserved recognition for her performance in Showtime’s “Penny Dreadful,” where she brings her uncanny, ice-cold ferocity to the role of the demon-hunting heroine. Her drama-actress nomination came at the expense of two other Showtime stars, Claire Danes of “Homeland” and Ruth Wilson of “The Affair.”SnubWill Forte of Fox’s “Last Man on Earth” was expected to grab a comedy-actor nomination, but his spot was probably taken by Mr. Bernal. That left Rob Lowe of Fox’s “Grinder” as the only broadcast-network star in the category, now that Jim Parsons of “The Big Bang Theory” has fallen out of favor.Surprise“Outlander” was actually considered a strong contender for a drama series nomination, but many casual viewers may have been scratching their heads at the mention of Starz’s historical-supernatural romance, whose audience averaged just under two million.SnubLena Headey of HBO’s “Game of Thrones” was a favorite to win the supporting-actress category but didn’t get nominated. Apparently long, naked walks in front of jeering crowds are not as attractive to foreign-press voters as one might have thought.SurpriseStarz’s “Flesh and Bone” in the mini-series category is a good example of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association’s habit of occasionally throwing in something outrageous just to prove it can. It took a spot that could have gone to a more high-minded project like HBO’s “Show Me a Hero” or “Bessie.”SnubNetflix’s “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt” and “Master of None” were both thought to be the kind of hip new shows that the Globes likes to associate itself with, but neither broke through in the comedy-series category, and neither did the star of “Kimmy Schmidt,” Ellie Kemper. (Though Aziz Ansari did grab a best comedy actor nomination for “Master of None.”) While Netflix led the TV nominations over all with eight, the absence of these shows, along with “House of Cards” in drama, was noticeable.Advertisement