AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckFeeling rebellious? Stream “Mad Max: Fury Road.” Or turn on the tube as Mary Poppins produces a spoonful of sugar in the Disney classic, while Selena Gomez and Vanessa Hudgens leave their Disney pasts behind in “Spring Breakers.”What’s StreamingMAD MAX: FURY ROAD (2015) on iTunes. George Miller’s reboot has landed on a lot of “best of” lists this year, and it’s easy to see why: Hugh Keays-Byrne as Immortan Joe, a tyrannical C.E.O. who scorches a death’s-head insignia into the people he owns; Tom Hardy as Max, now a “blood bag” kept alive for transfusions; and Charlize Theron as Imperator Furiosa, a rebel with glazed-over eyes, a prosthetic arm and a souped-up truck full of the women Joe keeps for breeding. And he wants them back. “It’s all great fun, and quite rousing as well — a large-scale genre movie that is at once unpretentious and unafraid to bring home a message,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. (Image: Charlize Theron, kneeling)What’s on TVMARY POPPINS (1964) 8 p.m. on ABC. P. L. Travers’s English nursemaid brings her spoonful of sugar and bottomless satchel to the Banks family’s London home in this Disney fantasy starring Julie Andrews. Dick Van Dyke is Bert, the chimney sweep with a thing for her. “Of course, it is sentimental,” Bosley Crowther wrote in The Times. “And, as Mary Poppins says, ‘Practically perfect people never permit sentiment to muddle their feelings.’ But being not practically perfect, I find it irresistible.” (Image: Ms. Andrews)THE DIVERGENT SERIES: INSURGENT (2015) 8 p.m. on HBO. Shailene Woodley and Theo James return as the teenage renegades Tris and Four, this time fleeing a post-apocalyptic future Chicago, where an oppressive system is in control. Kate Winslet plays its leader, hunting down Divergents. This second installment in the dystopian film series based on Veronica Roth’s young adult trilogy “arrives with a yawn and ends with a bang,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. (Image: Ms. Winslet, left, and Ms. Woodley)SPRING BREAKERS (2012) 9 p.m. on Showtime. Four college women, played by Selena Gomez, Vanessa Hudgens, Ashley Benson and Rachel Korine, hold up a restaurant to finance a vacation in St. Petersburg, Fla. And then — paaarty! It’s a bacchanal of drinking, snorting and grinding, filmed in gaudy color by Harmony Korine, who “embraces the role of court jester, the fool whose transgressive laughter carries corrosive truth,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. (Image: Ms. Benson)FOUR FALLS OF BUFFALO 9:30 p.m. on ESPN. “30 for 30” looks at the early 1990s Buffalo Bills, the only team to make it to four straight Super Bowls — and to lose four years in a row.SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE 11:30 p.m. on NBC. Chris Hemsworth hosts; Chance the Rapper performs.Advertisement