AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon ParelesThe harmonies couldn’t have been purer, or the picking more precise, when the trio I’m With Her — an alliance of Americana virtuosos — performed at the Bowery Ballroom on Thursday night.Sara Watkins (violin), Sarah Jarosz (banjo, mandolin and guitar) and Aoife O’Donovan (guitar) all have solo careers in the largely (but not exclusively) unplugged sphere where folk and bluegrass meet jazz, world music and chamber music; Ms. O’Donovan has an album due in January. But I’m With Her is no casual jam session or songwriters’ round table. Each song in the trio’s generous set was meticulously arranged to make the most of the many ways the musicians could blend. Serene understatement was the concert’s hallmark; at times, the music was so quiet I could hear the club’s floorboards creaking.Lead vocals revealed distinctive voices: Ms. Watkins’s plaintive clarity, Ms. O’Donovan’s tremulous warmth, Ms. Jarosz’s hint of bluesiness. But when the three women sang together, their voices became one instrument, sharing every breath. There were two-part and three-part vocal harmonies that could be sweetly ethereal, or as tightly in tandem as country sibling teams like the Everly Brothers, or as hearty as mountain gospel. There were brisk, zigzagging, bluegrass-based tunes shared in precise unison by Ms. Watkins’s fiddle and Ms. Jarosz’s mandolin over Ms. O’Donovan’s rhythm guitar. There were toe-tapping banjo songs, like the trio’s version of John Hiatt’s “Crossing Muddy Waters.” And there were hushed ballads, like Ms. Jarosz’s “Run Away,” which connected deep Celtic roots to haunted private thoughts.The women sang their own songs and material from others, among them Laura Veirs, Bill Monroe and the Swedish traditionalist group Vasen. With foot stamps and handclaps for percussion, the trio performed “Be My Husband,” a field-holler-style song originally recorded by Nina Simone that starts with a vow of devotion but goes on to complain, “Please don’t treat me so doggone mean/You’re the meanest man I ever seen.” They also brought on five members of the Knights, a New York City chamber orchestra, to back them on Christmas songs like “Lo, How a Rose E’er Blooming” and a robust “Go Tell It on the Mountain.”For most of the set, the three sang about separation and longing: songs like Utah Phillips’s “I Think of You,” Gillian Welch’s “One Hundred Miles” and Ms. Watkins’s own “You and Me.” But the separations were only in the stories they sang; the music radiated togetherness.Advertisement