AdvertisementSupported byBy Siobhan BurkeNew York Live Arts, as its longtime visitors know, has changed. Once a destination almost exclusively for dance — in a previous life, it was Dance Theater Workshop — it has opened its doors, under shifting leadership, to a wider range of disciplines and cross-disciplinary programs, for better and for worse.This fall brought the first installment of a contemporary music series, with the exciting indie-classical ensemble yMusic in residence for three months. Two estimable dancer-choreographers, both in their 60s — Bill T. Jones, the artistic director of Live Arts, and Dianne McIntyre — joined the six young instrumentalists for “Come Around Part IV,” the last of their four concerts, presenting solos to a new composition by Marcos Balter.Why these choreographers with this music? Neither pairing seemed natural — perhaps it was the generational rift — though the contrasts between the dances were intriguing. Appearing on alternate nights in the program’s second half, Mr. Jones on Wednesday (with his first solo in nearly a decade) and Ms. McIntyre on Thursday, the two took the same shimmering score, titled “We Carry Our Home With Us Which Enables Us to Fly,” in strikingly different directions.Mr. Jones, known for his outspokenness, gave himself the first word — or sound — clicking his tongue from a crouched, kneeling position. Rising and extending one hand in the shape of a gun, he shouted “drop it!” as he whipped his body around — the first in an arsenal of verbal and gestural phrases laden with meaning. A few minutes passed before the musicians — on viola, violin, trumpet, clarinet, cello, flute and vocals — joined in with a warbling chant, laying the foundation for many more undulatory layers of sound.With the ensemble seated in a back corner, Mr. Jones, clad in orange, had plenty of room to chart his right-angular path along the front of the stage and toward the back wall, pausing to pose in isolated patches of light. He alternated powerful stances and statements — flexed biceps for “Hell yeah!” — with meek ones, like a high-pitched “please give” with inward-bending knees. Strung together, repeated and reoriented, these mostly plowed over and through the music, rather than conversing with it.Ms. McIntyre, on the other hand, was guided by what she calls “longing to be another instrument in the ensemble.” The musicians sat scattered around the stage — dressed, like she was, in white — allowing her to skitter from one to the next, at times along strips of red tape on the floor. Sculpting the space around each with feverish hands, she could have been casting a spell or usurping their magic for herself. It was a generous approach, though Ms. McIntyre’s vocabulary, based mostly in the upper body, grew repetitive.The yMusic members are themselves physically expressive. When the group walked onstage on Wednesday for the program’s first half, which consists of music only, the bounce in their steps was bracing. And though seated when they play, the musicians don’t sit still, in particular the violist Nadia Sirota. With a visceral sound and adventurous taste, they make sense as collaborators for dance, but in Mr. Jones and Ms. McIntyre, they haven’t found their match.­yMusic continues on Saturday at New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street Chelsea; 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org.Advertisement