AdvertisementSupported byBy Vivien SchweitzerOnly a few decades ago, purists argued that Bach should be played not on the modern piano, but on the harpsichord. But for listeners now accustomed to hearing this composer’s work rendered with the elaborate expressive capabilities of the modern piano, its predecessor’s sound can seem dry and monochromatic.The harpsichord itself is often blamed more than the performer. But musicians like Wanda Landowska, who helped revive the art of playing it early in the 20th century, offered magical performances of Bach on the harpsichord. And Richard Egarr is a contemporary master of using the instrument in imaginative, soulful Bach renditions.It’s true that the harpsichord lacks a wide dynamic range and can sound brittle when compared with the tonal warmth of a piano. But since harpsichordists can’t shape a phrase as they would on a modern instrument, they can vary the palette by switching manuals and registers, which the harpsichordist Jory Vinikour did during his performance of Bach’s Partita No. 3 at Weill Recital Hall on Thursday.Still, his confident performance lacked soul and left me missing the singing lines and depth that can be elicited from a modern keyboard. Other parts of the program proved more satisfying, like the virtuosic performance of four sonatas by Scarlatti, including an energetic rendition of the well-known Sonata in D (K. 119). Mr. Vinikour deftly mastered technical challenges like the rapid arpeggios and hand crossings in the Sonatas K. 535, K. 534 and K. 120; he also demonstrated his dexterity in “The King’s Hunt,” an extravagant, picturesque piece by the Renaissance composer John Bull.The second half of the program included Louis Couperin’s Suite in C, featuring a soulfully rendered Prelude, and Rameau’s Suite in A Minor from “Nouvelles Suites de Pièces de Clavecin,” whose witty moments and textural depth Mr. Vinikour deftly illustrated.His encores included two selections by Rameau, performed with an engaging spontaneity often missing earlier in the program. His flair was particularly striking in an exuberant rendition of a transcription of the Overture from “Pygmalion.”Advertisement