By ANTHONY TOMMASINIDEC. 11, 2015
Can the young American composer Andrew Norman keep this up? I’m not just referring to the career roll he’s been on: This week the recording of Mr. Norman’s breathless orchestral work “Play” was nominated for a Grammy Award in the contemporary classical composition category.I’m also wondering whether Mr. Norman can keep turning out pieces as audacious, exhilarating and, in a way, exhausting as “Split,” a fantasy for piano and orchestra that had a spectacular premiere by the New York Philharmonic at David Geffen Hall on Thursday. Jeffrey Kahane, the dynamic pianist for whom the piece was written, was the soloist in this frenetic 25-minute work. The accomplished American conductor James Gaffigan (36, the same age as Mr. Norman) led the performance brilliantly, placing the piece intriguingly between Beethoven’s Fourth Symphony and Strauss’s “Till Eulenspiegel’s Merry Pranks.”Mr. Norman explained from the stage before the performance that he had long admired Mr. Kahane’s spunky, characterful playing. So he made the soloist in “Split” a kind of trickster who eggs on the orchestra but, in turn, finds himself pushed around by the players, especially three percussionists, the pianist’s primary antagonists.This description makes “Split” sound too innocent. The radical element, something this piece has in common with “Play,” is the way Mr. Norman handles time and structure. His feel for storytelling is permeated by “nonlinear, narrative-scrambling techniques from cinema, television and video games,” as he explains on his website. So his music can seem like nonstop quick cuts from one idea to another. This technique could result in pieces that sound crazed, incoherent or gimmicky.AdvertisementBut Mr. Norman brings to his work an acute ear for sonority, along with a sure feel for musical architecture. During every teeming, discombobulating moment of “Split,” you sense a composer in control. So you relax and go along for the ride.Advertisement“Split” begins with a whiplike crack that prods the piano to play repetitive clusters high in its register. Looking pensive, Mr. Kahane unraveled the cluster, bringing out a motif of four notes that he tried over and over, then began to vary. The madcap interplay between the piano and the orchestra soon got going, and seldom stopped.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Certain sonic cues from percussionists compelled Mr. Kahane to respond in certain ways. Sometimes the piano broke into spiraling flourishes, like Ravel gone vehement, or arpeggio madness, like spliced-together outtakes from a recording of a Tchaikovsky concerto.There is constant variety: stretches in which a bout of pointillist-like notes are scattered across the orchestra, like a 12-tone Webern piece turned into music for a video game; episodes in which a briefly wistful piano engages in an almost tender exchange with a solo string instrument. Yet when the strings seem to buttress the piano during quizzical passages, it sounds as if they were just biding their time, plotting how to steal the idea and run with it.Mr. Kahane, true to form, played the daunting piano part with impish command and rich colors. Under Mr. Gaffigan, the orchestra entered readily into the game. But the question remains: Is this now Mr. Norman’s style? Can he stick to an approach that results in such intentionally fragmented pieces, however riveting? Maybe, just to try it, he should compose an Adagio for Strings.Mr. Gaffigan, who is thriving as the chief conductor of the Lucerne Symphony Orchestra, led a bracing performance of Beethoven’s Fourth Symphony, chosen because it’s an ebullient piece full of that master’s equivalent of jump cuts. Strauss’s popular tone poem tells the story of Till Eulenspiegel, an actual prankster. Mr. Gaffigan conducted an uncommonly brash account that made the music seem ominously playful. Much like “Split.”­This program will be repeated on Saturday at David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center; 212-875-5656, nyphil­.org.A version of this review appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: A Madcap Prankster at Play.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.