By MIKE HALEDEC. 11, 2015
In its 23 years, the cable channel now known as Syfy has had exactly one series that became required viewing: “Battlestar Galactica,” which ended in 2009. In the six years since, while AMC, FX, HBO, Netflix and others have defined the parameters of “peak TV,” Syfy’s most recognizable show has probably been “Ghost Hunters,” the reality series about plumbers turned paranormal private eyes.The channel has made periodic attempts to banish the ghost of “Galactica,” including the spinoff show “Caprica” and the serialized movie reboot “12 Monkeys.” On Monday, it jacks up the stakes with “The Expanse,” a 10-episode dystopian drama that it’s calling “the most ambitious series in Syfy history.” Hey, “Galactica” producers, it was nice knowing you!Based on a series of novels by James S. A. Corey (a pen name for the writers Daniel Abraham and Ty Franck) and set in the 23rd century, “The Expanse” does have certain ambitions. While it’s primarily (through the four episodes available to critics) an action-oriented space opera, it also tries to incorporate an extended political allegory, as well as an initially free-standing film noir detective story that’s like a kids’-table version of “Blade Runner.”These genre elements are, in themselves, the main attraction, but they’re also in service of parables about climate change and terrorism. Water is scarce, and humans have begun to offload themselves to other parts of the solar system, populating Mars and the asteroid belt. Earth and Mars are the first world, in an uneasy peace along the lines of the United States and China, while the belters — who mine the ice that keeps everyone drinking and bathing — are a discontented, radicalized bunch. (It’s surely not a coincidence that the central gathering place on a space station is called the Medina.)Mark Fergus and Hawk Ostby, who are show runners on the series and wrote the pilot, achieve a reasonable balance between sci-fi clichés and inventive twists — slow pans over ornate spaceshiép models and the doughty band of bickering heroes are balanced by the interplanetary Mormon missionaries and the Martian interrogator whose empathic powers are drug-enhanced. They also assemble their story smoothly and coherently, signaling early how the search for a missing woman by a detective (Thomas Jane) will intersect with the travails of a renegade spaceship officer (Steven Strait) and the machinations of a ruthless Earth politician (Shohreh Aghdashloo).It’s all a little too smooth and unexceptional, though — nothing in the central performances, the writing, the action or the computer effects goes beyond proficient, and nothing has the stark, strange, sometimes brutal feeling that made “Battlestar Galactica” compelling. For Syfy, the search goes on.A version of this review appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline:  The Geopolitics of Earth, Mars and Asteroids.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.