AdvertisementSupported byBy Randy KennedyChristopher Rothko doesn’t look much like his father, the painter Mark Rothko, who took his own life when his son was 6. The father was rotund and jowly, with a high bald pate and a world-weary demeanor (at least in the best-known portraits.) The son, now 52, is lean and reedy, with a head of just-graying hair and a ready smile.But in an email describing himself before a recent meeting at a Times Square restaurant, Rothko the son said he would be easy to spot because “I usually look like I could use a nap (or two).” And when he arrived, his pillowy, encircled eyes indeed conveyed sleeplessness, along with a striking resemblance to his father’s eyes, which the poet Stanley Kunitz once described as “liquid with patriarchal affection and solicitude.”Christopher Rothko gave up a profession as a clinical psychologist to oversee his father’s complex legacy and to lecture about his work. And now, more than a dozen years into that full-time life in the art world, he has published his first collection of critical essays about his father’s painting and its still-unsettling effect on viewers, “Mark Rothko: From the Inside Out” (Yale University Press).Several times at the outset, Mr. Rothko makes clear what his book is not about, for readers who might come to it with expectations shaped by “Red” (2010), the Tony Award-winning play, or by the stratospheric market heights reached in recent years for Rothko works. (A painting from 1961 sold at auction in 2012 for almost $87 million, setting a record almost broken this year with the sale of another painting for $82 million.)Because he was so young when his father died, Mr. Rothko writes: “I have no vast cache of private communications to trawl as I think about the art. And certainly the 6-year-old is in no position to write a kiss-and-tell, so those seeking copious revelations about my father’s personal life will be disappointed.” But after three decades of paying close attention to his father’s work and breaking the Champagne bottle, as he describes it, “over the prow of many a Rothko steamer” in museums around the globe, Mr. Rothko said he felt ready to step forward to try to untangle the public’s thinking about these paintings from thinking about his father’s life, which swerves too often toward myth. “People have this image of an irascible, kind of titanic figure,” he said, of an alpha-male Olympian of the Abstract Expressionist movement, smoking and sparring furiously with history. Because of Rothko’s suicide, in 1970, there are the additional readings of his classic sectional paintings, with their totemic weight and sometimes-glowering palette, as statements of existential darkness and foreboding.“I don’t think anybody would deny that he was deeply depressed in the last two years of his life, his health was failing, but he painted a tremendous number of works in those years, and he was experimenting with at least two new directions,” Mr. Rothko said. “The very act of painting is a hopeful act.”Through the book’s 18 essays, on topics as broad as Rothko’s reliance on the rectangle and as specific as his infatuation with Mozart, Mr. Rothko’s refrain is that his father worked in a quiet, philosophical, most un-Pollock-like way. (“Specifically, he always painted alone. Always.”) And that his work, far from being muscular and aggressive, is aesthetically fragile and remains so despite its enshrinement by the canon and the market. “It is so dangerously close to nothing that it is easily rendered irrelevant when approached or presented unsympathetically; its initial grip on us can be tenuous at best,” he writes.But if viewed in the spirit Rothko hoped for, the paintings achieve a “primal, pre-verbal communication” that is powerfully humanistic, highly individual and, in an odd way for paintings still seen by some as elitist, almost populist, Mr. Rothko writes. In 1954, Rothko told his fellow Abstract Expressionist Ethel K. Schwabacher of his dream of having small chapels along roads throughout the country, where lonely travelers could stop and commune with his paintings one at a time, a kind of exalted rest stop somewhere between the drive-through and the motel.Mr. Rothko and his older sister, Kate Rothko Prizel, who was 19 when her father died, have tended the Rothko flame since the conclusion of an ugly, highly public battle in the 1970s in which they prevailed against Rothko’s executors and the Marlborough Gallery, which they accused of defrauding the estate. (Their mother, the former Mary Alice Beistle, who was known as Mell and married Rothko in 1945, died six months after her husband’s suicide.) The outcome of the case resulted in the restoration of hundreds of paintings to the estate, $9 million in fines, and damages levied against the executors and the gallery, and the restructuring of the Rothko Foundation, which went on to distribute more than 1,000 Rothko works to museums in the United States and abroad.Dr. Prizel, a pathologist who lives in Washington, was primarily responsible for years for dealing with the stream of questions from those exhibiting, studying and conserving her father’s work. But her brother — who was raised mostly in Ohio by his maternal aunt and uncle, and who later settled in Ann Arbor, Mich., to practice psychology — began to take on a larger role. And around 1999, he stopped taking new patients and transitioned into a life of Rothko stewardship.“When he told my husband and I that he was going to go in this direction, we were a little surprised and, frankly, we were a little worried for him,” Dr. Prizel said in an interview.“But I think one of the things he’s done is to forge a new relationship with our father through the scholarship.”Dr. Prizel and Mr. Rothko, who lives on the Upper West Side with his wife and their three children, commune closely in their respective homes with a rotating selection of their father’s work. Much of it will eventually be given to institutions, and it includes many of Rothko’s lesser-known figurative paintings, made during the 20-year span before he became a fully abstract painter. The sky-high prices now being paid by ultra-wealthy collectors, Mr. Rothko said, are on one hand a validation of the importance of Rothko’s work. But they are also causing private owners of prime works to grow less willing to lend to public exhibitions, and inflating insurance and shipping costs for institutions.“It really is drastically changing the playing field, and I don’t think it’s to the public’s benefit,” Mr. Rothko said.He said he hoped his book, written in a scholarly but accessible voice and very much from the perspective of the uninitiated viewer (an emphasis due in part, perhaps, to his days as a therapist), presents a strong public case for Rothko’s continued relevance beyond hype and dollars. “My father didn’t see himself as a revolutionary,” he said. “He saw himself as extending painting’s traditions into our time, to speak to us now, and I think we’re still very much living in a time that needs him.”Advertisement