Compiled by BEN RATLIFF and NATE CHINENDEC. 11, 2015
Frank Sinatra was was born on Dec. 12, 1915. A hundred years on, the Voice resonates still.Elvis Presley and Frank Sinatra, “Love Me Tender/Witchcraft” (1960)“I’m thinking of the encounter between Frank and Elvis, when El guested on Frank’s TV show, and they did a medley duet. What I noticed at first viewing was how much larger, prettier and vocally more powerful Elvis was than Frank. Sort of a solid gold Cadillac in human form, purring through the material with God-like ease. I think Frank showed incredible pluck and guts in holding his own gracefully. Kind of a sympathetic Everyman. Worthy of respect, even from Apollo.”“It’s Easy to Remember (and So Hard to Forget)” (1957)“I was 18. In my tiny Bahia house, I would spend hours listening to the album ‘Close to You.’ ‘It’s Easy to Remember,’ ‘Everything Happens to Me,’ ‘With Every Breath I Take,’ ‘P.S. I Love You’ … Sinatra at his soberest, most dignified manliness. His natural musicianship in perfect calm. Nelson Riddle. That album formed my taste. I loved Ray Charles, Monk and Miles. And listened to João Gilberto more than anything. But Sinatra’s ‘Close to You’ played a special role in my musical life.”“It Was a Very Good Year” (1965)“Sinatra is the embodiment of a dominant, swinging singer. His technique is flawless. (Did Sinatra ever sing out of tune?) His delivery is emotionally transparent and rich. His diction is at once relaxed and crystal clear. He is a profound storyteller — as you can gather from this clip. Really, there is so much about popular singing of good taste that Sinatra simply defined that it’s tough not to throw one’s hands up at the idea of even attempting to match him. It is one more spur to those who come after him to chart new territory. Otherwise, he just owns the field. I’ve always wished there was one more verse to this remarkable song — it’s just over too soon.”By Andrew ChowLISTEN to two 100-track retrospectives, each released this year: “Ultimate Sinatra,” which includes all your favorite hits from “Night and Day” to “Fly Me to the Moon,” and “A Voice on Air,” which unearths radio recordings that span two decades.AdvertisementTUNE IN to the SiriusXM channel Siriusly Sinatra for round-the-clock programming, including shows hosted by Sinatra’s children, Nancy, Frank Jr. and Tina.AdvertisementWATCH “All or Nothing at All,” an HBO documentary on Sinatra by Alex Gibney, re-airing at 12 p.m. “It reminds us of the type of stardom Sinatra enjoyed, one that some people might think was invented by Elvis Presley or the Beatles,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in his review for The New York Times.READ Gay Talese’s definitive essay for Esquire on Sinatra from 1966. Despite not getting a single interview with Sinatra, Mr. Talese brilliantly captured the ethos of a legend as a weary lion.ATTEND one of the many concerts paying tribute to Sinatra across the country — from Michael Feinstein at NJPAC to Frank Sinatra Jr. in Beverly Hills, Calif., to Joe Piscopo in Bethlehem, Pa.A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Moments Revisited.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.