By BRIAN SEIBERTDEC. 10, 2015
“Trying to describe Coltrane’s music is like trying to describe God.” So says a member of Urban Bush Women during the troupe’s new work, “Walking With ’Trane,” which opened at the BAM Harvey Theater on Wednesday. That kind of talk is standard for the practically beatified jazz saxophonist John Coltrane, one of the only musicians in history to have a church consecrated in his name. But these dancers don’t have to describe Coltrane’s music, only dance to it.Or rather they must dance to music inspired by Coltrane’s. The work has two parts. “Side A” features a recording, composed by Philip White, that sounds as if all of Coltrane’s music and all of his influences had been crushed together (perhaps for transmission to outer space) and then partially decompressed. For “Side B,” the excellent pianist George Caldwell joins the dancers onstage to play a jazz fantasia on themes from Coltrane’s beyond-classic album “A Love Supreme.”The choreography is credited to this distinguished troupe’s artistic director, Jawole Willa Jo Zollar, and one of its dancers, Samantha Speis, “in collaboration with the company.” Yet much of the time it looks as though the dancers — six powerful women joined by one gentle man — have been left to themselves, asked to respond in the moment, as if they were jazz musicians. Jazz improvisation requires a lot more discipline and preparation than these dancers appear to have.“Side A” begins promisingly, with the lithe and lanky Chanon Judson undulating, her internal antennas tuned in to some cosmic channel. But she and the other dancers take this inward focus too far; doing her or his own thing and sporadically stamping, each might as well be wearing headphones. Tendayi Kuumba’s vocal progression from field holler to jazz scatting is impressive, but suggestions of biography, like a scene of drug withdrawal, are unconvincing, and the performers’ thoughts about Coltrane, delivered in voice-over, are deflatingly pedestrian.“Side B” has more developed choreographic content, but against Mr. Caldwell’s clearer musical structure, the poverty of the danced response is set into greater relief. The performers run around and around. They reach and reach, but they have no vocabulary to match Mr. Caldwell’s, much less to approach Coltrane’s, and their feigned ecstasy at the end is nowhere near earned. Sophisticated video design (by Wendall Harrington) quotes Coltrane: “All paths lead to God.” Yet artistic transcendence isn’t achieved by faith alone.“Walking With ’Trane” continues through Saturday at BAM Harvey Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Brooklyn; 718-636-4100, bam­.org.A version of this review appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: Jazz Improvisation, With the Whole Body as an Instrument.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.