By CHRISTOPHER D. SHEADEC. 10, 2015
LONDON — This week, in a tiny theater nestled above the Old Red Lion Pub here, the first play that Arthur Miller ever wrote is having its world premiere.The staging of the play, “No Villain,” a nakedly autobiographical story that Miller wrote in 1936 as a 20-year-old sophomore at the University of Michigan, was scheduled to open on Thursday night, capping a banner year for the playwright in England.In June, the director James Dacre staged “The Hook,” a 1950 Miller screenplay that never made it to the screen, at the Royal & Derngate Theater in Northampton. A production of “A View From the Bridge” that originated at the Young Vic in London swept this year’s Olivier awards and is running to critical acclaim on Broadway. In October, the BBC aired a slate of Miller documentaries, radio plays and dramas based on his life to celebrate the centenary of his birth on Oct. 17, 1915.That he should come in for special attention in Britain is little surprise, Miller scholars say: His reputation here in many ways outstrips that in his home country.AdvertisementJoshua Polster, a professor of theater studies at Emerson College in Boston, said that Miller’s reception in the United States suffered from his left-wing politics, as well as lingering distaste for “After the Fall,” in which, in slightly disguised form, he dramatized his ill-fated marriage to Marilyn Monroe. “The U.K. has always been very embracing of Miller, and you see that now,” Mr. Polster said, noting that there was a greater appetite for politically tinged theater in Britain.AdvertisementIn the 1980s and 1990s, as Miller’s new work struggled to find a foothold in New York, it gained traction at London’s leading, not-for-profit theaters. Several plays, like “Elegy for a Lady” and “The Archbishop’s Ceiling,” had tepid regional productions before getting robust London runs at the state-subsidized companies that embraced his work — the Young Vic, the National Theater and the Royal Shakespeare Company in particular.Because of the publicity from Miller’s politics and personal life, Mr. Polster said, “his plays never really had the opportunity to breathe” in the United States. “In the U.K., there was a little bit more space for that.”Sean Turner, the 29-year-old director staging “No Villain,” first learned of the play about 18 months ago when he ran across a reference to it in Miller’s autobiography, “Timebends.” He requested the script from the University of Michigan, which had given Miller an award for the  three-act play when it was written.After reading the script, he asked the Arthur Miller Dramatic and Literary Trust, which controls the rights to his works, for permission to stage the production. The foundation agreed, somewhat to his surprise.Patrick Herold, the head of the theater department at the literary agency ICM Partners and the agent for the Miller Trust, said in an email that the trust had approved staging the play because it seemed a fitting part of the centenary celebrations“No Villain” follows the Simons, a Jewish family living in Brooklyn during the Depression. It turns on the conflict between the family patriarch, Abe, who owns a coat and suit factory, and his son Arnold, who returns from a year at the University of Michigan, inflamed by the leftist politics he has encountered there. Tensions erupt over Abe’s business, which has fallen on hard times, and a garment industry strike.Some experts have questioned whether Miller would have wanted the play staged at all. Mr. Polster argued in his book “Stages of Engagement: U.S. Theatre and Performance 1898-1949,” published last month, that Miller re-worked “No Villain” several times and that the final product was in fact “Death of a Salesman.”Advertisement“This is why he always turned down offers to produce ‘No Villain,”’ Mr. Polster said in a phone interview. “He saw it as an example of trial and error.”He was not necessarily against the idea of staging “No Villian,” he said, but it was important “to contextualize it properly” as a student work, “or it could shift how we understand Miller.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If we had all of a sudden ‘No Villain’ in an anthology of Miller’s collection, that does change his signification,” he said. “I think that’s why he didn’t want it done in his lifetime.”Christopher Bigsby, the director of the Arthur Miller Center for American Studies at the University of East Anglia who has written a biography of Miller, said that he and the playwright had had a conversation in which Miller said he decided not to publish “No Villain” because he did not want people to consider the play as the beginning of his career.Mr. Bigsby, too, said he was not opposed to the staging of “No Villain,” and on an invitation from the production team at the Old Red Lion, he visited rehearsals this fall to offer background and context. “It’s a kind of a curiosity,” he said of the play, saying its merits were chiefly scholarly. “It’s not going to damage Miller’s reputation. Miller’s reputation is absolutely secure. It’s just intriguing.” He added: “It’s interesting it’s being put on in a tiny pub theater. Had it been produced at all at the time, it would have been produced in a tiny, small theater in Michigan.”Among the cast of “No Villain” at the Old Red Lion are Nesba Crenshaw, an American who plays Esther, the matriarch, and Kenneth Jay, a Canadian who plays Esther’s father, Grandfather Barnett. Both have lived in England for decades.In a joint interview at the theater, Ms. Crenshaw and Mr. Jay considered Miller’s appeal to British actors and audiences. “There’s none of the ‘don’t make a scene, stiff upper lip’ thing at all,” Ms. Crenshaw said of his plays.Mr. Jay added: “He came into a very industrialized America where it was every man for himself and you had to stand up for yourself and shout, literally.”“Americans tend to just live their hearts on their sleeves more. ‘Go away, don’t bother me,”’ he said, imitating an “On the Waterfront”-style dockworker. “Whereas here you might just get a sidewise look.”AdvertisementIn the last decades of Miller’s life, his career soared in Britain even as it foundered in the United States. “Broken Glass” from 1994, for example, ran for only two months on Broadway after tepid reviews. The London production, meanwhile, won the Olivier award for best play of the year that same year.“His career would have been different in America if he had had a theater,” Mr. Bigsby said. “He had hoped Lincoln Center would be that, but it didn’t work out.” The Repertory Theater of Lincoln Center produced “After the Fall” in 1964. Reviews were, by and large, disastrous.“But, of course, he did have a theater,” Mr. Bigsby said. “It was in this country, and it was the National Theater, the Royal Shakespeare Company, the Young Vic, the Bristol Old Vic. It was the British subsidized theater that really fell for him.”A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Arthur Miller’s ‘Lost’ Play: His First.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.