AdvertisementSupported byTransparentBy Rachel SymeEpisode 2, like the season premiere directed by Jill Soloway, opens on Amy Landecker, who plays Sarah, looking decimated — puffy, no makeup, sallow, dead in the eyes.Sarah is in the throes of a depressive catatonia after her botched wedding, forced to sit in divorce counseling and adopt a new “bird-nesting” plan for her children, which sounds like a logistical nightmare. She feels like a pariah everywhere she goes; when Len is asked if he wants to share a house with her and answers “hell no,” Sarah barely flinches.Meanwhile, Josh is trying to integrate Colton’s “all-American grass-fed beef” into his family life while Raquel grins and bears it. Kathryn Hahn’ssquealing “Colton!” when he jumps into the pool was one of the best insincere “I’m-trying-here-though-I-hate-this-situation” line readings of all time. Josh seems much more connected to the young members of Fussy Puss than he does to his own son (his moony eyes at the lead singer during the performance do not bode well). Still, he does end up confessing to Raquel that he has a “big feeling” that they should all play house together in the Palisades and try to give Colton a sense of home.We see Josh try to empower himself to make adult decisions, and yet we also see him fidgeting in Rita’s living room while waiting for Colton, feeling helpless and intimidated. With his son in his life, Josh is forced to reckon daily with the woman who abused him as a child. Josh is caught somewhere between needing a father figure and needing to be a father figure, and he is using Raquel, Colton and the new baby as his life rafts rather than confronting the real demons lurking below the surface.Ali and Sarah, two siblings that often failed to connect in the first season, present a united front at Josh’s pool party, cracking jokes about Tammy’s gaudy interior designs and deciding to put out Sarah’s old wedding cake at the catered buffet.The wedding cake turns out to be Chekhov’s pastry: when Tammy, no longer adhering to her sobriety, bursts into the fete to remind the Pfeffermans of the collateral damage they caused by walking away, she hurls the cake into the pool, screaming “I am your pain!” Sarah may look numb, but Tammy wants her to know that there is very real hurt caused in her wake. This is a pattern with the Pfeffermans — they move ahead, sticking together, not really caring about who they might injure in the process. Tammy serves as the episode’s comic relief as she stumbles around Silver Lake ranting about her “heart of a warrior,” but she is also a poignant physical reminder of what the Pfefferman family code can do to people who don’t adhere to it.Earlier in the episode, a more covert Pfefferman family tradition takes place in Shelly’s bathtub, when Maura uses her magic fingers on her ex-wife. A note about this scene, because it is pretty amazing that it exists: this may not be the first time we are seeing two characters over 60 engage in sexual activity on television, but it is certainly the first time one of those characters is trans and the sex is filmed as both tender and then highly erotic (kudos to Judith Light for her uninhibited moans: we will all have what she is having). There is so much history in this interaction: a reminder of the way things used to be, how Mort used to make Shelly feel.But Mort no longer exists, and Maura does not want the action reciprocated; she wouldn’t know what to ask for (the moment when Maura says “I’m good” when Shelly asks how to please her is heartbreaking). When it comes to sexuality, Maura is just finding out who she is. She is only at the beginning of a long journey of discovering what her new body desires. As she dances in the mirror at the nightclub at the end to Sia’s “Chandelier” — a perfect song cue: “just holding on for tonight” describes Maura’s fragile state — we see Maura finally connected with herself as a person to be desired, as a sensual being.Ali is also on a journey, this time backward: toward her longtime pal Syd, who may be turning into something more than a friend (Syd confessed her romantic feelings for Ali at the end of Season 1). Carrie Brownstein brings such an effervescence to this show, and her mocking terms for Ali’s new hairdo are the kinds of jabs only a best friend could make (my favorite: “did you join a new wave polygamist cult?”). Ali’s wanderings have led her back to her comfort zone, but are also pushing her beyond it — if her flirtations with Syd lead to romance, she will be exploring a queerness that she has always been curious about, which may prove to be healing or dangerous for her. As we saw when she dove underwater, Ali is the Pfefferman who has visions: of Berlin, of Nazis, of her grandma Rose as a young girl (played by the same actress who plays young Ali). She sees more than anyone, and yet, when it comes to running her own life, she is often stumbling around in the dark.When Mama Cass released the song “New World Coming” sexual freedoms were opening up in America and second wave feminism was in flower; it looked like there really might be a new world coming, and that it was just around the bend.As we know now, however, that world has yet to come. We are still living in a mixed up time where transgender people are persecuted (see the stories shared in Maura’s support group this episode for a glimpse at the daily discrimination they face) and radical feminism has been shunted to the corners of the university system. And yet, the Pfeffermans are an optimistic lot: They feel always, collectively, like a new world might be coming if they keep searching, keep pushing boundaries, keep forging ahead into previously forbidden territories.“New World Coming” was directed by Marielle Heller, whose debut film this year, “Diary of a Teenage Girl,” perfectly captured the sexual awakening of an adolescent woman without stigmatizing or pathologizing it. Ms. Heller has a way of putting the camera right in the center of uncomfortable situations and letting them play out, and this episode is full of discomfort for her to work with.First up, there is a conversation that has been a long time coming in this show: Maura asks Davina and Shea (played by the great actresses Alexandra Billings and Trace Lysette, who are both transgender) about gender reassignment surgery. In the scene in Davina’s dumpy kitchen, a place that seems more real than many of the bougie L.A. locations the Pfeffermans usually flop around in, Maura learns that Shea’s reassignment cost her $15,000 — and that Davina is dating a man who is “transamorous” and who gets out of jail in a few weeks. Suddenly, Maura is tossed into a world outside of her own moneyed privilege, in which transwomen date ex-cons and must scrimp and save to get the surgeries that save their lives. Her chanting of “yaaaas queen” is endearing, but awkward; she is new to this world, and she doesn’t totally understand it or fit into it. (This may be Ms. Soloway’s subtle way of addressing the criticism she endured for casting a cisgendered man to play her main trans character.).Maura must again confront her privilege when she has lunch at U.C.L.A., this time faced with a foe from her past. Leslie Mackinaw, who is modeled on the poet Eileen Myles (whom Ms. Soloway is now dating, according to a New Yorker profile), captivates Ali from the moment they lock eyes on each other. She seems like the mentor Ali has been craving, a woman who is radical enough to speak her mind at all times and who was enough of an activist in the ’70s to overthrow a provost. Her strain of radicalism may prove to be troubling down the line — her flippant comment about the women’s studies department changing its name to gender studies seems to show that she is not the kind of feminist who is interested in trans rights. But her recounting of her mistreatment by Maura back in her professorial days is very important to understanding what Maura’s gender politics might have been like before transitioning.As Maura’s support leader says, many of the men who give transwomen a hard time are themselves closeted, and Maura must now confront the ways that her hidden pain led her to act out against women earlier in her life. Maura, before she was Maura, turns out to have been a misogynist. This is an interesting twist, and explains a lot of the alienation that her daughters feel — and explains why Ali is drawn to Leslie. She wants be around a matriarch who believes in and celebrates the power of women.Something about meeting Leslie also sparks Ali’s desire: She suddenly craves women, to relish the feminine. As she reads a Mackinaw poem, which is really an Eileen Myles poem, out loud at a lesbian bowling night, her gaze turns lascivious. She recites “this is my country” as she prowls through a group of women, finally turning her eyes toward Syd. Syd becomes the locus for this budding desire, the person with whom Ali can experiment with her own female power. This is a dangerous place for Syd to be — she has already admitted to feelings of love for Ali, who has not been shown to be particularly good at turning her sexual exploits into relationships — but they end up in bed together anyway.Meanwhile, Josh is still playing dadbro to Colton, trying to impress him with leather scented candles and stories of his high school conquests (Colton has already known four or five girls “in the biblical sense,” so he is likely unimpressed). He is trying so hard to be Colton’s buddy that he seems to be forgetting his obligations to Raquel, who is still waiting to show her congregation a rock on her finger. Raquel may come off as a nag, but the truth is that she knows Josh: She knows that he will never step up to the plate unless forced. When she tries to propose to him, it comes from knowing that she could be waiting forever. His outburst is warranted: She doesn’t trust him. But also, who would? Josh is a mess. The only thing he can do right is put together a killer girl group.Advertisement