
The Affair By                     
 MIKE HALE
 
DEC. 13, 2015
Sarah Treem, show runner of “The Affair,” recently told The New York Times that a central issue of the show’s current season was “Noah’s inability to separate his fantasy of Alison from the actual person.” After this week’s episode, consider fantasy and reality at least partly separated.Not that we have much more of an idea what’s going on.Noah went through a dark night of the soul, though it mostly took place on a bright New York afternoon. His trials started before sunup when he went to work on his Omar Bradley novel in what was apparently the only space available: his bathroom, where he put a board over the sink, like all those people in movies set on the Lower East Side who use their bathtubs as counter space. This definitely wasn’t the French writing retreat of his dreams. The crowding seemed a little over the top, but maybe his own children were sleeping in the living room?He didn’t appear to get any writing done, which must have made Harry’s question at lunch — “When can I see pages?” — particularly painful. Harry then compounded the indignity by urging him to set aside his Bradley opus and crank out something “less ambitious” like a “Descent” sequel (Harry’s already titled it “Ascent”). “What kind of writer do you think I am, Harry?” Noah asked, and the eventual answer — that perhaps he’s the popular kind of writer, like Danielle Steel — wasn’t what he wanted to hear.But it got worse. Trying to be the good man, Noah showed up at Alison’s school with flowers and discovered she had dropped out more than a month before (while he continued to pay her pre-med tuition). Then a text popped up with a photo of Alison and Cole and a typically nasty Oscar Hodges message: “Guess you couldn’t hold onto her either.” (We already knew, from the episode’s first half, that the photo was taken at the auction of the Lobster Roll. More on that later.)AdvertisementNoah drove straight to the East End (a close look at his texts showed that it took about three hours) to confront Oscar, but ended up drinking with him and being told that Alison’s “wounded-bird thing is an act” — she has no heart, Oscar said, without elaborating. The next stop was Max’s house, where Noah didn’t get further bad news about Alison but did deduce that Max had slept with Helen, which led to yelling, a broken glass and a seriously damaged friendship.AdvertisementIt had been a really bad day, so maybe Noah could be excused for having a recurrence of his running-over-Alison vision as he drove away from Max’s beach house. Just then — this is “The Affair,” remember — Alison called, and told him to come to the Lobster Roll. Now Noah’s journey had come full circle, back to where he and Alison met. And for once, you had to see Noah’s point. She had decided to go into business with her ex-husband — a business hours away from the city — without consulting Noah. She had dropped out of school without telling him, and pretended to go to class to keep him from finding out. “Now I see why your first marriage fell apart,” he said. And then — nothing happened. Alison went for his sympathy — she misses home, she’s just a girl from Montauk, she doesn’t know how it will work out but she hopes they can work it out together. No secrets revealed, no resolution, see you next week for the season finale.In a short, opening Cole chapter, we saw how the purchase came about, starting with one of those “Affair” coincidences when Cole happened to pull off the road into the Lobster Roll’s parking lot just before Luisa explained her desire to have her own restaurant, “something people will care about.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They were on their way to see Cole’s mom, and they saw her a little sooner than planned — in Cole’s absence, she’d taken a job cleaning at a hipster motel, and (coincidence!) she was the maid Luisa asked for soap. Scotty appeared, 25 percent more hyper than the week before, and rambled about buying the Roll with the $37,000 he made from selling his truck, his boat and their mother’s furniture.Here there was a sudden break for the episode’s best scene: Cole, Luisa and Cole’s mom visiting Luisa’s mom at the Montauk mansion where she’s the housekeeper. We knew whose house it was — Cole drove Bruce Butler there in Week 2 — but it was still a surprise when Margaret Butler walked out, unaware of Cole’s link to her family, and announced that she wanted to host Luisa and Cole’s wedding. When he let drop his last name, Kathleen Chalfant as Margaret was perfectly dry as she asked whether he was the Lockhart who impregnated her granddaughter or the one who pulled a gun on her former son-in-law. The latter was the correct answer, of course, and as Cole made a dignified exit, Margaret touchingly said that her offer stood.That just left the Lobster Roll. Cole pitched the idea to Luisa, saying he could afford it if he could talk Alison into investing with him. Luisa wasn’t happy, but apparently she came around, because the next thing we saw was the happy ex-couple at the auction, holding the deed. Then Scotty showed up — another 10 percent more anxious — and learned that Cole was cutting him out unless he went to rehab. Scotty, like Oscar, said bad things about Alison — “she’s pathological,” whatever that meant — and suggested that he knew a deal-breaking secret. But of course he wouldn’t say what it was. I’m calling that it’s his suspicion that Cole is baby Joanie’s father.Random observations• Cole and Luisa were driving away from Montauk, not toward it, when they pulled into the Lobster Roll.• Harry continues to be the miracle man of the publishing world. He’ll have Noah’s unfinished book in stores by Christmas! And in perhaps his looniest promise, he can have Noah living at Yaddo by the end of the week — for as long as he wants! Maybe it worked that way for John Cheever and Philip Roth, but I doubt that Noah Solloway has that kind of pull.• It was a week for artful dishevelment: Scotty looks more handsome the more supposedly coked up he gets, and the Lobster Roll (a real place, though in Amagansett, not Montauk) had been very carefully staged to look like a place in foreclosure. Anyone who’s paid “market price” for the signature sandwich might have enjoyed a little schadenfreude during that scene.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »