
Homeland By                     
JUDITH WARNER

DEC. 13, 2015
This recap contains spoilers for Sunday’s episode of “Homeland.”O.K., “24” fans, how many of you thought you knew exactly how Peter Quinn was going to be revived so that he could spit out his intel on the impending sarin gas attack on Berlin?The setup was just right, and all too familiar: A ticking clock, a desperate need for information to save civilian lives.“We need him awake,” Saul says.“Is there a procedure for waking him up?” Carrie asks.“Yes!” we helpfully shouted at the TV. A shot of epinephrine! Right into the heart! It brought back Jack Bauer back (at least once) from the seemingly dead. It (briefly) revived Paula Schaeffer. And Renee Walker. Why not our friend Quinn?Because, of course, Quinn being Quinn, things have to get much, much worse before they can get better.AdvertisementSeriously, how much does this poor man have to endure? As if being gassed wasn’t bad enough, his body now has been subjected to another chemical attack, this time, at the hands of the C.I.A. (Jonas is right; these people are not normal.)AdvertisementA normal person would no doubt sit by the hospital bedside of the man she loves — particularly after having almost killed him again with disappointment by waking him up with the empty promise “I’m here. Waiting for you.” (Did you notice how Quinn’s brain activity kicked up after those words? And then, when he woke up, and the first words out of her mouth were, “Tell me what the target is,” he shut his eyes again, as though he just couldn’t stand it?)“I can’t just sit here and do nothing,” Carrie says.Of course not. If the situation were reversed, neither could Quinn.He’ll pull through. But oh, poor Astrid, with her ever-so-hopeful, “Did he say anything?” You know that she wasn’t looking for terrorist information. I don’t think I could stand it at this point if Carrie and Quinn ended up getting together. (Not that they will.) I’d hate to see Astrid out in the cold.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Speaking of chill: Allison is one cool customer. You kind of have to love the way she knows how to play the peacock-strutting men of the international intelligence community. And I liked the way she thought to kick her purse out of the way before shooting herself in the shoulder. Had she forgotten to Scotchgard it? Was she concerned with blood spatter? Will the purse travel with her to the Black Sea dacha, tracking device and all?Call me crazy, but there’s something up with that handbag, which has made so many appearances at key moments in Allison’s subplot, that I’m starting to think it’s entitled to its own line in the credits. Did you notice when Allison has her who-am-I-really moment in front of the bathroom mirror — a rite of passage for Homeland’s major characters — she only locked eyes with her reflection briefly before looking down and away at, I presume, the bag that holds the key to her soul? Did its dark presence tell her what to do?Moving on.Is anyone else experiencing some anxious inner rumblings about Saul? After all, this is the third suspect dead by his own hand after contact with him. In Season 1, there was Afsal Hamid, whose death by razor blade occasioned the polygraph that Saul failed. In Season 2, Aileen Moregan killed herself with a shard from the reading glasses that Saul brought her.It’s hard to believe; after all, Saul’s distress after Faisal Marwan’s jump looks genuine. He seems to age 10 years in a moment, and sound just right in delivering that deadpan line: “You deal with Laura Sutton. I think I’ve had enough for one day.” His pain after Aileen’s death seemed true, too.But mole rumors have swarmed around him on and off for years. It was sort of odd that he was out of the C.I.A. headquarters on the day of the car bombing and, as I recall, subtly invited Carrie to be elsewhere, too. And was his quick agreement in Sunday night’s episode that Allison postpone surgery just so that he could interrogate her? Or was he buying her time to flee?It is very difficult for me to believe that Saul is evil. But crazy or fatally misguided are real possibilities. Does Saul, like the Russians running Allison, believe that “the West needs a wake-up call”? Does he, like Vladimir Putin and Bashar al-Assad, but not Barack Obama (as Homeland imagines them), understand that “Radical Islam must be eradicated, root and branch”?AdvertisementAnd could Marwan actually have known that Laura Sutton had just signed his death warrant by telling television audiences that “he had already volunteered to help the investigation”? Or had Saul somehow given him a signal?Judith Warner, a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine, is the author, most recently, of “We’ve Got Issues: Children and Parents in the Age of Medication.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »