
American Horror Story By                     
E. A. HANKS

OCT. 8, 2015
Season 5, Episode One: “Checking In” In her essay, “Notes on Camp,” Susan Sontag wrote: “When something is just bad (rather than Camp), it’s often because it is too mediocre in its ambition. The artist hasn’t attempted to do anything really outlandish ... The hallmark of Camp is the spirit of extravagance. Camp is a woman walking around in a dress made of three million feathers.”Or perhaps a dress made of meat? Or better yet, diamond bondage gear on a little outing to Hollywood’s Forever Cemetery for an outdoor screening of “Nosferatu”?The fifth season of FX’s anthology series “American Horror Story” finds us back in Los Angeles, at the Hotel Cortez. Where previous seasons have certainly dabbled in camp, the season opener goes all in with macabre abandon. Casting Lady Gaga, beloved doyenne of “Little Monsters,” fashionistas and club kids everywhere, could not be a clearer signal that the show’s creators are invested in a theatricality that is all but promised when as grandiose a star like Gaga is around. If “Hotel” will have a problem, “mediocre ambition” is not likely to be it.“Your boy has a jaw line for days,” purrs Lady Gaga’s The Countess, a blood drinking, haute couture wearing, child snatcher who lives in the hotel penthouse.Advertisement“American Horror Story: Hotel” is a show that knows its jaw lines. In this one episode, we’ve got Matt Bomer, Cheyenne Jackson, Wes Bentley and Max Greenfield, all so similarly tall, dark and handsome, they could pass for brothers, each sporting various combinations of chiseled jaws, diamonds, ascots and drill-bit dildos. For every stomach-turning vision of gore, there was more than enough handsomeness on screen to act as a palliative.The relationship between horror and camp has always been cozy. Both genres depend on big impact visuals, which fade quickly and leave their dedicated (some might say rabid) fans always wanting more. There’s no lid on horror or camp; you can go as dark or as fabulous as you dare.Advertisement“American Horror Story” may have gone fairly far out on a limb in the first episode but as with other seasons, the show leans on classic horror tropes to act as foundation.Hotels, by their transient nature, are equal parts glamorous and eerie. Anyone who has stayed in a hotel has wondered who was in their room before, and what did they do there.The obvious ficitonal reference for the Hotel Cortez is the Overlook from “The Shining” — the Cortez’s geometric carpet is a nice subtle hat tip, the uncanny twins appearing and disappearing in hallways, not quite as such — but a less obvious, and more on point reference is the 1971 Belgian film, “Daughters of Darkness.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Daughters of Darkness” features a pair of lesbian vampire lovers who move into an empty hotel during the off-season and entrap a naive young couple, much as The Countess and her lover Donovan do in this first episode.The leading lady of “Daughters of Darkness” is also called The Countess (Delphine Seyrig) and also mirrors Marlene Dietrich’s platinum glamour. If Lady Gaga’s Countess also happens to be actually be the infamous Elizabeth Bathory, the 17th century Hungarian noblewoman who tortured 800 virgins to death for their blood in an effort to stave off aging, I predict a lawsuit.(Could Gaga’s Countess, aside from being a beautifully dressed, mysteriously accented, killer also be the eyeless, white worm-like monster who brutally violated junkie Gabriel?)However, Gaga isn’t the first “A.H.S.” femme fatale to mirror Dietrich. Last season’s “Freak Show” featured Jessica Lange (who is sitting out this round) as Elsa Mars, the warbling, fame-seeking, German-born impressario of a freak show in Florida.AdvertisementIn fact, women looking to keep their youth and beauty are quite common on “American Horror Story.” Constance, in Season 1, had a florid panache that often read as mutton dressed as lamb, while Season 3 featured three women who killed to stay young: the supreme witch Fiona Goode, Kathy Bates’s sadistic Madame Delphine LaLaurie and the immortal voodoo priestess Marie Laveau.As the season premiere, Sunday’s episode is burdened with explaining to the audience just enough to know the basics of what we’re seeing, but never so much that it spoils the party. This season looks to be a party as only “American Horror Story” can do it: four-way sex, neon, pop music, intestines pouring wetly out of the recently disemboweled.But if horror and camp have no limits, can the same be said for an audience? After all, in the same essay, Sontag also noted, ”One must distinguish between naive and deliberate Camp. Pure Camp is always naive. Camp which knows itself to be Camp...is usually less satisfying.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »