LOS ANGELES – Warner Bros. suffered yet another washout over the weekend, as the troubled studio’s “In the Heart of the Sea,” directed by Ron Howard and costing at least $140 million to make and market, arrived to just $11 million in domestic ticket sales.“In the Heart of the Sea,” a period disaster drama starring Chris Hemsworth, was set for release in March, but Warner pushed it back, partly because of the success last December of Universal’s “Unbroken,” which had $30.6 million in initial ticket sales. Despite facing no new wide-release competition, however, “In the Heart of the Sea” was unable to claim the No. 1 spot at the North American box office, losing to “The Hunger Games: Mockingjay Part 2” (Lionsgate), which took in $11.3 million in its fourth weekend.Warner, until recently Hollywood’s most successful movie studio, has explained its recent string of misfires – “Pan,” “Jupiter Ascending,” “Entourage,” “Hot Pursuit,” “Our Brand Is Crisis,” “The Man from U.N.C.L.E.” — by pointing to the cyclical nature of the film business; there will inevitably be hits and misses. New Line, a division of Warner, has helped offset the losses, finding success with “Creed” and “San Andreas.” Warner said “In the Heart of the Sea” had collected an additional $39.4 million from multiple weeks of overseas release.Where did “In the Heart of the Sea” go wrong? Warner’s marketing department did the best it could with difficult material, analysts said, with the problem perhaps resting more on the decision to make the film in the first place, especially for so much money. Audiences have seen a lot of bobbing in the ocean in recent years (“Unbroken,” “Life of Pi,” “Kon-Tiki,” “Noah”); Mr. Hemsworth has not proven himself able to draw audiences; and Mr. Howard has been on a cold streak (“Rush,” “The Dilemma”).With prestige films  overflowing the box office, “In the Heart of the Sea” also received poor reviews from critics.“Ron made a great movie, and we stand behind him completely,” Jeffrey B. Goldstein, Warner’s executive vice president for domestic distribution, said  Sunday. Mr. Goldstein conceded that “In the Heart of the Sea” will need to “leapfrog” next weekend, when “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” is expected to crush all competition, but said he believed Mr. Howard’s film still had a “strong chance” of finding an audience over the Christmas and New Year’s holidays. “There’s no question that when you have an adult movie in December, that it’s all about word of mouth, and this movie had a terrific CinemaScore,” Mr. Goldstein added, referring to the B-plus grade moviegoers gave “In the Heart of the Sea” in exit polls. He pointed out that Disney’s “Saving Mr. Banks”  earned only $9.3 million in its first weekend of wide release in December 2013, but ultimately took in $83.3 million. (“Saving Mr. Banks” also carried a relatively low production budget of $35 million.)Also of note at the weekend box office: “The Big Short,” a well-reviewed Paramount Pictures drama about the housing bubble of the mid-2000s, took in $720,000 from just eight theaters, a “whopping” result, according to analysts at Rentrak, which compiles ticketing data.