AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan WolfeCatch up with the presidential candidates on the Sunday morning talk shows, or, for a less political Washington tradition, watch as the White House is decorated. GOODNIGHT MOMMY (2015) on iTunes. After their mother returns home from the hospital in bandages, twin boys, Lukas and Elias (Lukas and Elias Schwarz), begin to suspect that the mummified woman lurking in the house is not their kin in this “carefully controlled creep-out,” Jeannette Catsoulis wrote in The New York Times. Directed by Veronika Franz and Severin Fiala, the film “gains significant traction from small moments: an eerily depopulated village; a glimpse of exposed tissue; a single, malevolently bloodshot eye,” she added. “The movie’s impressiveness, though, lies less in its ingenuity with Super Glue and cockroaches than its patient mastery of tone and, particularly, its visual richness.” (Image: a scene)WHITE HOUSE CHRISTMAS 2015 6 p.m. on HGTV. Preparing the White House for the holidays — and the 20 parties it hosts during its most-trafficked time of year — requires help from dozens of volunteers and several branches of the military. The scale is impressive: Bakers will prepare 25,000 cookies, and 70,000 ornaments and garlands will fill the White House. This annual glimpse into the hustle and bustle follows the interior designer Genevieve Gorder as she gets a room-by-room tour of the transformation, including a close look at the construction of a 500-pound White House made from gingerbread and chocolate.STATE OF THE UNION 9 a.m. on CNN. In his first appearance on the Sunday talk show circuit since his controversial proposal to ban Muslims from entering the country, the Republican presidential candidate Donald J. Trump will appear here and on “Fox News Sunday,” at 10 on Fox.JILL AND JESSA: COUNTING ON 8 p.m. on TLC. Even after “19 Kids and Counting” was canceled by TLC after reports that one of the stars, Josh Duggar, was investigated on molestation charges, the Duggar clan continues to deliver. In the first installment of this three-part special centered on Jill Dillard and Jessa Seewald, Jill prepares to move her family to Central America for missionary work, and Jessa prepares to give birth to her first child. While Jill and Jessa have spoken out about their the issue with their brother in the past, for the first time several members of the family and Anna Duggar, Josh Duggar’s wife, speak about the difficult last few months.THE SIMPSONS 8 p.m. on Fox. Told in the style of Richard Linklater’s film “Boyhood,” Bart’s coming-of-age story, from 6-year-old to young adult, traces his fraught relationship with Lisa, who continually outshines him, and Homer, a more callous version of himself. On “Family Guy,” at 9 p.m., Peter forms a neighborhood watch group after the couch on his front lawn is stolen. While on duty, he shoots someone entering Cleveland’s home and is charged with a hate crime. (Image: “The Simpsons”)THE GOOD WIFE 9 p.m. on CBS. Ruth tries to persuade Courtney Paige, played by Vanessa Williams, to hire Jason for business in another state in a plot to distance him from Alicia. Meanwhile, Lucca and Alicia defend a respected surgeon who is accused of plotting to commit a crime in this series’ fall finale.Advertisement