By ANNA KISSELGOFFDEC. 10, 2015
Gloria Contreras, a leading Mexican choreographer who chronicled her development as a dance maker under George Balanchine’s mentoring, and who created more than 260 ballets for companies she directed in New York and Mexico, died on Nov. 25 at her home in Mexico City. She was 81.Her son, Gregorio Luke, said the cause was respiratory failure.“Gloria was a Balanchine disciple, and she had a great belief that she could bring Mexican culture into neo-Classical dancing,” said Arthur Mitchell, who became a star of New York City Ballet shortly after he met Ms. Contreras at Balanchine’s School of American Ballet in the 1950s.One of Ms. Contreras’s major achievements was the company and school she founded in 1970 in Mexico City: the Taller Coreográfico (Choreographic Workshop) of the National Autonomous University of Mexico.There she showcased a signature style that avoided folk dance but used Mexican composers and motifs to infuse even plotless neo-Classical ballets in leotards with a Mexican sensibility.AdvertisementHer role in Mexican culture was recognized after her death with a minute of silence in the Mexican Congress and a tribute on Twitter by the country’s president, Enrique Peña Nieto.AdvertisementMaria del Carmen Gloria Contreras Roeniger was born on Nov. 15, 1934, in Mexico City to Gregorio Contreras and Carmen Roeniger. She was a young, unknown ballet dancer when she left to join the Royal Winnipeg Ballet in 1955.She went to New York City in 1957 and, still unknown, phoned Balanchine and asked him to look at her choreography. She then enrolled at the School of American Ballet, where she choreographed pieces for Mexico Lindo, a small troupe she directed in New York.Ms. Contreras later detailed Balanchine’s mentorship in a book, “What I Learned From Balanchine: The Diary of a Choreographer” (2008). In a phone interview on Tuesday, Mr. Mitchell said that Balanchine would critique her work.Balanchine and Lincoln Kirstein, the founders of City Ballet, “both liked her,” Mr. Mitchell said. “They were trying to develop choreographers.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although she was a strong dancer in her own troupe and was briefly an apprentice at City Ballet in 1959, Balanchine did not take her into his company. But he did ask her to create two ballets in 1960 as part of “Panamerica,” a City Ballet program that featured Latin American composers.The evening, dedicated to Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller of New York for his support of the arts, presented eight short ballets by five choreographers. Balanchine contributed three works and Ms. Contreras choreographed two: “Serenata Concertante,” representing Chile, and “Ocho por Radio,” for Mexico.The entire evening was poorly received, but “Ocho por Radio” was performed as a separate ballet the next season.The same year, the State Department sent Mr. Mitchell and Ms. Contreras to Rio de Janeiro as advisers to a new contemporary-style ballet troupe that would draw on the Brazilian heritage. Both choreographed for the company.Advertisement“Gloria had energy, drive and attack, and she put all that into her choreography,” Mr. Mitchell said.At the same time, she could produce a work of elegiac beauty, as she did with “Dances of Women” for the Gloria Contreras Dance Company, which she directed in New York from 1962 to 1970.While some of her pieces drew mixed reviews, they could also be “exciting,” as Clive Barnes wrote in The New York Times in 1966; when the Joffrey Ballet performed Ms. Contreras’s “Moncayo 1”, he praised its “tequila-like potency.”In addition to her son, Ms. Contreras is survived by her daughter, Lorena; her husband, Jaime Farell; her sister, Margarita; and two grandchildren.A version of this article appears in print on December 13, 2015, on Page A41 of the New York edition with the headline: Gloria Contreras, 81, Mexican Choreographer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.