By JAMES PONIEWOZIK, MIKE HALE and NEIL GENZLINGERDEC. 7, 2015
The television critics of The New York Times — James Poniewozik, Mike Hale and Neil Genzlinger — share their picks for the best shows of the year. Was 2015 the best TV year ever? It was, at least, the most TV year ever. There are more original shows every year. Choosing 10 shows annually, then, becomes a crueler and crueler process. As it should be. A list only means something to the extent that it leaves something off. It should hurt. But inevitably, any best TV show list will omit some of what was best about TV.Mine, say, leaves out some of 2015’s most adventurous and relevant series (“Mr. Robot,” “UnREAL,” “Empire”). It overlooks the farewell runs of some greats (“Mad Men,” “Justified,” “Parks and Recreation”). It disregards the year of musical desk chairs on late night. And it chucks out series (“Bob’s Burgers,” “Jane the Virgin,” “Fargo”) that I watch weekly with delight. This list is not about anything wrong with those shows; it’s about what’s right with these 10.I didn’t rank my list. Art isn’t math, and I feel silly putting on my lab coat and declaring that this sitcom is precisely two Quality Units greater than that drama. There was an elite tier of shows — “The Americans,” “The Leftovers,” “Master of None” and “Transparent” — I knew immediately had to be on this list, but beyond that, these all play different but equally vital positions. Herewith, in alphabetical order, my fantasy team:“The Americans” (FX) This Cold War thriller has made good use of the songs of Fleetwood Mac, and that’s fitting — it’s the TV equivalent of the album “Rumours,” a work of intimate, emotional warfare, at once brooding and torrid. As the Cold War entered its “Evil Empire” phase, the married Soviet plants Elizabeth and Philip Jennings (Keri Russell and Matthew Rhys) became more deeply ensnared in the battle between cause and conscience.Advertisement(Read a review | Purchase on Amazon and iTunes)“black-ish” (ABC) Kenya Barris created a sitcom about an African-American father worried his kids were forgetting their racial history. He ended up with an essential series for a moment when racial history keeps repeating itself. Impeccably cast and written, full of heart but sharply satirical, “black-ish” revived the idea of the engaged network comedy.Advertisement(Read a review | Watch at Hulu)“Halt and Catch Fire” (AMC) The 2014 debut season of this 1980s computer-business drama turned out to be mere beta testing. In its much superior sophomore year, the series evolved from an I.B.M.-clone “Mad Men” to an origin story of the social Internet. The show smartly took the reins away from the antihero played by Lee Pace and gave them to Kerry Bishé and Mackenzie Davis, who were transfixing as early online-service pioneers who cracked open the beige box to find our connected future.(Read a review | Purchase on Amazon and iTunes)“The Jinx” (HBO) Reality gave the director Andrew Jarecki an antagonist for the ages in Robert A. Durst, the cold-eyed, batty millionaire arrested on murder charges on the weekend of this docu-series’ finale. The twists were gobsmacking — the incriminating “BEVERLEY” note, a seeming hot-mike confession in the closing seconds — and Mr. Jarecki’s storytelling was haunting, dogged yet empathetic. This year, true crime surpassed “True Detective.”(Read a review | Watch at HBO Go | Purchase on iTunes and Amazon)“The Leftovers” (HBO) Damon Lindelof and Tom Perrotta took a banality — bad things will happen, and you will never know why — and made it into art. Set after the random disappearance of 2 percent of the earth’s population, this series is less mystery than extended parable, a new Bible set among fanatics and nonbelievers. The relocated, rejuvenated second season felt both expansive and grounded, aided by seismic performances from Carrie Coon and Regina King.(Read recaps | Watch at HBO Go)“Master of None” (Netflix) 2015 was a year that TV opened the books to a wide variety of ethnic experiences and casting choices (see also “Fresh Off the Boat” and “Quantico”). “Master,” starring an appealing Aziz Ansari and created in part by him, benefited from this new openness and paid it forward, with a frankness about identity and a curiosity about other walks of life — all packaged in a hilarious, fresh millennial rom-com.(Read a review | Watch at Netflix)“Rectify” (SundanceTV) The story of a death-row parolee and his family takes its spiritual power not from preaching Christianity but from grappling with its ideals: forgiveness, penance, grace. In an era that favors brooding and bellowing antiheroes, Aden Young has given an understated and under-rewarded performance for three seasons as the enigmatic, damaged Daniel Holden.(Purchase on iTunes and Amazon)“Review” (Comedy Central) You could make a strong year-end list just from this network’s array of voices — “Inside Amy Schumer,” “Broad City,” the swan song of “Key and Peele,” a reinvigorated “South Park.” But in its second season, “Review” elevated cringe comedy to poetry, as the TV “life reviewer” Forrest MacNeil (Andy Daly) self-immolated in the name of obsession like an existential Wile E. Coyote.(Read a review | Watch at Comedy Central | Purchase on iTunes and Amazon)What was the best TV show — new or old — that you watched this year?“Transparent” (Amazon Prime) The splendid 2014 premiere focused on Maura Pfefferman (Jeffrey Tambor) and her late-life coming out as a transgender woman. Season 2, released Dec. 11, is more expansive — plumbing the identity quests of the Pfefferman clan and tracing the history of sexual-liberation movements — but every bit as gorgeous, gloriously messy and full of fractious, argumentative love.Advertisement(Read a review | Watch Episode 1 at Amazon Prime)“Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt” (Netflix) Robert Carlock and Tina Fey’s unlikely oddball of a sitcom was made for NBC but saved by streaming. Lit by the human glow stick Ellie Kemper, ably assisted by Tituss Burgess and Carol Kane, it was a daring feat: a trauma-survival story played for dark comedy. Though 2015 was the year NBC’s fabled Thursday comedy block died, “Kimmy” proved that sophisticated, screwy comedy is still — to quote its theme song — alive, dammit.(Read a review | Watch at Netflix)I ranked the 10 best television series of 2015 by watching as much TV as possible, making a list of about 50 shows and then moving them up, down and around on a sheerly intuitive basis. No careful weighing of qualities here. All that matters in a list like this is how far a show moves the needle on your personal seismometer. Did the earth shake when you watched it?In a time of burgeoning diversity across broadcast, cable and digital, “Jessica Jones,” “Master of None,” “Inside Amy Schumer,” “Jane the Virgin” and “Catastrophe” were strong contenders for this list. But none of them forced their way into the top 10.1. “Louie” (FX) Louis C. K. can be counted on to go deep, dark and strange. But the moments I remember best from the fifth season of his show are the romantic ones — the tender, sad, sometimes wildly inappropriate and always true depictions of middle-aged courtship. The off-again, off-again relationship of Louie and Pam (Pamela Adlon) is the delicate heart of a tough-minded, hilarious show.(Read a review | Purchase on iTunes and Amazon)2. “The Americans” (FX) Still the best, most relentless drama on television, though perhaps a little less enthralling in its third season. The question of how the Russian spies’ teenage daughter would handle her growing knowledge of her parents’ secrets never felt as urgent as it should have, but the season-ending twist could mean that Season 4 will get back to the nastiness and fervor that the show does so well.(Read a review | Purchase on Amazon and iTunes)3. “The Knick” (Cinemax) This period medical drama is the best evidence for those fashionable auteur theories of television — in the show’s current second season, Steven Soderbergh continues to direct, shoot and edit every episode, giving the show a dark, voluptuous palette and compositional rigor that challenge the truisms about TV being a writer’s medium. The story lines can sag, but Mr. Soderbergh’s visual panache and an excellent cast, led by Andre Holland and Clive Owen, more than make up for any narrative deficiencies.(Read a review)4. “The Jinx” (HBO) A documentary mini-series gave us the best central character — the empty-eyed real estate heir Robert A. Durst, arrested on a murder charge on the weekend of the series finale — and the most gripping ending of the year.(Read a review | Watch at HBO Go | Purchase on iTunes and Amazon)5. “Fargo” (FX) If you miss “Breaking Bad,” this Midwestern-gothic anthology crime series probably comes closest to that show’s operatic sweep and meticulous design. The second season, in which Minnesota cops get embroiled in a Fargo-Kansas City turf war, includes excellent performances by Jesse Plemons, Kirsten Dunst, Patrick Wilson and Zahn McClarnon.Advertisement(Read a review | Watch on FXNow)6. “Broad City” (Comedy Central) Ilana Glazer and Abbi Jacobson’s daffy, dirty stream-of-consciousness comedy is the true and logical heir to “Sex and the City.” Except instead of showing us the city that we want, Ms. Glazer and Ms. Jacobson show us the city that we get.(Watch Episodes 6-10 on Comedy Central | Purchase full season on iTunes and Amazon)7. “Justified” (FX) This Kentucky-set Elmore Leonard-inspired series about United States marshals and their enemies, was the most soulful and purely entertaining crime drama around. The sixth season wrapped up the Cain-and-Abel story of Boyd Crowder (Walton Goggins) and Raylan Givens (Timothy Olyphant) with the show’s typical mix of sadness, satire and deep feeling.(Read a review | Purchase on iTunes and Amazon)8. “Transparent” (Amazon) Not everyone will find the travails of the self-absorbed Pfefferman family compelling or humorous, but Jill Soloway’s series succeeds like no other in bringing a cinematic, indie-film approach to serial comedy, and it features a marvelous central performance: Jeffrey Tambor as Maura, the reluctantly brave, occasionally clueless transgender woman and family matriarch.(Read a review | Watch Episode 1 at Amazon Prime)9. “Moone Boy” (Hulu) Chris O’Dowd’s autobiographical sitcom about a young Irish boy (David Rawle) and his gangly imaginary friend (Mr. O’Dowd) maintained its winning eccentricity — whimsicality with a sharp bite — through its third and, for now, final season.(Read a review | Watch at Hulu)10. “Penny Dreadful” (Showtime) Eva Green’s performance as an implacable demon hunter with witchly powers of her own is more than enough reason to watch John Logan’s sumptuous horror serial. Throw in the great British actors Rory Kinnear, as one of Frankenstein’s monsters, and Simon Russell Beale, as a vivid Egyptologist, along with Mr. Logan’s literate, thoughtful scripts, and there’s no excuse for missing it.(Read a review | Watch on Showtime Anytime | Purchase on iTunes | Amazon)If you watched only scripted shows this year, you were well entertained, but you missed some very fine television. Quality documentaries, both one-shots and series, were everywhere in 2015, with HBO and PBS leading the way but plenty of other outlets finding room for this work on their schedules. Here (excluding films that had a theatrical release, like “Citizenfour”) are the 10 I’m most glad I saw, documentaries that taught me something or opened my eyes or were just plain invigorating.1. “The Jinx” (HBO) Lots of documentaries illuminate something in the news, but not many become the news, as this Emmy-winning six-part mini-series did. It began by taking a studied look at Mr. Durst, a New York real estate scion who had been connected to three deaths but convicted in none, and it ended with his arrest the day before the final episode was broadcast. There have been plenty of true-crime documentaries, but this one, by Andrew Jarecki, stood out from the beginning, with its patient, detailed revisiting of a 2001 killing in Galveston, Tex. And when, partway through Episode 2, it became clear that Mr. Durst was a willing participant in the series’ making, it really found a chilling, startling groove. It’s one thing to take an outsider’s view of a high-profile criminal case; it’s quite another to get inside the head of the suspect.(Read a review | Watch at HBO Go | Purchase on iTunes and Amazon)2. “Mimi and Dona” (PBS) Any parent of a child with a disability fears the future; the caregiving issues as the parent ages and perhaps dies are daunting. Here the filmmaker, Sophie Sartain, follows her grandmother, Mimi, and her aunt, Dona, as they grapple with a harsh reality: Mimi has devoted her life to caring for Dona, who has an intellectual disability, but now she is in her 90s and Dona is in her 60s. The challenges are becoming more than Mimi can handle. The film is wrenching and, at the same time, a beautiful portrait of parental commitment.Advertisement(Watch at PBS)3. “Cancer: The Emperor of All Maladies” (PBS) Ken Burns, who came to prominence with a documentary about the Civil War, turned his attention to a different kind of war in this absorbing three-part series, which traced the mixture of hope and frustration that has defined efforts to treat and cure cancer for decades. The formula pioneered by Mr. Burns (an executive producer here) works well with the subject matter, but the director, Barak Goodman, added a humanizing touch by cutting in poignant personal stories of people grappling with the disease.(Read a review | Watch at PBS)4. “The Brain With David Eagleman” (PBS) What Mr. Burns did for cancer Dr. Eagleman, a neuroscientist, did for research into the brain and how it works. Much of this six-part series might be out of date in fairly short order, so rapidly is the field advancing, but unless you’re a neuroscientist yourself you probably have no idea how many fascinating discoveries have been made in recent years. What might lie ahead is exciting and a little creepy to contemplate.(Watch at PBS)5. “Of Miracles and Men” (ESPN) Sometimes a documentary’s main achievement is to make you reassess an event or subject you thought you knew. This film by Jonathan Hock, part of ESPN’s “30 for 30” series, accomplished that with one of the best-known sports triumphs in American history, the Miracle on Ice Olympic hockey victory against the Soviet Union in 1980. This film provided the Soviet perspective and in doing so showed how the game figured in the evolution of glasnost.(Purchase on iTunes and Amazon)6. “The Seventies” (CNN) Last year, CNN took a 10-part look at the 1960s, and this year, in eight parts, it dissected the music, politics, cultural shifts and headline-making traumas of the 1970s, a decade that began with Kent State and ended with the Iranian hostage crisis. Tom Hanks and Gary Goetzman, the executive producers, are experts at this type of not-too-distant history. The episodes on cultural subjects — television, music — are enjoyable remember-whens, while the ones on more weighty matters establish the decade as pivotal in the evolution of phenomena like terrorism and political cynicism that are still very much with us.7. “Documentary Now!” (IFC) Oh, all right; this series, introduced in August, consists not of actual documentaries but of parodies of actual documentaries. It sure is funny, though. Beginning with an earnest introduction by Helen Mirren at the top of each episode, it never deviates from deadpan. Personal favorite: “Gentle & Soft: The Story of the Blue Jean Committee,” a two-parter about a famous 1970s soft-rock band that never was.(Purchase on iTunes and Amazon)8. “Dawn of Humanity,” “Nova” (PBS) There was a breaking-news feel to this program, which was broadcast days after the announcement of a major fossil find in South Africa. The story of the discovery of a trove of hominid bones deep in an almost inaccessible cave was told in an up-close way that let you feel the scientists’ thrill.(Read a review | Watch at PBS)9. “Looks Like Laury, Sounds Like Laury” (World Channel) When their friend Laury Sacks started having odd speech and memory problems, Connie Shulman and Pamela Hogan began shooting film as a way to help her. They ended up capturing her battle with frontotemporal dementia, a terrifying degenerative disease. The result was a painfully personal film about a little-known condition.(Read a review)10. “Just Eat It: A Food Waste Story” (MSNBC) There was a lot of programming pegged to Earth Day in April, but this lively documentary explored a subject not often associated with environmentalism: the amount of food we waste, at both the personal and the industrial level. What does this have to do with the environment? Growing and raising food takes land, water, fertilizers. The film gave the subject an amusing twist by having a couple try to live off discarded food for six months.(Read a review)More highlights from the year, as chosen by our critics:Movies, Pop Music, Classical Music, Classical Albums, Dance, Theater, Art, Books and PerformancesA version of this list appears in print on December 13, 2015, on Page AR16 of the New York edition with the headline: Of Spies, Techies and Lost Souls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.