AdvertisementSupported byJessica JonesBy Simon AbramsWhile immediately engaging, “A.K.A. Ladies Night,” the first episode of “Jessica Jones,” sometimes leans too hard on its title character’s alienated, hyper-cynical worldview. The pilot’s pseudo-hard-boiled (read: moodily under-lit) style and intricate narrative, with multiple overlapping subplots integrating by episode’s end, is mostly an effective continuation of the Hell’s Kitchen-focused, adult-oriented brand of drama that Marvel Comics and Netflix first tried with “Daredevil” earlier this year.Here, the show’s title character (Krysten Ritter) works through her issues at Alias Investigations, her detective agency. Jones’s past is largely a mystery to viewers: she has superpowers, but we don’t learn much about her abilities. She also has friends, like Malcolm (Eka Darville), a nosy neighbor who pops over whenever he wants, and Trish Walker (Rachael Taylor), a radio host, but Jones doesn’t seem to like any of them. We eventually learn about Jones’s relationships as she selectively engages them.Jones’s personal relationships are a credible extension of her character. She bluntly explains to viewers (through voice-over narration) that she is O.K. with the thorniest aspect of her job as a private detective: she profits from other people’s suffering. “New York may be the city that never sleeps — but it sure loves to sleep around,” she says. “Not that I’m complaining: cheaters are good for business. A big part of the job is looking for the worst in people. Turns out I excel at that.” The show’s version of Jones is somewhat more obnoxious, and definitely more desperate, than the version that debuted in Brian Michael Bendis and Michael Gaydos’s sharp “Alias” comic book series. Jones drinks constantly: her office/apartment is littered with bottles, and she always seems to be a few inappropriate comments away from making a hung over fool of herself.She has a reputation for being a hothead who gets results, as high-powered client Jeryn Hogarth (Carrie-Ann Moss) explains to Jones before reluctantly hiring her to deliver a subpoena to Gregory Spheeris (Juri Henley-Cohn), a strip-club owner who’s being sued by a brain-damaged dancer (and a bunch of high-powered businessmen who want to buy Spheeris’s property). Spheeris’s case isn’t the focus of “A.K.A. Ladies’ Night,” but rather one of a series of encounters whose significance is only explained later on. An entire world is suggested through well-placed details, like omnipresent advertisements for Walker’s “Trish Talks” talk show, or nightmarish, PTSD-esque flashbacks to what appears to be a rape scene.The show’s overlapping subplots are pieces of a collage that amounts to a simple, but engaging portrait of an independent woman struggling to assert control over her life. That struggle for greater agency is reflected in a predominantly female supporting cast who, like Hogarth, are either more in control of their lives than Jones or in greater need of rescue, like Hope (Erin Moriarty), a missing college student that Jones is hired to find. This community of women provides an immediately accessible context for Jones’s struggles, and ensures that viewers never lose sight of the thematic stakes that ground Jones’s casework.In contrast, scenes involving sex and violence are often handled without sensitivity or nuance in “A.K.A. Ladies’ Night.” When Jones sleeps with cocky bar-owner Luke Cage (Mike Colter), we immediately know it’s a mistake. She flirts with Cage at his bar, and gets into bed with him right after he dares her to tell him what she really wants. Jones’s answer comes in a sex scene that is edited so frantically that it comically emphasizes the violence of Cage and Jones’s lustful encounter. There’s no romance here, just two people relentlessly going at each other. This is supposed to be the funny half of the scene. Fun and games end when Jones tells Cage “I won’t break” and Cage boastfully replies “Yeah — you will.” That line is a fratboy-ish wink to comic fans who (spoiler alert) know that Cage has superpowers: impenetrable, diamond-hard skin.The scene slows down noticeably after Cage’s rejoinder. Jones tries to prove she’s in control, but is ultimately humiliated after Cage mounts her from behind. Jones tries to regain control of her body by grabbing at Cage’s arm while he thrusts into her. But eventually, she sees that he was right, and does essentially break, clutching at Cage’s bedsheets and crying out before she and Cage separate from each other.Watching Jones make a mistake by sleeping with Cage isn’t out of character for her. She’s supposed to be a more-down-to-Earth hero than the other characters in the Marvel universe since she comes to heroics from the perspective of someone who has powers, and has a past as a hero, but doesn’t want to deal with that anymore. Matt Murdock in Netflix’s “Daredevil” is the only other hero in the Marvel movie and TV universe that constantly grapples with doubts about whether or not he should be a superhero. But he unconvincingly wrestles with Catholic guilt and daddy issues while Jones gets punished for her indecisive nature by drinking to excess and being dominated sexually. Jones and Cage’s sex scene is shot and scripted in such a flip way that it suggests that she ought to be ashamed for wanting to experiment with him.In the first issue of “Alias,” Jones similarly has sex with Cage, and the fact that the sex is obviously implied to be anal sex only serves to up the punishment factor. Jones thinks to herself in this scene that Cage will only remember their tryst as the one time she “let him do whatever he wants.” Bendis and Gaydos break the scene down sequentially so that it focuses on the intense discomfort on Jones’s face. Likewise, in the TV version of this scene, the image of Jones’s hand twisting Cage’s bed sheets and crying out before she hurries out of Cage’s apartment the next morning suggests that she does “break” after all.This encounter rankles because “Jessica Jones” is an ostensibly progressive show — Marvel’s second project dedicated to a female protagonists after “Agent Carter” — that shows strong women like Hope and Spence trying to stop callous, domineering men like Kilgrave (the former “Doctor Who” star David Tennant) from taking advantage of them.Read our recap of episode 2.Advertisement