
Fargo By                     
SCOTT TOBIAS

DEC. 14, 2015
“And here ya are, and it’s a beautiful day.”That line, part of a soliloquy that Marge Gunderson delivers to the crook she’s apprehended at the end of “Fargo,” may be the central utterance of the whole movie. Because Marge turns out to be such an excellent sleuth — she gets every detail of the road killings right (despite a bout of morning sickness) and follows the breadcrumbs to Minneapolis and the infamous wood chipper on Moose Lake — it can be easy to forget that she’s never known such violence. She’s not some big-city detective, picking through grisly crime scenes every day, but a small-town police chief who’s probably more accustomed to issuing tickets to drunken drivers or breaking up domestic disputes. The killings have violated the ice-crusted idyll of Brainerd, Minn., and she’s genuinely struggling to come to terms with it. There’s more to life than “a little bit of money.” Isn’t that obvious?As one chapter in a now-literal book about crime in the Midwest, this mostly excellent season of “Fargo” has taken great pains to reveal the violence that grips the region, from the presence of an organized crime family like the Gerhardts to the appalling treatment of Native Americans. Yet for the Solversons — and at least one of the Blumquists — the mayhem that’s landed on their doorstep remains inexplicable. Killing is not their business, as it is with the Gerhardts and the Kansas City mob; the people of Luverne only learn about violence if they serve their country overseas, as men like Lou and Hank have done. And when the bloodletting finally ends, they’re left to come to terms with it.The Fargoverse includes many distinct elements — the quirky idiosyncrasies of language, the low-level hostility of “Minnesota nice,” the relentlessly cold and arid landscapes — but the movie and the TV show boil down to affirming life’s simple value against the obscenity of violence. Though “Palindrome” has a few loose ends to tie up, last week’s shootout at the Motor Motel was essentially the climax and this week is the extended denouement, like the scene in Marge’s police cruiser drawn out to the better part of an hour. Noah Hawley, who created the series and wrote this episode, naturally loses the concision of Marge’s monologue and the brief, exquisite scene of her talking three-cent stamps with her husband in bed. Yet the philosophizing throughout “Palindrome” is touching in it own way, a necessary counterbalance to a season where the bodies piled up by the dozen.The episode opens with a faces-of-death montage that includes mostly Gerhardts, who have lost nearly every member of the household, save for the cook and Hanzee.AdvertisementBut consider for a moment the poor old man who just happens to be driving through a Sioux Falls alleyway as the Blumquists flee the Motor Motel with Hanzee in pursuit. Ed tries to commandeer the man’s car, but a bullet intended for him hits the old man instead. That’s all in the flow of the action, and not even Lou, who’s trailing Hanzee, has time to pause for more than a second before resuming the chase. But the director, Adam Arkin — who appears later as the corporate goon showing Mike Milligan the ropes in Kansas City — stays on the victim long enough for it to register in our conscience. Another dead body. And for what? A little bit of money?AdvertisementThe reckoning commences with Ed, bleeding out in a grocery store freezer from a bullet Hanzee fired, finally telling Peggy how he feels. “Even if we get out of this,” he says. “I don’t think we’re gonna make it, you and me. We’re just too different.”Ed has learned some disquieting things about his wife since she pulled into the garage with Rye Gerhardt stuck in her windshield, but this scene is not about her immorality. It’s about a more common form of irreconcilable differences, the kind that happens when two people don’t want the same things from life. Ed, for lack of a better term, has “Fargo” values: He wants a home, a family, a small business downtown. Peggy wants something more. That’s not a value judgment on her necessarily, but the Blumquists’ involvement in this mess has clarified a pre-existing problem in their marriage. It might not have ended as violently, but it would have ended.Mr. Hawley gives Peggy a chance to speak for herself in a scene that echoes the denouement in the Coens’ “Fargo,” but is more of a two-way street. Peggy isn’t Peter Stormare, blankly absorbing a monologue in the back of the cruiser; she’s a talker and disinclined to listen to Lou discuss the virtues of manhood without pushing back a little. The two are not speaking from positions of equal moral authority: When Lou recalls the fall of Saigon and the extraordinary efforts that fathers make to protect their families, Peggy’s argument that she was “the first victim,” before Rye, doesn’t hold water. (“People are dead, Peggy,” Lou reminds her.) But that doesn’t make Peggy’s counter on women like herself any less true. She’s not a monster for wanting to wriggle out from under the role that had been assigned to her. Trying to do it all — to “be a wife, be a mother, be a self-made career woman” — isn’t possible in her mind, and a place like Luverne seems particularly inhospitable to the women who defy convention. Given Peggy’s poor choices and fevered delusions, she’s perhaps not the best spokeswoman for her gender, but Mr. Hawley (and Kirsten Dunst, who’s done inspired work all season) valiantly fights the uphill battle anyway. And nearly to a draw.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The last exchange takes place in the warmth of the Solverson home, where Lou and Hank can finally catch a breath, and Betsy, off bed rest after collapsing from cancer treatments, joins them in the living room. Betsy finally gets to ask her father about those weird symbols that festoon his office, which have been bothering her (and the “Fargo” faithful) ever since she stopped in to feed his cat. Hank explains his conviction that miscommunication accounts for the senseless violence in the world, and that the symbols were his attempt at creating a universal language. If William Shatner couldn’t make Esperanto happen, then Hank’s efforts are surely for naught, but the sentiment is nonetheless moving. This season of “Fargo” has often worked in references to war — many characters have fought, all have come back changed — none of them more moving than Hank’s language, which is his way of beating back the evil he’s witnessed. That he does it privately makes it all the more affecting. It’s his three-cent stamp — a triumph that means something, but only in his little corner of the world.Three-Cent Stamps: • Molly’s “dream” tips too much toward the precious, but ending it with the roar of Black Sabbath’s “War Pigs” and a bracing return to the action makes it more digestible. My favorite of the season’s music cues.• Milligan and the Kitchen brother claiming the Gerhardt home like conquerors sets up the irony of Milligan being denied the throne. Tradition dictates that Milligan gets to rule the kingdom, just like Otto Gerhardt did after he knocked off the old boss at a movie theater in the ’50s. “No more schnitzel or strudel,” he declares. “Let’s get some American food!” That Milligan winds up ushered to an accounting job at corporate — which frowns on the bolo ties and the ’fro — is a little too neat an irony. The show had been setting up Kansas City as the Walmart to the Gerhardts’ ma-and-pa operation all season, but it seems unlikely that it’s actually run out of an office building like Walmart. The metaphor needn’t be reality.• The direct use of Carter Burwell’s score from the movie “Fargo” was a nice touch and a reminder that the faux-Burwell score from Season 1 was one of the worst things about it. Accept no imitations.• A beautiful affirmation of Midwest values from Betsy in response to Noreen, who parrots the Camus line about the knowledge of death making life absurd: “We’re put on this earth to do a job and each of us gets the time we have to do it. When this life is over and you stand in front of the Lord, you try telling him it was some Frenchman’s joke.”• After Hanzee assumed such a prominent role in recent episodes, it was something of a letdown to see his story wrapped up so tidily, but he makes a meaningful exit. Hanzee seeks a new life and a new identity, but the scene that plays out in front of him on the baseball diamond is discouraging. Conflict is everywhere. It can’t be escaped. (You can read my interview with Zahn McClarnon, the actor who plays Hanzee, here.)Advertisement• The penitentiary that looks out on the Bay in San Francisco? Does Peggy want to go to Alcatraz?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »