AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott TobiasThroughout most of the second season of “Fargo,” which ends tonight, Hanzee Dent has served as a reliable tracker and enforcer for the Gerhardt crime family of North Dakota. He’s a shrewd and implacable killing machine, like a more stoic variation on Javier Bardem’s terrifying Anton Chigurh in “No Country for Old Men” (one of the many Coen Brothers films the show’s creator, Noah Hawley, alludes to in the series). Yet Hanzee’s role has evolved and deepened down the stretch, as his own agenda has surfaced amid the chaos of a turf war with the Kansas City mob.For Zahn McClarnon, a character actor who’s worked in TV and film for over 20 years, playing Hanzee has offered a rare opportunity to step into the spotlight. Of Lakota and Irish descent, Mr. McClarnon grew up on reservations in the ’70s Middle America where the show takes place, and his understanding of that milieu has informed a character that upends stereotypes and speaks to the cultural climate for Native Americans during that time.With his run on “Fargo” certain to end with a bang, Mr. McClarnon talked about audition jitters, his back story for Hanzee, and the motives that might account for Hanzee’s actions.Read our ‘Fargo’ recaps here.Q: How did you get the part?A: Just the basic audition process. I thought I messed up the audition. At that point, there wasn’t a lot of material to audition with, because Hanzee didn’t have a lot of dialogue. But they sent me the scene in the garage with Nick Offerman and that gave me a little more back story about Hanzee being a Vietnam vet. I was able to take that information and use it. After I finished, Noah [Hawley] just stared at me for a minute. I said, “Do you want me to make adjustments or anything?” And he kind of looked at me and said: “Nah. If it’s not broke, don’t fix it.” Then two weeks later, he hired me.Q: Why did you feel you had screwed up the audition?A: There was a lot of pressure. I knew they were looking for a series regular, someone who would do a lot of episodes of “Fargo,” which is a huge TV show. So you get nervous. You don’t have a lot of information on the character. There’s only a few lines. And there’s only a certain way you can deliver those lines. You might forget a line because you didn’t memorize it all. There are all these nerves, walking into an audition. I think I dropped a line and had to start again. And sometimes you only get that one shot, especially on television.But then again, there’s not really a big pool of Native actors to choose from. It’s not like 20- to 25-year-old white Americans, where you can have hundreds and thousands of actors. With Natives, you’re going to have a choice between maybe 30 people or 50 people — and half of them are in Canada or all over the country.Q: Did you imagine a back story for Hanzee beyond what was written on the page?A: Oh yeah, for sure. There wasn’t a lot on the page. I was lucky enough to have grown up in areas like Nebraska and South Dakota and Minnesota, North Dakota, Wyoming, Montana. I grew up in the ’70s, and I was very familiar with the revitalization of the Native American spirit, like what happened in Wounded Knee in ’73. I know all those people. I know Russell Means. I know Dennis Banks. And I knew John Trudell, who unfortunately passed away [last week]. John Trudell was a poet and activist for the American Indian Movement and he was a friend. I’m very familiar with that period of time and being around those people and being around that culture.Q: Given the show’s relationship to the Coen brothers’ work, were those films a key text for you, too? There’s so much Anton Chigurh in the way you carry yourself.A: In the movie “Fargo,” a buddy of mine named Steve Reevis played Shep Proudfoot. He was the guy who worked at the garage and beat Steve Buscemi. Steve [Reevis] and I grew up in the business together in the early ’90s. So I did take a bit from Steve’s performance. And I was aware of how Noah was pulling different aspects from different Coen brothers movies and putting them in the series. But with the Anton Chigurh thing, I didn’t really think about what Javier Bardem did in “No Country for Old Men.” It actually didn’t hit me until after I did the gas station scene. Javier had so much more dialogue. He was telling a story in that scene.Q: Do you feel like the character of Hanzee was a way to reimagine or expand on the character of Shep Proudfoot?A: I don’t think that was Noah’s intention. It possibly could have been, but I think it’s more of the time period in that area that inspired him. There are a lot of Native Americans in North and South Dakota and Nebraska, Iowa and Minnesota. There’s probably 15 different reservations in that whole area. I think the show is more about being true to that era, which was an activist period for American Indians.Q: In the last episode, “The Castle,” the narrator speculates about when Hanzee turned against the Gerhardts. When did it happen in your mind?A: Hanzee had an agenda from the beginning. There are multiple moments that happen throughout the show that suggest he wanted to become more of an individual. I really think, though, that Hanzee is planning something from the get-go.Q: So you feel like he arrived at the cabin with the intention of shooting Dodd, no matter what Dodd said to him?A: I’m not sure about that. It was half and half. The relationship with Dodd came to a boil at that point. He was tired of being called a “mongrel” and a “half-breed.” Dodd treated Hanzee pretty badly, and at that point the relationship had deteriorated. In his mind, though, I think he also wanted to do his own thing. It’s left up to the audience to decide.Q: Are there meaningful distinctions to be made between Hanzee’s relationship with Dodd and his individual relationships with other members of the family? Or are they all guilty in his mind?A: I think Hanzee has a lot of issues. He was a “tunnel rat” in the Vietnam War, and there’s the PTSD from that. Then the identity problems of growing up since he was nine-years-old in a white family, and probably taken from — and this my back story — his alcoholic parents off the reservation. Hanzee probably lived in the shed outside the Gerhardt’s house. He probably lived in the goddamned barn. He had some problems. [Laughs]Q: Hanzee has gone from a seemingly peripheral character to one of the most important on the show. What has that been like for you to experience on a week-to-week basis?A: Watching the show has been awesome. They’d give us the scripts about eight to 10 days before we shot each episode. And it’s just been amazing to watch Hanzee’s character become more of a leading character on the show. I’ve been pleasantly surprised by the response. At one point, Angus Sampson, who plays Bear Gerhardt, said: “We got to get some shirts that say ‘Hanzee’ on them.” [Laughs] It was great thing to go through, and it continues to be a great thing to go through.Advertisement