By KATHRYN SHATTUCKDEC. 14, 2015
Adele, whose new album, “25,” has sold more than five million copies in the United States, takes New York by storm. Syfy ventures into deep space. And some cartoonists for The New Yorker tickle our funny bones.What’s on TVADELE LIVE IN NEW YORK CITY 10 p.m. on NBC. Hello from the inside: Cameras followed Adele offstage and on as she prepared for her one-night engagement at Radio City Music Hall on Nov. 17, her first concert in four years. She also performs alongside Coldplay and One Direction on the season finale of “The X Factor UK” at 8 p.m. on AXS TV. (Image: Adele)GHOST TOWN (2008) 6:15 p.m. on HBO2. After a near-death experience during a colonoscopy, Bertram Pincus, a misanthropic Manhattan dentist played by a sniveling Ricky Gervais, starts to see dead people — namely, a two-timing yuppie (Greg Kinnear) who was hit by a bus. This ghost wants Bertram to befriend his widow (Téa Leoni) and prevent her from remarrying. She hates Bertram, and then she doesn’t. (Image: Mr. Gervais, left)SUPERGIRL 8 p.m. on CBS. Kara dukes it out with Astra, her aunt, in defense of her mother’s honor. And Cat finds her job jeopardized after a hacker exposes some personal emails.AdvertisementCHILDHOOD’S END 8 p.m. on Syfy. When an armada from space parks over Earth’s capital cities, the aliens carried here on giant ships seem kinder and gentler than others we’ve heard about as they eliminate poverty, war and sickness in this three-part adaptation of the Arthur C. Clarke novel. But, as humanity soon discovers, it’s all a little boring. The space thrills continue at 10 p.m. with “The Expanse,” a new series set 200 years in the future, when man has colonized the solar system. Thomas Jane (“Hung”) plays the hardened detective out to expose the greatest conspiracy in human history.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.JANE THE VIRGIN 9 p.m. on CW. Mateo celebrates his first Christmas. (Image: Gina Rodriguez and Justin Baldoni)VERY SEMI-SERIOUS: A PARTIALLY THOROUGH PORTRAIT OF NEW YORKER CARTOONISTS (2015) 9 p.m. on HBO. Each Tuesday, cartoonists line up outside the office of Bob Mankoff, an editor at The New Yorker, to show off their work. Each week, the magazine publishes about 15 of the thousands of submissions he sifts through — exercises in humor by George Booth, Roz Chast, Liana Finck, Emily Flake, Mort Gerberg and Ed Steed — designed to elicit a knowing chortle rather than a less sophisticated guffaw. And, of course, the magazine features cartoons by Mr. Mankoff himself, whose most famous one depicts a businessman pointing to a datebook and saying into a phone” “No, Thursday’s out. How about never — is never good for you?”AdvertisementFARGO 10 p.m. on FX. Peggy and Ed make a run for it.What’s StreamingTHE TRIALS OF JIMMY ROSE on Acorn TV. Ray Winstone plays an armed robber who, returning home after a 12-year prison sentence, is greeted with mixed emotions. His daughter and grandson are happy to see him. His wife and son, not so much.A version of this schedule appears in print on December 14, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Watch Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.