By DAVID ALLENDEC. 13, 2015
Here’s all you need to know to grasp the whimsical character of Ensemble Dal Niente, a superb contemporary-music collective: In its hometown, Chicago, it runs a concert series called Hard Music, Hard Liquor.No spirits were involved in the New York leg of the group’s Neue Musik tour, which had already passed through Boston on its way to an ingenious evening at the DiMenna Center on Thursday presented by Permutations, a bicoastal performance series. Except, that is, for the spirit of the composer Helmut Lachenmann, whose influence could be found all over this program. That’s unsurprising given that the ensemble’s name is a homage to Mr. Lachenmann’s own piece “Dal Niente (Interieur III),” — “dal niente” meaning “from nothing” in Italian.Mr. Lachenmann’s impact on music has run in myriad directions, but the key element is a rethinking of sounds and the instruments that produce them. His classic “Guero” (1969), for instance, takes a piano and asks the pianist not to play it. Instead, she (Mabel Kwan, here) runs her nails up and down the keys, lifts a few of them rather than depressing them and brushes the instrument’s insides.A similar language, laden with extended techniques that demand intense concentration, was pervasive in Dal Niente’s concert. Included was Carola Bauckholt’s “Zopf” (1992, revised 1994), for flute, oboe and clarinet. This work uses a vocabulary of sounds both familiar and unfamiliar, juxtaposing long, alarmed notes against squeals, sucks and sibilance before culminating in the swish of a cassette tape case, swaying on its hinges, and the rasp of a hand drill.AdvertisementThat felt inventive, but less so was Mark Andre’s “… zu staub …” (2005) despite the presence of three cactuses amid the percussionist’s drums and gongs. If cactuses in a chamber ensemble can possibly be an anticlimax, they were here, despite theatrical plucking and bowing by Greg Beyer. The gatherings and vanishings of this reflection on life and dust — the title comes from the Book of Genesis — were precisely charted by the conductor Michael Lewanski.Mathias Spahlinger’s ghostly “adieu m’amour: homage à Guillaume Dufay” (1982-83) had more atmosphere. It’s a work of both desolate sadness and desperate tedium for violin and cello, just barely breathed into life, in almost total darkness, by Tarn Travers and Chris Wild.AdvertisementMr. Spahlinger’s ethereal silences were perfectly contrasted by the two raucous works that surrounded them: Think of Enno Poppe’s “Salz” (2005) as a postmodernist “Boléro,” a tense crescendo that builds in 125 waves, growing ever more frantic and complex until it reaches a peak of sonic pain. And try not to think much about Johannes Kreidler’s mad, histrionic “Stil 1i” (2015), in which a theme is rapidly pushed through innumerable electronic variations — church bells, hard rock, tweeting birds, telephone rings — as five standing musicians interrupt with chords, gyrating all the while.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.