By BEN RATLIFFDEC. 13, 2015
Blood Orange, Dev Hynes’s solo project, is a continuing force of homage. A Blood Orange song, in how Mr. Hynes sings and plays and dances it, may remind you of stylish and romantic energies in pop and R&B from around the time he was born, the mid-1980s: records like Janet Jackson’s “Control” or Cyndi Lauper’s “True Colors.” But he isn’t paying homage purely in the service of look or sound or era. Pop savants raiding old styles for shallow reasons can sound hard-shell or narcissistic. Mr. Hynes’s songs point directly toward their influences, yet remain strangely light in ego, gentle and opaque and elegiac to the bone.His sort of homage is about more than old records. It seems like the outward manifestation of a complicated interior state, one full of gratitude, contemplation and loss. This is what gives his work its traction, as well as a kind of counterintuitive appeal. Mr. Hynes grew up outside London but moved to New York in the mid-aughts, and his work has reflected New York more and more, both in present and past tenses. And so his two sold-out concerts on Saturday at the Apollo Theater, a black-music landmark and a temple of homage, were live milestones in a pretty studio-bound career.Much to the point, the concerts, both benefits for the Opus 118 Harlem School of Music, were billed as “Blood Orange and Friends.” The Blood Orange records — there are two, “Coastal Grooves” (2011) and “Cupid Deluxe” (2013) — are only part of his essence. The rest is his work as a songwriter and producer with other singers, mostly women, including Solange Knowles, Nelly Furtado, Sky Ferreira, FKA twigs, Kylie Minogue and Carly Rae Jepsen (he helped write Ms. Jepsen’s recent song “All That” and performed it with her on “Saturday Night Live” last spring). The first two singers made unannounced appearances during the evening set, as did Caroline Polachek from Chairlift; Adam Bainbridge, who performs as Kindness; the Queens rapper Despot; and members of the WAFFLE dance crew, performing in the acrobatic Litefeet style known to New York subway riders. Preceding the early set was the rapper Junglepussy and the hip-hop group Ratking; the late set’s opener was the rapper Le1f.Mr. Hynes, of course, was the star. In the late set, in front of a five-piece band with two backup singers, he sang lead with only a few exceptions: When Ms. Furtado sang her old hit “Say It Right,” and when Ms. Knowles performed songs from “True,” her EP from 2012 that he worked on. (They sang together on a version of Marvin Gaye’s “Inner City Blues.”) At regular intervals he picked up an electric guitar and meted out extremely clean-toned funk. He played the cello, standing up, in a recent song called “Delancey,” redolent of another one of his heroes, the singer and songwriter Arthur Russell. He danced beautifully, with guitar or not, in sashays and slants and pivots that combined the body language of Michael Jackson with his own moves. But the concerts managed to present him as the center of attention without concretizing him.AdvertisementMr. Hynes has a soft and breathy and slightly anachronistic voice, suited to his band’s watery synthesizer sounds and popping slow-funk bass, and he’s used it to sing songs from both male and female points of view. On Saturday, it was romantic even when singing a conclusive put-down — “I never was in love/You know that you were never good enough,” in “You’re Not Good Enough” — or a eulogy for Sandra Bland, who died in police custody, in the new “Sandra’s Smile”: “Who taught you to breathe, then took away your speech?” Both of these were situations in which he could have dramatized his own power, but didn’t: They remained light-footed and generous.Most remarkable about the set was the way it politely resisted moments of release. This is a common characteristic of a Blood Orange song — it will find a vamp or refrain and dwell there rather than shifting dynamics and moving on to a big hook — and perhaps there was no reason to believe that his performance would prove otherwise. But still: This was the Apollo, a symbolic and actual victory, and the energy through the set remained subtle, cool, almost deflective. Mr. Hynes hasn’t given all his power away. He’s keeping some for himself.AdvertisementA music review on Monday about Blood Orange and Friends, at the Apollo Theater in Manhattan, misidentified the song they performed that includes the lines, “I never was in love/You know that you were never good enough.” It is “You’re Not Good Enough,” not “Chamakay.”A version of this review appears in print on December 14, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Nods to His Influences, but Moves All His Own.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.