By ALASTAIR MACAULAYDEC. 13, 2015
MONTCLAIR, N.J. — No other American choreographer alive just now is making movement that so marvelously cleanses the palate the way Liz Gerring’s does. Her hourlong work “Horizon” had its premiere last week at the Alexander Kasser Theater at Montclair State University as part of the Peak Performances series here, and its mix of purity and athleticism is strong, clean, bold and exciting. It fluently combines modern technique with a postmodern and quasi-analytical scrutiny of pedestrians and athletes. But the mind that shapes the choreography is warmly modernist: scientific but also passionately and infectiously in love with movement.All seven dancers are admirable, and Brandon Collwes, who danced for the Merce Cunningham company and joined Ms. Gerring’s troupe  in 2013, performs as if he’s on fire. A powerfully built hunk — broad shoulders, chest, pelvis, thighs — he’s always been strong, innocent and unmannered, dancing with sweep on a large scale. Here, however, it’s as if he’s found a fresh motor: He’s broken through to new layers of fervor and zeal, throwing himself into the movement as if it were his mission. His contributions to “Horizon” are exemplary and electrifying. This is one of the most marvelous performances in New York dance today.To stride backward sounds like a contradiction in terms; Ms Gerring’s dancers make it seem natural. And Mr. Collwes, when he does it along one diagonal late in the work, seizes on the task like a hungry giant. You see his leg shoot out behind him to claim new space, then the other leg. His torso, tilting forward, continues the line of the leg, but since he’s racing backward as if into the unseen, the effect — he is leaning away from the direction he’s taking so eagerly — is uncanny, galvanizing, haunting.As in previous works, Ms. Gerring occasionally gives us a gesture that seems taken directly from sports, especially when Jake Szczypek crosses the stage, repeatedly throwing out an arm as if pitching a softball. Other echoes of the world we know come when Pierre Guilbault does one repeated, quick, springing jump (feet together throughout), as if on a pogo stick. And Joseph Giordano has an advancing jump like a kangaroo’s: It ends each time with his torso plunging forward down past his knees.AdvertisementUsually, though, Ms. Gerring’s movement is about itself, not inviting us to find imagery or illusions. You’re shown the rewarding difficulty of physical transitions and control at full stretch. But whereas some modern-dance choreographers give us pure dance that’s all too contained, Ms. Gerring gives us phrases of exuberant sweep, shape, contour, line, impetus.When Mr. Collwes, balancing on one leg, stretches the other leg behind him and his torso and arms ahead of him to make a single horizontal line, you see all the exertion involved: He makes a shape that’s powerfully charged by energy. Then he tilts that elongated T shape, so that his head, torso and thigh face us; the transition is so marvelously legible that it’s as if we’re doing it with him.AdvertisementIn another one-legged balance, he arches the other leg and both arms to one side, as if he’s showing us an overlapping pair of C shapes, suspended in air. His supporting leg and torso are all part of the arcs he’s making, and all of him blazes as he sustains and stretches those linesMs. Gerring’s female dancers aren’t sylphs or deities; they’re worthy colleagues to the four men. All seven are gorgeous athletes who jump, roll, stretch, balance, crouch, plunge; their feet and torsos are powerful. (They move their torsos faster and more forcefully than some dancers elsewhere move their legs.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Gerring has a long-term team of artistic colleagues: the composer Michael J. Schumacher, the production designer Robert Wierzel, the costume designer Liz Prince. In some pieces, they’ve worked with her as if to create a stage world; here, instead, they heighten the cool, analytical aspect of her work. Mr. Schumacher’s score is a collage of John Cage-like found sound that features some fascinating effects of turning vocalism into abstract vibration and meter. But it also includes a few patches of rock/pop music that in context sound trite — mere kitsch.Mr. Wierzel places a white ceiling and wall above and behind the dancers; the effect is like a laboratory across which his and Amith A. Chandrashaker’s sometimes colored lighting casts experimental strokes. Ms. Prince’s costumes all differ in cut, color and material, as if the seven dancers have come from different places. Though Ms. Gerring’s choreography has more sense of pattern and plan than this, the overall stage mood is one of enthusiastic scrutiny.Not since Trisha Brown (who announced in 2012 that after 50 years of choreography, she would be making no new dances) have we had a dance-maker who conjures such spells from movement at its purest.A version of this review appears in print on December 14, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Zealous Athleticism in Literal Leaps and Bounds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.