AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck11:05 A.M. (Cinemax) TRANSAMERICA (2005) Felicity Huffman goes full-frontal as Bree, who, though still technically a man, passes for a woman with tasteful pink outfits, meticulous makeup and a breathy voice. But before gender reassignment surgery, she needs to tie up a loose end — so she hits the road with the son (Kevin Zegers) she never knew she had. Duncan Tucker’s debut feature “sets out to affirm Bree’s dignity, to liberate her and others like her from any association with camp or freakishness,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “That the film succeeds without slipping too far into sentimentality or didacticism is in no small measure the result of Ms. Huffman’s wit and grace.” (Image: Ms. Huffman)11 A.M. (Starz Cinema) A SEPARATION (2011) A couple (Leila Hatami and Peyman Moaadi) must decide whether to leave Iran for the sake of their daughter or stay to care for a parent with dementia — either of which could end their marriage. “It is a rigorously honest movie about the difficulties of being honest, a film that tries to be truthful about the slipperiness of truth,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times about this Oscar winner for best foreign-language film, written and directed by Asghar Farhadi and starring his daughter, Sarina, as the couple’s child. “It also sketches a portrait — perhaps an unnervingly familiar picture for American audiences — of a society divided by sex, generation, religion and class.”8 P.M. (13) NYC-ARTS: FINDING NEVERLAND Like the Johnny Depp-Kate Winslet movie before it, the Broadway musical “Finding Neverland” recounts how J. M. Barrie’s relationship with a widow and her four sons inspired the creation of Peter, Tinker Bell, the Darling Family and Captain Hook in his masterpiece, “Peter Pan.” This episode traces the show’s evolution through footage from workshops, rehearsals and the finished production as well as through interviews with its director, Diane Paulus, and its stars Matthew Morrison and Laura Michelle Kelly.8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY The night belongs to Alex (Justin Chambers), who must determine the fate of newborn twins while Stephanie (Jerrika Hinton) keeps a secret from him. In “Scandal,” at 9, Oliva (Kerry Washington) tells the truth and pays the price. And in “How to Get Away With Murder,” at 10, Annalise (Viola Davis) and her team investigate a swanky sex club.9 P.M. (NBC) THE BLACKLIST Liz (Megan Boone) flees to the safety of the Russian embassy with Ressler (Diego Klattenhoff) hot on her heels. Red (James Spader) hires a lawyer to extract them from this mess.11 P.M. (MTV) MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT SHOW Strange bedfellows: Brian Murphy of CollegeHumor oversees this new series, which commandeers the bedroom of an unsuspecting celebrity, who is forced to host a talk show on the spot. Thomas Middleditch of HBO’s “Silicon Valley” is the first victim.What’s Streaming NowSUPERMANSION He’s gone from a doofus dad on “Malcolm in the Middle” to a meth cook on “Breaking Bad.” Now Bryan Cranston is Rex, a superhero with a faulty prostate and some bumbling sidekicks in this stop-motion animated series from Stoopid Buddy Stoodios, the people behind Adult Swim’s “Robot Chicken.” “Is anything sadder than the sight of an aging superhero who no longer commands the respect needed to lead?” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times. “ ‘He’s too old to get his bladder to follow orders,’ someone says as Rex struggles at a urinal. ‘No wonder he’s lost control of his team.’ ” (crackle.com)MELANCHOLIA (2011) The Danish director Lars von Trier sets a celestial apocalypse to mighty blasts of Wagner as Justine (Kirsten Dunst), a young bride whose crippling depression sabotages her wedding and nascent marriage, and Claire (Charlotte Gainsbourg), her dutiful sister, await the impact of a rogue planet that seems to be on a collision course with Earth. Alexander Skarsgard portrays Justine’s bewildered husband; Mr. Skarsgard’s father, Stellan Skarsgard, is her obnoxious boss; and Charlotte Rampling and John Hurt are her bitterly divorced parents. “Mr. von Trier, inspired (if that’s the word) to make this movie by his own experience of depression, gleefully turns a psychological drama inside out,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “The world, Justine declares in her darkest moment of clarity, deserves its awful fate. The perverse achievement of ‘Melancholia’ is how difficult it is to argue with her conclusion.” (amazon.com, iTunes, netflix.com) (Image: Ms. Dunst)Advertisement