By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMDEC. 13, 2015
The stone put and caber toss do not feature in Rossini’s Scottish-themed opera “La Donna del Lago” (“The Lady of the Lake”), which the Metropolitan Opera revived in a musically outstanding performance led by Michele Mariotti on Friday. But with fiercely athletic vocal parts distributed among competing roles, this work sometimes feels like the bel canto version of the Highland Games.The story revolves around Elena, a morally incorruptible Scottish beauty. Three men lay claim to her affections. There’s Rodrigo, the local alpha male, whom her father expects her to marry; and Malcolm, the sensitive boy next door, whom she hopes to wed. Then there is Giacomo V (King James V), who, in the guise of a lost hunter, appeals to Elena’s hospitality and swiftly loses his heart to her. With Elena’s headstrong father, Duglas, in the mix, those are a lot of men for one woman to manage.As Elena, the incandescent mezzo Joyce DiDonato commands the necessary vocal backbone to focus the drama on herself: steely in confrontational exchanges, she can sound meltingly tender when daydreaming about Malcolm and produce a more juicy, complex tone when the arrival of the hunter complicates her emotional landscape.Ms. DiDonato’s mastery of the gymnastic elements of bel canto singing is absolute, and the seeming ease with which she binds them into the musical and emotional context of each phrase and scene is breathtaking.AdvertisementLawrence Brownlee gave a thrilling performance as the king. His voice seems to have grown creamier and more complex recently, with some of the most appealing colors concentrated on his very top register.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The tenor John Osborn brought gladiatorial zest to the part of Rodrigo, singing with a firm but somewhat monochrome voice and nimble articulation. The (kilt-wearing) trouser role of Malcolm brought out the inky depths and silky pliancy of Daniela Barcellona’s mezzo, but also a certain dramatic awkwardness that undermined her role as Elena’s favorite.AdvertisementThe bass Oren Gradus sounded underpowered as Duglas. It was really only the men’s chorus, in excellent form, that provided an effective counterweight to the opera’s leading high voices. Mr. Mariotti proved wonderfully adept at building up each scene layer by layer, drawing sensitive and alert playing from the orchestra.Paul Curran’s unobtrusive production, with naturalistic sets by Kevin Knight, adheres closely to the text. Much of the time the staging feels like an afterthought to the singing, but with a cast as talented as this, that’s no great handicap.“La Donna del Lago” remains in repertory at the Metropolitan Opera House through Dec. 26; metopera­.org. A version of this review appears in print on December 14, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Scottish Beauty Must Decide Her Fate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.