AdvertisementSupported by11 PhotosView Slide Show ›Chad Batka for The New York TimesBy Jon Pareles“Thanks for letting me be real with you guys,” Demi Lovato told the Madison Square Garden audience on Friday night at the iHeartRadio Z100 Jingle Ball, the annual showcase for Top 20 pop.Ms. Lovato had just belted “Stone Cold,” a soul-style dirge that strains to wish happiness to an ex with a new girlfriend: “I wish I could mean this,” she sang with quivering intensity. Earlier, after she sang “Confident,” the title song from her current album, she had told the crowd: “I don’t feel that confident, but you know what? I’m standing here on this stage, and I’m singing my heart out for you guys.” She went on to explain that her “fake nails” had fallen off during her first song. How much more real could she be?The pop celebrated at Jingle Ball mixes real-life emotions and unreal, larger-than-life fantasies. The New York edition is the flagship of a nationwide string of concerts promoted by iHeartRadio stations, and it was webcast by that network and streamed live on Yahoo. The concert had 16 live segments punctuated by advertisements: hitmakers sticking to their hits, minimizing risk like radio programmers.The music drew mostly on new and old R&B and dance music — soul, funk, disco, electronic dance music — with hard-rock guitars for occasional heft and the remnants of rebellion. It was pitched at the young women and little girls who filled the Garden, some accompanied by parents. And it was devoted to the ups and downs of adolescent romance — which, adults know, can easily outlast adolescence.In the realm of wish fulfillment, nearly all of the male performers portrayed themselves as ideal boyfriends: flattering, thoughtful, respectfully amorous and, as Nick Jonas sang, “Jealous ’cause you’re too sexy, beautiful/And everybody wants to taste.” The punk-pop band 5 Seconds of Summer opened the show, redirecting the sound of the Who and Green Day toward boy-band sentiments, but most of the other men on the bill were pop-R&B crooners, full of unctuous melismas, like Charlie Puth and Conrad Sewell. R. City and Fetty Wap, the night’s rappers — who were actually closer to the Jamaican tradition of sing-jays — stuck to love songs, as did the two electronic dance music disc jockeys in the lineup, Calvin Harris and Zedd.The women were not only confident — a word brandished by both Ms. Lovato and Fifth Harmony, the vocal quintet formed on a reality show — but also strong, loving and, when necessary, ready to retaliate. Hailee Steinfeld, the actress from the 2010 version of “True Grit” who has gone on to a pop career, summed up the Jingle Ball polarities of self-esteem and tough kiss-off with a two-song set punctuated by screams of affirmation: “Love Yourself” and “You’re Such A …”One of the concert’s subtexts was the way stars who were nurtured by the Disney Channel in younger, wholesome roles — Selena Gomez, Ms. Lovato, the Jonas Brothers — are now seizing more adult prerogatives. Ms. Lovato, in “Cool for the Summer,” promised, “I’m your body type” and cussed a little in and between songs. Ms. Gomez’s current album, “Revival,” has surprisingly sparse, mournful tracks promising sensual moments; she sang, in “Good for You,” about how she would “leave this dress a mess on the floor.”Two of the Jonas Brothers didn’t reunite. Before Nick Jonas’s set, Joe Jonas led his group, DNCE, harking back to Hall & Oates as he toggled between full voice and falsetto; one song chivalrously offered, “You can leave a toothbrush at my place.”The 17-year-old Canadian songwriter Shawn Mendes, who parlayed attention on Vine into a recording career, played most of his set with just an acoustic guitar. His songs, like “Stitches,” use quick rap cadences in the verses and smoother, slower pop choruses that insist on his vulnerability. But for his last song, this saccharine troubadour showed a different side; a band backed Mr. Mendes and Camila Cabello, from Fifth Harmony, performed “I Know What You Did Last Summer,” a duet of bitter recrimination and remorse.Topping the Jingle Ball bill, rightly, was the Weeknd, who had the concert’s most charismatic voice and most emotionally complex songs: tormented by compulsion and trauma, enmeshed in decadence and drugs. He worked the Garden stage like a soul man, even allowing himself a quick twirl; his high tenor voice, openly emulating Michael Jackson, rang out clearly. Yet at this show the women had the power, so the men behaved nicely. The Weekend did, in his way. When his lyrics in songs like “The Hills” included a four-letter word, he went silent for a syllable — like a radio version — leaving the high voices of the crowd to fill them in.Advertisement