By SAM ROBERTSDEC. 11, 2015
Bryony Brind, who at 22 startled audiences when Rudolf Nureyev plucked her from the ranks of junior Royal Ballet dancers to be his partner in a Covent Garden production in London, putting her on a path to become a principal dancer for the company, died on Dec. 2. She was 55.Her death, apparently of heart failure, was confirmed by Ashley Woodfield, a spokesman for the Royal Ballet. He said he did not know where she died. Ms. Brind performed with the company for more than a decade.Nureyev spotted her in 1982, after the Royal Ballet had invited him to stage “La Bayadère: Kingdom of the Shades.” He had hoped to direct the Royal Ballet and was disappointed when he was not chosen, and had made disparaging comments about the troupe’s dancers.Ms. Brind, who was half his age, was “the best bet” to dance the role of Nikiya to his Solor, he said.AdvertisementHe cast her again that year as the seductive Siren opposite him in George Balanchine’s “The Prodigal Son,” and as Miranda in his own ballet “The Tempest.”Advertisement“Originally I was terrified of him,” Ms. Brind said, “but he became a mentor, supporter and friend.”From her performance at 21 in the lead role in the Royal Ballet’s “Swan Lake,” she captivated audiences and critics alike with her striking beauty and youthful appeal. She performed with the company at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York, among other places.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She retired from the Royal Ballet in 1992 and danced her way into gossip columns as a companion of the married Prince Michael of Kent. She married a wealthy businessman and later a son of Barbara Cartland, the romance novelist.Bryony Jane Susan St. John Brind was born on May 27, 1960, in Plymouth, the daughter of Maj. Roger Brind of the Royal Marines and the former Jennifer Grey.She entered the Royal Ballet School when she was 11, graduated into the Royal Ballet in 1978, and was promoted to soloist in 1981 and to principal in 1984. She created a number of roles for the company. Her last was in David Bintley’s “The Planets” in 1990.Ms. Brind also appeared in several films, including “The Ghosts of Oxford Street,” a 1991 musical made for British television starring the singers Tom Jones and Sinead O’Connor.She married Ms. Cartland’s son Ian McCorquodale in 2000. Two years after their wedding, he had two strokes.“She went from being a newlywed” to a caregiver, Mr. McCorquodale, who survives her, told The Daily Mail in 2008. He added, “My mother loved Bryony; she saw her as a Cartland heroine.”A version of this article appears in print on December 14, 2015, on Page D10 of the New York edition with the headline: Bryony Brind, 55, Ballerina Who Caught Eye of Nureyev.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.