AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott ReyburnLONDON — “Buy the best, forget the rest” has become the conventional wisdom for collectors in today’s investment-minded art market. But what does “the best” mean? Clearly it meant different things to the 77,000 people who flocked to Art Basel Miami Beach this month.The fair, the last major event of 2015 for the hectic contemporary art market calendar, defied reports of bubbles bursting and demand cooling.On the one hand, toward the top of the price scale, the New York dealer Van de Weghe sold a 1954 Francis Bacon painting, “Man in Blue VI,” to an American collector for $13.5 million, almost twice the $7.7 million it made at Christie’s in 2013. And on another, there were artists’ estates. At a time when some collectors are becoming more risk-averse, fresh pieces by highly regarded, deceased artists have an obvious allure.Hauser & Wirth is one of several international dealerships looking to expand its program of managing artists’ estates. (It now represents more than 10.) Its booth at Art Basel Miami Beach was devoted to just seven works by American artists, including signature pieces by the sculptor David Smith (1906-65) and the painter and printmaker Philip Guston (1913-1980), both of whose estates it took over this year.Guston’s 1973 self-portrait, “The Canvas,” sold to a private collector for between $4 million and $5 million, while Smith’s 1961 painted steel sculpture, “Circles Intercepted,” priced at $7.5 million, is being considered for purchase by trustees at an undisclosed museum, according to Marc Payot, a vice president and partner at Hauser & Wirth.Away from the main fair, in Miami’s more than 20 satellite events, collectors’ desire to pan for fresh talent priced at less than $20,000 also seemed to be undiminished.“The rush out of the bullpen at the Nada fair on Thursday morning in Miami was insane,” the New York adviser Wendy Cromwell said of the event staged by the New Art Dealers Alliance. “Within minutes it appeared that many stands were sold out. Most of the artists on view were young and untested.”For all the talk of the boom in contemporary art being speculative and unsustainable, the market’s dizzying — and ever-renewing — range of buying opportunities continues to attract the vast majority of money spent on art.This is a very different situation from smaller, more traditional collecting areas. One of them, tribal art, is one of the few where buyers of the new and the old still intersect, and it received its first serious study this month in a report by the specialist database Artkhade.Using results provided by Art Analytics, the report, “The Tribal Art Market: 2000-2015,” charted auction prices, primarily for objects from Africa and Oceania. (Many auction houses avoid the contentiousness of North American artifacts, as well as the term “tribal.”)The report, issued on Dec. 2, found that auctions of carefully selected pieces — in other words, “the best” — have driven a significant price increase in the sector, with the total amount of public sales increasing from 13.7 million euros in 2001, about $15 million today, to €52.8 million in 2013 and €92.1 million in 2014.African sculpture, which influenced — and still looks good with — modern and contemporary art, dominates the top end of the market. All of the top 10 auction prices from 2000 to 2014 were achieved by African objects, led by the $12 million (with fees) paid in November 2014 at Sotheby’s New York for a wooden Senufo statue, from the Ivory Coast, that was part of the Myron Kunin collection. It remains the all-time auction high for the category, not accounting for inflation.Last year, objects from Africa made up 76 percent of the sector’s auction sales, the report says. Oceanic artifacts were next, at 15 percent of sales.Even though museum-quality objects from prestigious collections are bringing impressive prices, especially those with “crossover” interest from contemporary art buyers, the overall market remains small. Last year’s total sales of €92.1 million was equaled by the sale of one Giacometti, and was just 0.68 percent of the overall auction market. “Tribal arts remain a niche market,” the report from Artkhade says.It remains to be seen whether the upward price trend will continue in a more economically and geopolitically uncertain 2015. Nonetheless, significant sales were made in Paris at the biannual sales of African and Oceanic material at Sotheby’s on Dec. 2 and at Christie’s on Dec. 3 .Both events included objects from admired, long-established collections. Christie’s offering included a Fang sculpture from Gabon once owned by Modigliani’s dealer, Paul Guillaume. It sold to a collector of contemporary and modern art for €3.8 million. A three-times-life-size mask from the Torres Strait in New Guinea (owned by the American collectors John and Marcia Fried) was sold to an undisclosed museum for €1.7 million, an auction high for an Oceanic mask.Historical or visual connections with American or European art of the past 100 years is a nearly surefire value-enhancer. The Torres Strait mask, from Saibai Island, was in the “Primitivism” exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in 1984.Sotheby’s showed wooden sculpted portraits of King Pokam and Queen Yugang, late-19th-century rulers of the Batoufam kingdom in Cameroon, at a preview of contemporary works in New York in November. The portraits were sold on Dec. 2 in Paris to an unnamed collector for the low estimate of €1.4 million. Overall, Sotheby’s took in €5.9 million from the 84-lot auction, with 19 percent of the material unsold. Christie’s raised €7.3 million from 100 lots, of which 35 percent failed to sell.With a thin stratum of wealthy trophy hunters skimming off the finest pieces at big sales like those, the adage about buying the best certainly applies to tribal art, experts said.“The auction houses like to blast people with huge results,” said Anthony Meyer, a dealer in Paris who specializes in Oceanic art. “But it is true. It is about the best. It’s not necessarily the most expensive, but it’s fast becoming that.”He added: “People who buy want to make financial returns, and it’s difficult to make money on works priced under €5,000 to €10,000.” With collectors and speculators targeting the “best,” spare a thought, then, for that mass of the “rest” that does not have obvious remunerative appeal.On Dec. 2, as Sylvester Stallone and other celebrities were looking over multimillion-dollar Bacons and Gustons in Miami Beach, the Scottish novelist Ross Leckie was in a small London gallery extolling the virtues of what he called a “bog standard” ancient Greek drinking cup he had just bought. He was among the enthusiasts enjoying a festive round of pre-Christmas exhibitions at Mayfair galleries specializing in antiquities.Quoting poems by D.H. Lawrence and R.S. Thomas, he enthralled private viewers at Charles Ede with an off-the-cuff panegyric on the elegance and lightness of a humble, undecorated fifth-century B.C. black-glazed kylix, from around the time Phidias was constructing the Parthenon and Sophocles was writing his tragedies.And the cost of owning this miraculous survivor from one of the greatest eras of human civilization? Nine hundred and fifty quid, around $1,400.Advertisement