By ALASTAIR MACAULAYDEC. 15, 2015
While New York dance this week is dominated by the continuing and annual seasons of “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” (New York City Ballet at the David H. Koch Theater) and Alvin Ailey Dance Theater (at City Center, where the Balanchine “Nutcracker” had its premiere in 1954), two other events occur this week only. Though not primarily dance events, they connect music, theater and dance in various ways.The Baryshnikov Ballets Russes Collection and Misia SertMany of us were happily astonished by the exhibition “The Art I’ve Lived With: Works From the Collection of Mikhail Baryshnikov” at the ABA Gallery in Manhattan in 2012. It included items by Léon Bakst, Alexandre Benois, Christian Bérard, Jean Cocteau, Merce Cunningham, Natalia Goncharova, Mikhail Larionov and more; most were connected to dance theater in one or more ways. (There are no designs for “The Nutcracker” — “Casse-Noisette,” as it was often called — I should like to have seen as much as those by Benois. If only I’d started going to dance a couple of years earlier, I could have; they adorned the old London Festival Ballet production for many years until the mid-1970s.) Not least, this exhibition was a revelation of the artistic curiosity, and exceptional taste, of Mr. Baryshnikov.Some of his Benois and Bakst costume designs, and Cocteau’s drawing of the Ballets Russes founder, Serge Diaghilev, will be on display this Wednesday and Thursday at the Baryshnikov Arts Center to accompany the “Celebrating Misia Sert” musical performance in the Howard Gilman Performance Space. Ms. Sert was Diaghilev’s friend and fellow patron of the arts; the baritone Michael Kelly and the pianists David Fung and Roman Rabinovich will perform works by Satie (“Three Pieces in the Shape of a Pear”) and Ravel (“Histoires Naturelles” and “La Valse”).Diaghilev never staged any of these scores. He rejected “La Valse” (“not a ballet”), whereupon Ravel ended their friendship. Several choreographers have contradicted Diaghilev, notably Frederick Ashton (whose 1958 version was acclaimed by Poulenc as the first staging to honor Ravel’s intentions) and George Balanchine (whose 1951 treatment pointedly departs from Ravel’s ideas, which asked for an opening view of 19th-century couples whirling as seen through clouds; Ravel also emphasized that no death occurred in the music). Satie’s “Three Pieces” was choreographed by Mr. Cunningham (as “Septet”) in 1953, and danced by Mr. Baryshnikov with his White Oak Dance Project in the 1990s. So, though no dance occurs in these “Celebrating Misia Sert” concerts, the connections they establish between music and dance theater are complex.Meredith Monk and Anne WaldmanTwo category-defying artists perform together for the first time Thursday to Saturday at Danspace Project: the extraordinary veteran musician-choreographer Meredith Monk and the poet, playwright and activist Anne Waldman. There will be movement, though how much we have not been told. Ms. Monk’s place in radical dance history was established decades ago with “16 Millimeter Earrings” and other works. Her pioneering place in music theater is yet larger.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.