
Transparent By                     
 RACHEL SYME
 
DEC. 15, 2015
When Ali and Syd are in the stacks of the Malibu library, Ali stumbles upon the concept of “epigenetics,” the idea that trauma can actually get baked into a family gene pool and pass down from generation to generation. If this theory is true, then there is something buried deep in the Pfefferman’s past that might be able to explain — or at least partly account for — the current mixed-up nature of the family, with no one quite able to chart a path toward happiness.We are starting to pick up breadcrumbs about what this inherited trauma might be in the flashbacks to Berlin; we now know that grandma Rose had a brother named Gershon, who worked at Berlin’s Institute for Sexual Research (a place that actually existed in 1933 and was later destroyed by the Nazis), and who was living as a woman. From what we know about how transgender people were treated in Nazi Germany, we cannot guess that Gershon’s life was an easy one, and we see that Rose and her mother were trying to escape to America before things got too bad. This makes Grandma Rose seeing Gershon’s face in Ali’s especially moving; she is seeing, in this grandchild that she moved to America to help make possible, the face of her brother (turned sister) who suffered so much. Ali has become the inheritor of this family pain, and it is her job to work her way out of its twisty knot.Her siblings are also trying to work through their own issues. Sarah goes to see Raquel, the first rabbi in her life who doesn’t fall into the category of “men with beards who creep me out,” asking for advice about how to better navigate her anxiety around her children’s school. For Sarah, school is an unsafe space, a place where she feels that she must constantly confront her misdeeds, be it in the form of idle gossip about her broken marriage or her inability to have as much enthusiasm as the other mothers during “spirit week.” Annie Mumolo (the screenwriter of “Bridesmaids”) plays the chirpy head of the spirit committee who is Sarah’s nemesis.For Sarah, the school gala is a nightmare: she shows up alone, looking a little too sexy for the evening, and is immediately forced to confront Len and Melanie about the makeup palette she stole (she lies about it, of course). She can’t sell tickets out of her garish, flashing bucket and has to buy them all herself, and then must face a drunken Tammy (now with a neck tattoo), who tries to corner her in a classroom and bully her into a makeout session. She runs away, thinking she has escaped the circus, when her name is called not once but twice for the raffle, and she has to loudly refuse her prize, a life-coaching session, in front of the entire school. It is in this moment, when Sarah is barking about not needing a life-coach, that her humiliation is complete. Of course she needs a life-coach. She is the poster child for needing a life-coach. It took the entire PTA seeing her have a meltdown for her to finally accept it.AdvertisementJosh is still desperately trying to bond with Colton, taking him boogie-boarding and bumping shoulders the way he has seen other dads do (a noogie can’t be far away). And yet, it is clear that he still doesn’t really understand him, as evidenced by him lightly mocking Colton for praying (“it was like one of those Precious Moments figurines”). Josh mocks spirituality, and yet he is living with a rabbi and a conservative Christian. Josh is in way over his head, and in trying to do the right thing, he keeps doing the wrong thing. Inviting Rita to dinner may have been his worst idea yet: he wants her to be “a part of our bigger family” without realizing how wildly inappropriate that is. Raquel doesn’t want to spend time with Rita, who she feels abused a person she loves, and Rita cannot get the hint and proceeds to act like a total lunatic during dinner, singing out loud, making bold demands on Josh as a mold specialist, and telling Raquel to box up the pizza as if she is a waitress. And there’s Colton, caught in the middle, an innocent just trying to make all these uncomfortable adults happy even though he is still a child.AdvertisementMaura is also thrust into an awkward dinner situation; as she dines alone at a bar, a pretty lawyer comes in and she tries to hit on her and buy her tapas. But the lawyer demurs, clearly uncomfortable by Maura’s advances as she realizes she is trans. Maura is learning how hard it will be for her to find romance in her new body, a body that her hormone doctor suggests she “get to know” before moving ahead with surgery. Back home, Maura takes this frustration out on Shelly, who is just trying to pick between “Dancing With The Stars” and “The Scandal.” She tells Shelly to make herself happy, because she knows she can’t, not right now. Until Maura goes out to find some joy on her own, she is in no position to offer it to anyone else.“Mee-Maw” is one of the season’s most moving episodes. That has to do partially with how it was written: “Transparent” creator Jill Soloway wanted to add a transgender writer to the staff, but couldn’t find many trans writers already working in Hollywood given the narrow gender dynamics of the industry. So she put out an open call and invited the writers she liked best to camp out for a week and take a crash-course in TV writing; one of those writers was transgender classical pianist Our Lady J, who ended up impressing Ms. Soloway so much that she joined the show staff and wrote this episode. With so many subtle gender and family issues that play out, this stands as a testament to Ms. Soloway’s openness to include and promote outsider voices.The main plotline is the most devastating: Colton’s adopted televangelist parents, Pastor Gene and Blossie, come to town for a doomed meet-the-parents encounter that ends in heartbreak for everyone involved. The culture clash becomes apparent right away: Pastor Gene loves to shoot guns and preach on camera and talk to his congregants at the local Sizzler, while Raquel confesses to not knowing how one would even procure a firearm in Los Angeles. The pastor makes an attempt to bridge the gap between the families by pontificating on his respect for the Jews, but Josh makes the mistake of saying that Colton is, by some reform-definitions, technically Jewish, and suddenly things become tremendously awkward. “No, you aren’t sweetie,” Blossie says to Colton, with a nervous trill.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Suddenly, it becomes clear that Josh and Raquel are out of their depth; Colton was raised as an evangelical, and they are just playing at becoming a family. Even Raquel’s ring, the pearl heirloom passed down from Gershon to Grandma Rose, is a set-piece: Josh forces her to wear it as a symbol of their commitment for “optics,” when what she really wants is an authentic proposal. The cracks between Josh and Raquel truly start to show when she tells him that Colton “is lucky he gets to stay with us,” and Josh says, “I think you mean we are lucky to have him.” Josh sees Colton as a kind of answer to his troubles, a band-aid for his search for meaning, while Raquel views Colton as an unhealthy reminder of Josh’s past trauma: things are about to break, and indeed, by episode’s end, they explode.The other members of the family are on their own spirit quests: Maura decides to re-gender her childhood photos, taking bolder and bolder steps to orient herself in her female body. Ali is jumping into her relationship with Syd with gusto and is being drawn deeper into Leslie’s charismatic web, attending a lesbian blood moon ceremony in which Leslie holds court like a high priestess. “I don’t teach,” Leslie says, looking directly at Ali with a kind of mesmerizing venal gaze. “I like to talk about things I care about to people who are ready.” Leslie is pompous and grandstanding (not to mention potentially involved with a teenage girl), but Ali finds her irresistible. Ali has always been vulnerable to authority figures as she searches for mentorship, and Leslie seems to latch on to this, staring Ali down across the bonfire like she is going to eat her alive. And she just might.“Mee-Maw” ends in tragedy — Maura spills the fact that they bribed Colton’s family to take the baby off Rita’s hands and never tell Josh, and Josh’s world is split down the middle. He cannot admit to Raquel that he was molested, but he cannot stand to have Colton around as a reminder of his familial pain. Poor Colton, a sweet puppyish soul who only wants to be loved and kept, must deal with being rejected yet again by his birth parents as Josh stays silent when he asks if he should stay. Josh rejects Colton because Raquel is traumatized by having him there, but also because he cannot face up to the way his family lied to him all those years ago. Colton becomes a living reminder of the Pfeffermans pain, and he must be born away with a gospel song and a harrowing last glance. As Josh and Raquel’s little insta-family dissolves, another, longer bond also loosens: Maura leaves Shelly for good. They have done too much damage: to each other, to their children. The only hope for both of them is to start over.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »