
Jane the Virgin By                     
PILOT VIRUET

DEC. 15, 2015
Christmas is the perfect setting for a “Jane the Virgin” episode. It’s a holiday that, especially on television, emphasizes happiness, togetherness, family and tradition. The midseason finale is no exception, though it does contain a few wonderful (and dark) twists.We learn about Jane’s quick temper, shown through cartoonish steam that blows out of her ears when she gets increasingly angry at Rafael. And following the events of the last episode — when she discovered Rafael had been lying to her for six months about the messy circumstances surrounding Michael and his job — Jane has plenty of reasons to be angry with him. Her ire only increases when Rafael wants to have Mateo for Christmas, and it results in Jane pondering suing Rafael for full custody of Mateo (which, given the explosive article Wesley wrote, shouldn’t be too hard). However, a deep dive into his finances reveals only good things, and Jane decides that maybe they should try couples therapy.While in therapy, it becomes clear that there are deeper issues that need to be discussed. It’s a wonderful little scene, one that could’ve easily become over-the-top comical (think: couples therapy scenes involving the two hitting each other with foam bats) but instead strikes the perfect balance between emotions. Jane and Rafael role-playing as each other leads to real talk about how Rafael is hurt because Jane forgot that Sin Rostro murdered his father and how Jane has issues with people lying to her. This leads to another revelation: The reason Jane tends to go from zero to 60 is because of those first two decades of her life when her mother withheld information about Jane’s father. Those years without a father — without even knowing who he was — have stuck with Jane.This leads seamlessly into Rogelio’s plot. He misses his friendship with Michael since he’s now unofficially forbidden to talk to him while Michael and Jane aren’t on speaking terms. Early in Season 1, Rogelio first met and bonded with Michael, particularly when Rogelio was shadowing Michael for a role. Soon, their weird little friendship became a highlight of the series’s humorous side but also worked on a deeper level, as just about everything on “Jane the Virgin” does. This friendship was also a result of the years Rogelio spent without Jane. Because of how close Michael is with Jane, he’s the go-to person for Rogelio to talk and vent to, to express his sadness about not being part of Jane’s life, and to learn more about the life she had before Rogelio entered it. It’s oddly heartbreaking to see Rogelio so down in the dumps about Michael, but it’s worth it when Rogelio later has a heart-to-heart with Xo and we see how strong their relationship has gotten during the first half of this season.There are other cute little plots running throughout “Chapter Thirty,” especially the budding mentor-mentee relationship between Jane and Professor Chavez. It certainly helps that Adam Rodriguez is not only devastatingly handsome but also tends to have chemistry with all of his on-screen peers. When Jane learns that the scholarship she received was actually money from Rogelio (and money that he no longer has since going broke), she turns to her professor for help. He recommends that she enter a writing contest but tricks her about what the genre is in order to get Jane to step out of comfort zone of romantic fiction and explore something else. He also gets the weasel Wesley kicked out of school, opening up a TA job for Jane the following semester. The two have come a long way since their rocky beginning and it seems like Professor Chavez is really warming up to Jane. Will he complicate Jane’s love triangle even further when the show returns in January? She has her hands full with the father of her child and the man she’s clearly still in love with (Michael fixed the topper for the Christmas tree! Let’s all swoon together!) but it’s possible that Chavez could spice things up even more.In typical “Jane the Virgin” fashion, the episode ends on both a sweet note and a cliffhanger. At the Villanueva house, the tree is decorated, Rogelio finds a new passion project through his intern’s script, and — most importantly — Alba gets her green card! But Petra confesses everything to Rafael when she learns her high blood pressure isn’t good for her pregnancy, leading Rafael to convince her to tell the police that it was her mother who murdered Ivan. Before Petra can make the call, the police barge in and arrest her for the murder. It’s a delicious shock, and it’s going to be excruciating to wait for the show to come back.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »