AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckLinda Ellerbee, who explained the birds and the bees and everything in between to a generation of children, bids farewell. The finalists on “The Voice” sing their hearts out. And a South Korean homicide detective has a very bad day.What’s on TVHELLO, I MUST BE GOING: 25 YEARS OF NICK NEWS WITH LINDA ELLERBEE 8 p.m. on Nickelodeon. Ms. Ellerbee, who spent nearly 20 years reporting the news to adults before spending the next 25 explaining the news to children, will retire next month. This retrospective looks back at some of the show’s most poignant discussions on topics including the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the Oklahoma City bombing, Hurricane Katrina, AIDS, sexuality and racism. (Image: Ms. Ellerbee reporting on violence in the Palestinian town of Bethlehem)THE IDES OF MARCH (2011) 4:50 p.m. on Starz Cinema. George Clooney stars as Mike Morris, a Pennsylvania governor turned dream candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination. Ryan Gosling is Stephen Meyers, a strategist with a pretty intern and a secret that could derail his career and Morris’s campaign. Marisa Tomei is a reporter trying to get at the truth. This political thriller, which Mr. Clooney also directed and helped write, “deals mainly in platitudes and abstractions, with just enough detail to hold your interest and keep you hoping for something more,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. (Image: Mr. Clooney)THE VOICE 9 p.m. on NBC. The winner is announced in this two-part finale featuring performances by Justin Bieber, Coldplay, Missy Elliott, Sam Hunt and the Weeknd. Monday’s round will be rebroadcast at 8.HERE WE GO AGAIN 9:30 p.m. on TV One. LeToya Luckett plays Maddy Walker, a single mother who was born when her own mother was 16, had a child herself at the same age and is convinced there’s a family curse. Now she is determined to prevent her daughter, Shante, from becoming the next in line.GIRLFRIENDS’ GUIDE TO DIVORCE 10 p.m. on Bravo. Abby dates a celebrity to increase the readership of her new blog. (Image: Paul Adelstein and Lisa Edelstein, who plays Abby)What’s StreamingNIGELLA’S CHRISTMAS KITCHEN on Acorn TV. The plummy celebrity chef Nigella Lawson shares her favorite recipes, traditions and entertaining tips for a stress-reduced, oh-so-British holiday.A HARD DAY (2015) on Fandor. While making funeral preparations for his mother, a South Korean homicide detective (Lee Sun-kyun) runs over a man on a dark street and then hides the body in his mother’s coffin. A few days later he discovers that another detective is immersed in the case. So he digs up his mother’s grave in this black comedy, which Manohla Dargis of The Times called “a kinetically visceral, enjoyable, nasty joy ride.” (Image: Mr. Lee)Advertisement