By MICHAEL COOPERDEC. 14, 2015
Gustavo Dudamel is now a Jedi maestro.In the soundtrack equivalent of a surprise cameo, Mr. Dudamel, the music director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic, was brought on in secret to conduct some of the music for “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” by John Williams, the composer. The film opens this week.“When John called and asked if I would conduct the opening music and closing credits for this historic film, I remember thinking, ‘He’s joking,’” Mr. Dudamel said in a statement. He added that when he walked into the studio to record the tracks in October, it took almost everyone by surprise, from the studio musicians — some of whom were members of the Los Angeles Philharmonic — to people on the film’s creative team and studio executives.The Los Angeles Philharmonic opened its 2014-15 season with Mr. Dudamel conducting the film music of Mr. Williams, a concert later broadcast in “Great Performances” on public television. A long time ago, in a galaxy far, far away, some orchestras considered it overly commercial to perform such scores, but they are now commonly heard, played by distinguished artists like Simon Rattle and the Berlin Philharmonic at the Waldbühne in Berlin, and by Andris Nelsons and the Boston Pops at Tanglewood in Massachusetts, both last summer.It is not Mr. Dudamel’s only guest-star spot this month. He shows up in the first episode of the second season of Amazon’s classical-music comedy “Mozart in the Jungle,” as well.AdvertisementWhen the series premiered last winter, it featured a longhaired, wunderkind conductor from Latin America, played by Gael García Bernal, who was clearly inspired by Mr. Dudamel. (“Hear the hair!” was its parody of a modern orchestra marketing campaign.)That put Mr. Dudamel among the small number of conductors famous enough to be lampooned in popular culture — a group that includes Leopold Stokowski (sent up by Bugs Bunny in “Long-Haired Hare”) and Thomas Beecham (the thinly disguised model for the Rex Harrison character in Preston Sturges’s “Unfaithfully Yours”).AdvertisementNow, as “Mozart” returns for a second season Dec. 30, with a Golden Globes nomination under its belt, it will feature Mr. Dudamel as a staff member at the Los Angeles Philharmonic — giving him a chance to briefly appear on screen with his fictional alter ego, and even to tell a joke at his own expense.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Classical Conductor for ‘Star Wars’ Music.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »