By ROBIN POGREBINDEC. 14, 2015
MIAMI — On a recent balmy day in his new institutional home overlooking Biscayne Bay here, Franklin Sirmans should have looked haggard.Mr. Sirmans, a former curator, had just started his job as director of the Pérez Art Museum Miami at a time when the institution had committed to increasing its private contributions and art collection in a city without a tradition of cultural philanthropy — and with a benefactor who alienated the potential donor base by having the new building named after himself.Art world luminaries in town for Art Basel Miami Beach were pouring across the causeway to let Mr. Sirmans know they’re pulling for him as a first-time director — not to mention one of the few African-Americans to lead a major metropolitan museum.He had come to Miami in a climate of increasing competition for donors, given the planned Institute of Contemporary Art in the Design District, the expanding Bass Museum of Art in Miami Beach and the Museum of Contemporary Art in North Miami.AdvertisementAnd he was still living out of boxes — both in his office and at home — having moved with his wife and 5-year-old daughter from Los Angeles, where he was the department head and curator of contemporary art at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, also known by its acronym, Lacma.AdvertisementBut Mr. Sirmans, 46, appeared at ease as he strolled through the Pérez Art Museum’s elegant building, talking about how his first hire would be a new development director; pointing out exhibitions featuring the Jamaican artist Nari Ward and the Cuban artist Carlos Alfonzo; and insisting that he is not concerned about what many see as an uphill climb.“It’s exactly what I was hoping for,” Mr. Sirmans said. “Right city, right museum.”People who have worked with Mr. Sirmans say he is widely respected and well liked. He came to Los Angeles by way of the Menil Collection in Houston and, before that, the Dia Art Foundation. He served as the artistic director of the 2014 Prospect New Orleans biennial and has built connections throughout the art world.But he had never been a museum director. And while Mr. Sirmans has raised money for exhibitions and acquisitions, his fund-raising chops have yet to be really tested.“I’m very optimistic he will be successful,” Aaron Podhurst, the museum’s chairman, said.He added: “Do we need a larger endowment? Of course we do.”The endowment is about $20 million and the museum has pledged to raise $50 million more. That’s a lot of money for Miami, a city with nascent cultural philanthropy.“Do we have a tradition of giving in Miami? The answer to that is ‘no,’” said Jorge M. Pérez, whose name is on the museum and who serves on the board.Mr. Pérez has tried to set an example by giving $40 million to the museum building, which was designed by Herzog & de Meuron and opened in 2013, including a pledge of $20 million and $20 million worth of art.AdvertisementHe continues to donate — most recently $1 million to the museum’s African-American fund and art for its sculpture garden. And Mr. Pérez said that all of his art would eventually go to the museum.But the renaming of the building — formerly called the Miami Art Museum — remains a sticking point for some, because the institution sits on public land and was financed partly by $100 million in taxpayer money.“People are not going to support a museum that a real estate mogul put his name on,” said Mary E. Frank, a former president of the museum and one of four trustees who in 2011 resigned to protest the Pérez naming.And some of Miami’s prominent collectors continue to hammer away at the issue. Mera Rubell, who with her husband, Donald, and son, Jason, has an important collection at the museum, is one such critic.“It confuses the mission,” she said, “because it’s the people’s museum that has his name on it.”Even Terence Riley, a former director of the Miami Art Museum, said the naming “produced mixed results.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Jorge certainly stepped up at a moment that was unbelievably critical in terms of the financial health of the institution,” he said. “At the same time, precedent has shown that naming an art museum can have a dampening effect on donations as well as works of art.”Mr. Sirmans said that he did not have a problem with institutions being named after individuals. “I worked at the Menil, I grew up going to the Frick, the Whitney,” he said. “Somebody’s got to do it.”Still, Miami’s major private collectors have yet to throw their support behind the museum, presumably because they also focus on contemporary art and have their own exhibition spaces that rival that of the Pérez.AdvertisementMartin Z. Margulies, a successful developer, recently said that he would not be donating his considerable collection to any institution.Mr. Pérez sounded incredulous. “How does a person who’s made all his money here in Miami — this community’s allowed him to become what he is — and you don’t leave your art to the museum?” he said. “But I can’t tell people what to do.”Ms. Rubell added that her foundation was always happy to loan works to the museum, which it has done in the past.In addition to enlisting outside donors, some say, Mr. Sirmans needs to increase the strength and buy-in of the trustees, several of whom have been on the board since the museum’s inception in 1984 as the Center for the Fine Arts, before it became the Miami Art Museum — and a collecting institution — in 1996.“No director can succeed without meaningful support from the board,” said Craig Robins, a trustee who is a developer and the head of the museum’s acquisitions committee. “The key is Jorge,” he said. “If it’s going to go to the next level, it’s going to be because Jorge really gets behind Franklin and they build this thing together.”But Mr. Pérez said he did not want the museum to be overly dependent on his largess.“The mandate is to get the community behind the museum,” he said. “It’s a city of small businesses. So a lot of the burden of fund-raising is in the hands of a few individuals.”Many said that Mr. Sirmans’s curatorial expertise and magnanimous personality could significantly help raise the museum’s profile and financial reserve. Brought up in Harlem, where his father, a doctor, collected work by African-American artists, Mr. Sirmans studied art history at Wesleyan and wrote his thesis on Jean-Michel Basquiat.His notable exhibitions include a 2005 show on Basquiat at the Brooklyn Museum; at Lacma, he curated shows like “Noah Purifoy: Junk Dada” and oversaw major retrospectives by Glenn Ligon and Blinky Palermo.Advertisement“He has as good an eye for art as anyone I’ve met,” Michael Govan, the director of Lacma, said.Mr. Sirmans does not have encyclopedic ambitions for his Miami museum; on the contrary, he believes the institution should fully embrace its local connections, featuring artists from the Caribbean, South America and Latin America.“We’re here,” he said, “and we should be able to do ‘here’ better than anybody else.”While the Cuban artist Wifredo Lam, for example, “used to be relegated to the coat room at MoMA,” Mr. Sirmans said, “here he’s our Picasso.”On a broader level, Mr. Sirmans said that he just wanted to bring additional people in the door; annual attendance is 300,000.“I want people who are enthusiastic and I want people who are not enthusiastic yet,” he said. “I want more people in here. I want more of Miami.”An article on Tuesday about Franklin Sirmans, director of the Pérez Art Museum Miami, misstated the amount of money the museum has pledged to raise to add to its endowment. It is $50 million, not $70 million.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: New Tone  for a Miami Museum.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.