AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasA work like “Memoria” unveils a sampling of Alvin Ailey’s obsessions: classical ballet, jazz and the modern-dance techniques of Lester Horton and Martha Graham. Set to music by Keith Jarrett, “Memoria,” dedicated to Ailey’s friend, the choreographer Joyce Trisler, begins quietly with the lead dancer, Jacqueline Green, dressed in a pale gown with flowers in her hair.Deep arabesques give way to hip rolls as this dance builds from mourning to celebration. On Friday night at City Center, the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater led with “Memoria” and ended with Ronald K. Brown’s stirring, superior “Grace.” Both show how a dance can be a pleasure in itself.What happens when a dance is not a pleasure? When the setting, a smoky dive bar, is full of lecherous characters? In the company premiere of “Piazzolla Caldera,” the choreographer Paul Taylor pays homage to the tango. Set to music by Astor Piazzolla and Jerzy Peterburshsky, this 1997 work opens with tension: women on one side of the stage and men on the other. Jamar Roberts is glittering in this standoff in which sexuality mingles with desperation and decay.Early on, Yannick Lebrun and Belen Pereyra lock foreheads and then go to war in a series of fearless lifts: Are these body slams or embraces? Later, when Linda Celeste Sims joins in, Mr. Lebrun swirls around the stage with both women affixed to his hips. But Ms. Sims is the odd one out for much of the dance; in one scene, male dancers, one at a time, turn their backs to her and she is left in despair.In a drunken encounter, Daniel Harder and Michael Francis McBride sink under each other’s weight as they vacillate between romance and exhaustion, and Mr. Roberts meets Rachael McLaren for a silken duet. In the crisp finale, groups of dancers collapse to the floor until Ms. Sims, clutching at her neck, is left standing. Just as the dancers rise, she spirals to her back.While it is a sizzling addition to the Ailey repertory, “Piazzolla,” as it stands, is too tentative; the women, especially, are too cautious and light on their heels for such a down-and-dirty dance. In many instances, the acrobatic partnering should be more seamless. Ms. Sims has flashes of brilliance, but could take her interpretation to a deeper, more internal place — as could the other dancers. For all its posturing and haze, “Piazzolla” is strangely subtle. After all, it isn’t a tango dance; it’s about uncovering the tango’s soul. That’s the essence that needs to devour these dancers.Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater performs through Jan. 3 at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan; 212-581-1212, alvinailey­.org.Advertisement