By ANTHONY TOMMASINIDEC. 14, 2015
Though Pierre Boulez has been too ill to take part in the celebrations of his 90th birthday this year, James Levine and the Met Chamber Ensemble saluted him on Sunday at Zankel Hall with an incisive account of “Dérive 1” for six instruments.It was rewarding to hear such an alluring account of this ingenious seven-minute score, but disappointing to miss out on the Boulez work originally announced for this program: “Sur Incises,” a 40-minute piece, scored (unusually) for three pianos, three harps and three percussionists. Mr. Levine conducted the Met Chamber Ensemble in a scintillating account of “Sur Incises” in 2010.But earlier this month, without explanation, Carnegie Hall announced that “Sur Incises” would be replaced by the much shorter and less demanding “Dérive.” Added to the program was Poulenc’s delightfully rowdy “Le Bal Masqué,” a secular cantata for baritone and chamber orchestra with settings of loopy texts by the Surrealist poet Max Jacob. The ensemble’s vibrant performance, conducted by Mr. Levine, featured a commanding turn by the muscular-voiced baritone John Moore. The program ended, as originally planned, with Messiaen’s “Quartet for the End of Time,” in an inspired performance by four superlative Met musicians.Composed in 1984 and revised in 1986, “Dérive 1” opens with a series of pungent, complex chords, each of which sets off a wave of responses from the ensemble: subdued tremolos, skittish solo lines and atmospheric rumblings, though decisive mini-motifs punch through the shimmering mass of sounds. The piece unfolds with episodic daring, including passages that playfully suggest dance. Under Mr. Levine, the musicians, including the elegant young pianist Bryan Wagorn, an assistant conductor at the Metropolitan Opera, played with color and confidence.In his 18-minute “Le Bal Masqué” (1932), Poulenc treats Jacob’s strange poems seriously. Whether a poem refers to a blind lady with bleeding eyes or the reek of dead goat’s hide, Poulenc’s vocal lines mostly hew to a declamatory, vehement style, with fleeting moments of lyricism. The ensemble plays music that combines cabaret-hall insouciance with bitter harmonies and fractured phrasing.Messiaen wrote his mystical 45-minute “Quartet for the End of Time” while being held in a German prisoner-of-war camp near the Polish border in 1941. Sunday’s performance, in addition to Mr. Wagorn, offered the violinist David Chan, the cellist Rafael Figueroa and the clarinetist Boris Allakhverdyan. Of course, the quartet requires no conductor; in a way, though, Mr. Levine was a presence in that he has nurtured these exemplary musicians as music director of the Met.A version of this review appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Pungently (Yet Pithily) Honoring Boulez.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.