By SIOBHAN BURKEDEC. 14, 2015
If you weren’t part of the postmodern dance scene in 1970s New York, you might not know about Andy de Groat, an imaginative minimalist who moved to France in the ’80s, leaving behind few traces of his work. The choreographer Catherine Galasso, born in 1982, is well aware that his dances, if not performed, could be forgotten on this side of the Atlantic. During the past few years, she has been reconstructing his early repertoire, or as she calls it, “live archiving.” The result is “get dancing,” an illuminating, heartfelt program of old and new work performed at Danspace Project on Friday.Ms. Galasso and Mr. de Groat are something like family: Her father, the composer Michael Galasso, who died in 2009, was Mr. de Groat’s friend and frequent collaborator. That’s just a sliver of the history behind “get dancing,” which included two de Groat works first shown at Danspace in 1978 — “get wreck” and “fan dance,” featuring a handful of their original cast members — along with “Rope Dance Translations” (1974/79), “Swan Lac” (1982) and a premiere by Ms. Galasso.Time seemed to loop back on itself throughout the evening, most eerily in “Rope Dance Translations,” which highlighted Mr. de Groat’s signature interest: spinning. A black-and-white film, with cyclical string music by Mr. Galasso, showed dancers whirling with wreaths of ropes, resembling atoms or ringed planets. A series of soloists arrived onstage with excerpts from the same mesmerizing material, mapping past onto present.The more rambunctious “get wreck,” for 10 dancers, unfolded to the steady rhythm of a poem by Christopher Knowles, recited by a chorus in the balcony. The actions (lots of running and skidding) and words (a motley bunch) shared a pleasing randomness, like a game with secret rules. In “fan dance,” to another string composition by Mr. Galasso, rows of dancers holding fans intersected and encircled one another in gorgeously spiraling patterns. “Swan Lac,” a trio with a Talking Heads soundtrack and translucent yellow jumpsuits, showed a funkier side of Mr. de Groat’s formalism.Tucked among these was Ms. Galasso’s “notes on de groat,” part dance and part explanation of her relationship to his work. With historical details and de Groat-inspired movement — delivered by Chris DeVita, Kristopher K. Q. Pourzal, Meg Weeks and Ms. Galasso — it provided context. But Mr. de Groat’s own works, revived with such care, were the main event. New York is lucky to have them back.A version of this review appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Reviving Lost Works.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.