
Ask a Showrunner By                     
 BRUCE FRETTS
 
DEC. 14, 2015
Once mostly anonymous, the producers who oversee top television series have sometimes become as well known as the actors who star in them. On occasion, The Times will pose questions from readers (and pose some of our own) to notable show runners, and post their responses.This week, Alex Gansa of “Homeland” discusses how the show has dovetailed with real-life events and what to expect from the Dec. 20 season finale and beyond. Read our recaps of the series here.Previously: Noah Hawley of “Fargo,” Sarah Treem of “The Affair,” Damon Lindelof of “The Leftovers,” and more.Q. How did you decide where to take Carrie (Claire Danes) and the story in the current fifth season? — Heather, ManhattanAdvertisementA. The task of any new season is to locate our main character emotionally. So we spend the first month in the writers’ room trying to figure out where she is in her personal and professional life. Clearly, this time it was a function of where she ended up last year and her complete disillusionment with the Central Intelligence Agency. Ultimately, we came to the conclusion that she should do something diametrically opposed to her work in the intelligence field, so we settled on this idea that she would use her skill set in service of a philanthropic organization, something like George Soros’ Open Society Foundations or Bono’s ONE.AdvertisementQ. What informed her move to Berlin?A. Berlin is a great spy town. Every year, the entire writing staff heads to Washington, D.C., where we do a four-day debrief with our C.I.A. consultant, John MacGaffin, who was an associate deputy director of operations at the C.I.A. for a number of years. He sets us up at a small Georgetown club where we entertain a parade of former and current intelligence officers, State Department people, journalists and White House staffers, and we get a real sense of what people are talking about in the halls of power.When we did it earlier this year, the Charlie Hebdo attack had just happened, ISIS had just burned a Jordanian pilot in a cage, Vladimir Putin was rattling his saber in Ukraine, and Edward Snowden was all over the news. Laura Poitras had just made a film called “Citizenfour” about Snowden and was living in Berlin because of its quite strict privacy laws. For all those reasons, we decided that Berlin was the perfect place, right smack in the middle of all those stories.Q. How often does the team change the script during production because of actual events in the real world? — Bello, Western Mass.A. Very rarely. We are shooting these episodes months before actual events, but in the case of Paris, we did make a few minor adjustments to the Dec. 6 and Dec. 20 episodes. We did ADR, which means additional dialogue replacement, a line over Allison’s back in the Dec. 6 episode where she says, “Nobody wants to see another Paris.” So occasionally we will adjust when we can. In the finale, there is one scene that was rewritten as a result of what happened in Paris.Q. Do the recent murders in San Bernardino, Calif., reinforce or alter your motivations for how you shape the show? There will now be a new surge of anxiety about Muslim radicals in America. Do you have a plan about how you are going to respond to or integrate that fear into the course of the coming shows? — Galen, San DiegoA. The answer to that question is undoubtedly we will, but since we have no idea where we’re going to shoot next season and what next season’s story is going to be, it’s hard to predict how it will influence us. But the threat of terrorism not only in Europe but here in the United States seems to be growing and it seems to have captured people’s attention in a significant way, and I imagine that will be reflected in next season’s story.Q. As your show matures, Carrie’s bipolar diagnosis feels increasingly irrelevant. To me, it is not the root of her genius or her problems. Her circumstances are. In what ways do you feel it is still relevant to the development of the show? — Kf, SeattleAdvertisementA. I’m saddened to hear people have that perspective. Her disorder or illness is always part of our conversation about Carrie and how she’s managing that and her relationship to her medication, which is an issue that a lot of bipolar people face. This season, I’m particularly proud of the third episode in which Carrie decides to go off her medication in an attempt to connect to her genius. We tend every season to touch the subject of her condition, and to weave it into the story, and some people wish we didn’t do that. But for us, the fact that she’s bipolar is central to her character, speaks volumes about how she chooses to live her life, and it’s one that we’ll always come back to every year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. Whatever happened to Carrie’s love of jazz? Unwinding with some music would certainly help this season. — Austin P., Rochester, N.Y.A. Honestly, Claire had mentioned the same thing to me as we were shooting the finale. Admittedly, that has fallen by the wayside a little bit. Obviously, the music we play over the main titles — that beautiful piece Sean Callery composed — is meant to mimic in that improvisational trumpet how Carrie thinks about the world and how her mind works. Maybe we got away from that too much this season.Q. It has been obvious since Season 1 that you are a fan of John le Carré. The current season — with a mole in the C.I.A. — is pure “Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy.” Can you talk about his influence on your work? — ab, ParisA. John le Carré’s influence on the show cannot be overstated. Ninety percent of what I know about intelligence work comes from those novels. Season 3 was so heavily inspired by “The Spy Who Came in From the Cold.” If you look carefully enough, we pepper episodes with little nuggets from le Carré every now and then, and you’ll find one in the finale.Q. What do you have in store for C.I.A. black ops director Dar Adal? Will he be back in Season 6? — Leslie, ChicagoA. I’d rather not spoil what happens in the last episode, but Dar has become a more and more important character. If you remember that scene in the Dec. 6 episode, after the video comes out of Quinn in the gas chamber, you witness the emotion on Dar’s face. He has been such a stolid, unemotional character, and his relationship with Quinn mirrors Saul’s relationship with Carrie. You can see in that moment how affected he is by what happened to Quinn, and you will see more of that as this season moves forward.Q. How many more seasons do you see the show running?A. The show will run for at least two more seasons, six and seven. That would be my guess.Q. As one of the producers of the show, does Claire Danes have a real say in how the series will end and what happens to her character? — Douglas, New JerseyAdvertisementA. Absolutely. Nobody knows this character better than Claire. Her input into the narrative is always important to us. In fact, she accompanies us on that field trip we take to Washington, D.C. every year, as does Mandy Patinkin.Q. What’s the best TV show you’ve recently seen?A. The last two shows I’ve watched were British, “Peaky Blinders” and “Happy Valley,” and I thought they were both off-the-charts great. The whole between-the-wars time frame of “Peaky Blinders” is fantastic, and the storytelling is at such a high level. Damian Lewis’s wife, Helen McCrory, is in it, and she plays a fantastically ruthless matriarch of this clan of thugs. Cillian Murphy is just extraordinary. The first season cliffhanger just blew my mind.In “Happy Valley,” Sarah Lancashire’s portrayal of a middle-aged former police detective who’s taken on the job of chief of police in a small rural town was so harrowing and powerful. We tried to hire Sarah to play the role of the American ambassador that was ultimately played very well by Laila Robins last season. But Sarah’s performance in “Happy Valley” was the best I’ve seen on TV in a long time.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »