

      By JAMES PONIEWOZIK

DEC. 16, 2015

In original streaming TV, the dramas, like “House of Cards” and “The Man in the High Castle,” tend to get the most attention. But the best series so far are comedies. If you spend a lot of your holiday binge-watching — and the companies’ data says that you do — here are some less-hyped shows to catch up on.
Related Article
The animated story of a horse and washed-up 1990s sitcom star (Will Arnett) is set in a world where animals interact as equals with humans. (Take Princess Carolyn, a Persian cat and showbiz agent dating Vincent Adultman, who is three children stacked on top of one another and wearing a trench coat.) At first, “BoJack” sounds like just another, albeit absurdist, Hollywood satire. But it’s become something much more rich and rare: an insightful, melancholy story of a depressive, learning to grow up and recognize his limits.In space, no one can hear you scream. On Yahoo, apparently, no one hears you exist. The company’s attempt to get into original programming didn’t generate much buzz for “Community,” and this sci-fi parody from Paul Feig (“Freaks and Geeks”) — one of the year’s offbeat pleasures — was sadly overlooked. But it’s worth a reconnaissance mission: a screwy, light-on-the-science reimagining of a “Star Trek”-style expedition that develops into a workplace comedy and a surprisingly affecting sibling-rivalry story.Unlike Netflix and Amazon, Hulu has emulated linear TV, releasing its originals (mostly comedies, like “The Mindy Project”) on a weekly schedule. But the first full season of “Casual” — about the dating travails of a divorced mother (Michaela Watkins), her cynical brother (Tommy Dewey) and her teenage daughter (Tara Lynne Barr) is now up in full, and its indie-comedy moodiness is better off binged. (And save some time for Julie Klausner and Billy Eichner’s delightfully mean “Difficult People” when you’re done.)Middle-aged singles Rob (Rob Delaney) and Sharon (Sharon Horgan) find themselves shacking up, after a brief fling (he’s an American in London on business) leaves her knocked up, and they both need to grow up. Hilarious and raunchy, with little patience for the vanilla-scented clichés of romantic comedy, this is a charming story of love as hard work.Even the stoutest binge-watcher needs a break now and then. Consider this artful anthology, about a laid-back Brooklyn pot dealer and his clients, a palate cleanser. The lapidary episodes run from as little as a few minutes to around 20, but they pack in visual wit and insight about the anxieties of modern life. The creators have cut a deal to bring it to HBO, but you can find the old episodes online. You’ll leave buzzed and hungry for more.Advertisement