By ZACHARY WOOLFESEPT. 30, 2015
Yarn/Wire’s concert on Tuesday ended without Yarn/Wire. It speaks to this unusual, insightful ensemble’s self-effacing focus on composers and their music that after playing Mark Fell’s “core, self, oscillation,” the four members — two pianists and two percussionists, celebrating the start of their 10th season together — left the stage and listened along with the audience to an electronic version of the same piece.While rigorous in conception, the austere yet sensual “core, self, oscillation” nevertheless surprised. At the start, somber piano chords, distantly spaced, underlay an uncertain rhythm played on shallow frame drums.In the basement of Artists Space Books & Talks in TriBeCa — a regular host for presentations by Issue Project Room, a frequent Yarn/Wire collaborator, while its home in Downtown Brooklyn is renovated — each tap of fingers on the skin of the drum registered with tactile immediacy. Both chords and drum beats brightened, and then harsh mallet strikes on one percussionist’s drum found a softer, gentler echo on the other’s.Vigorously attacking a piece of pipe, the percussionists occasionally held it so that loud clanging muted to duller clunks. Gongs laid flat on tables in the final section were vibrated to a subdued shimmer. In the electronic version, the chords were an ambient whisper; the percussion was milder and less ritualistic. Live, the work felt more ambiguous and less structured: The performances provided two different flavors of thrill.AdvertisementSam Pluta’s “Seven” involved a similar alternation of subdued and violent moments. A quiet, glistening bell-like beginning quickly fell down a rabbit hole of crashing, jerky activity, marked by nature sounds played over loudspeakers and the weird, wheezy tone of two robotically stimulated snare drums placed among the audience.An increasingly insistent percussion duet was paired with an increasingly cataclysmic piano one, and then long runs of 16th notes in the pianos formed a flowing fabric for the jittery embroidery of uneven percussion rhythms. Much of the music was anxious, but the writing had cool confidence.AdvertisementThe first piece on the program, David Bird’s “Mediums,” was the least interesting, pairing serene footage of New York City with a muddled mixture of ambient street noises and more mystical acoustic playing from the quartet. But the pianists Laura Barger and Ning Yu and the percussionists Ian Antonio and Russell Greenberg brought to all three works their characteristic combination of precision and freedom.A version of this review appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: An Ensemble That’s Focused on Composers Offers Two Flavors of Thrill.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.