‘DANCING DAY': Music for Christmas
St. Thomas Choir of Men and Boys; John Scott, conductor
(Resonus Classics)
Reminders of the choirmaster and organist John Scott, who died suddenly in August, are all around during the holiday season, a time he and the choir of St. Thomas Church Fifth Avenue did so much to enrich for New Yorkers. This year’s annual performances of Handel’s “Messiah” went by, alas, without him. He would have led Benjamin Britten’s “A Ceremony of Carols” and John Rutter’s “Dancing Day” in a concert on Thursday, Dec. 17. (Stephen Buzard, the choir’s acting music director, will conduct instead.) And now comes an album of the Britten and Rutter works and a few other carols, the last of Mr. Scott’s many recordings, bringing tidings of melancholy and joy. The choir sings wonderfully, whether accompanied by Mr. Buzard or Benjamin Sheen on organ, or Sara Cutler on harp. Several of the boy trebles — some of whom by now, as such things go, may well be baritones — have lovely solo moments. Yet another worthy memorial to a beloved figure on the New York music scene. (James R. Oestreich)MOZART: Keyboard Music, Vols. 8 and 9
Kristian Bezuidenhout, fortepiano
(Harmonia Mundi)
The virtuosic, imaginative fortepianist Kristian Bezuidenhout completes his survey of Mozart’s keyboard music with this two-disc installment. The album offers stylish accounts of familiar works, like Mozart’s Sonata in C (K. 545) — yes, the one with the first movement that every student pianist learns — and some rarities, even a couple of sonata movement fragments (completed by Robert Levin). Mr. Bezuidenhout gives articulate and sensitive performances of the charming early Sonata in F (K. 280) and the elaborate late Sonata in D (K. 576). There are wonderful accounts of three sets of variations, as well as the Suite in C (K. 399), a piece clearly inspired by Handel. My favorite is the astounding little Gigue in G (K. 574), a minute and a half of ingeniously intricate yet coyly playful counterpoint. (Anthony Tommasini)RYAN WIGGLESWORTH: ‘Echo and Narcissus’
Claire Booth, Pamela Helen Stephen, Mark Padmore, singers; Barnabás Keleman, violin; RSVP Voices; Hallé Orchestra; Ryan Wigglesworth, piano and conductor
(NMC)
It’s an auspicious time for violin concertos: Knussen, Widmann, Birtwistle, Adès, Salonen and others have all recently pushed the genre on. So too the British composer and conductor Ryan Wigglesworth, 36, whose brief entry (2011/2013) is a lyrical, disturbed arc that searches for resolutions both tonal and emotional. On this superb self-portrait album, he draws out all the colors in “A First Book of Inventions” (2010), and his smart arrangements of music by Matthew Locke in “Locke’s Theatre” (2013). The acute vocal writing and inherent drama of a moving song cycle, “Augenlieder” (2009), and a thorny cantata, “Echo and Narcissus” (2013-14), bode well for his first opera, due at the English National Opera in 2017. (David Allen)