
Transparent By                     
 RACHEL SYME
 
DEC. 16, 2015
Here’s everything you need to know about Pfefferman parenting: when Josh confronts his mother about hiding his child, Shelly is not the least bit contrite. Instead, she immediately justifies her actions, saying they were just trying to protect him and let him move on with his life, consequence-free. She says they didn’t beat him and that they gave him a credit card — what else could a good Jewish boy want?Well, maybe a maternal figure who isn’t cold and unyielding in the face of her errors, for one. This episode lays bare Shelly’s selfishness and deep lack of empathy, traits that have trickled down to her children and affected their abilities to connect with others as well. When Shelly calls Sarah home from being date-spanked because babysitting her grandkids made her cry, she puts her head in Sarah’s lap to be comforted. It is unclear in this moment who, exactly, is the mother and who is the child.Motherhood (or lack thereof) is a theme that runs throughout the episode — Ali, having been raised by the same distant matriarch as her siblings, is searching out a maternal figure who will supplement her need for feminine wisdom. So she goes to Leslie’s house under the guise of asking for help with her admissions essay, but really to enter the inner-sanctum of her hero and potentially to strike up an erotic connection. From the get-go, she is both attracted to and afraid of Leslie’s Sapphic fortress, full of lesbian porn, tasteful nudes and radical feminist art on every wall. This is a land that Ali is drawn to — she can’t have an emotional connection with anyone who hasn’t suffered under patriarchy, after all — but also one that is new to her. “You come out late in your family,” Leslie tells her as they roll around naked in the “barrel,” almost but not quite kissing.As Ali confesses that her lesbian tendencies have been bubbling up, she also says that she has been trying to confront the chasm of pain that keeps Maura and her mother apart. It is no coincidence that these two impulses are bubbling up at once; as Ali becomes open to her family’s past, she is also becoming a conduit for past voices to speak through her, voices that seem to be pushing her into ever more radical corners of her sexuality and politics. Where Syd ends up in this remains to be seen — as Ali crashes on Leslie’s couch, it is hard to imagine that her girlfriend would be happy to know where she was. But then, Ali has never been one to take others’ emotions into considering if they are impeding her own path of exploration. She puts her own questioning first, never thinking about how that might destabilize others — she is nothing if not Shelly’s daughter.AdvertisementAnd then there is Raquel, so desperate to be a mother that she stayed with Josh after their hail mary pregnancy came through, despite Josh’s many shortcomings. When Raquel miscarried, I thought at first that it was a convenient plot device to split the pair up, as they were already fraying apart at the edges; part of me thought it would have been more interesting to see Raquel carry to term and see Josh struggle head on with his responsibilities. But then, I realized that having Raquel lose the baby also made a lot of sense; not many shows confront the needs and desires of women in their late 30s who so badly want babies but whose bodies are making the process extremely difficult.AdvertisementSo many women at Raquel’s age lose babies and never discuss it, and I was happy to see “Transparent” tackle the issue head on without sentimentality or histrionics; these things happen. And Raquel was willing to take it in stride, to try again. But Josh isn’t ready, and won’t be ready, to be a father until he works through the pain caused by his abuse and his parents denying Colton’s existence. He knows this, and says this out loud, treating his honesty as a kind of gift he can give Raquel. But all he is giving her is disappointment, and what she feared the most: Josh always wanted to back out. I predicted that Raquel would leave while Josh was out getting wasted, but seeing that ring alone on the bed still stung. That ring has been through the Holocaust, and still manages to be an enduring symbol of Pfefferman family sorrows.It is the holiest day of the year, and the Pfeffermans are making amends — or at least pretending to. The thing about Yom Kippur (and I write this as a reform Jew who only goes to temple on High Holy Days) is that it is an incredibly sacred day, but one that can also be twisted (by casual believers) into a kind of convenient get-out-of-jail-free card, a free tabula rasa. The Pfeffermans are the kind of Jews that never celebrate the Sabbath but will manipulate Yom Kippur for their own selfish purposes, and that is exactly what happens. Everyone has something to atone for, but no one is doing it with grace or humility (except of course for Raquel, who physically leads an entire congregation in voicing their sins while gracefully suffering through her own heartbreak and loss).Sarah has chosen Tammy as the first target of her Yom Kippur contrition tour, showing up at Tammy’s office to deliver a speech about her lack of proper mothering and the way that it affected her own ability to care for another person. While this “epiphany” rings true — Sarah wasn’t parented well, and like her siblings, she has not yet found a way to move past it — it also feels hollow when directed at Tammy. Sarah should be working through her issues with a therapist, not a jilted ex who was so wounded that she tattooed the word “becoming” on her neck. Tammy is now numb to Sarah’s psychobabble (her response to Sarah not being mothered: “oh, you mean the orphanage in the Palisades? Yeah, that was tough.”) and rejects her apology with curt disdain. Melora Hardin’s smarmy delivery of “Happy Yom Kippur” is both withering and triumphant: Tammy makes sure Sarah knows that her words are empty, even on the day when they are supposed to mean the most.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Across town, another tense, anguished scene of lost love: the scene between Raquel and Josh inside the temple is one of the strongest of the season so far; both Kathryn Hahn and Jay Duplass infuse their final conversation with so much subtext and unutterable hurt. They both realize they have come to an impasse — Raquel wants a baby yesterday, Josh can barely take care of himself — but Josh, never wanting to own up to the consequences of his actions, forces Raquel to be the one to confirm that they are officially done. And though he knew it was coming, something inside Josh seems to crack when he hears the words “it’s over.” He knows that he has lost something that he will not easily get back; the sense of family and security that Raquel could provide for him, the chance to be a father and correct the mistakes of his past. Josh doesn’t want those things — security and responsibility terrify him — but he wants to be the type of man who wants those things, and realizing that he is not sends him into a spiral.He has to flee in the middle of services (while his mother is working overtime to flirt with Buzz via chest pounding — Judith Light is a treasure on this show always), and then has no appetite even when he is allowed to break the fast. We only see Josh snap back to action under fluorescent lights of a supermarket’s cold cuts aisle, where he rips open packets of ham, cheese, and bread and shoves them into his mouth like a person who hasn’t eaten in weeks. He is trying to fill up the hole inside himself with something, anything; even if that means shoplifting fistfuls of roast beef.“Transparent” is always at its strongest when the entire family comes together, and the break-fast scene at Syd’s loft is a prime example of the strength of the ensemble. At the dinner party (where no water is served, in spot on bourgeoisie L.A. fashion, “in solidarity with the drought”), each Pfefferman is on his or her worst behavior. Sarah shows up late, stoned out of her gourd. Maura immediately begins sizing up Buzz in the elevator. Ali, fresh off of giving Syd a big speech about her interest in non-monogamy, gives another grandiloquent speech about “investigating her Jewishness,” but then forgets the blessing. Shelly may be in the finest form of all, turning Josh’s confession into a bravura performance of grief that pulls all the focus in the room. Judith Light’s wails seem to come from an ancient place inside her gut; she makes Shelly seem both pathetic for commanding the spotlight and also completely justified in her sorrow. As Maura tells Josh, “it’s O.K. to be sad. It’s sad.” And it is sad. The Pfeffermans have so much — just look at the magnificent lox spread from Canter’s deli — but they also suffer so much, often at their own hands, and that is a lot more than one day of atoning can fix.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »