AdvertisementSupported byCritic's NotebookBy Mike HaleAfter a recent screening of the very compact new “season” of “Luther” (two hourlong episodes, being shown back to back on Thursday on BBC America), a fan’s question knocked Idris Elba off his stride for a moment: “Why are you such a badass?” She wasn’t talking about John Luther, rogue detective, or Stringer Bell, the drug dealer Mr. Elba played on “The Wire,” or James Bond, the secret agent much of the world wants him to play. She was going to the source. Badassery follows Mr. Elba around, and in the age of the incredible shrinking movie star, he’s the rare performer who sells a production based on his own considerable charisma.That’s the good news and the bad news about “Luther.” Across four seasons and 16 episodes, the series has been devoted to the proposition that having Mr. Elba front and center as a dangerously unstable but superfly cop — John Shaft with issues — makes up for any amount of murky, mundane plotting and over-the-top violence and psychodrama. And it works, to a point. “Luther” has never been a good show, exactly, but it’s pretty much the definition of a guilty pleasure.The new installment finds Luther on leave after the events of Season 3 — internal affairs investigation, murdered partner, nearly murdered girlfriend — and living in a picturesque cabin near what looks like the cliffs of Dover. Before you can say “cannibal serial killer,” he’s drawn back to London by a new case, and also by a mystery surrounding Alice Morgan, his psychopathic stalker and best friend.Fans know that Ruth Wilson, now engaged in “The Affair,” has not returned to play Alice, and the character’s absence is a problem — it helps to have someone on screen who’s as smart as Luther but even crazier, against whom he can define his outer limits. Without her, he’s less exciting. A potential new nemesis (Laura Haddock of “DaVinci’s Demons”) and a fledgling partner (Rose Leslie of “Game of Thrones”) are introduced, but they don’t begin to compensate for the lack of Ms. Wilson’s brainy, sexy presence.Neil Cross, who created “Luther” and writes every episode, is good at orchestrating spectacle and, working primarily with the director Sam Miller, at using visual cues to stir our emotions. The most inspiring moment in the new episodes is probably the simple sight of Luther donning the cinched-waist tweed coat and narrow tie that define his badness as succinctly as Shaft’s wide-lapeled leather coats did his.Overall, though, nothing lives up to Mr. Cross’s previous standard of breathless improbability. The murderer, the mystery and the gruesome tableaus all feel tepid and familiar. Indeed, the grisliness and psychosis are a little behind the curve, with “Hannibal” gone and the focus of crime drama, like every other television genre, shifting toward character study.Mr. Elba, as Luther, is still gratifyingly larger than life, knitting his brow to stare down lesser humans and meeting every challenge with a weary shrug of his endless shoulders. But there’s a sense of going through the motions. It’s hard to be a badass forever.Advertisement