By JON PARELESOCT. 7, 2015
Alex G“Beach Music”(Domino)Alex G (for Giannascoli) upholds an indie-rock archetype that’s older than he is: the lo-fi introvert, sequestered in a bedroom, assembling songs with whatever equipment he has. The private, homemade songs can be as odd or obsessive as he wants. Then, somehow, word gets out. In the 1980s, it was via college radio and print media; for the 22-year-old Alex G, it’s online. “Beach Music” is his first album for a large independent label (Domino), but it’s his seventh full-length collection since 2010 to appear on his Bandcamp website.He’s a throwback. Advancing technology gives home recordists huge artificial sounds at their fingertips, but Alex G prefers scraggly, mostly analog ones, the vocabulary of songwriters like Elliott Smith. (He also shares Mr. Smith’s fondness for waltzes that turn slightly dissonant.) In the studio, he layers on guitars (with finger squeaks on the strings) and keyboards, and he uses a drum kit more often than he uses machines. (One detail that separates him from 1990s lo-fi is his attentiveness to percussion sounds, captured without distortion and pinpointed in stereo space.)Alex G’s narrators have often been traumatized, druggie, lovesick or inscrutable, and moving up the indie-rock circuit hasn’t made his new songs any more outgoing. Just the opposite: They are more cryptic and withdrawn. Most of “Beach Music” turns down from the rambunctious electric guitars of Alex G’s 2014 album, “D.S.U.,” and his latest characters hint at the sociopathic: “Don’t make me hurt you/I’m watching you from here,” he sings in “Salt,” as his falsetto floats over undulating guitar chords and jittery percussion.The music reflects the characters’ instability, with fluctuating meters and deliberately jerry-built arrangements. In “Station,” the high, gentle vocal of the opening verses is elbowed out of the way by a lower, rougher Alex G voice that takes over the song: “Please don’t look me in the eye/If you do, I think I might cry,” the intruder bawls. But even as Alex G sings about pulling back, the melodies and guitar lines persist, inducing listeners to stick around — if not to figure everything out, then to commiserate.A version of this review appears in print on October 8, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: Alex G Cracks the Bedroom Door With ‘Beach Music’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.