AdvertisementSupported byBy James PoniewozikThere have been several 1970s in TV’s imagination. We’ve seen the brightly plumed ’70s of the last season of “Mad Men,” the innocent mood ring of “That ’70s Show,” the consciousness-raising 1979 of “Fargo,” whose characters grasp at U.F.O.s and self-help programs to levitate them out of malaise.“F Is for Family,” a new half-hour animated comedy streamed on Netflix starting Friday, is set in the dirty 1970s. It’s 1973, to be precise, an unsentimentally drawn time of stagflation, middle-class anxiety and gas-guzzling cars belching leaded exhaust. You can practically smell the rust on this show. And yet it has its own kind of foul-mouthed sincerity.Created by the comedian Bill Burr and the writer Michael Price (“The Simpsons”) and drawing on Mr. Burr’s childhood experiences in Massachusetts, “F Is for Family” centers on Frank Murphy (Mr. Burr), a middle-aged baggage worker at a regional airport in the Northeast. His wife, Sue (Laura Dern), is trying to find purpose selling Plast-a-Ware storage tubs; his older son, Kevin (Justin Long), is a 14-year-old F student whose main interests are weed and a prog-rock band called Shire of Frodo.Yes, you’ve been to this house before. We started visiting it around the time “F Is for Family” is set, when “All in the Family” et al. made the besieged American patriarch a sitcom staple. (Frank is not exactly Archie Bunker, but he does have a favorite chair to slump into and he recoils when he sees an issue of Modern Lady magazine with the cover line “Bella Abzug Talks Abortion.”)Indeed, Frank could turn his TV on and see his own forebears on “Wait Till Your Father Gets Home,” the 1972–74 NBC prime-time cartoon with Tom Bosley voicing a conservative dad struggling to understand his feminist daughter and longhaired son. But he prefers “Colt Luger,” an ultraviolent street-cop drama whose hero has the catchphrase, “Sometimes a man’s gotta do what a man does.”The point is pretty obvious: In his own life, Frank is more often a man who gets done to. The opening titles, scored to Redbone’s slinky “Come and Get Your Love” (last seen in the opening credits of “Guardians of the Galaxy”), show Frank as a happy young graduate wafting into the air, only to be buffeted by a blizzard of life events: a draft notice for Korea; a baby bottle; a wedding cake; bills, bills, bills. He hates his job, he’s disappointed in his kids, he resents his porn-mustachioed bachelor neighbor Vic (Sam Rockwell).The animation, and the show’s tone, are closer to the naturalistic “King of the Hill” than “Family Guy” or “The Simpsons.” There’s a little Peggy Hill in Sue, a former softball champ who takes out her frustrations with housewife life in the batting cage. Her struggles have an echo in her daughter, Maureen (Debi Derryberry), who refuses to wear a female-gendered Halloween costume.At first, all that sets “F Is for Family” apart from its analogues is the rawness of the content. Few cable or streaming shows have applied their liberties to family sitcoms, and it lends a certain verisimilitude to arguments between a beer-drinking dad and a rebellious teenager. As you may have guessed, the “F” is not in fact only for “Family.”The show’s smarts creep up on you over the six-episode season.Like many period comedies, “F Is for Family” relies heavily on what-it-was-like-then references. But they’re well-curated ones that suggest that a young Mr. Burr was keeping assiduous records in his “Super Friends” notebook. When the Murphys shop for a TV (a color console the size of Skylab), the salesman promises to finance the sale at “a point above prime: 26 percent!” Props to any show that appreciates a good interest-rate joke.As Frank is promoted to management and must stave off a strike by his former baggage-handler comrades, the stakes get higher and the Rust Belt reality gets realer. Meanwhile, the family dynamics are fleshed out, especially with Kevin, whose bad grades turn out to have a deeper explanation.The show’s story lines — money problems, childhood rebellions — are what you might see on any animated family show. The difference is, “F for Family” treats these issues as if they’re real and lasting. It’s still a comedy, rude, raunchy and not entirely original, but it has heft and heart.Though Frank is the show’s center, its real point-of-view character seems to be his youngest son. Bill (Haley Reinhart of “American Idol”), a wide-eyed 11-year-old with a bowl cut who, like a good ’70s kid, lives through a lot of inappropriate moments, including a disgusting and hilarious unchaperoned visit to the men’s bathroom at a minor-league football game.To “F Is for Family,” that’s what growing up, and passing through a rudderless decade, is. You spend a lot of time wandering unsupervised. You see some things you weren’t quite ready to see. And you come out, a little tougher if not wiser, on the other side.Advertisement