AdvertisementSupported byTransparentBy Rachel SymeOne of the best episodes from the first season of “Transparent,” called “Best New Girl,” was set almost entirely in the past; in it, we watched Mort become Maura for a long weekend at Camp Camellia, dancing the tango with the actress Michaela Watkins as they guzzled martinis and waxed dreamy about breaking down gender boundaries.In this episode, Watkins appears again in an extended flashback sequence, though this time she is not a sympathetic wife at a cross-dressing camp but rather Yetta, Maura’s Jewish grandmother, who is desperate to get her children out of Berlin and to the United States (where their father has run off to without warning) before it is too late. We have seen little flashes of Yetta, Rose and Gershon in 1933 before, but the opening scenes of “Oscillate” are our first full immersion into their world; the director Andrea Arnold shows us eight full minutes of Berlin before the credits roll. In these minutes, we finally understand the full weight of Gershon’s story and the hidden tragedy behind the pearl ring that the Pfeffermans keep passing around as that “Holocaust heirloom” that no one seems to want to keep.“Transparent” thrives during these glimpses into the past; they are swirling, gauzy, dreamlike. Gittel’s life at the research center is filled with Weimar decadence: slow dancing, chaise lounges, velvet kimonos, campy amateur theater, a chanteuse plaintively singing Gershwin in German. It makes sense that Rose is drawn deeper and deeper into her brother’s glamorous bohemia while Yetta scrimps for visa money and encases her jewels in chocolate just in case the authorities should come looking. Yetta’s life is drudgery, Gittel’s is sparkle. They are both doing what they need to survive. But when it comes to the ultimate survival — that is, evading the Nazis before they rise to power — Yetta is the real hero; she procures the precious documents needed to slip out of the country, and she is so excited about her coup that she runs down to the center to deliver the news.I was very moved to see Yetta’s reaction; she isn’t disgusted, just pragmatic. She tells her son that he can change his name to whatever he likes in America, but he needs to get to America first. Yetta sees what is at risk if Gershon doesn’t join her on the ship. Gittel and Magnus see different stakes. Magnus barks “this is the future!” about his sexual laboratory, telling her that what he is doing is very serious business indeed.This was certainly the case — the research files of the Berlin Institute were lost in Nazi burnings and are a great casualty of the war — but what he doesn’t yet see is that under Hitler, his center has no future at all. Gittel chooses to take his side, staying right where she is, elevating her current freedom over a potential one. This is where the Pfefferman grief finds its apex: a family split apart by a decision to express gender, a decision that breaks the family irrevocably into the saved and the left behind. Rose, a young witness to this break, torn between her sibling and her parent, will carry the fracture for the rest of her life. And as epigenetics tells us, her sorrow has been passed down for generations.Back in the present day, we see the various siblings fairly isolated from one another even though they have no fascist regime trying to tear them apart. Josh is making himself hurl in CrossFit. Ali is pulling some deeply shady justification business with Syd, talking about how their queerness should open them up to the possibility of multiple partners and being free to follow their every whim.Ali is a searcher, one who feels most comfortable when she is in flux. Syd wants a monogamous, loving, faithful partnership. She has loved Ali for so long, and she sees that she will never get what she wants from her. So she walks away. Carrie Brownstein has been so strong all season, but she really gives everything in the breakup scene. We all knew that Syd was going to be an innocent victim of Ali’s lesbian walkabout, the first sacrificial lamb of her sexcapades.Meanwhile, Maura is still doing her penance tour for offending Davina with her holier-than-thou judgments about Sal, volunteering to work the trans suicide hotline overnight. The scene where Maura practices suicide prevention with Shea is an illuminating one: we learn that Shea, like so many trans people, has often thought of killing herself. This is the P.S.A. section of the episode, where viewers learn that there are very real dangers to the trans community, from both within and without. We also see Maura finally soften and become nurturing, embracing her inner mom. This newfound gentleness may be the force that pushes her into deciding to join her daughters on their pilgrimage to dance topless in the forest. She’s finally ready to be their mother.Ali and Sarah’s other mother is now living in a love shack with Buzz, who signs his beef and loves margaritas and bidets. Shelly is changing herself for a new man, but she is happy. So happy, in fact, that she threw out all her children’s old artwork. Hey, it wasn’t bringing her joy. Shelly may be harsh, but at least she is honest. She and Yetta have that in common. Harshness with an undercurrent of unconditional love runs in the family.“Man on the Land” is this season’s best episode; it might very well be one of the best episodes of television made all year. There is something electric about the setting: the Idyllwild Wimmin’s Music Festival, loosely modeled on the famous Michigan Womyn’s Festival (which ended this year after 40 years, and also held the same controversial “womyn-born-womyn” policy). From the very first strains of music, we know we are somewhere we haven’t been before: a woman sings “let’s go into the forest, and menstruate on a stick!” and suddenly we follow Ali, Sarah and Maura into a crowd of reveling, naked women in all their glory; there are women with cellulite, women with beards, women with latex chaps. This is a utopian pastoral for female empowerment, and all three Pfeffermans are enthralled from the get-go.The appearance of the Indigo Girls (singing one of their best songs, “Hammer and Nail,” in a perfect music cue) is just one of several cameos. There’s also the series creator Jill Soloway jamming along in the concert scene (she’s the one in the red T-shirt singing about sweat); the musician Peaches, who opens the episode with spoken word; the pop artist Sia, wandering through the woods like a mystic singing (fully unmasked, a rare sight); and of course, the great Anjelica Huston, who plays Vicki, a cheesemonger who takes enough of a liking to Maura to whisper to her about the exclusionary camp policy.The singer Alice Boman also appears in the episode several times, but always out of the corner of Ali’s eye, singing the song “Waiting (PAL remix).” (The number also closed the first episode of the season, and serves as this season’s haunting thematic motif.) We are not sure if everyone can hear Boman’s musical lamentations or they are just another one of Ali’s visions, but the song swells by episode’s end and becomes the chilling soundtrack for Ali’s final flashback to Gittel’s tragic end by the bonfire.It remains hazy as to whether or not Ali actually sees her family’s history unspool in the woods — what is real and what is fantasy breaks down the minute she looks down to see her jingling shoes. She has fallen through a wormhole to the past, and she is now the shepherd of this secret family story, the one who bears witness to Gittel’s life. In a recent New Yorker profile, Ms. Soloway talked about keeping an open, permeable, safe feminine space on set. Ariel Levy writes: “Directing with ‘the female gaze,’ she asserted, is about creating the conditions for inspiration to flourish, and then ‘discerning-receiving.’” This woozy flashback is an example of this receptive, female gaze. History and modern day collapse on each other, but the overlap isn’t violent; instead, the past and the present gently come together, allowing Ali to have a quiet revelation about her grandmother and hold her gaze for several long seconds of anguish.As Rose watches with anguish as her sibling is dragged into the woods by Nazi soldiers, Ali watches Rose, and suddenly all things become clear. Gittel died for her gender explorations, for her stubbornness in remaining exactly who she was until the very end. Her death is barbaric, but tiny versions of her erasure are still being perpetuated two generations later. Maura suffers alone in the forest, just as Gittel did in her final moments, though Maura’s pain is that of not being included rather than being hunted and persecuted for being who she is. Both Maura and Gittel feel abandoned by their mothers, forced to forge ahead on their own to try to make a life. Gittel’s attempt ends in murder; Maura’s (at least so far) ends in self-righteous alienation from her entire family and a ride off into the sunset in Vicki’s sedan.There is so much rich detail in this episode, it is hard to list it all: Crying Bear’s Brooklyn accent as she asks women to “mourn their murdered femininity”; the soggy nut loaf; the pay-by-the-minute clown who teaches Maura about the “man on the land” trigger warning for when men come to haul the porta-potties away. This Sapphic wonderland holds little joy for Sarah at the beginning, as she bumps into another mother from her school who offers her a little friendly “advice” about not walking around with such a sourpuss all the time and not believing herself to be the center of the universe for once. It’s good advice! But it sends Sarah into a deeper spiral; she knows she has to forgive herself, but she is certainly not going to find redemption in Crying Bear’s feelings hut. When she sees Pony slapping her naughty doggy with a leather paddle, something inside Sarah goes neon. She needs to be punished for the hurt she has caused people, preferably with whips and bound hands. “Woof,” she tells Pony, and just like that she has found better living through B.D.S.M.Though the last five minutes of the episode are masterful the most impressive scene of the episode, and the series so far, is the scene around the campfire at Sojourner, where Maura, Leslie, Ali and a group of radical feminists get into a heated discussion about what makes a woman and how male privilege and male pain are separate. Ali Liebegott, who wrote the episode, and Soloway, who directed it, do a lot of heavy lifting with this scene; it covers a wide swath of issues facing the transgender community and their female allies, and it was refreshing and surprising to see it all laid bare, out in the open.The viewer feels for Maura, who has as much right as anyone to call herself a woman and enter female spaces, but also the women around the fire make compelling points as well. Maura, before she became Maura, benefited from male privilege, and she hasn’t fully accounted for that. Ali is caught in the middle, trying at once to bond with her moppa and also to impress her new Svengali Leslie, whose radical feminist dogma doesn’t have much place in it for trans women (she even calls Maura “Mort” at the fire, a small but pointed aggression). Ali goes off in search of Maura after the blowup, but she ultimately returns to Leslie’s tent for a romantic encounter. The pull of Leslie’s feminine mystique is too strong for Ali to ignore, and so she heeds it. But in doing so, she leaves her moppa all alone, out in the woods.Advertisement