The HBO documentary “Becoming Mike Nichols” has been given late clearance into next month’s Sundance Film Festival, a berth that allows the film to premiere before a rival PBS project arrives on Jan. 29.Sundance, which starts on Jan. 21, said on Thursday that it would play “Becoming Mike Nichols” in a section dedicated to high-profile documentaries. Directed by Douglas McGrath, the film — set for a Feb. 22 debut on HBO — focuses on Mr. Nichols’s early career. It looks at his on-stage partnership with the comedian Elaine May and then delves into two of his landmark Broadway productions (“Barefoot in the Park,” “The Odd Couple”) and two breakthrough films, “Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf” and “The Graduate,” for which he won an Academy Award for directing in 1968.“By not covering his whole career, we were able to give him the time to discuss in-depth the work that he thought was his best,” Mr. McGrath said by phone. He added, “It’s not a gossipy piece. It doesn’t have celebrities giving personal anecdotes. I wasn’t interested in doing a film about anything other than his work as an artist.”Mr. McGrath’s directing credits include “Emma” (1996) and the 2011 documentary “His Way,” which looked at the larger-than-life Hollywood figure Jerry Weintraub. He filmed Mr. Nichols over two days in 2014 at the Golden Theater in New York, where “An Evening with Mike Nichols and Elaine May” had its debut in 1960. Mr. Nichols died four months after the taping, at age 83.The PBS documentary – directed by Ms. May – will kick off the 30th season of “American Masters.” Her film will showcase her former partner’s many achievements through interviews with people like Meryl Streep and Steven Spielberg.Sundance has long been a showcase for HBO documentaries, but the premium cable channel has an unusually large number of entries this time around. Six HBO documentaries will play the festival, including “Mapplethorpe: Look at the Pictures”; the Lena Dunham-produced “Suited,” about a Brooklyn clothier known for making menswear for transgender clients; and “Unlocking the Cage,” a film about an animal rights lawyer that was directed by Chris Hegedus and D.A. Pennebaker.