AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon CaramanicaToby Keith“35 mph Town”(Show Dog Nashville)George Strait“Cold Beer Conversation”(MCA Nashville)It’s easy to complain about the dearth of classic soul music being made these days. And it’s true — contemporary R&B has all but abandoned the gestures of the 1960s and ’70s, and even its adult contemporary wing owes more to denuded smooth jazz than to vintage soul’s punchy lust.Classic soul isn’t dead, though — it’s just hiding out in country music, in the songs made by elders who’ve sandpapered their rough edges to reveal the heartbreakers and heartbroken underneath.Take George Strait and Toby Keith, both with new albums that boast a smooth-croon streak: “Cold Beer Conversation,” the 29th for Mr. Strait, and “35 mph Town,” Mr. Keith’s 18th. Both men understand that elegant soul may be the only logical approach to graceful aging in a genre suddenly overrun with youthful disrupters.That’s especially the case for singers who never much wanted to rock the boat. Mr. Strait wasn’t particularly rebellious as a young singer — he felt like Eddy Arnold in starched Wranglers. Mr. Keith was more of a rabble-rouser, from the contentiousness of his politics to the muscularity of his sound, but his fealty to tradition was never in doubt.Mr. Keith always extended his wild-eyed approach to love, though, and Mr. Strait’s come-ons were unfailingly gentlemanly. “Cold Beer Conversation” is a bit looser than Mr. Strait’s last album, “Love Is Everything,” with convincing flashes of western swing (“It Takes All Kinds”). But the standouts here are the love songs. “Even When I Can’t Feel It,” a song with light gospel flourishes in its structure, is about feeling the hole left behind by a broken love as keenly as the love itself. And “Something Going Down,” written by Jamey Johnson and Tom Shapiro, finds Mr. Strait at his most pulpy and resonant, asking a lover, “These lights, don’t they seem a little bright?”That’s as moist as Mr. Strait gets — he’s an ask-first, seduce-later sort of guy. Mr. Keith, though, has always had that honey voice, like the purr of a jungle cat. The way he elongates his a’s — in the past, it was well suited to indignation, but it’s just as effective as a come-on.In his breakout years, Mr. Keith’s métiers were jingoism and brawn. Some of that’s still here — there’s an actual Ford F-150 ad inside the CD booklet of this album — but his lens has widened. (Most of the album was written by Mr. Keith with Bobby Pinson, whose 2005 album, “Man Like Me,” was a sort of proto-country-soul.)The album opener, “Drunk Americans,” talks about a bar — Mr. Keith’s favorite locale — that doesn’t discriminate at the door. “We’re all mudflap suburbans/all ball caps and turbans,” he sings, before toasting the “C.E.O.s, G.E.D.s, D.U.I.s, F.B.I.s, Ph.D.s.” (The title track walks back some of that progressivism, but not as much as you’d think.)Where Mr. Keith is truly gentle, though, is in detailing the faultlines of the heart. “Beautiful Stranger” is a sweaty song about rekindled passion, delivered with Teddy Pendergrass intensity. And on “What She Left Behind,” Mr. Keith laments, “The clothes she wore the night before/still laying on the bathroom floor/when I found her ring on the sink, I died.” He turns that last word into sort of a small death yelp, a compromise between country modesty and full soul release.Advertisement