
American Horror Story By                     
E. A. HANKS

DEC. 17, 2015
What a child needs from a parent is simple enough: love, safety, comfort. But what does a parent need from a child? Equal measures of love? Forgiveness?What does a maker need from what they have made? Fealty? Fidelity? Adoration? When the Countess realizes the depths of Donovan’s destructive jealousy, she is brought to tears: it’s beautiful to her, how much he’ll destroy in her name. Parenthood, brought to you by “American Horror Story.”At the beginning of the season we discussed how a hotel makes for a natural horror setting Hidden staircases, strangers coming and going, messes made and erased. Liz Taylor, our stylish concierge and bar tender, has seen it all, but what touches her most is an old couple come to the Cortez to end their lives together. Elegant in her cheongsam, the score remarkably similar to Shigeru Umebayashi’s “Yumeji’s Theme,” best known for its use in Wong Kar Wai’s luxurious film “In the Mood For Love,” Liz decides she’s had enough. “I feel like I’ll never be happy again,” she said. “I pretend that I’m O.K. living in a world without Tristan, but it’s... It’s been difficult. Besides, knowing the Countess, it’s just a matter of time before she slits my throat.”Liz isn’t the only one who wants out; even vampire Iris has had enough: “Donovan was my one true love. I thought when he brought me back from the brink of death, it was because he loved me. He doesn’t love me. He never will.”AdvertisementBut while the indifference of Iris’s son is driving her to death, Liz’s son, whom she left behind, is the reason their death pact has to wait. Like in other seasons, the mythology of “Hotel” is fairly standard: unfinished business means ghosts will be trapped wherever they died.Advertisement(I find myself rooting for a Liz-Ghost Tristan reunion, if only so we’d actually get to see this couple be in love rather than just hear about it after the fact.)Once again Denis O’Hare shows how it’s done: it’s one of the season’s high points when the bartender realizes that her son is not going to turn away from her in disgust, but instead accepts his father as the woman she now is.So often television audiences see children hoping their parents accept them, but don’t adults also hope to be understood as their own people, and not just as what their children want from them?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Speaking of children, Alex and John are reunited when Alex confesses that both she and Holden are in danger from the Countess unless the pack of rabid vampire children Alex inadvertently created are dealt with. After luring the children into the hotel’s dungeon (where Ramona Royale is still lurking) the Lowes tumble into bed, much to Sally’s murderous fury. “What we have is an addict’s high,” John explains to Sarah Paulson’s junkie ghost. “In the moment, it seems like it’s never ends. But it always ends.”Alex, John and Holden leave the Cortez, hopefully to retrieve daughter Scarlett, as forgotten by them as by the show’s writers. But what will happen when Alex discovers John has spent the past five years slaughtering people to appease a ghost? Or when John realizes there’s something different about his wife? But sure, cancel the divorce papers, romance is for optimists!The Countess, meanwhile, threatens the ghost of Will Drake, her former fiancé and current owner of the Cortez: “I don’t kill children,” she explains after reminding Drake that his young son, her legal ward, is his sole heir, “but I could make him a blood relative.” Keeping his son uninfected might just be Will Drake’s unfinished business.Remember Valentino, the Countess’s lost love whose back story we spent two episodes learning? Forget undead, he’s officially dead thanks to Donovan’s jealousy. That’s what you get for bringing a scimitar to a gunfight.While the Countess confronts Donovan, Liz is talking Iris into making a move: “You and I are women of a certain age. We have suffered, more than our fair share. Damn it, we are the ones who should inherit the earth [...] We’re entitled to a second chance. A glorious blazing, final act.” Armed with guns galore (no scimitars in sight) Iris and Liz open fire on the Countess and Donovan, giving “Hotel” it’s first serious cliffhanger.Thus far Liz has been right about caftans, books choices and the best way to fake pâté. Let us hope she was also right when she said, “My friend, the best is yet to come.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »