By BEN RATLIFFDEC. 16, 2015
“Ardipithecus”(Roc Nation)“What the heck is happening?” Willow Smith sings in “Cycles,” a song from “Ardipithecus,” her first full album. “Why am I here?” “Why can I sing?”There’s a lot of that in “Ardipithecus,” released last Friday as a sudden digital drop: common youthful dissociative feelings, sudden long-view glimpses of the self. For Ms. Smith, the 15-year-old daughter of Will and Jada Pinkett Smith, it’s a really long view. She’s writing diaristic, run-on narrative songs, and singing them in an authentically mystical or overwrought way, but many of the details have to do with astral planes, Mesopotamian deities, crystals, Gaia and the third dimension. She has the point of view of someone who knows things. At the same time, for philosophical reasons, she doesn’t want to know a lot of things. She’s got a song about that called “IDK.”“Ardipithecus” is a little under an hour of homemade neo-neo soul and spartan vanguardist pop fed by occult teen-speak and, seemingly, the television cartoon “Adventure Time.” (Two tracks here are about Marceline, the vampire-musician character from that show.) It has little regard for a marketplace: It’s essentially a Bandcamp record released by Roc Nation.Ms. Smith has written and produced almost the whole album herself, and she keeps it simple: She organizes her free-associative words into melodic lines over two chords and midtempo beats. The introduction of other producers on a few tracks — including Mel Lewis, a.k.a. Chaos, and Ant Bell, and her half brother Trey Smith (as AcE) — seems to lead her away from her own sound, toward something lusher and more generic. This is a record that never stops threatening to be dull — in the way that Miley Cyrus’s record of mind-blurt autonomy from this year was dull — but rarely is, except when others try to streamline a lumpy aesthetic.Like many teenagers, Ms. Smith is unfocused in a macro sense and incredibly focused in a micro sense. She has a skill for using very little. The two chords in “Natives of the Windy Forest” sound rough and scratchy, as if strummed on a viola, over intermittent snare-drum rolls; “F Q-C #8” is arranged sparsely for harp, xylophone, electric guitar and drips of drums. (It changes to a dance-floor beat halfway through, when Ms. Smith murmurs “grab your neighbor’s hand” and then chants “Om.”) It is the only track for which she has written a note of explanation: “I have an on going list of F Q-C songs. These songs were created through characters I have developed within my mind.” Fair enough.A version of this review appears in print on December 17, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: Willow Smith’s ‘Ardipithecus,’ Teen-Speak on Astral Planes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.