AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon Pareles“Tell Me I’m Pretty”(RCA)“Hold on with all your might/You’re gonna die, die,” Matt Shultz sings on Cage the Elephant’s fourth album, “Tell Me I’m Pretty.” The song, “Cry Baby,” goes bounding along on a triplet beat and a hopping bass line, but there’s no hiding its morbid streak, which resurfaces throughout the album. Cage the Elephant, a band from Kentucky, has always been conscious of death; its best-selling song, the 2008 hit “Ain’t No Rest for the Wicked,” continues that thought with “until we close our eyes for good.” But until now, the band’s boisterous momentum always held grim thoughts at bay. Now they’re in the foreground.Cage the Elephant’s music slices across multiple eras of rock. Its songs have pointed toward the Beatles, the Pixies, glam, grunge and garage-rock, topped by Mr. Shultz’s rambunctiously frazzled lead vocals. The band’s previous album, “Melophobia” in 2013, defied its title with nervy, abundant hooks and pushy guitars; it reached the Top 20. But “Tell Me I’m Pretty” turns inward.The album was produced by Dan Auerbach of the Black Keys, who brings out Cage the Elephant’s late-1960s and early-1970s affinities: analog-sounding keyboards, acoustic strumming, fuzz-toned electric guitars echoing psychedelia and T. Rex, lots of tambourine-shaking.But the bigger change is in the songs, which no longer promise that rock brashness can overpower adversity. “Sweetie Little Jean” uses steady music-hall chords to ponder the fate of a missing person, concluding, “I think we should just let go.” A bleak ballad with hints of Radiohead and Oasis, “How Are You True” envisions, “All your days spent countin’ numbers ’til one day you’ll find/That life has passed you by.”The band works up a stomping, tom-tom pounding riff in “Punchin’ Bag” to sing about a woman fighting back against domestic abuse, and puts a rockabilly beat under a backing chorus of “Oh no!” to warn “She’s gonna try to break ya” in “Mess Around.” The most hopeful come-on arrives in “Portuguese Knife Fight”: “I wanna waste my life with you.”It’s a daring, deliberate shift for Cage the Elephant. But in its single-mindedness, the album sacrifices the wildly seesawing balance between life force and mortality that gave the band its verve.Advertisement