By ANTHONY TOMMASINIDEC. 16, 2015
Some conductors, determined to bring a jolt of freshness to Handel’s “Messiah,” opt for bracing tempos and extra incisive execution. Not Jane Glover, the respected British conductor, in a long-overdue debut with the New York Philharmonic on Tuesday night at David Geffen Hall. Using no conductor’s stand, no score and no baton, Ms. Glover led a flowing, elegant and subtle “Messiah.”Though best known for her work in early music, Ms. Glover has conducted a wide range of repertoire, including challenging contemporary pieces. In 2013, she became only the third woman to conduct at the Metropolitan Opera, a run of Mozart’s “The Magic Flute.” She is just one of a number of international conductors who should have been brought onto the Philharmonic’s roster of guest artists long ago.She drew lithe, glowing playing from the Philharmonic. And the young, skilled members of the excellent Westminster Symphonic Choir (under the direction of Joe Miller) seemed inspired, singing with full-bodied yet unforced sound and abundant character. There was plenty of articulate clarity and bounce in Ms. Glover’s performance, not just during the joyous choruses, like “For unto us a Child is born,” but in unexpected numbers, like the Pifa, the pastoral orchestral interlude, which had uncommon breadth and suppleness. What made this “Messiah” stand out, though, was the naturalness and grace of the music-making.In the opening Sinfonia, Ms. Glover emphasized the weighty depth and harmonic richness of the introduction, then moved to a lucid account of the quick Allegro section that had a touch of mystery about it. In the first recitative, “Comfort Ye,” Ms. Glover allowed the gifted young tenor Paul Appleby to shape the phrases with melting tenderness. And during the spirited tenor aria “Ev’ry Valley Shall Be Exalted,” the playing had the expressive nuances of singing when the orchestra echoed the tenor’s lines. Ms. Glover, who has extensive experience in opera, was especially sensitive to the operatic character of this elaborate oratorio.AdvertisementThe alluring countertenor Tim Mead was consistently excellent, especially his somber account of the aching aria “He Was Despised.” The baritone Roderick Williams sang with sturdy tone and authority. Sometimes, in her bright top range, the soprano Heidi Stober’s voice took on a slightly hard edge. But in arias like “Rejoice, Greatly, O Daughter of Zion,” she dispatched passagework crisply and sounded joyful.During the complex, contrapuntal choruses, like “He trusted in God,” Ms. Glover trusted in Handel, drawing depth and clarity from the chorus and orchestra without interpretive fussiness. And she began the final choral “Amen” with rare calm and beauty, allowing the music to crest to a majestic conclusion.AdvertisementIt’s hard to make a strong first impression with a piece as familiar as the “Messiah.” Ms. Glover did.Handel’s “Messiah” continues through Saturday at David Geffen Hall; 212-875-5656, nyphil­.org.A version of this review appears in print on December 17, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: In Skilled Hands, a Ranging Philharmonic Debut.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.