By MATT WOLFDEC. 16, 2015
LONDON — If you are going to confront the specter of a performance that haunts the decades still, it helps to possess a degree of charm that few performers can match. That, in brief, is the remarkable achievement of Sheridan Smith in the much-awaited London revival of “Funny Girl” at the Menier Chocolate Factory through March 5.In every way, Ms. Smith, a two-time Olivier Award-winner, for the musical “Legally Blonde” and the Terence Rattigan play “Flare Path,” could not be further from Barbra Streisand, who immortalized Fanny Brice in “Funny Girl” on the Broadway and London stage and again on film: She is neither American nor Jewish nor a particular powerhouse of a singer in the inimitable Streisand style.But what Ms. Smith possesses in marquee-worthy lights is a ready likability, as well as an ability to connect with audiences that cannot be taught in theater school. Playing Brice, the New York-born singer-comedienne who helped define American showbiz in the first half of the 20th century, Ms. Smith lets her own, very different star power push thoughts of Ms. Streisand to the side.Ms. Smith may not deliver the sustained money notes that put the role’s originator on the map, but Ms. Streisand surely never mined so much sweetness and pure emotion from the part.AdvertisementThere will be more to say about the director Michael Mayer’s somewhat cramped production of “Funny Girl” when it transfers in the spring to the Savoy Theater, a larger space that may better suit a staging that looks slightly starved of oxygen at the Chocolate Factory. But for now, one remains in thrall to Ms. Smith’s ability to turn a time-honored solo number like “People” into a study in introspection that elicits tears from the house.AdvertisementIn its first revival in London since Ms. Streisand herself brought the Jule Styne-Bob Merrill collaboration here in 1966, “Funny Girl” strikes me as a second-tier musical about not very much that happens to be blessed — and not for the first time — with a first-rate star.I doubt that even Ms. Smith’s effortlessly capacious gift for empathy could salvage the season’s most ambitious new musical, the inaptly named “wonder.land”: the lower case is intentional, as is the Internet-friendly spelling. This modern-day and very free retelling of “Alice in Wonderland” opened last week in the Olivier auditorium of the National Theater after premiering to mixed reviews at the Manchester International Festival in July.The London iteration feels at least several drafts away from completion in its attempt to marry Lewis Carroll’s lineup of legendary eccentrics (the dormouse, the caterpillar and so on) with the coming of age story of a hapless teenager by the name of Aly (get it?). Played by Lois Chimimba, a sweet-faced newcomer who is by some measure the best thing about the evening, this bullied, belittled version of Carroll’s Alice takes refuge from her unhappy life in the dreamscape afforded by the Internet.And so it is that Aly soon finds herself with a Barbie-esque avatar named, of course, Alice (a suitably waxy-looking Carly Bawden) leading a motley crew of creatures who collectively help our self-loathing heroine — “I hate being me,” Aly sings toward the end of the first act — embrace her own fabulousness. Our heroine’s realization that empowerment begins within dates back at least as far back as, well, “Funny Girl.”If only this tale about accepting yourself as you are had an identity of its own. Instead, as co-created by  Rufus Norris with the playwright Moira Buffini (“Dinner,” “Handbag”) and the composer Damon Albarn, better known as the singer-keyboardist of the Britpop band Blur, “wonder.land” appears to be the result of a computer-generated algorithm about how to appear theatrically hip. For the real thing, all concerned might want to treat themselves to tickets for something genuinely revolutionary, like, say, “Hamilton” on Broadway.Early on, there is much banal commentary about the sense of togetherness that comes with life online, as well as the ease with which cyberspace allows people to reinvent themselves. “Please ask, who’s behind your mask?” sings the show’s glitteringly attired, elaborately coiffed M.C. (Hal Fowler), but the answer appears to be only greater platitudes on the order of “I am you/you are me.”The writing at times drifts toward the tortured — “detention,” Aly’s reprobate father (Paul Hilton) tells us, is “an invention of henchmen” and “not worth a mention” — which may or may not be preferable to lyrics, also by Ms. Buffini, that tend to settle on an image and run it into the ground. Or make that the sea, given frequent assertions that “the river will run.” What river, and where?AdvertisementIt’s good to bring new names into musical theater, especially in Britain, where the art form is drastically in need of fresh voices. But Mr. Albarn’s score for “wonder.land” busily plunders Lionel Bart here and a snatch of Gilbert and Sullivan there, quickly belying its supposed originality. Visually, the hyper-extravagant, projection-heavy design conjures up a watery, none-too-attractive netherworld that makes the enterprise appear to be taking place inside an aquarium. “wonder.land” is the first show in ages that may leave the audience wanting to go for a swim.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The spirit of Carroll is far better served by the London debut of “You for Me for You,” the Korean-American playwright Mia Chung’s dizzyingly intricate portrait of two sisters from North Korea, at the Royal Court Theater’s studio space through Jan. 9. The play was first staged at the Woolly Mammoth Theater Company in Washington in 2012, but it is hard to imagine the kaleidoscopic script more effectively realized than it has been here.The younger sibling, Junhee (Katie Leung), escapes across the border and eventually makes it to the United States, leaving her ailing sister Minhee (Wendy Kweh) at home amid the Kimjongilia. That, believe it or not, is a species of begonia named in honor of the nation’s onetime leader Kim Jong-il.As is probably apparent, the play benefits from the singularity of its subject: How often is North Korea brought to life on any stage? Ms. Chung goes a clever step further by suggesting that events in the 90-minute play may not be what they seem, set as they are in a “hermit country” that comes with its own code of conduct and obfuscating patterns of speech.In one scene, Minhee visits a doctor only to be informed by him that “it is my unique and special privilege to shepherd you to robust health using the most advanced medical solutions and technology known to man.” The fact that her condition is worsening seems to get lost amid the jargon.Jon Bausor’s dazzling design, consisting of a mirrored hexagonal container that generates a shape-shifting surprise or two, heightens the feeling of a gathering disorientation at every turn. The visuals are abetted by video work from Tal Rosner that finds the Dalí-esque pulse in a narrative that sets the personal alongside the political throughout.Richard Twyman’s direction is of a piece in its ability to reposition a forbidding regime so that it takes on its own freewheeling theatrical life. The production, its chosen terrain notwithstanding, is a thing of wonder.Funny Girl.  Directed by Michael Mayer. Menier Chocolate Factory. Through March 5.wonder.land.  Directed by Rufus Norris. National Theater/Olivier. In repertory through April 30.You for Me for You.  Directed by Richard Twyman. Royal Court Jerwood Theater Upstairs. Through Jan. 9. A version of this review appears in print on December 17, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.