In the book of Genesis, when God calls for Abraham to order him to sacrifice his son Isaac, Abraham replies obediently, “Here I am.”That line provided inspiration for the author Jonathan Safran Foer, whose new novel, “Here I Am,” will be published in September by Farrar, Straus and Giroux. The novel, his first since “Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close” was published in 2005, unfolds over a single month in present-day Washington, as a Jewish family with three sons falls apart after the parents’ marriage falters. While the family implodes, relatives from Israel are visiting for the bar mitzvah of one of the sons. The drama unfolds as a larger catastrophe engulfs the Middle East, when a massive earthquake devastates the region and Israel is invaded. Farrar, Straus and Giroux acquired the novel as part of a three-book deal that includes another novel and a work of nonfiction.“Here I Am” grapples with many of the themes that have occupied Mr. Foer in his previous two novels, “Everything Is Illuminated” and “Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close,” which have explored Jewish identity and heritage and how families are bound and pulled apart by tragedy. But in its tone and scope, it represents a departure, said Eric Chinski, who acquired the book for Farrar, Straus and Giroux and worked with Mr. Foer on “Everything Is Illuminated” at Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.“You wouldn’t mistake any sentence of it for any other writer,” Mr. Chinski said. “It’s got this high-wire inventiveness and intensity of imagination in it, and the sheer energy that we associate with Jonathan’s writing, but it’s a big step forward for him. It’s got a kind of toughness; it’s dirty, it’s kind of funny, like ‘Portnoy’s Complaint,’ it exposes American Jewish life.”Mr. Foer was hailed as a literary prodigy when, at 25, he published “Everything Is Illuminated” to wide acclaim. That novel and his next book were adapted into feature films. His most recent book, “Eating Animals,” a manifesto against eating meat, was published by Little, Brown, in 2009. (Mr. Foer was under contract for a novel with Little, Brown, as well, but got out of the contract and moved to Farrar, Straus and Giroux.)The plot and setting of “Here I Am,” which deals with divorce and parenthood, seem to borrow some elements from Mr. Foer’s own life. Mr. Foer grew up in Washington, as one of three sons — his brothers are Franklin Foer, the former editor of The New Republic, and the journalist Joshua Foer. Mr. Foer was married for a decade to the novelist Nicole Krauss, with whom he has two children; the pair split up in 2014.“It’s not an autobiographical novel except  in the sense that any mature novel reflects a lot of life experience,” Mr. Chinski said. “The book reflects growing up and coming to terms with the world.”A version of this article appears in print on 12/21/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: New Jonathan Safran Foer Novel, u2018Here I Am,u2019 Coming in 2016.