AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Luciana Achugar (through Dec. 19) Last year Ms. Achugar presented “Otro Teatro” at New York Live Arts, exploring what it would mean to “grow ourselves a new body.” Since that ecstatic, anarchic ritual of a performance, she has continued the investigation of pleasure, desire and dance as an agent for change. The next and perhaps final phase is “An Epilogue for Otro Teatro: True Love,” which takes over a studio at Gibney Dance’s downtown location for three hours at a time. Thursdays through Saturdays at 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Siobhan Burke)★ Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater (through Jan. 3) For a New York holiday tradition without the Sugar Plum Fairy, get thee to City Center for Ailey’s monthlong winter season. After four years of shepherding the company into exciting artistic territory, the artistic director, Robert Battle, contributes a new work titled “Awakening” to the repertory. Also new this year are premieres from Rennie Harris, Ronald K. Brown and Kyle Abraham. A Paul Taylor work also joins the lineup, along with works by Talley Beatty, Hofesh Shechter and Christopher Wheeldon, among others. And, of course, “Revelations” will be on repeat. At various times, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, alvinailey.org. (Brian Schaefer)★ American Dance Machine for the 21st Century (Monday through Jan. 3) The original American Dance Machine ran from 1976 to 1987 with a mission to preserve, and pass on, great musical-theater choreography. Rebooted in 2012 and returning to the Joyce for its second year, this iteration showcases more than a dozen classic Broadway dances grabbed from “A Chorus Line,” “Pippin,” “West Side Story” and more, reconstructed by veterans of the original shows and set on a fresh crop of current Broadway Gypsies. Monday at 7:30 p.m. (Dec. 21 only), Tuesdays at 7:30 p.m., Wednesdays at 3 p.m. and 7:30 p.m., Thursdays at 3 p.m., Saturdays at 2 p.m. and 8 p.m., Sundays at 2 p.m. and 7:30 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)★ Company XIV (through Jan. 17) If the traditional “Nutcracker” evokes the transition from childhood to adolescence, then Company XIV’s “Nutcracker Rouge” might be the subsequent crossover into adulthood and the accompanying sexual awakening. The choreographer Austin McCormick combines a strong dose of burlesque, baroque and ballet with glittered pasties and G-strings for a charmingly sensual and playful holiday romp. Tchaikovsky never sounded so scandalous. Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., Sundays at 5 p.m., Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-745-3000, companyxiv.com. (Schaefer)Dancing Korea (Friday through Sunday) This showcase of artists and companies from Korea presents both traditional and contemporary dance of that country, selected and supported by a group of Korean cultural institutions. Each of the three programs offers a different configuration of artists, who include Goblin Party, Ju Bin Kim, Youn Puluem, Won Kim, Moonsuk Choi, Suksoon Jung, Moon Ei Lee and Eun-Me Ahn. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Schaefer)East Village Dance Project (Through Sunday) The themes of escape and self-discovery found just under the surface of “The Nutcracker” take fresh, poignant form in the East Village Dance Project’s production of “The Shell-Shocked Nut Project,” which sets the action amid East Village landmarks and follows the journey of a war veteran. The cast of 50 is split between students and professionals, and Tchaikovsky’s score shares airtime with Stevie Wonder, Duke Ellington and original music played live. Through Saturday at 8 p.m., Saturday and Sunday at 3 p.m., La MaMa, 66 East Fourth Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, lamama.org. (Schaefer)Gelsey Kirkland Ballet (through Dec. 20) It’s worth seeing this company’s “Nutcracker” not just for a well-constructed production of the Christmas classic but also for a glimpse of the troupe’s new Brooklyn home, at what used to be St. Ann’s Warehouse. Founded in TriBeCa by Ms. Kirkland, a former American Ballet Theater principal, the company attracts promising young dancers from around the world, who will be joined by 70 students and alumni from the affiliated Gelsey Kirkland Academy of Classical Ballet. Thursdays and Fridays at 7:30 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Sundays at noon and 5 p.m., GK Arts Center, 29 Jay Street, near John Street, Dumbo, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, gelseykirklandacademyofclassicalballet.org. (Burke)Maurice Hines ‘Tappin’ Thru Life’ (Wednesday) The actor, choreographer and esteemed hoofer Maurice Hines has had an illustrious career spanning Broadway and Hollywood, with cameos from luminaries like Gypsy Rose Lee and Frank Sinatra. This bio-revue recounts those adventures and pays tribute to his brother and showbiz partner, Gregory, who died in 2003. In a nod to that fraternal bond, Mr. Hines showcases the tapping Manzari Brothers, John and Leo, who gladly accept the torch. At 2 p.m., New World Stages, 340 West 50th Street, 212-239-6280, tappinthrulife.com. (Schaefer)★ Mark Morris Dance Group (Through Sunday) After a five-year hiatus, Mark Morris’s “The Hard Nut,” a rollicking, cheeky take on “The Nutcracker,” returns to Brooklyn. The narrative hews closely to E.T.A. Hoffmann’s original story, but the show is a welcome departure from tradition – and propriety. Mr. Morris plants his party in the suburbs of the 1970s and visits a world inspired by Charles Burns’s noirish Pop Art. Mr. Morris’s snowflakes blur gender lines while his characters crack open their inhibitions. It’s wacky fun. Friday at 7:30 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 1 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schaefer)★ New York City Ballet (through Jan. 3) Of the dozens of “Nutcracker” productions in town, none match the scale of City Ballet’s “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” or the giddy sense of childlike awe it inspires. Pantomime dominates the first half, but Act II culminates in a breathtaking pas de deux for the Sugar Plum Fairy and her Cavalier. After all, this is a duet for Balanchine and Tchaikovsky too, and it’s magical. At various times, David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.org. (Schaefer)New York Theater Ballet (Sunday) Many generations recall cozying up to the television to watch “A Charlie Brown Christmas,” a tradition that started in 1965 and offered a charming critique of the holiday’s increasing commercialization. In this staged concert version of the classic Peanuts story, music is provided by the New York Pops; New York Theater Ballet provides the dance, choreographed by Liza Gennaro. At 3 p.m., Carnegie Hall, 881 Seventh Avenue, at 57th Street, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schaefer)★ Noche Flamenca (through Jan. 23) Traditional Spanish dance and ancient Greek theater are an unlikely but well-suited pair in Noche Flamenca’s sharp production “Antigona,” based on Sophocles’s famous tragedy. The dance lights a fire under the play while discovering in itself a knack for narrative drama. In the title role, the powerhouse Soledad Barrio is both fierce and fragile. The century-old church where the performance takes place is filled with striking sets, darkly amorous music played by a live band and a ferocious Greek chorus of dancers. Mondays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., with an additional performance at 3 p.m. on Dec. 26 (no performances on Thursday and next Friday), West Park Presbyterian Church, 165 West 86th Street, Manhattan, 866-811-4111, nocheflamenca.com. (Schaefer)The Snow Maiden (Sunday) This colorful production geared toward children tells the tale of a poor girl whose good heart and deeds make her worthy of being transformed into the Snow Maiden by Grandfather Frost. Basically, it’s “Nutcracker” holiday fun meets “Cinderella,” in Russian. Traditional folk dances and songs (in Russian with English subtitles), along with bright costumes and fur-lined hats, make for a merry afternoon. At 4 p.m., Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College, Walt Whitman Theater, Campus Road and Hillel Place, Brooklyn, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement