DEC. 18, 2015
For news about comedy, including critical commentary: nytimes.com/arts. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.‘$5 Funnies’ (Tuesday) This regular show features some of the best stand-ups in the country for an incredible price; performers include Mark Normand, Laurie Kilmartin, Joe List, Monroe Martin and Gary Vider. At 10 p.m., the Stand, 239 Third Avenue, at 20th Street, 212-677-2600, thestandnyc.com. (Elise Czajkowski)‘If You Build It’ (Sunday) Kara Klenk never disappoints with this top-notch stand-up show. This week’s performers include Chris Gethard, Jared Logan, Eliot Glazer, Chris Thayer, Jason Saenz, Maria Heinegg and Boris Khaykin. At 8 p.m., Upright Citizens Brigade Theater East, 153 East Third Street, East Village, 212-366-9231, east.ucbtheatre.com. (Czajkowski)★ ‘The Mantzoukas Brothers’ (Monday) This improv duo, Jason Mantzoukas and “his brother Vincent,” played by Ed Herbstman, were a staple of the New York scene for years. Now the pair reunite from time to time for an informal night of very funny improvised comedy. At 8:30 p.m., Magnet Theater, 254 West 29th Street, Chelsea, 212-244-8824, magnettheater.com. (Czajkowski)Advertisement‘Merry Hanukkah With Judy Gold’ (Wednesday through next Friday) Ms. Gold, an underappreciated gem of the New York comedy scene, returns to Carolines on Broadway with her annual Christmastime shows, filling this slow entertainment week with stories and stand-up of the holidays from a Jewish perspective. She’ll be supported by Josh Gondelman and David Feldman. Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday at 7 p.m., Friday at 8 p.m., Carolines, 1626 Broadway, at 49th Street, Manhattan, 212-757-4100, carolines.com. (Czajkowski)Advertisement★ ‘Murderfist’ (Saturday) This city’s most insane sketch group returns with a Christmas edition of its always anarchic, brutally funny show. Jason Zinoman, in an article in The New York Times, wrote that the troupe delivered “crude, punked-out chaos” and that its “scenes are visceral and unpolished, full of spurting gore and exposed flesh.” At 9:30 p.m., Peoples Improv Theater, 123 East 24th Street, Manhattan, 212-563-7488, thepit-nyc.com. (Czajkowski)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ ‘Oh, Hello’ (through Monday) Nick Kroll and John Mulaney bring their memorable characters Gil Faizon (Mr. Kroll) and George St. Geegland (Mr. Mulaney), two Upper West Side gentlemen with a fondness for Alan Alda and pranks involving tuna fish, to the stage. The duo have been part of the “Oh, Hello” show for more than a decade, having appeared in a web series before being prominently featured in Mr. Kroll’s Comedy Central sketch series, “Kroll Show.” At 9:30 p.m., Sundays at 7 p.m., Cherry Lane Theater, 38 Commerce Street, at Bedford Street, West Village, 212-989-2020, cherrylanetheatre.org.Sean Patton (Friday and Saturday) Mr. Patton remains one of the most enjoyable live performers in the comedy scene, with a knack for long, joke-filled stories that are deeply personal and always hilarious. He performs here as part of the “Week at the Creek” series. At 7 p.m., the Creek and the Cave, 10-93 Jackson Avenue, Long Island City, creeklic.com; free, seating is first come first served.★ ‘Raise the Roof and Help Syrian Children!’ (Sunday) This stand-up show benefits Unicef and its work with children seeking refuge from the violence in Syria. Performers include David Cross, Sasheer Zamata, Todd Barry, Dave Hill, Jon Glaser, Jon Ronson, Aparna Nancherla, Maeve Higgins and Starlee Kine. At 8 p.m., the Bell House, 149 Seventh Street, Gowanus, Brooklyn, 718-643-6510, thebellhouseny.com. (Elise Czajkowski)★ ‘A Show for Christmas’ (Friday) Daniel Kitson, an always captivating comedian and storyteller, returns to New York for a short run of this Christmas-themed show, which, according to his website, includes “traditional seasonal concerns of loneliness,” “a brief scuffle in a newsagents” and magic. At 8 p.m., Connelly Theater, 220 East Fourth Street, East Village, danielkitson.com. (Czajkowski)‘The Terry Withers Mysteries’ (Friday) Terry Withers, a longtime Upright Citizens Brigade improviser, stars as a brilliant detective who must solve a brutal murder mystery in this entirely improvised show, which is heavily influenced by the audience. This Christmas-themed edition is entitled “Have Yourself a Terry Little Murder.” At 7:30 p.m., Upright Citizens Brigade Theater, 307 West 26th Street, Chelsea, 212-366-9176, newyork.ucbtheatre.com. (Czajkowski)A version of this schedule appears in print on December 18, 2015, on Page C19 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Comedy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.