AdvertisementSupported byMuseums and galleries are in Manhattan unless otherwise noted. Many institutions are closed on and around Christmas Day; see individual websites for schedule changes. Full reviews of recent art shows are at nytimes.com/art. A searchable guide to these and many other art shows is at nytimes.com/events.★ American Folk Art Museum: ‘Art Brut in America: The Incursion of Jean Dubuffet’ (through Jan. 10) This extraordinary show revisits and partly recreates a little-known chapter in outsider art history: the decade (1951-61) that the groundbreaking, still-forming Art Brut collection of Jean Dubuffet — the artist and one of the field’s earliest explorers — spent in the East Hampton mansion of the artist Alfonso Ossorio. While seen by a host of art world luminaries, it had little impact, as proved by how many of the impressive artists here are still unknown in this country. 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 66th Street, 212-595-9533, folkartmuseum.org. (Roberta Smith)★ Asia Society and Museum: ‘Philippine Gold: Treasures of Forgotten Kingdoms’ (through Jan. 3) More than half a millennium before Ferdinand Magellan reached the archipelago now called the Philippines in 1521, a number of related societies thrived there. One of the few things known about them today is that they were astoundingly skillful goldsmiths. This gorgeous and historically intriguing exhibition presents nearly 120 pieces dating from the 10th through the 13th centuries, including bracelets, necklaces, pendants, collars, finger rings, bowls and a balance scale made entirely of gold. The star of the show is a gleaming, nine-pound sash made of gold beads that could be mistaken for a futuristic ammunition belt. 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org. (Ken Johnson)★ Bronx Museum of the Arts: ‘Martin Wong: Human Instamatic’ (through Feb. 14) Fervor, desire and coded insider-outsider knowledge crackle through this career retrospective of one of our great 20th-century American visionaries. Expanding on an earlier survey at the New Museum, the Bronx exhibition takes the artist from precocious juvenilia to unearthly little pictures done the year before his death from AIDS in 1999. Along with his art we have the traces of his countercultural life as mythologist, homoeroticist, existential tourist and urban resurrectionist. And all revolves around his mystical visions of ghetto New York. Neighborhood buildings are fortresslike, crushing, sinister. Yet miracles abound: windows glow gold; night skies bloom with stars. 1040 Grand Concourse, at 165th Street, Morrisania, the Bronx, 718-681-6000, bronxmuseum.org. (Holland Cotter)★ Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Personal Correspondence: Photography and Letter Writing in Civil War Brooklyn’ (through spring 2016) Symbolically, the Civil War ended when Robert E. Lee surrendered to Ulysses S. Grant in the spring of 1865. For many people who lived through it, though, the war never ended at all, and it lives on in letters sent to and from the battlefield. Thousands of these ended up half-forgotten in attics and bureau drawers; a small stash comes to light in this exhibition that consists of just one little room with a lot in it — including letters, Civil War souvenirs and explanatory texts — with everything as readily accessible as if in a well-packed suitcase. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org. (Cotter)Brooklyn Museum: ‘Impressionism and the Caribbean: Francisco Oller and His Transatlantic World’ (through Jan. 3) Francisco Oller (1833-1917) was the most celebrated Puerto Rican artist of the 19th century. For most of his career he was a facile imitator sojourning in Madrid and in Paris, where he hung out with Impressionist painters like Pissarro, Monet and Cézanne. But it wasn’t until after settling down in San Juan around age 60 that he came into his own, producing haunting landscapes and some mysteriously powerful still-life paintings that can plausibly be called great. This show presents 40 paintings by Oller and 45 works by other artists, including his European and American contemporaries and his Puerto Rican predecessors. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum (continuing) The stately doors of the 1902 Andrew Carnegie mansion, home to the Cooper Hewitt, are open again after an overhaul and expansion of the premises. Historic house and modern museum have always made an awkward fit, a standoff between preservation and innovation, and the problem remains, but the renovation has brought a wide-open new gallery space, a cafe and a raft of be-your-own-designer digital enhancements. Best of all, more of the museum’s vast permanent collection is now on view, including an Op Art weaving, miniature spiral staircases, ballistic face masks and a dainty enameled 18th-century version of a Swiss knife. Like design itself, this institution is built on tumult and friction, and you feel it. 2 East 91st Street, at Fifth Avenue, 212-849-8400, cooperhewitt.org. (Cotter)★ Frick Collection: ‘Andrea del Sarto: The Renaissance Workshop in Action’ (through Jan. 10) The big-guns highlights of the Frick show, this first major American exhibition devoted to the Renaissance artist Andrea del Sarto, (1486-1530) are three spectacular paintings, including “Portrait of a Young Man” from London and “St. John the Baptist” from the Palazzo Pitti, Florence. But the substance lies an array of 45 drawings, mostly in red chalk, in which we can follow del Sarto as he feels his way into compositions and molds figures into life with an angel’s hand, a scientist’s eye, and a striver’s drive for perfection. 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, 212-288-0700, frick.org. (Cotter)Guggenheim Museum: ‘Alberto Burri: The Trauma of Painting’ (through Jan. 6) This Italian artist’s prescient paintings from the 1950s and early ‘60s — in patched, burned and otherwise abused burlap, plastic or wood — form a lavish, beautiful and admirable, if sometimes monotonous retrospective at the Guggenheim. Unfortunately, he may also inaugurate a bane of current art: the use of found materials so inherently affecting — burlap is one — that they require little of the artist. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. (Smith)Guggenheim Museum: ‘Photo-Poetics: An Anthology’ (through March 23) Formally complex and expressively reserved, even hermetic. the work by ten photographers in this stimulating show has roots in Conceptualism and takes language, history and speculative thinking as its raw materials. Photographs are structured with the equivalent of poetry’s metrical cadences and internal rhymes, and treated less as generators of translatable ideas than of suggestive metaphors. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. (Cotter)★ Jewish Museum: ‘The Power of Pictures: Early Soviet Photography, Early Soviet Film’ (through Feb. 7) Revolutions sell utopias; that’s their job. Art, if it behaves itself and sticks to the right script, can be an important part of the promotional package. That’s the basic tale told by this exhibition of photographs and vintage films of the 1920s and ’30s, but with a question added: What happens to art when the script is drastically revised? Russia was an experiment in progress in the heady years following the 1917 revolution, and avant-garde art, free-spirited by definition, was officially embraced. When Joseph Stalin came to power art became government-dictated propaganda and its makers, often under threat, towed the line. Remarkably, the show presents a dozen films — some familiar, some not — full-length, on a rotating schedule of four a day, in a small viewing theater built into one of the Jewish Museum’s galleries. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Jewish Museum: ‘Unorthodox’ (through March 27) With about 200 putatively unorthodox works crowded into tightly walled-in spaces, this lively show has the feel of an Outsider Art fair — in a good way. The paintings, drawings, collages, assemblages, ceramics, weavings and videos are variously funny, funky, quirky, eccentric, idiosyncratic and visionary. Are they truly unorthodox by the standards of a contemporary art world wherein no one wants to be thought orthodox? No, but that’s O.K. It’s an entertaining and intermittently exhilarating exhibition nonetheless. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Ancient Egypt Transformed: The Middle Kingdom’ (through Jan. 24) Ancient Egypt is box office gold: Do a show, and people will come. Why? Mummies, Hollywood and Queen Nefertiti contribute to its allure. Also, we tend to identify with Egyptians of thousands of years ago. In art, they look exotic, but not out of reach. They drank beer, collected cats and wore flip-flops. They yearned to stay young and to live forever, with loved ones nearby and snack food piled high. Who can’t relate to that? Few institutions have done a better job at illuminating Egyptian art than the Met. And it returns to the subject in an exhibition low on King Tut bling and high on complicated beauty, about a broad swath of history (circa 2030 to 1650 B.C.) that has never had a comprehensive museum showcase till now. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Andrea del Sarto’s ‘Borgherini Holy Family’’ (through Jan. 10) This fascinating gem of a show runs concurrently with the larger exhibition “Andrea del Sarto: The Renaissance Workshop in Action” at the Frick Collection and adds important layers to it. It both places the Renaissance artist within the political context of his time, and it draws on modern imaging technology to reveal his method for transforming and recycling images. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Celebrating the Arts of Japan: The Mary Griggs Burke Collection’ (continuing) This lavish roll out of 160 objects came to the Met from the Mary and Jackson Burke Foundation last spring. The Burkes loved Japanese art — all of it — and the collection is close to compendious in terms of media, from wood-carved Buddhas to bamboo baskets, with a particular strength in painting, early and late. The quality of the work? Japan thinks highly enough of it to have made the Burke holdings the first Japanese collection from abroad ever to show at Tokyo National Museum. Some pieces on view now will be rotated out and replaced in February, making this an exhibition to visit at least twice. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Grand Illusions: Staged Photography from the Met Collection’ (through Jan. 18) With 40 works, this small, choice exhibition forms a freewheeling survey of the ways and means of staged photography — the arranging objects or people for the camera — and the many needs and sensibilities it has served. Its smart installation jumps between past and present, commercial and fine, pre- and postmodern, and is peppered with surprises by artists well-known and not. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Kongo: Power and Majesty’ (through Jan. 3) For centuries the West assumed that African art had no history, because none had been found written down. But this tight, intense show, beautifully designed, with a stirring catalog, demonstrates otherwise. It begins in the 15th century when the rulers of Kongo peoples in Central Africa were sending luxury textiles to European courts and receiving gifts in return. It continues through the devastations of the slave trade, shifting from art made for pleasure and profit to art made to save lives and souls. It concludes with 15 sensational, just under life-size sculptures that were last-ditch responses to the slow-motion emergency of colonialism. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Reimagining Modernism: 1900-1950’ (continuing) One of the greatest encyclopedic museums in the world fulfills its mission a little more with an ambitious reinstallation of works of early European modernism with their American counterparts for the first time in nearly 30 years. Objects of design and paintings by a few self-taught artists further the integration. It is quite a sight, with interesting rotations and fine-tunings to come. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ MoMA PS1: ‘Greater New York’ (through March 7) With a multigenerational team of organizers, MoMA P.S. 1’s every-five-years-roundup of New York art steps away from its founding premise of newness, the idea that it would be an update on the metropolitan market. The 158 artists on the roster range from 20-something to 80-something; a few are deceased. The notion that an “emerging” artist has to be young is discarded. Older artists newly in the spotlight, or back after a long delay, qualify. And history works in two directions. Art from the 1970s and ’80s is presented as prescient of what’s being made now, and new art is viewed as putting a trenchant spin on the past. 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Cotter)★ Morgan Library & Museum: ‘Ernest Hemingway: Between Two Wars’ (through Jan. 31) Mounted on walls that have been painted tropical blue to suggest Hemingway’s years in Key West and in Cuba, this show takes him all the way from high school to roughly 1950 with photographs, handwritten first-drafts and personal correspondence. But the largest and most interesting section focuses on the ’20s, Hemingway’s Paris years, and reveals a writer we might have been in danger of forgetting: Hemingway before he became Hemingway. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org. (Charles McGrath)Museum of Arts and Design: ‘Wendell Castle Remastered’ (through Feb. 28) This eminent woodworker became noted in the 1960s for carving chic, curvy furniture out of blocks of laminated wood. In the past four years he has revived that method with the assistance of digital and robotic technologies that enable him to make bigger and more adventurous works. This engaging show focuses on pieces from those two periods. “Suspended Disbelief,” made this year, has an irregularly oval, glossy black table top extending horizontally and without legs some 10 feet in the air from a trio of tall conical forms resembling the tips of monstrous tendrils. It’s spectacular. 2 Columbus Circle, Manhattan, 212-299-7777, madmuseum.org. (Johnson)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Design and Violence’ (continuing) Described on the museum’s website as a “curatorial experiment,” “Design and Violence” was and is an exhibition that exists almost entirely on the Internet. The show includes pictures, descriptions, essays and discussions about design objects used for violent purposes, including the AK-47 rifle, animal slaughter systems, bullets, plastic handcuffs and graphics depicting everything from refugee migration to incarceration demographics to violent video games. It’s a heavy and heady gathering of information that leans at times toward a symposium rather than an exhibition, but remains grounded in innovative objects that have made — or could make — a cultural impact. Online at designandviolence.moma.org; 212-708-9400. (Martha Schwendener)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Endless House: Intersections of Art and Architecture’ (through March 6) This scattered but enjoyable exhibition, drawn from the museum’s art collection as much as its design holdings, focuses on the single-family home as a place of experimentation and regeneration; of conflict as well as dreams. Its highlight is a series of drawings and photographs by Frederick Kiesler, the Austrian-American polymath whose Endless House — never completed — fused fine art, architecture, furniture and lighting design into a bulbous, unstable whole. Several artists here echo Kiesler’s theme of the house as a reflection of the psychology of its inhabitants. None is more powerful than Rachel Whiteread’s sober image, made with white correction fluid, of a dwelling in East London: a preparatory drawing for a now lost sculpture crafted by filling the house with liquid concrete. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Jason Farago)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Joaquín Torres-García: The Arcadian Modern’ (through Feb. 15) Few artists can claim to have captured a revolution in thinking in a single image, but Joaquín Torres-García did. In 1934, Torres-Garcia (1874-1949) took a hard-won knowledge of European modernism from Paris back to his birthplace of Uruguay. He gave the transplanted movement a name — “The School of the South” — and designed for it a now-famous logo: the silhouette of the South American continent turned upside down and placed above the Tropic of Cancer, where North America was on conventional maps. And he explained the meaning: The South, as a font of creative energy, was the new North, or at least its equal. The image, and the spirit that produced it, can be found in MoMA’s career survey, the artist’s first major United States retrospective in four decades. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Cotter)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Ocean of Images: New Photography 2015’ (through March 20) To celebrate the 30th anniversary of its longstanding “New Photography” series, and perhaps to soften the news that the series will now change from annual to biennial, MoMa presents the largest and most cosmopolitan edition yet, with 19 artists and collectives, from 14 countries. The title refers to the infinite image blank called the Internet, and borrowed and manipulated images. So built-in delays in accessibility. Almost wherever you look you need to look twice, and consult a label, to fully understand what you’re seeing. The extra effort feels more fruitful in some cases than in others, with work by Yuki Kimura, Basim Magdy, Indre Serpytyte and Lieko Shiga particular worth lingering over. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Cotter)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Picasso Sculpture’ (through Feb. 7) Nearly a work of art in its own right, this magnificent show redefines Picasso’s achievement with the first full view here in 50 years of his astoundingly varied forays into sculpture. His materials, not his female loves, become the muses, and are different each time out. The basic plotline: After introducing sculptural abstraction and space, he spent about 50 years counting the ways that the figure was far from finished. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Scenes for a New Heritage: Contemporary Art from the Collection’ (through April 10) MoMA’s latest installation of works from its permanent collection fills the second-floor contemporary galleries with videos, installations, sculptures, drawings, prints and photographs produced by more than 30 artists during the past three decades. It’s an uneven, haphazard selection, but leaving artistic quality aside, its unusually optimistic-sounding title inadvertently raises a large and intriguing question: At a time when contemporary art seems to be spinning its wheels, what could a new heritage be? 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Johnson)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Soldier, Spectre, Shaman: The Figure and the Second World War’ (through March 20) MoMA usually stages the years after 1945 as a triumph of American abstraction, but this vital show affirms that the human figure never disappeared from art — especially not in battle-scarred Europe. With the end of the war, and the full revelation of the Holocaust, the human body became a sign of pathos and existential dread, notably in the fraught paintings of Francis Bacon and the spindly sculptures of Alberto Giacometti. The same was true of other European artists who received less American acclaim — such as Jean Fautrier, whose haunted “Otages” (“Hostages”) are far better known in his native France. The show is drawn entirely from the museum’s permanent collection, and its greatest surprise comes from Jan Müller, a German émigré in New York, whose ghoulish “Faust I” (1956) depicts the witches of Goethe’s epic as starved, traumatized wraiths. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Jason Farago)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Transmissions: Art in Eastern Europe and Latin America, 1960-1980’ (through Jan. 3) Visiting this big, spirited group show is like walking into a party of intriguing strangers. For every person you recognize, there are 10 you don’t know. One topic everyone’s talking about, at different intensities, is the anti-institutional politics that swept Europe and the Americas in the 1960s, and almost everyone speaks the language of Conceptualism. A product of an in-house research initiative called Contemporary and Modern Art Perspectives, or C-MAP, intended to expand MoMA’s narrow Paris-New York view of modernism, the show is very much the beginning rather than the end of a learning curve. But with curators exploring material new to them — just steps ahead of their audience — the show has a refreshing buzz of surprise as it takes the museum in a realistic new directions. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Cotter)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Activist New York’ (continuing) With a focus on activist tactics from the 17th century to the present, this exhibition — designed by the firm Pentagram — is a room-size onslaught of sensory stimulation, complete with videos, graphics and text. Told through 14 “moments” in New York activism, it includes a facsimile of the Flushing Remonstrance (1657), a petition for religious tolerance given to Peter Stuyvesant, director-general of the settlement, as well as contemporaneous objects, like a Dutch tobacco box, a Bible and “Meet the Activists” kiosks adjacent to each display, which identify activist groups working in the present. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Schwendener)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Folk City: New York and the Folk Music Revival’ (through Jan. 10) Handwritten Bob Dylan lyrics, well-strummed guitars from Lead Belly, Judy Collins and Odetta, concert posters, Sing Out! magazines, video from a raucous protest over banning folk singers from Washington Square, the street sign from Gerdes Folk City and plenty of songs on headphones evoke idealism and ambition in “Folk City.” The exhibition explores how New York City became a magnet for and a champion of rural styles and then the center of a pop-folk movement, from leftist “people’s music” efforts in the 1930s and ’40s, and the Red Scare reaction, to the civil rights rallies, coffeehouses and hootenannies of the folk revival at its peak. The tangle of tradition and change, earnestness and pop machinations are on view, along with the makings of a legacy that roots matter and a song can change the world. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Jon Pareles)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Jacob A. Riis: Revealing New York’s Other Half’ (through March 20) The Danish immigrant muckraker’s stark photographs, coupled with his documents from the New York Public Library and the Library of Congress, vividly portray the changing face of poverty since Riis exposed the poor to an oblivious public 125 years ago and remind viewers of the lingering challenges. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Sam Roberts)★ Neue Galerie: ‘Berlin Metropolis: 1918-1933’ (through Jan. 4) Another outstanding museum exhibition joins New York’s autumn roster with this ambitious, expertly designed and organized account of the rich cultural ferment of the fragile Weimar Republic. With many loans from Germany, it musters an egalitarian array of mediums into a poignant, detailed view of the tragic cost — less in human life than in immeasurable human potential land achievement — of Hitler’s devastating rise and rule and the shattering of a great city. 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street, 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org. (Smith)★ New Museum: ‘Jim Shaw: The End Is Here’ (through Jan. 10) In Mr. Shaw’s art, form follows polymorphous perversity. A virtuoso chameleon possessing an amazing range of skills, he does Surrealism, Pop Art, Abstract Expressionism, Conceptualism, cartoons and comic strips, psychedelic posters and myriad kitschy illustration styles all with his own endlessly inventive, comedic twist. His works range from huge to miniature and from political allegories to drawings documenting his dreams. Selections from his personal collections of found paintings and wacky religious materials add to the delirium. 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Whitney Museum of American Art: ‘Archibald Motley: Jazz Age Modernist’ (through Jan. 17) Let’s take it as a good omen that the first solo show to appear in the Whitney’s new home is a career retrospective of a still understudied artist. Motley (1891-1981) was born in New Orleans and lived in Chicago, where he painted the cultural life of the city’s African-American neighborhood known as Bronzeville, portraying it with an eye for calibrations of class and race, and with a sense of his own conflicted position within its context. The show is modest in size but has features that many larger, sexier exhibitions lack: an affecting narrative, a distinctive atmosphere, and a complex and troubling political and moral tenor. 99 Gansevoort Street, at Washington Street, 212-570-3600, whitney.org. (Cotter)★ Whitney Museum of American Art: ‘Collected by Thea Westreich Wagner and Ethan Wagner’ (through March 6) Two of New York’s most dedicated explorers of new art set an important example by refusing the auction or private-museum route and giving almost all of their large collection to a museum. Their generous gift both signifies and adds to the Whitney’s growing stature, especially going forward, as it is integrated into the museum’s rich holdings. This first sampling is quite rewarding. 99 Gansevoort Street, at Washington Street, 212-570-3600, whitney.org. (Smith)★ Whitney Museum of American Art: ‘Frank Stella: A Retrospective’ (through Feb. 7) This grand, high-spirited, slightly overstuffed exhibition pays overdue tribute to a prominent American artist whose 60-year odyssey through and beyond painting began in this city. It further anoints the Whitney’s new building: The show could never have been pulled off at its old uptown address. And its ingenious installation — alternately dazzling, oppressive and nuts — resounds with stimulating clashes of color, style and process that bring a new unity to his contentious achievement. 99 Gansevoort Street, at Washington Street, 212-570-3600, whitney.org. (Smith)★ Pierre Klossowski (closes on Saturday) The nine awkward but engrossing specimens in this exhibition date from the 1970s and 1980s, and many feature Klossowski’s aggressed but steadfast heroine Roberte in compromising positions: trussed on parallel bars, or splayed out on the lap of a medieval warrior. (The model for Roberte was Klossowski’s wife, Denise.) Though Sade was an influence on his drawings, Klossowski saw sex as neither a joy nor a punishment; it was a ritualized encounter, governed by complex rules of hospitality. It is an unmissable show, though you will want to leave the kids at home for this one. Gladstone Gallery, 130 East 64th Street, Manhattan, 212-753-2200, gladstonegallery.com. (Jason Farago)★ ‘Swedish Wooden Toys’ (through Feb. 28) This presentation of more than 300 playthings from the late 16th to the early 21st centuries will be catnip for anyone into antique toys. The show features diminutive vehicles of all kinds from old-time wagons, trains and fully-rigged sailboats, to futuristic cars and a rocket ship. There are naturalistic and anthropomorphic animals, weapons, puzzles, games, dollhouses and architectural construction kits. While many of these items were produced by big manufacturers like BRIO and Playsam, many others are one-of-a-kind wonders like a miniature baking set from around 1900 that includes rolling pins, spatulas and other implements all lovingly carved from wood and fitting into a tray just eight inches long. Bard Graduate Center Gallery, 18 West 86th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3011, bgc.bard.edu. (Johnson)★ Gil Batle: ‘Hatched in Prison’ (through Jan. 9) Mr. Batle, 53, served a total of 20 years in five California prisons for fraud and forgery. Now living in the Philippines, he has been recounting his experiences in an unlikely medium. Using a high-speed dental drill, he carves miniature narratives of prison life into the surfaces of ostrich eggs. The 19 examples in this show, all made in the past two years, are amazing for their meticulous craftsmanship and detailed story telling. Ricco Maresca, 529 West 20th Street, Chelsea, 212-627-4819, riccomaresca.com. (Johnson)★ Annu Palakunnathu Matthew: ‘Indelible Memories’ (through Jan. 16) Ms. Matthew was born in England to Indian parents, spent her adolescence and early adulthood in India, and has lived in the United States since. The mostly album-size photographs in this compact but far-ranging gallery survey are about the intensities and confusions of a cultural mixing that makes the artist, psychologically, both a global citizen and an outsider, at home and in transit, wherever she is. And it’s about photography as document and fiction: souvenir, re-enactment and imaginative projection. A beautiful show that could too easily slip away. sepiaEYE, 547 West 27th Street, Chelsea, 212-967-0738, sepiaeye.com. (Cotter)★ Robert Ryman (through June 18) For nearly 60s years, the Minimalist painter Robert Ryman has had few equals when it comes to doing more with less. White has been his primary, if not quite his only, color, the square his typical format. And yet within these seeming limitations a remarkably fecund and resonant body of work has evolved as demonstrated with unusual clarity (and in natural light) by this small but comprehensive exhibition. Dia: Chelsea, 535 West 22nd Street, 212-989-5566, diaart.org. (Smith)★ Giorgio Morandi (through June 25) The Italian master of modern still life, and closet abstractionist, is celebrated in a large show devoted foremost to his painting from the 1930s, which are not well known in this country. They reveal a period of struggle during which the artist had settled on what to paint, how to paint was still very much up for grabs. Joel Meyerowitz’s large color photographs of Morandi’s still life objects – which he sometimes altered – are also on view. Reservations are required. Center for Italian Modern Art, 421 Broome Street, near Crosby Street, SoHo, 646-370-3596, italianmodernart.org. (Smith)★ ‘For a New World to Come: Experiments in Japanese Art and Photography, 1968-1979’ (through Jan. 10) This exceptionally informative exhibition presents photographs, photography books, paintings, sculptures and videos produced by 29 Japanese artists during a decade of ideological disillusionment following the utopian excitement of the 1960s. Most of the works are black and white and driven by abstract concepts, with many focused on the nature of photography itself. It’s a dry show, but it’s fascinating for its revelation of memes and trends that continue to resonate in photographic art around the world. Japan Society, 333 East 47th Street, Manhattan, 212-832-1155, japansociety.org. (Johnson)★ Hollis Frampton: ‘ADSVMVS ABSVMVS’ (through Jan. 10) The filmmaker, photographer, essayist, poet, teacher, fabulist and proto-digital pioneer Hollis Frampton (1936-1984) eased off on producing photography after the 1960s but came back to it again at the end of his life. His final work in the medium, a portfolio of 14 pictures, makes up this exhibition, which is also his New York gallery solo debut. The premise of the series is that photography is a kind of embalming mechanism for images, with a counterpart in the everyday world: a garter snake’s shed skin; edible dried fish; pressed flowers. Each item is shot against a dark ground, and accompanied by a paragraph stating its find-spot along with mixes of description, opinion, folklore and art-lore. The result is zanily moving memento mori. Room East, 41 Orchard Street, Lower East Side, 212-226-7109, roomeast.com. (Cotter)★ ‘Painting Tranquility: Masterworks by Vilhelm Hammershoi From SMK — The National Gallery of Denmark’ (through Feb. 27) One of Denmark’s most celebrated artists, Hammershoi (1864-1916) was known as “the painter of tranquil rooms.” This beautiful show of 24 paintings includes pictures in severely muted colors of women in nearly empty rooms suffused by atmospheres of mystery and loneliness; misty, gray cityscapes, devoid of people, that are like anxiety dreams; and tenderly unflinching portraits of the artist’s wife, Ida. Scandinavia House, 58 Park Avenue, at 38th Street, 212-779-3587, scandinaviahouse.org. (Johnson)Jeppe Hein: ‘Please Touch the Art’ (through April 2016) People with small children likely will enjoy Mr. Hein’s three-part show. If it’s a hot day, the kids will rush to be drenched by “Appearing Rooms,” which has water spouting up unpredictably from a square platform of metal grating. Youngsters as well as grown-ups also may be fascinating by the perceptually confounding “Mirror Labyrinth NY,” which consists of mirror-surfaced planks of stainless steel in varying heights planted in the grass in a spiral formation. Meanwhile, guardians can rest on one of 16 fanciful, shocking orange park benches while their young charges clamber about on the furniture’s surrealistically altered parts. Brooklyn Bridge Park, 334 Furman Street, Fulton Ferry, Brooklyn, publicartfund.org. (Johnson)Dia:Beacon: Robert Irwin: ‘Excursus: Homage to the Square³' (through May 2017) A walk-in maze with walls of white scrim lit by color-filtered fluorescent tubes, Mr. Irwin’s “Excursus: Homage to the Square³” had its debut in 1998 at the Dia Center for the Arts in Chelsea. It was so popular that the curators elected to keep it on view a year longer than its originally planned run. It’s reincarnation here is similarly transporting, if not as thoroughly as the original was. But to experience it at Dia:Beacon along Minimalist works by other artists that encourage heightened perceptual attention to the here and now is as spiritually calming as it is historically illuminating. 3 Beekman Street, Beacon, 845-440-0100, diaart.org. (Johnson)★ ‘Enigmas: The Art of Bada Shanren (1626–1705)' (through Jan. 3) Beginning next January, the Freer Gallery of Art in Washington will go dark for a year and a half while it’s 1923 building gets an overhaul. Its Chinese painting collection will be especially missed. And as if intent on leaving a potent memory of it, the museum has served up a sparkler of final show, centered on a charismatic 17th-century superstar whose life encompassed dramatic shifts of fortune, and whose art holds mysteries yet to be understood. 1050 Independence Avenue SW, 202-633-1000, asia.si.edu. (Cotter)★ Museum of Fine Arts Boston: ‘Made in the Americas: The New World Discovers Asia’ (through Feb. 15) One of the great gifts that multiculturalist thinking gave us was freedom from the tyranny of purity. Simply put, there’s no such thing, at least not in art. Everything is a mix, and this has always been true. Globalism, which we take to be so 21st century, is as old as the hills. In this smallish show those hills encompass the Andes, the Alps, the Appalachians and Mount Fuji between the early 16th to the late 18th century. The main setting includes large swaths of North, Central and South America being colonized by various European powers, all of which had lucrative commercial links to Asia, and they were bringing Asia with them to the New World. The result: some of the most brilliant American art ever. 465 Huntington Avenue, Boston, 617-267-9300, mfa.org. (Cotter)★ National Museum of African Art: ‘Conversations: African and African American Artists in Dialogue’ (through Jan. 24) For its 50th anniversary, this museum has brilliantly thread together work from two sources: its own holdings in African material and the Camille O. and William H. Cosby Jr. collection of African-American art. The Cosby collection, weighted toward canonical figures like Romare Bearden and Charles White, will bring in the crowds, but it is the curators and museum itself, which is in a period of renaissance, that have made the show rise well above predictability. Smithsonian Institution, 950 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, 202-633-4600, africa.si.edu. (Cotter)★ Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art (ongoing) The skilled refurbishing of the Atheneum’s storied Morgan Memorial Building reveals as never before the museum’s splendors. The Great Hall is triple-hung with European paintings encircled by a spirited art-historical Cliff Notes from Egypt to Florence. On the second floor the fabulous Cabinet of Art and Curiosities leads to even more often outstanding paintings – Baroque to Modernism – accompanied by an array of decorative objects, especially porcelains. 600 Main Street, Hartford, Conn., 860-278-2670, thewadsworth.org. (Smith)★ Georg Baselitz: ‘Visit from Hokusai’ (closes on Saturday) Not given much thought to the painter Georg Baselitz of late? This beautiful show of large diptychs in ink and watercolor on paper will make you think again. In each, the German Neo-Expressionist has paired one of his versions of a wonderful ink self-portrait by the great Japanese master, with a reprise of some (usually figurative) motif from his own repertory. Part homage, part self-deprecating review, these marvelously assured, emotionally felt works also have the effect of an artist’s slide lecture, compressed. Bravo. Gagosian Gallery, 980 Madison Avenue, at 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-2313, gagosian.com. (Smith)Meriem Bennani: ‘Gradual Kingdom’ (ends on Sunday) Ms. Bennani’s first show at Signal might not be as funny as her other projects, which have appeared on sites like Instagram. Instead, this exhibition focuses on her hometown, Rabat, Morocco, and how the area has nearly been depleted of sand, which has been exported to build artificial islands in the Middle East. The centerpiece of the show is a colorful video projected onto pyramids that have been mounted on opposite walls. It serves as a gentle reminder of the longstanding representation of Morocco as an exotic land, now affected by its leaders’ desires to make the country a player in the world economy. Signal, 260 Johnson Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 347-746-8457, ssiiggnnaall.com. (Schwendener)★ ‘Corruption: Everybody Knows…’ (closes on Wednesday) E-flux began in 1998 with an emailed news release for a one-night group show in Chinatown. Since then, it has grown to include a wide-reaching distribution system for art world information, a monthly journal and it’s become one of the few galleries in the city to present politically minded global fare consistently. Its current show, organized by Natasha Ginwala, will be the last in the Manhattan space — the whole operation is moving to Brooklyn in 2016 — and is very much in the signature e-flux think-piece mode. eflux Gallery, 311 East Broadway, at Grand Street, Chinatown, e-flux.com. (Cotter)★ Vaginal Davis: ‘Come On Daughter Save Me’ (closes on Sunday) The self-described intersex artist Vaginal Davis is a performer, writer, editor, composer and painter, and as this solo show confirms, a sculptor. The 16 wall reliefs here, while small, give the term multimedia a serious stretch, each having been made from (to quote the exhibition’s checklist) “clay, stucco fragments, wet n wild brickhouse nail varnish, neon nail lacquer, Rival de Loop nylon nail enamel, hydrogen peroxide, glycerin, witch hazel, Pam, Aqua Net extra-strength hair spray and Jean Naté perfume.” An audio recording sets the work in a bracingly feminist, prophetically anti-patriarchal narrative context. Invisible-Exports, 89 Eldridge Street, Lower East Side, 212-226-5447, invisible-exports.com. (Cotter)Alex Ebstein: ‘Form/Fit’ (closes on Sunday) A young painter adept with yoga mats (of all things) makes her New York debut in the new downtown gallery of a former and a current employee of the Skarstedt Gallery venture. Ms. Ebstein exploits the mats’ bumpy texture and colors with compositions that have one foot in design (think soft Formica), one in 1950s biomorphism and a third in present interests in worldly abstraction and painting-without-paint. She paints patterns on a few of her cutout shapes, and these also look promising. Cuevas Tilleard, 142 Henry Street, at Rutgers Street, Lower East Side, 917-868-1225, cuevastilleard.com. (Smith)‘Expanding Perceptions: Jack Goldstein, Beverly Pepper, Deborah Remington’ (ends on Wednesday) If you’ve often had a feeble if not negative response to the work of these three artists, the artist and curator Andy Onderdonx is out to revise — and expand — your experience. He has brought together eight interesting, sometimes little-known examples of their efforts, creating an amazing crossfire of techniques, palettes and imagery. A certain shininess, whether real or illusive, has something to do with it, and that’s not a criticism. Creative curatorial thinking is alive and well here. Marlborough Chelsea, 545 West 25th Street, 212-463-8634, marlboroughchelsea.com. (Smith)★ Sheila Hicks: ‘Ode to Roy Davis’ (closes on Wednesday) Prior to going private, this storied gallery pays homage to its founder and longtime guiding light (who died last year) with a show devoted to the small but powerful weavings called “minimes” by their maker, the veteran fiber artist Sheila Hicks. Like miniatures, these pieces reward close study and in their intimacy, limited format and expressive variety sustain comparison with the small still lifes of the Italian painter Giorgio Morandi. Davis & Langdale Company, 231 East 60th Street, Upper East Side, 212-838-0333, davisandlangdale.com. (Roberta Smith)★ Joseph Kosuth: ‘Agnosia, an Illuminated Ontology’ (ends on Saturday) A pioneer of 1960s-style Conceptualism, Mr. Kosuth has consistently insisted on the primacy of language as a constructor of reality over the course of his 50-year career. This philosophically provocative exhibition gathers together more than 40 works from 1965 to 2015 that feature electrically illuminated words, phrases and sentences in a visually sumptuous installation designed by the artist. Sean Kelly Gallery, 475 10th Avenue, at 36th Street, Chelsea, 212-239-1181, skny.com. (Johnson)★ Giorgio Morandi (closes on Saturday) This exhibition of 20 paintings concentrates on the artist’s mature years (1950-1963) when his experimentation with the ways of painting his beloved still lifes continued, but subtly, and his manipulations of space, scale and suggestion were especially rich. The display culminates in a wonderful theme-and-variations sequence: four canvases from 1952 that depict a nearly identical arrangement of objects. David Zwirner, 537 West 20th Street, Chelsea, 212-517-8677, davidzwirner.com. (Smith)Seth: ‘Nothing Lasts’ (closes on Saturday) The acclaimed comic-book artist Seth (real name, Gregory Gallant) is a poet of the ordinary and the downbeat, a nostalgic chronicler of regret, disappointment, confusion and occasional moments of happiness. This enchanting exhibition features 80 original drawings for two chapters from an autobiography called “Nothing Lasts.” Adam Baumgold Gallery, 60 East 66th Street, Manhattan, 212-861-7338, adambaumgoldgallery.com. (Johnson)★ H.C. Westermann: ‘See America First: Works from 1953-1980’ (ends on Saturday) No one who cares about contemporary art should miss this terrific exhibition of sculptures, drawings, prints and illustrated letters by H. C. Westermann (1922–1981). He once said that he wanted his constructions to look as if they’d been made by a mad cabinetmaker, and they do. Made with consummate craftsmanship, his constructions mainly in wood are by turns funny, philosophical and politically vehement. He was a great American original. Venus, 980 Madison Avenue, at 76th Street, 212-980-0700, venusovermanhattan.com. (Johnson)Advertisement