In the Night/Adam Is/Symphony in C
National Theater
Dec. 20-28George Balanchine’s iconic “Symphony in C,” which the choreographer set to music by Bizet in 1947, helped solidify his reputation; it appears here alongside Jerome Robbins’s classic “In the Night,” a series of romantic pas de deux. Those works will appear together alongside Aszure Barton’s “Adam Is” in this Christmas triple bill. The latter work was created this year; it features music by Curtis Macdonald, costumes by Michelle Jank and video by Tobin del Cuore. A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Los Modernos
Museo Nacional de Arte
Through April 3This exhibition offers an overview of painting in the 20th century, with a focus on major players from Europe and Mexico. Artists include Francis Bacon, Diego Rivera, Gerardo Murillo, Picasso and Matisse. Some lesser-known Latin American artists like David Alfaro Siqueiros and José Clemente Orozco are also on view. The exhibition includes around 140 artworks, many of which are on loan from the Museum of Fine Arts in Lyon, France. Sunburn Festival
Vagator Beach
Dec. 27-30Martin Garrix; the Belgian D.J. pair Dimitri Vegas and Like Mike; and David Guetta are among the headline acts who will appear in Vagator, a beach resort on India’s west coast, for this three-day electronic dance music festival. Some emerging acts from India and abroad will appear. The festival also offers activities like bungee jumping and team sports. Nothing New. Abstraction Still Pending.
Markus Lüpertz at the Bode Museum
Through Feb. 7The German artist Markus Lüpertz — a writer, musician, sculptor and painter best known for gloomy works that teeter between figurative painting and abstraction — has created a series of pieces inspired by Ludwig Münstermann’s statue of Apollo, one of the works in the collection. (The Bode Museum, on Berlin’s Museumsinsel, houses significant holdings of sculpture, Byzantine art and coins). Small fine works that the artist created in response to that work are scattered around the museum, as are some of his bronze statues. La Traviata
Schiller Theater
Through Dec. 31The director Dieter Dorn’s production of Verdi’s “La Traviata,” about the lovelorn and doomed courtesan, Violetta Valéry, makes its debut this month. The conductor Daniel Barenboim will lead the orchestra. Sonya Yoncheva plays Violetta and Abdellah Lasri plays her lover, Alfredo. Mr. Barenboim will exercise his other musical muscle — piano playing — in two concerts with the opera’s orchestra, on Dec. 21 and Jan. 13. Masters of the Everyday: Dutch Artists in the Age of Vermeer
Buckingham Palace
Through Feb. 14This exhibition places around 30 17th-century Dutch masterpieces from the palace’s collection on view. Artists include Gerrit Dou, Jan Steen, Rembrandt and Vermeer, whose “Lady at the Virginals With a Gentleman or ‘The Music Lesson”’ is showing. For centuries the work was misidentified as one from a minor artist, and sold into the Royal Family’s collection under the reign of George III. It was not attributed to Vermeer until the mid-1800s. The exhibition focuses on Dutch painters’ ability to render mundane activities, like washing up, working and chopping vegetables.Korean Art 1965-2015; Korean and Japanese Modern Artists in the Korean Peninsula: 1890s to 1960s
Fukuoka Asian Art Museum
Through April 5; Feb. 2This museum will mark the 50th anniversary of diplomatic ties between Japan and South Korea with two major exhibitions. “Korean Art 1965-2015” showcases around 20 works by Korean contemporaries like the mid-century abstract artist Kim Whanki and the multimedia artist Cho Duck Hyun. “Korean and Japanese Modern Artists in the Korean Peninsula,” meanwhile, focuses on paintings produced by Korean and Japanese artists who traveled in the region. It explores how each culture’s artistic traditions influenced the other. Hansel and Gretel
Bozar
Through Dec. 22The Chicago-based troupe Manual Cinema will stage a new fairy-tale opera here this month. The group uses projectors, puppets and silhouettes to tell stories, which they often write themselves. Alongside La Monnaie’s orchestra and choir, they turn their attention to Humperdinck’s 1893 adaptation of the Grimm fairytale. (Humperdinck’s opera is also getting a major new production at the Dutch National Opera in Amsterdam, where the rising director Lotte de Beer’s production runs through the end of the month.) Great Opera Hits
Sydney Opera House
Dec. 26-March 20Some of the top extracts from the opera canon — like Puccini’s “Turandot,” Verdi’s “La Traviata” and Bizet’s “Carmen” — will get full-throated renditions in this concert series, which features singers accompanied on the piano. The company’s up-and-coming stars Natalie Aroyan, Anna Dowsley, Anna Yun, Simon Kim and Luke Gabbedy will perform on dates through March 20. Guy Noble and Thomas Johnson take turns on the piano. Habitat; Till It’s Gone
Istanbul Modern
Dec. 23-through springTwo exhibitions here will focus on the intersection between the environment and art. “Habitat” includes work by 13 photographers who focus on how natural and built environments shape our everyday lives. “Till It’s Gone,” meanwhile, will include work that deals with ecological issues. That exhibition opens Jan. 13. From Dec. 23 to Jan. 12, it will get a special “preview” when Yoko Ono’s “Ex It” installation, which features coffin-like boxes with trees sprouting from them, goes on view. 