By LAUREL GRAEBERDEC. 18, 2015
Daisy, never mind that bicycle built for two. At the New Victory Theater, you can look awfully sweet on a bicycle built for 11.Well, not exactly a bicycle, but the enormous Gantry Bike, made up of bicycle wheels and parts and ladderlike steel frames. This 22-foot-tall contraption functions as a stage, a big top and a fantasy bicycle shop in “Pedal Punk,” the new show from Cirque Mechanics.It’s tempting to say that Chris Lashua, this troupe’s founder, has reinvented the wheel. (He and Sean Riley are both credited as machine designers.) Although “Pedal Punk” includes many conventional circus acts, each centers in some unusual way on that basic element of transportation. And while the production showcases the company’s love of gadgetry, last seen at the New Victory in “Boom Town,” it remains determinedly low-tech. As representatives of steampunk, the science-fiction subgenre embracing 19th-century industrialism, its performers look as if they could have walked off the set of “The Knick.” (Lisa Ragatz designed the costumes.)And what a talented bunch they are. Wes Hatfield stands inside a gigantic hoop, his arms and legs like spokes, as he rocks and even flips it. In “BMX,” Blake Hicks cavorts so expertly with an ordinary bicycle that his body becomes the machine and the bike an accessory. And Nick and Wendy Harden, a married couple, look sweet on a cycle built for one. Their unicycle moves include jumping rope and her standing on his head as he pedals.AdvertisementThe Gantry itself stars in other segments, like “Siren Cycle,” in which Nata Ibragimov, Lauren Stark and Lindsey Covarrubias perform aerial acts on one of its huge, pedal-driven discs. (Left, Ms. Covarrubias, top, and Ms. Stark in “Penny Farthing.”) “Gantry Trampoline” features four cast members, including the striking contortionist Windu Ben Sayles, flying from trampoline to Gantry like surging electrons.But mechanical wizardry isn’t all that sets “Pedal Punk” apart. Choreographed by Aloysia Gavre, the performers move with dancers’ exactitude to Michael Picton’s pulsating score. And Jan Damm, an expert juggler and the show’s de facto ring master, demonstrates a silent-film star’s comic finesse in “Bike Race,” an audience-participation skit whose plot I won’t reveal.A recent performance also enlisted the audience in singing “Happy Birthday” to the New Victory, which, now 20, long ago took off its own training wheels to ride confidently to the forefront of New York’s cultural scene.Advertisement(Through Jan. 3 at 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan; 646-223-3010, newvictory.org. This week: Friday, Tuesday and Wednesday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 5 p.m. The 5 p.m. show is autism-friendly.)Alvin Ailey Family Matinee Series (Saturday) Children can take their first steps as dancegoers by following the leaps and bounds of the members of Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater in these programs, which are followed by question-and-answer sessions with the dancers. Each family matinee concludes with Alvin Ailey’s own “Revelations,” the troupe’s signature work, inspired by spirituals. (Through Jan. 2.) Saturdays at 2 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Continuing) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing Middle Eastern artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (around 1900) where young archaeologists can dress in costume and portray early-20th-century immigrants to Palestine. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Ballerina Swan’ (Saturday through Wednesday) A lot of dancers compete for the opportunity to dance the lead in “Swan Lake,” but Sophie has special qualifications: She’s actually a swan. Revived by New York City Children’s Theater, this production is based on the picture book of the same title by Allegra Kent, former principal with New York City Ballet. Geared to ages 3 to 8, it tells the story of Sophie, who resides in Central Park but has bigger dreams. The 50-minute show features Tchaikovsky’s music, choreography by Michael McGowan, a book by Barbara Zinn Krieger and puppetry from Phantom Limb. (Through Jan. 3.) Saturdays and Sundays at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m.; Mondays through Wednesdays at 11 a.m.; Theater 3, 311 West 43rd Street, Clinton, 646-250-1178, nycchildrenstheater.org.‘Beauty & the Beast’ (Saturday and Sunday) The music of Jules Massenet accompanies this version of the French fairy tale, adapted by Nicolas Coppola, artistic director of Puppetworks. While most of the characters are played by marionettes, the Beast is appropriately huge and intimidating: He’s a grown-up. The show, which closes this weekend, also promises some interesting effects, including animated vines in the enchanted wood that close in on the Prince while he’s traveling there. At 12:30 and 2:30 p.m., Puppetworks, 338 Sixth Avenue, at Fourth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-965-3391, puppetworks.org.‘Brooklyn Sewers: What’s Up Down There?’ (Through May 29) When it comes to subterranean infrastructure projects, New York City’s subway system seems to get all the attention. But a group of teenage curators at the Brooklyn Historical Society would like to introduce you to another underground marvel: Brooklyn’s sewer system, one of the city’s oldest and most extensive infrastructure projects. This exhibition explores engineering conundrums and courtroom battles and tells the story of the sewer system through photographs, drawings and maps. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.‘Carnival of the Animals’ (Saturday) The Miller Theater is giving children a chance to forget about Santa’s reindeer for a while and concentrate on some other creatures, like the lion, the elephant and the kangaroo. They’re among the subjects of Saint-Saëns’s “Carnival of the Animals,” a musical production that the Miller intends to turn into a holiday tradition for listeners 6 and older. The piece, presented with Ogden Nash’s humorous verse and Lake Simons’s puppetry, will be performed with other works, including Tchaikovsky’s “Dance of the Sugar Plum Fairy” and Peter Yarrow’s “Light One Candle.” At 3 and 7 p.m., Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com.‘A Charlie Brown Christmas’ (Saturday and Sunday) What could be better than singing along with Schroeder on a toy piano? How about singing along with the Rob Schwimmer Trio? That ensemble will provide live accompaniment when the Metropolitan Museum of Art screens the film classic “A Charlie Brown Christmas,” now 50 years old. After the movie, in which Charlie Brown, Linus, Lucy, Snoopy and the rest of the Peanuts gang learn the true meaning of the holidays, the Met will hold a seasonal singalong. Children under 4 are not permitted, but everyone else is welcome at this movie-and-music celebration. Saturday at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m.; Sunday at 1 and 3 p.m.; Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org/tickets.Advertisement‘A Charlie Brown Christmas’ (Friday through Sunday) Linus, Lucy and the rest of the “Peanuts” gang have returned — but to a new location — for what has become an annual tradition: the Pig Brooch Theater Company’s staging of the musical “A Charlie Brown Christmas.” The troupe’s production of this tale, closing this weekend, in which Charlie learns the real meaning of the holidays, is a live re-creation of the original “Peanuts” television special and includes a jazz trio playing Vince Guaraldi’s score. Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 1, 4 and 7 p.m.; Redwood Studios, 55 Ninth Street, near Smith Street, Gowanus, Brooklyn, brownpapertickets.com/event/2433028. Advance purchase is recommended.‘A Christmas Carol’ (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) It’s time to haunt old Ebenezer again. Literally Alive Children’s Theater, which turns books into shows, takes on a holiday classic in this musical production, by Brenda Bell and Michael Sgouros (with additional music by Mr. Sgouros’s daughter, Emily). One bonus children may enjoy: A canine role in the production is played by a real dog. And on Sundays, before accompanying Scrooge on his travels with the Ghosts of Christmas Past, Present and Future, young theatergoers can participate in a preshow workshop (starting one hour before the curtain) to learn more about the literary source and make a related craft. (Through Dec. 30.) Friday and Tuesday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 3 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; Monday at 1 p.m.; Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, scroogeinthevillage.com.‘Christmas in New York’ (Saturday and Sunday) Wonderful window displays are one of the first signs that the holiday season has arrived in the city, and from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. this weekend, young visitors will be invited to create their own three-dimensional versions in this program at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. On Sunday only, from 2 to 4 p.m., they can also make silk-screen prints with holiday motifs. On Saturday only, at 2 and 3:30 p.m., children can enjoy a story often presented at this time of year: “Peter and the Wolf,” when the choreographer and performer Cartier Williams dances excerpts from his interpretation. And since holiday cheer is for animals, too, the museum will present a drop-in reading program on Sunday at noon in which the author Julie Salamon and the illustrator Jill Weber will share “Cat in the City,” their book about a lovable stray and his adventures in Greenwich Village. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Connected Worlds’ (continuing) Human choices and actions have an impact on the world’s ecosystems, but people usually can’t see the effects as they happen. That isn’t true in this new permanent exhibition in the renovated Great Hall of the New York Hall of Science. Consisting of huge screens (one is 38 feet tall), the show depicts six interconnected environments with a shared water supply. With the help of technology that responds to gestures, “Connected Worlds” allows children to use simple motions to plant, harvest, cut trees, create clouds and make other changes in the projected landscapes — and see how the native flora and fauna fare. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.‘The Discovery of King Tut’ (Through May 1) The Egyptian pharaoh Tutankhamen died when he was only a teenager, but the magnificent riches of his tomb have made him immortal in the public imagination. This touring show at Premier Exhibitions 5th Avenue recreates Tut’s tomb as it was when the British archaeologist Howard Carter discovered it in 1922. The display includes reconstructions of the tomb’s three chambers and reproductions of more than 1,000 treasures and ritual objects, accompanied by video documentaries and texts. 417 Fifth Avenue, at 38th Street, tutnyc.com.‘Evergreen Express’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) There’s a lot of locomotion going on in the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden at the New York Botanical Garden, and it’s all centered on trees. In this celebration, part of the botanical garden’s Holiday Train Show, children can investigate trails in search of evergreen trees and shrubs. At the Discovery Center Depot, they can investigate evergreen plant parts, make pressings of a conifer specimen and create a miniature pine sachet. Other activities include making an evergreen puppet, patterned after the work of the master artisan Ralph Lee, and putting on puppet shows in the Woodland Theater. (Through Jan. 24.) Weekdays (except Mondays), 1:30 to 5:30 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 6:30 p.m.; Sundays, 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.‘Fancy Nancy: Splendiferous Christmas’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company, which gave eager young audiences “Fancy Nancy: The Musical,” is now reviving its other show starring that inimitable little diva. Based on the book written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, “Fancy Nancy: Splendiferous Christmas” deals with Nancy’s fancy expectations for the holiday season. With a book by Cara Lustik, music by Randy Klein and lyrics by Matthew Hardy, the production revolves around Nancy’s purchase of a grand decoration for the top of the Christmas tree, and what ensues when her dreams don’t turn out quite as planned. (Through Dec. 27.) At 1 p.m., Theater at St. Jean, 184 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org. (Tickets are limited at the 1 p.m. shows.)‘Frolic!’ at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan (Through Dec. 31) You’re never too young to rock — and this space proves it. A new pop-up installation at the museum, “Frolic!” uses rock music and a themed décor to stimulate sensory play and learning in visitors ages 5 and under. In addition to a stage, a pretend ticket booth and ’70s-style props — including a Volkswagen mini-van to climb into — the 1,500-square-foot area has programs of workshops and live performances to help little ones get into the groove. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’ (Friday through Wednesday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Monday through Wednesday at 2 and 4:30 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.Advertisement‘The Greatest Pirate Holiday Spectacularrr!’ (Thursday) My, that Scrooge was a scurvy knave: repossessing houseboats, stealing ugly sweaters, hiding his ill-gotten gains in a litter box. You’re probably thinking that Charles Dickens must be rolling in his grave over this, and he probably is — with laughter. Off Sides Entertainment, which also produced “The Greatest Pirate Story (N)ever Told,” is reviving this show, which combines a parody of piracy and “A Christmas Carol” with audience-assisted improvisation and a variation on the children’s fill-in-the-blank game Mad Libs. (Daily through Jan. 3, except for Christmas Day, Dec. 26 and New Year’s Day.) At 11 a.m., Theater 54, 244 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 866-811-4111, greatestpiratestory.com.Hands-On Nano Demos (Saturday) Forget about thinking big; this free event is all about thinking small, as Sony Wonder Technology Lab offers experiments and workshops exploring the properties, structures and materials involved in nanotechnology. Recommended for ages 6 and older, these demonstrations are enhanced by the lab’s permanent exhibit on nanotechnology’s applications in fields like medicine, transportation and fashion. From 2 to 4 p.m., 550 Madison Avenue, at 56th Street, Manhattan, 212-833-8100, sonywondertechlab.com.‘The Hunger Games: The Exhibition’ (Through Jan. 3) What enterprising 12- or 13-year-old wouldn’t like to foment a little rebellion? Such a visitor can do so vicariously at this attraction at Discovery Times Square, stepping into the role of Katniss Everdeen, the teenage heroine of “The Hunger Games” and the ultimate leader of the resistance against her nation’s totalitarian government. Based on the Lionsgate film adaptations of Suzanne Collins’s novels, the show includes costumes and artifacts from the movies, as well as re-creations of Katniss’s journey and interactive, role-playing elements like a gamesmaker’s table and a chance to learn and practice stunt choreography. 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com, thehungergamesexhibition.com.‘If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home’ (Through Jan. 17) Maps present facts, but they can also engage the imagination. This new exhibition at the Children’s Museum of the Arts explores the intersection of cartography and art, showing work that expands upon, redefines or simply refers to maps. Among the eight artists represented are Matthew Cusik, who makes collages from map fragments; Joyce Kosloff, who layers images and textured paint onto maps; Loren Munk, who adds plaques of color and information to street maps; and Nikki Rosato, who subtracts from maps, cutting away all but roads and rivers. In the museum’s Cynthia C. Wainwright Gallery, 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.‘Jean-Michel Cousteau’s Secret Ocean’ (Through Jan. 10) Ever encounter a goby or a blenny? How about a Christmas tree worm? These small marine species, often unnoticed and uncelebrated, are among the stars of this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History. Filmed by Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau, and Holly Lohuis, a marine biologist, the film captures 30 species that are among the tiniest to inhabit the seas. Daily schedule: Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Kids ‘N Comedy: ‘The Christmakwanzukah Show’ (Sunday) The class clown gets applause, not detention, at this series, in which tween and teenage comics perform stand-up. At this show, the young comedians will consider all that’s laughable about the holidays, whether it’s that horrible sweater from Grandma or the carolers who won’t stay on key. The material is recommended for children 9 and older, but there’s no need to worry about appropriateness (profanity is banned) or knock-knock jokes (this crew is sophisticated). Reservations required. At 1 p.m., Gotham Comedy Club, 208 West 23rd Street, Chelsea, 212-877-6115, kidsncomedy.com.Kompot (Sunday) Kompot is a Russian term for a dessert beverage made up of different fruits, and this series presented by FolksbieneRU, a Russian division of National Yiddish Theater Folksbiene, aims for a combination of sweet ingredients, too. This inaugural program, in Russian and English and created especially for Russian Jewish families with children ages 2 through 8, will involve cooking a family kompot, making a klezmer band, taking part in an art workshop and hearing a concert by the Golem klezmer band. At 11 a.m., Museum of Jewish Heritage, 36 Battery Place, Lower Manhattan, 646-437-4200, mjhnyc.org.‘LARD: Life’s a Real Dream’ (Saturday) This show about LARD, the concept, has nothing to do with lard, the substance. An acronym for “Life’s a Real Dream,” “LARD” is the title of a rollicking musical production starring Lard Dog, who also happens not to be a dog. The alter ego of the multimedia artist Steven Erdman, Lard is a gregarious out-of-this-world character who has flown in from the planet Belopio on a giant pretzel. He and his Band of Shy perform this hourlong entertainment, which includes cartoon graphics and a pretzel toss. Shows this month also feature a holiday singalong and surprise giveaways for children. (Through Jan. 2.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, houseoflard.com.AdvertisementJoanie Leeds and the Nightlights (Sunday) Her band may be called the Nightlights, but there’s nothing soporific about the music. Ms. Leeds and her group will perform child-friendly, dance-worthy rock for ages 3 through 8 at this concert, offering tunes from their most recent albums, “Good Egg” and “Meshugana.” Typical subjects include dinosaurs, trips to the doctor and dads and, on “Meshugana,” Jewish holidays. At 2 p.m., the Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org/programs/families.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’ (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.‘Lollipops for Breakfast’ (Saturday) O.K., so it’s not nutritious, but a girl can dream, can’t she? And this girl, Sylvie, welcomes the audience into her dream as she works with her pet bird to concoct the perfect lollipop. Part of the Just Kidding series at Symphony Space, this show, created and performed by Bonnie Duncan, uses puppets, props, pop-up materials, music and no dialogue to portray Sylvie’s quest, which includes falling into candy machines and wandering through a cookbook. At 11 a.m. and 2 p.m., Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.MADreads: ‘Elmer the Patchwork Elephant’ (Sunday) Although he’s an elephant, there’s nothing gray about Elmer. In this program for ages 3 to 10 at the Museum of Arts and Design, educators will read the story of Elmer’s multicolored life, made famous by the author David McKee in “Elmer the Patchwork Elephant.” Elmer’s odyssey, in which he misguidedly tries to dye his hide with berry juice, will lead into a discussion about tolerance and diversity that is also linked to the museum’s show “Ebony G. Patterson: Dead Treez.” At 10:30 a.m., 2 Columbus Circle, Manhattan, 212-299-7777, madmuseum.org.Music in Motion (Saturday) That motion is the gentle rocking of a boat for this series of family neighborhood concerts presented by Bargemusic, the floating barge at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge. As always, the material — announced just before the performance — is chamber music, but these programs differ in important ways from the regular Bargemusic fare: With unreserved seating, they last only an hour, include a post-show question-and-answer session with the musicians and are free. (Through March 26.) At 4 p.m. (doors open at 3:45), Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org.‘NYC + Me: A Little Bite of the Big Apple’ (Through Jan. 18) There’s one place where little citizens can safely run loose on the streets of New York: the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. This new interactive 3,000-square-foot gallery is a city microcosm for small visitors, allowing them to pretend to be taxi drivers, bus drivers, construction workers, street performers and, most impressively, the mayor. Activities include directing traffic, erecting a skyscraper, “ice skating” in their socks and investigating urban tales on the steps of the New York Public Library. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Seven in One Blow, or the Brave Little Kid’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday) In the Grimm fairy tale “The Brave Little Tailor,” the title character dispatches seven flies with one swat but allows the gullible public to believe that he has really whacked seven enemies. In its annual holiday production for children 4 and older, written and directed by Randy Sharp and closing on Tuesday, Axis Theater has adapted the story to feature a clever New York boy. He triumphs over adversity, thanks to his wits and a lot of help from theatergoers, who are asked to shout lines and even sing. Friday and Tuesday at 7 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 3 p.m.; Axis Theater, 1 Sheridan Square, off Seventh Avenue, West Village, 212-352-3101, axiscompany.org.‘The Snow Maiden’ (Saturday) Who better to narrate a fairy tale about snow than Grandfather Frost? He will preside over this Russian song-and-dance production, which begins with Slavic folk tunes and cavorting clowns. Performed in Russian with English supertitles, the show tells of a poor but worthy girl (a kind of Eastern European Cinderella) who is transformed into the Snow Maiden by Grandfather Frost (the Russian Santa Claus). At 4 p.m., Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, Brooklyn, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org.Advertisement‘The Three Bears Holiday Bash’ (Friday through Wednesday) There’s no word on whether Goldilocks is invited to this seasonal celebration, but Santa Claus definitely is. An annual production from the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, this puppet musical centers on a variety show put on by the Bears, in which Baby Bear asks Santa to star. The fun draws on Hanukkah and Kwanzaa, as well as on Christmas. (Through Dec. 30.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional 2:30 p.m. performance on Wednesday; weekends at 1 p.m.; no shows on Christmas Eve or Christmas Day; Swedish Cottage, 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org. Reservations required; some shows are sold out.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’ (Continuing) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. This Tuesday is also the beginning of Art Week, when children can do projects that include silk-screening and making bookmarks. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.‘Young Charles Dickens’ (Saturday and Sunday) Audiences won’t have to have read the Dickens canon to enjoy this earnest and often evocative family musical, from New York City Children’s Theater. An adaptation of Deborah Hopkinson’s book “A Boy Called Dickens,” it seeks to illuminate how its subject became the conscience of the Victorian age. With a book and lyrics by Barbara Zinn Krieger and a score by Charlie Greenberg, it focuses on the wretched experience the 12-year-old Charles had working in a polish factory, and how he helped save himself — and eventually others — with stories. (Through Jan. 3.) At 4 p.m., Theater 3, 311 West 43rd Street, Clinton, 646-250-1178, nycchildrenstheater.org.‘You’re a Good Man, Charlie Brown’ (Saturday) Charlie Brown may not have ever felt like a popular kid, but he’s a huge hit at this time of year. In addition to various local performances of “A Charlie Brown Christmas,” the Brooklyn Public Library is presenting this free production of another musical starring Charlie. Written by Clark Gesner, “You’re a Good Man, Charlie Brown” includes memorable moments from “Peanuts,” like Snoopy’s World War I flying ace routine and Lucy’s attempts to play psychiatrist. At 1 p.m., Dweck Center, Grand Army Plaza at Flatbush Avenue and Eastern Parkway, Prospect Park, 718-230-2100, brooklynpubliclibrary.org/calendar.A version of this schedule appears in print on December 18, 2015, on Page C16 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.