AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Amore Opera (Friday through Sunday) This energetic small company, an offshoot of the now defunct Amato Opera, offers its production of “La Bohème” directed by Nathan Hull, conducted by Jason Tramm and featuring a cast of young singers. Friday and Saturday at 7:30 p.m. and Sunday at 2:30 p.m. (also at various times Dec. 29 through Jan. 3), Loreto Theater, Sheen Center, 18 Bleecker Street, near Elizabeth Street, East Village, amoreopera.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)‘The Barber of Seville’ (Saturday, Monday and Thursday) The Tony Award-winning director Bartlett Sher’s popular 2006 production of Rossini’s “Barbiere di Siviglia” conveys the opera’s comic confusions through fluid staging and a playful set (all movable doors, staircases and potted orange trees). It has returned this season with an enticing cast and extra afternoon performances for the holiday season. Antony Walker conducts. Saturday at 8 p.m., Monday at 7:30 p.m. and Thursday at 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)‘Die Fledermaus’ (Friday and Wednesday) Though it’s hard to believe, James Levine is conducting his first complete performances of Strauss’s “Die Fledermaus” with this revival of Jeremy Sams’s 2013 production at the Metropolitan Opera. On opening night, he drew a lithe and stylish performance from the orchestra, chorus and an appealing cast, headed by Paulo Szot, Susanna Phillips, Toby Spence and Susan Graham. This operetta is performed in Mr. Sams’s playful English translation of the lyrics. But Douglas Carter Beane’s new spoken dialogue trades in lame, topical jokes. At 8 p.m., Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)★ ‘La Donna del Lago’ (Saturday and Tuesday) Rossini’s bel canto adaptation of a Sir Walter Scott poem about a Scottish beauty and her three suitors returns with most of the same stellar cast that first brought it to the Met earlier this year. The one outstanding newcomer is the tenor Lawrence Brownlee as King James; Joyce DiDonato remains incandescent in the title role, with additional strong performances by the tenor John Osborn and the mezzo Daniela Barcellona. The unobtrusive production is signed by Paul Curran; Michele Mariotti conducts. Saturday at 1 p.m., Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Anonymous 4 (Tuesday) Can it really be the last time that this fine quartet sings together? Evidently so. They go out after almost three decades with a Christmas program, “The Last Noel,” performed in the Medieval Sculpture Hall. At 6:30 and 8:30 p.m., Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org/tickets. (David Allen)Bargemusic (Friday) The intriguing partnership of the cellist Inbal Segev and the guitarist Jason Vieaux gives a program that would warm this floating concert hall, if it felt like winter. On the bill is the premiere of an arrangement of Fernando Otero’s “Pagina de Buenos Aires,” along with works by De Falla, Villa-Lobos, Piazzolla, Granados and Gnattali. At 8 p.m., Bargemusic, Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org. (Allen)★ Lise de la Salle (Sunday) This much-talked-about young French pianist joins members of the Knights including the violinist Colin Jacobsen and the cellist Eric Jacobsen in a chamber music program featuring works by Mozart, Ravel and Martinu, and recent compositions by Judd Greenstein and Toru Takemitsu. At 2 p.m., Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, pscny.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Four Pianos Festival (Friday and Saturday) There will be four grand instruments on stage during this piano extravaganza, copresented by Jack and the International Contemporary Ensemble. On Friday, Craig Taborn and Cory Smythe present works for two pianos; on Saturday they join forces with Sylvie Courvoisier and Ron Stabinsky for music for eight hands. At 8 p.m., Jack, 505 ½ Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Schweitzer)Kent Tritle’s ‘Messiah’ (Monday and Tuesday) Well, almost. The conductor Kent Tritle leads back-to-back performances of the “Messiah.” The first, with the venerable Oratorio Society of New York, is given in Mozart’s arrangement, and stars Leslie Fagan, Sara Murphy, Nicholas Phan and Matt Boehler. Mr. Boehler also sings the bass part in the second performance, with Musica Sacra, and the vocalists Kathryn Lewek, Christopher Ainslie and Mingjie Lei. Monday at 8 p.m., Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)★ Igor Levit & Marina Abramovic (Saturday) There is much talk these days of mindfulness, “being present” and the need to disengage from digital distractions. Those attending a performance of Bach’s magnificent “Goldberg Variations” by the superb pianist Igor Levit, part of an installation by the artist Marina Abramovic, will be required to deposit their electronic gadgets in a locker before entering the vast drill hall, where they are expected to sit in meditative silence before Mr. Levit begins to play. At 3 p.m., Wade Thompson Drill Hall, Park Avenue Armory, 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org. (Schweitzer)Lionheart (Sunday) This excellent all-male vocal ensemble performs music for Advent and Christmas spanning centuries, from Renaissance polyphony to the contemporary mysticism of Arvo Pärt. At 1 and 3 p.m., Fuentiduena Chapel, the Cloisters, 99 Margaret Corbin Drive, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights, 212-923-3700, metmuseum.org/tickets. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Make Music Winter (Monday) If the warm weather streak continues you won’t have to bundle up too much for the cold-weather version of the annual summer festival. This year’s lineup on the winter solstice features an eclectic array of experimental, audience participatory parades in Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx and Manhattan. Highlights include the vocalist Joan La Barbara leading a call-and-response piece in Washington Heights; a piece for bicycle bells performed by cyclists in Prospect Park; a High Line Soundwalk in which footsteps are rendered into sounds ranging from electric guitar to water splashes via a smartphone app; Parranda caroling in the Bronx and Brooklyn; drumming in the West Village; lantern-illuminated medieval melodies through Central Park en route to Cathedral of St. John the Divine; a kalimba parade in Bushwick and sruti boxes in Astoria. From noon to 6:30 p.m. at various locations; 917-779-9709; a schedule and more details are at makemusicny.org/winter. (Schweitzer)New York String Orchestra (Thursday) A buoyant Christmas Eve tradition features Mozart’s “Haffner” Symphony and Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No. 2, with Emanuel Ax at the keyboard. Jaime Laredo conducts. At 7 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Riverside Choral Society (Friday) Patrick Gardner offers a diversion from the citywide “Messiahs” with a program called “The Creative Spirit.” He conducts the Riverside Choral Society and Orchestra in Haydn’s “Theresienmesse” and Colin Britt’s “House of Clouds,” with soloists including the bass Daniel Mobbs and the tenor John Tiranno. The program also includes Copland’s “Quiet City.” At 8 p.m., Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest, 2 East 90th Street, Manhattan, riversidechoral.org. (Schweitzer)SEM Ensemble (Saturday) The composer, conductor and flutist Petr Kotik leads this chamber ensemble in a program of baroque rarities by the 17th-century Czech composer Pavel Jan Vejvanovsky as well as contemporary works including Xenakis’s “Kassandra,” Alvin Lucier’s “Orpheus Variations” and Mr. Kotik’s own “Reiterations and Variables.” At 8 p.m., Paula Cooper Gallery, 521 West 21st Street, Chelsea, 718-488-7659, semensemble.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Advertisement