AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichAs he may be tired of hearing, the French pianist David Fray bears a striking physical resemblance to Darren E. Burrows, who played the film buff Ed Chigliak on “Northern Exposure” — except for Ed’s lovely smile. Not that Mr. Fray’s smile is not lovely; it undoubtedly is, but you seldom see it.Oh, there may have been a slight, gracious curl of the lips after his beautifully played and rapturously received Schubert recital in the Board of Officers Room at the Park Avenue Armory on Tuesday evening. But Mr. Fray is a serious artist, clearly intent on being seen as such.Though Mr. Fray’s New York recital debut, in 2010, was warmly received, he has not appeared in New York often. And a Schubert program, unless it consists of the three great final sonatas, is not calculated to make a splash.Mr. Fray offered none of those, playing instead three sonatas from across Schubert’s brief career. He opened with the Sonata in E minor (D. 566, from 1817), in the seemingly unfinished two-movement form that is widely accepted today, giving it a muscular cast despite its modest dimensions and expressive range.Then he turned to the lovable, smaller A minor Sonata (D. 784, 1823), whose first movement, within a craggy exterior, offers some of Schubert’s most exquisite moments (and that’s saying something). The second subject could not be more beautiful, you have to think, until you hear it return in the recapitulation with some of the rhythms sweetened to tiptoeing triplets.Mr. Fray was again muscular when appropriate, but he was captivating in those melting moments, sweet but not at all sentimental. Some abrupt phrase endings seemed in his touch simply to evanesce. Yet his playing could also be explosive, and he was not above display in the strong moments, with big, splaying arm thrusts.Then there was the lateish G major Sonata (D. 894, 1826), originally called a fantasy. The meditative chordal opening seemed to suit Mr. Fray’s pensive temperament ideally. And again he forged the work’s powerful outbursts and abundant lyricism into a compelling unity.This is an artist we need to hear more of, and in different moods. Maybe there’s a bubbling humor somewhere beneath that stern facade. But even if not, I’ll listen eagerly to whatever he wants to say.David Fray repeats this program on Friday evening at the Park Avenue Armory, Manhattan; 212-616-3930, armoryonpark­.org.Advertisement