AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckThe comedian Bill Burr remembers when nothing could come between a man and his TV in Netflix’s new animated comedy. Lady Gaga is named Billboard’s woman of the year. And Thackery bucks the system on “The Knick.”F IS FOR FAMILY on Netflix. Stagflation, middle-class anxiety, lead exhaust and a man who won’t be separated from his beer and TV set — it’s all here. The comedian Bill Burr (with the writer Michael Price) draws on his 1970s childhood in this animated tale about a middle-aged airport baggage worker; his wife, a former softball champ who hawks plastic storage tubs; and his older son, a 14-year-old F student with a passion for weed and a prog-rock band called Shire of Frodo. The series, voiced by Mr. Burr, Laura Dern and Justin Long, “treats these issues as if they’re real and lasting,” James Poniewozik wrote in The New York Times. “It’s still a comedy, rude, raunchy and not entirely original, but it has heft and heart.” (Image: a scene)BILLBOARD WOMEN IN MUSIC 2015 8 p.m. on Lifetime. Lady Gaga takes home top honors for a year in which she toured with Tony Bennett, starred in “American Horror Story: Hotel” and brought attention to sexual assault on college campuses. (Image: Lady Gaga)A HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS 9 p.m. on CBS. Christina Aguilera, Jason Derulo, Rascal Flatts and Ed Sheeran sing on behalf of the more than 400,000 children in foster care in the United States.SINATRA: VOICE FOR A CENTURY 9 p.m. on PBS. The birthday tributes keep pouring in as Sting, Fantasia, Sutton Foster, Bernadette Peters, Billy Porter, Kyle Dean Massey, Chris Botti and Christina Aguilera salute the Chairman of the Board in songs like “I’ve Got the World on a String,” “Witchcraft” and “Someone to Watch Over Me.” Seth MacFarlane croons a couple himself as host of this “Live From Lincoln Center” concert, taped on Dec. 3 and featuring music by the New York Philharmonic. (Image: Sting performing)TEN THOUSAND SAINTS (2015) 9 p.m. on Starz. When his aimlessness turns tragic, a teenager in late-1980s Vermont is sent to live with his estranged father in Manhattan and gets involved in the East Village punk scene. Asa Butterfield, Ethan Hawke and Hailee Steinfeld star in what Neil Genzlinger of The Times called “a very fine film, full of quietly impressive performances and young characters who register as authentic.” (Image: Mr. Butterfield)TREEHOUSE MASTERS 9 p.m. on Animal Planet. The crew heads to Dogwood Canyon, a 10,000-acre Missouri preserve, to build a floating nature center that can withstand the trampling of thousands around Christmas.THE KNICK 10 p.m. on Cinemax. Thackery goes rogue.Advertisement