AdvertisementSupported byBy Randy KennedyThe Brooklyn Museum’s new director, Anne Pasternak — who has been rapidly shaking up its galleries and programming in the four months since she took over — announced on Thursday that Nancy Spector, the longtime chief curator at the Guggenheim Museum and a highly respected voice in contemporary art, would become her new chief curator.The move is unusual, partly because Ms. Spector has been synonymous with the Guggenheim for almost 30 years, organizing exhibitions that have helped define the careers of significant artists like Matthew Barney, Felix Gonzalez-Torres, Tino Sehgal, Maurizio Cattelan and Marina Abramovic. Curatorial leaders at large, encyclopedic museums like the Brooklyn tend to come from within the ranks of such museums. With the hiring of Ms. Pasternak, who has never before worked in a museum, and now Ms. Spector, the museum is sending a strong signal that it is rethinking the conventions that have long guided many older art institutions.The two appointments add to the growing presence of women shaping the city’s art museums. Besides Brooklyn, the New Museum, the Bronx Museum of the Arts, the Queens Museum, the Cooper Hewitt, the Jewish Museum, the Studio Museum in Harlem and several others are run by women, and many women hold high curatorial positions at those and other museums.Ms. Pasternak, who spent more than two decades running Creative Time, a public art organization that she focused in recent years on politically and socially engaged projects, said in an interview that she was seeking “a really forward-thinking, creative, trailblazing curator, and from the beginning my dream candidate was Nancy.”“I’ve always seen her not only as a great curator but a great thought leader,” she added. Besides directing the curatorial department at the Guggenheim and shaping programming at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation’s satellites in Berlin, Venice and Bilbao, Spain, Ms. Spector served as an organizer of the first Berlin Biennale, in 1998, and as the United States’ commissioner for the 2007 Venice Biennale, where she presented work by Mr. Gonzalez-Torres, who died of AIDS in 1996. In addition, she has had a hand in a Guggenheim initiative, supported by the bank UBS, to broaden the museum’s global perspective.Ms. Spector, who will begin in April, said in an interview that she had never imagined leading the curatorial staff of an encyclopedic museum, but that when the opportunity presented itself, she was excited and interested for several reasons. “Here’s a museum in which the collections are in fact global, and I began to think about what it would mean to examine that through a contemporary lens,” she said, “so that they are relevant to the world we live in today.” She added, “We’re in this global age and the model of an encyclopedic or a global museum is very old, and maybe it’s outdated, but it’s here to stay and we need to think about how to use it.”She said that her interest in the job also grew out of conversations with Ms. Pasternak over the last year about socially engaged art and social justice. “Once she took the position, our conversation shifted a bit to: ‘What if you came to work with me?’ I was certainly not looking for a job. I love the Guggenheim and it’s been my primary place my entire adult life.”Asked what changes she envisioned in the museum’s curatorial structure or the ways it collects and presents art, she said that “any disruption I would bring would be done with great respect.” She added, “It’s too early to say how that’s going to manifest itself.” She added that she wanted to ensure the museum’s longtime patrons that “what they love about the Brooklyn Museum will still be there.” (Ms. Spector said that she counted herself among those patrons. She lives within walking distance of the museum and says she has “practically raised” her two daughters in its galleries.)Ms. Spector, who will also be a deputy director of the museum, will succeed Kevin Stayton, who has been chief curator since 2001 and who will assume a newly created job as deputy director and director of collections and history.Directed by Arnold Lehman for the last 17 years, the Brooklyn Museum has transformed itself, sometimes in the face of criticism, into a more populist and inclusive institution. Mr. Lehman, who retired in June, sought to draw a more diverse audience across lines of race and class. His success in these areas was not always consistent, but the museum’s overall attendance in 2014 was more than 540,000 visitors, up from lows in the late 1990s of less than 200,000 a year, and minorities now make up more than 40 percent of the audience.Ms. Pasternak said that while she intended to continue building on Mr. Lehman’s efforts to broaden the audience, she believes the museum must deal with a longtime image problem that Mr. Lehman was not fully able to overcome. “It is true that there are a lot of people who don’t know what the museum stands for, and that the permanent collections need attention,” she said. She has already begun to initiate basic redesigns of gallery space, including demolishing what she called all the “faux architecture” in the museum’s beloved Egyptian galleries, “to get rid of as much visual interference as possible so that we can commune with the art.”She said that she also planned to increase the size of the curatorial staff — now fewer than 20 people for a collection of more than 1.5 million objects — and that selecting Ms. Spector as her first major hire to lead her curators was a clear announcement of the Brooklyn Museum’s intention to compete in a city crowded with world-class museums.“There’s not a part of the museum that I’m not engaging afresh,” Ms. Pasternak said.Advertisement