AdvertisementSupported byBy Elise CzajkowskiHOLIDAY cheer can have its limits — by late December, you might be looking for a night out with entertainment that’s a little less wholesome. Luckily, some of New York’s finest comedians are putting a twist on the classic wintertime fare with a mix of stand-up, sketch, storytelling, improv, music and other nonsense to tickle the Grinch in all of us.‘A Murray Little Christmas’Holiday parties are a staple of the season, but this “cocktail-style variety show” at Le Poisson Rouge is bound to be livelier than the average office shindig. Backed by the 12 Steps swing quartet, the comedian Murray Hill hosts a party that will include appearances from the cabaret comedian Bridget Everett, the burlesque dancer Dirty Martini, the drummer Carmine C. Covelli, the Wau-Wau Sisters singing acrobats and three “strutting Santa showgirls.” (Saturday at 7 p.m., Le Poisson Rouge, 158 Bleecker Street, at Thompson Street, Greenwich Village; 212-505-3474; lepoissonrouge.com; $20 to $55.)‘Raise the Roof and Help Syrian Children!’ If Christmas commercialism has you down, consider giving something back with this fund-raiser at the Bell House, which benefits Unicef and its work with child refugees fleeing violence in Syria. The lineup, featuring David Cross, Sasheer Zamata, Todd Barry, Dave Hill, Jon Glaser, Jon Ronson, Aparna Nancherla, Maeve Higgins and Starlee Kine, promises an evening of sharp stand-up and storytelling. (Sunday at 8 p.m., the Bell House, 149 Seventh Street, at Second Avenue, Park Slope, Brooklyn; 718-643-6510; thebellhouseny.com; $25.)‘Bing Faithful’s Very Merry Nondenominational Holiday Special’ The holiday crooner Bing Faithful (the veteran improviser Bob Kulhan) faces seemingly insurmountable odds when he must perform his planned holiday show moments after his entire band, the Bing Faithful 5, have perished in a bus accident. Still, he will be taking requests for holiday classics and receiving a little help from the audience at this show at the Peoples Improv Theater. He will be assisted by some old friends, in the form of Jordan Klepper, Nick Vatterott, Micah Sherman, Greg Kotis, Mark Stetson and Bill Connelly. (Sunday at 8 p.m., the Peoples Improv Theater, 123 East 24th Street, Manhattan; 212-563-7488; thepit-nyc.com; $10.)‘The UCBT Holiday Concert’ The brass-playing comedy trio the Trumpet Boys (Dan Fox, Ian Stroud and Mark Vigeant) host this festive concert “just like the ones you used to have to go to in middle school.” In reality, this variety show at Upright Citizens Brigade Theater in Chelsea will most likely be a slightly more adult affair, with performances from the comedian Matt Klinman, the musical comedy duo Nancy and the musical sketch group Pop Roulette. (Monday at 9:30 p.m., the Upright Citizens Brigade Theater, 307 West 26th Street, Chelsea; 212-366-9176; newyork.ucbtheatre.com; $5.)‘An Amber and Matteo Christmas’ Amber Nelson and Matteo Lane share the distinction of being both trained opera singers and very funny stand-up comedians, and they will show off these gifts during their annual Christmas show at the Creek and the Cave. Accompanied by the pianist Henry Koperski, the duo will be imbibing and taking on classics like “Silver Bells” and “White Christmas,” as well as a special rendition of “It’s the Most Wonderful Time of the Year” featuring their (and the audience’s) most disgusting tales of the New York subway. (Monday at 9 p.m., the Creek and the Cave, 10-93 Jackson Avenue, Long Island City, Queens; 718-706-8783; creeklic.com; free.)‘The Griff and Joe Christmas (and to a Lesser Extent Hanukkah) Spectacular’ The comedian Griffin Newman and the writer Joe Garden team up for this musical comedy extravaganza in the style of an old TV special, with the duo hosting competing Christmas and Hanukkah parties on opposite sides of the stage. Their “guests” will then perform, with comedy from Liam McEneaney, Bronwyn Ariel Isaac, Brett Davis, Rae Sanni and Nigel Dunkley (known as Docta Gel), and music from Frankie Cosmos. (Wednesday at 8 p.m., Union Hall, 702 Union Street, at Fifth Avenue, Park Slope, Brooklyn; 718-638-4400; unionhallny.com; $10.)‘Merry Hanukkah With Judy Gold’ Judy Gold, an underappreciated gem of the New York comedy scene, returns to Carolines on Broadway with her annual Christmastime shows, filling this slow entertainment week with stories and stand-up of the holidays from a Jewish perspective. She’ll be supported by Josh Gondelman and David Feldman. (Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday at 7 p.m., and next Friday at 8 p.m.; Carolines on Broadway, 1626 Broadway, at West 49th Street; 212-757-4100; carolines.com; $31.25 to $103.50.)‘The Cast’ Holiday Edition Every week, an all-female cast of talented improvisers of the Magnet Theater — Hannah Chase, Geri Cole, Ali Fisher Megan Gray, Kate Koch, Alexis Lambright, Devin O’Neill and Elena Skopetos — take on a different theatrical genre for a one-time-only, completely impromptu show. Clad in black, the performers present both the onstage show and the offstage antics of their characters. This week, it’s a special “holiday” edition. (Dec. 26 at 10:30 p.m., Magnet Theater, 254 West 29th Street, Chelsea; 212-244-8824; magnettheater.com; $10.)‘Christmas Hangover’ The Upright Citizens Brigade improviser Mike Kelton loves to turn our terrible holiday stories into comedy. For this “Christmas Hangover,” he and performers at the UCB East will interview an audience member to hear about “the weirdness that was your Xmas” and then spin that story into an entirely improvised show. (Dec. 26 at 10 p.m., Upright Citizens Brigade Theater East, 153 East Third Street, East Village; 212-366-9231; east.ucbtheatre.com; $10.)‘Jewmongous’ Holiday Comedy Songfest The musical comedian Sean Altman was once part of the a cappella group Rockapella; now he performs under the moniker Jewmongous. His “unkosher comedy songs” feature titles like “They Tried to Kill Us (We Survived, Let’s Eat)” and “Just Too Jew for You,” which is also on his album, “Taller Than Jesus.” Here, he performs a special holiday concert, along with the comedy musician Cynthia Kaplan and the musician Michael Hunter. (Dec. 26 at 7:30 p.m., the Cutting Room, 44 East 32nd Street, Manhattan; 212-691-1900; thecuttingroomnyc.com; $20 in advance, $25 day of show.)Advertisement