By NICOLE HERRINGTONDEC. 17, 2015
This weekend two very different groups of people will be walking the streets of New York City: Those planning to watch “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” and those hoping to steer clear of theaters during its opening weekend. For the second group, the Miser has some options with a holiday vibe.For those still itching to see a movie, consider the IFC Center. In addition to screening its retrospective of animated films from the Japanese Studio Ghibli (“Spirited Away,” “My Neighbor Totoro”), that art house has holiday movies this weekend, including “It’s a Wonderful Life” and “Home Alone.” Most important, “Star Wars” will be nowhere on the marquee.(Various screenings through the weekend, IFC Center, 323 Avenue of the Americas, at West Third Street, Greenwich Village; 212-924-7771, ifccenter.com; $14 for most screenings.)On Friday night, the group SecretFormula presents “The Xmas Pop Sing-Along” party at Union Hall in Brooklyn. The goal is to sing karaoke-style to holiday classics with old friends and strangers — who just might become new friends by night’s end. With music (interpretations by Bing Crosby, Mariah Carey, Wham!, David Bowie and others), TV and film clips from traditional fare (like “Frosty the Snowman” and “The Nightmare Before Christmas”), the evening will be heavy on nostalgia. In addition to holiday-themed cocktails (the Grandma Got Run Over by a Reindeer is likely to be a doozy), there will be milk and cookies and Santa Claus. Holiday attire is optional, but partygoers donning their worst holiday sweater might win a prize.Advertisement(At 9:30 p.m., 702 Union Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn; 718-638-4400, unionhallny.com; $10.)The Flatiron district has been in holiday mode since the start of the month, when its “23 Days of Flatiron Cheer” began. Presented by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership Business Improvement District, the free events end on Wednesday. The centerpiece, “Nova,” by the design studio Softlab, is a sculpture that visitors can walk in and peer through, viewing the area’s landmarks — like the Flatiron Building and the Metropolitan Life clock tower — from various perspectives. The experience is heightened by a kaleidoscopic array of lights, colors and reflections. (The installation will remain in the Flatiron Public Plaza through the holidays.) Free hot beverages will be provided on Friday (cider) and Saturday (coffee) from noon to 4 p.m. On Sunday at 11 a.m., there’s a free 90-minute walking tour. (Meet at the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, in front of the William H. Seward statue.)On Tuesday at 6:30 p.m., a free winter solstice celebration, Solstice Stars, incorporating geometry and light, will take place in the plaza. Presented by the National Museum of Mathematics, the commemoration will have participants use glow sticks to form a heptagram, a seven-pointed star, which will represent the sun’s position over New York City on Tuesday, the day with the fewest hours of sunlight in the Northern Hemisphere. Information on the science of the solstice will be shared, as well as hot tea. (Cans of food will be accepted on site, with contributions going to the Partnership’s food drive.)Advertisement(All events are at the Flatiron Public Plaza, West 23rd Street, between Fifth Avenue and Broadway; 212-741-2323, flatirondistrict.nyc.)A version of this article appears in print on December 18, 2015, on Page C31 of the New York edition with the headline: Weekend Miser.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.