DEC. 17, 2015
‘All Gone Pete Tong’ (Friday) The inspiration of the enduring British phrase for a situation gone awry (“It’s all gone Pete Tong!”), Pete Tong is a prominent BBC Radio 1 D.J., the founder of FFRR Records and a longtime arbiter of house and dance music. He also regularly performs and programs stages at major American dance festivals, including TommorowWorld and Electric Forest. He headlines this dance set with Golf Clap. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Stacey Anderson)Baroness (Sunday) This band’s heavy screeds are often called “stoner metal” for their dusky, mercurial textures, and the heavy-lidded, languidly draped forest nymphs that adorn the cover of its fourth album, “Purple,” hardly contradict that. But this group from Savannah, Georgia, packs intricate melodicism in the sturdy, succinct record, its first since the band was part of a serious bus crash while on tour in 2012. At 8 p.m., Saint Vitus, 1120 Manhattan Avenue, at Clay Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, saintvitusbar.com; sold out. (Anderson)★ James Blake (D.J. Set) (Saturday) This soulful singer, songwriter and producer was an early practitioner of post-dubstep pop. His second album, “Overgrown,” featuring collaborations with such disparate musicians as Brian Eno and RZA, snapped up the Mercury Prize two years ago. With 1-800-Dinosaur, Airhead and more. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Anderson)Mariah Carey (Friday) Some jovial clubs around the city have been blasting Ms. Carey’s yuletide hit “All I Want For Christmas Is You” since early November. Time for the rest of New York to join in for the close of the whimsical, endlessly melismatic singer’s eight-night run at the Beacon Theater, the second time in two years that she’s hosted a seasonal residency in New York. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementEscort (Friday) All that’s missing from Escort’s precise, nu-disco act is an illuminated floor. The local group delivers a dance party without kitsch or irony on its new album, “Animal Nature,” with lyrics that nod to the jazz titan Anita O’Day. The group performs this set with a “disco orchestra,” which presumably involves many synths. With Damn Right! and Speakerbot. At 8 p.m., Brooklyn Bowl, 61 Wythe Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-963-3369, brooklynbowl.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementFoals (Friday) “What Went Down,” the title track of these English rockers’ fourth album, opens with macabre organ and the loosely distorted yelps of the singer Yannis Philippakis, who, amid such production, sounds like an electroshocked Chris Martin. The rest of the album shares that group’s pop expansiveness, with electronic dance leanings — perfect for stadiums, but not for piquing fresh interest. With Circa Waves. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.H.R. and Dub Agents (Friday) Bad Brains, the group of punk-reggae hybridists who ruled the hard-core underbelly of Washington in the 1980s, still boasts a debauched energy and tight, jazz-derived grooves. Now the singer H.R. (which stands for Human Rights; his real name is Paul Hudson) leads his fiery solo side project Dub Agents. With MC Jamalski, Skarroñeros and Banddroidz. At 7:15 p.m., Bowery Electric, 327 Bowery, at Second Street, East Village, 212-228-0228, theboweryelectric.com. (Anderson)Luis Miguel (Friday) Three decades into his career, which he began as a preteen, this crooner remains a top draws in Latin music, and a main employer of sultry saxophone soloists. His annual residency in Las Vegas has endeared him to many new American ears; he returns to Madison Square Garden for a night of sonorous bolero ballads. At 8 p.m., 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)★ San Fermin (Thursday through Saturday) This ensemble of local classical-pop experimentalists is undersung in both contemporary and baroque circles, yet proved to have a savvy way with arrangements in “Jackrabbit,” released this year. On that album, the vocalist Allen Tate’s baritone nods to John Grant of the Czars or Matt Berninger of the National, with a winking bend in the vocals; Ellis Ludwig-Leone remains in the shadows as the group’s bandleader and primary songwriter. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)★ ‘Ronnie Spector’s Best Christmas Party Ever’ (Tuesday and Wednesday) Even in the pantheon of Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees, Ms. Spector stands apart as an enduring figure of glamour. The former lead singer of the Ronettes delivers her cheery covers of “Frosty the Snowman,” “Rockin’ Around the Christmas Tree,” “Sleigh Ride” and other yuletide tracks at this reprisal of her popular Christmas show. At 8 p.m., City Winery, 155 Varick Street, near Spring Street, South Village, 212-608-0555, citywinery.com. (Anderson)Squeeze (through Friday) The torch-bearing British New Wavers — formed in the mid-1970s and after several lineup changes and an official breakup in 1999, found a combination in 2007 that finally stuck — tear through “Cool for Cats” and “Black Coffee in Bed” in this acoustic performance. At 8 p.m., PlayStation Theater, 1515 Broadway, at 44th Street, 888-929-7849, playstationtheater.com. (Anderson)A version of this schedule appears in print on December 18, 2015, on Page C20 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Pop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.