By MIKE HALEOCT. 7, 2015
“Red Oaks,” a new Amazon comedy, pulls off a neat trick: Set in 1985, it manages to be of the ’80s rather than about them, an affectionate and startlingly authentic evocation rather than a satire or a dissection. Whether it’s a trick that needed to be pulled off at all is debatable, but the result, while uneven across its 10 episodes (all of which debut on Friday on the streaming service), is undeniably charming.The story of a summer in the life of David Meyers (Craig Roberts), a suburban New Jersey college student who gets a job as an assistant tennis pro at his local country club, “Red Oaks” on the surface calls to mind ’80s bellwethers like “Caddyshack” and “Dirty Dancing.” But it’s more warmhearted and low-key than those — the film from that period that it feels most like is probably “Fast Times at Ridgemont High.” As if to reinforce that connection, the “Red Oaks” producers hired Amy Heckerling, whose career began with “Fast Times,” to direct several episodes.Ms. Heckerling is just one of the ’80s figures brought together for “Red Oaks.” Jennifer Grey, of “Dirty Dancing,” plays David’s mother, and Paul Reiser, of “Diner,” is absolutely at home as the club’s big wheel, a Wall Street guy and weekend tennis warrior who is David’s mentor and nemesis. Steven Soderbergh (whose “Sex, Lies and Videotape” came out in 1989) is an executive producer, and one of the show’s creators and writers, Gregory Jacobs, has been a producing and directing partner of Mr. Soderbergh’s since the early ’90s.The events and characters of David’s summer are familiar from a half-century of stories of the Jewish suburban experience, but for the most part, they feel fresh, or at least lovingly recreated. David is a New York University student caught between the ’burbs and the city — he’s more interested in French cinema classes than in the accounting coursework insisted on by his father, a broken-down Korean War vet with a mild fetish for Asian women. The heart of the show is the push and pull between these two, with Mr. Roberts (of the film “Submarine”) capturing David’s wary but determined entry into the adult world, and Richard Kind superbly prickly and compassionate as the worried dad.AdvertisementThe club’s staff includes David’s current and prospective lovers, the requisite pudgy pothead friend with a crush on an unobtainable girl, the randy tennis pro (a very funny Ennis Esmer) and the reprehensibly blow-dried Barry, a photographer and pioneering videographer who says that the money he makes taping bar mitzvahs “heats my jacooz.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a review of the new Hulu comedy “Casual,” my colleague James Poniewozik made the case for television as the new indie film, and “Red Oaks” fits into that category, even though it’s not set in Los Angeles, and its comedy is gentler and more straightforward than what you’ll find in “Casual” or Amazon’s “Transparent.” Overseen by Mr. Soderbergh, the indie godfather, and with multiple episodes directed by David Gordon Green (“George Washington,” “All the Real Girls”), “Red Oaks” is intimate, detailed and focused on its characters rather than on scoring satirical points or piling up period references.(The period soundtrack, though, is wise and glorious, stretching from the sheer pop bliss of Exile’s “Kiss You All Over” to the more rarefied pleasures of Television’s “Marquee Moon” and the English Beat’s “Save It for Later.”)AdvertisementAmazon is on a roll with its comedies — “Red Oaks” is the third straight winner, after “Transparent” and “Mozart in the Jungle.” Put those three shows and the British sitcom “Catastrophe,” which Amazon carries exclusively, on a Thursday from 8 to 10 p.m., and you’d have a lineup that — for 10 weeks — would be far and away the best comedy night on TV.A version of this review appears in print on October 8, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Psyched About the ’80s, but Keeping the Jokes Chill.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.