AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate ChinenEvery jazz singer who reaches a certain age is granted a turn as the voice of experience. Ed Reed, who will be 87 in February, takes that covenant more seriously than most. “I spent so many years being unhappy,” he said, confidingly, early in his first set at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola on Wednesday night. He waited a beat. “Anybody out there read my bio?”An appreciative laugh rippled through the room: Why yes, of course. But for the benefit of anyone who hadn’t, Mr. Reed sketched a basic outline over the course of the night: his struggles with addiction, to heroin and other substances; his cycles of incarceration, including several stints at San Quentin State Prison in California; the fact that he’s now 29 years in recovery. He recorded his first album, “Love Stories,” in 2006.Mr. Reed is cleareyed about what he has had to overcome. He has had a charmed post-rehabilitation career, one that recalls the example of the saxophonist Frank Morgan, his former band mate in the San Quentin Jazz Band, who died in 2007. (Mr. Reed recalls their youthful, larcenous capers together in “Sound of Redemption: The Frank Morgan Story,” a documentary that opened this month in limited release.)Mr. Reed sings in a dark-mahogany baritone with careful diction, evoking the midcentury styles of Billy Eckstine and Nat King Cole. He inhabited this stage with casual flair, keeping his composure alongside a first-rate rhythm section: George Cables on piano, Ugonna Okegwo on bass and Akira Tana on drums. The tunes in the set — drawn from each of Mr. Reed’s four albums — seemed chosen partly for their dramatic potential, amplifying his narrative and persona.He began his performance alone, singing “Sometimes I Feel Like a Motherless Child” in a slow, unregulated cadence, as an opening monologue. He later brought flinty cool to “The Old Country,” a lonesome tune associated with Nancy Wilson, and teased out the remorse in Jon Hendricks’s lyrics to “Ask Me Now,” by Thelonious Monk. Under Mr. Reed’s spell, even the lucky-in-love standard “A Sleepin’ Bee” took on a bittersweet hue.And Blossom Dearie’s “Inside a Silent Tear,” with its unabashed pathos, tilted toward emotional overload: “Sometimes I laugh too much,” Mr. Reed sang, his voice containing a buried sob, “to hide the emptiness.”Still, he isn’t a miserablist. His banter, earnest and encouraging, often had the ring of therapy: “I’m the choice-maker in this experience I call me.” The song given pride of place in the set was “Here’s to Life,” a testimonial by Shirley Horn. “I had my share, I drank my fill,” Mr. Reed attested, “And even though I’m satisfied, I’m hungry still.”But as the lyrics pivot from first to second person, the singing got more impassioned: “May all your storms be weathered/And all that’s good get better.” Mr. Reed repeated that exhortation, as if thoughtfully turning it over in his hands, before letting it go.Advertisement