AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertUnder the leadership of Robert Battle, Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater has expanded and updated its repertory, mostly for the good. But as the dancers take on new challenges, how do they handle the perennial task of making old material look fresh? The All Ailey program at City Center on Wednesday night was as good a test case as any.By old material, I don’t mean “Revelations,” the 1960 Ailey masterpiece that closed Wednesday’s program and still closes a majority of the company’s programs. It remains mostly true that the definition of an Ailey dancer is someone who can dance “Revelations” well, and Wednesday’s cast, composed largely of newer members, performed admirably.“Blues Suite” — which opened the program, returning to the repertory after a few years’ absence — is another story. Created two years before the first version of “Revelations,” it has often been described as that spiritual work’s secular counterpart, a representation of the Saturday night sinning that precedes the Sunday churchgoing. But if the cast on Wednesday had anything to repent, it was failing to fill out the thin choreography and bring it to life.When “Blues Suite” was new, it was hailed for its social observation, for putting “real people” onstage, characters from the milieu of Ailey’s Southern childhood, then underrepresented. But the current dancers don’t invest these characters with any particularity. Even with the help of live music — a robust, if also conventional, performance by the Brawner Brothers band — these aren’t people onstage so much as musty stage conventions.The women are a bit more vibrant than the men, though only generically, and this only highlights the choreography’s generic quality. What breaks through isn’t character, but form: the long lines of Jacqueline Green’s arabesques, gorgeous enough to broadcast their own meaning.“Night Creature,” a 1974 Ailey work set to Duke Ellington symphonic jazz, is in somewhat better shape. Too much of the performance of it on Wednesday was rhythmically flaccid, sloppy rather than loose, but Akua Noni Parker, as the queen of the night, wiggled her hips with majestic cool. The segment she fronts is one part of the Ailey repertory that seems always to stay polished.“Cry” is another, perhaps because that 1971 solo is a cherished role. Rachael McLaren’s performance on Wednesday exhibited all of the traditional Ailey virtues of strength, beauty and passion — virtues that should be discoverable not just in “Revelations.”Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater performs through Jan. 3 at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan; 212-581-1212, alvinailey­.org.Advertisement