By DAVID ALLENDEC. 17, 2015
Since Dec. 7, the pianist Igor Levit has been playing Bach’s “Goldberg” Variations in “Goldberg,” a collaboration with the performance artist Marina Abramovic at the Park Avenue Armory. In her staging, audience members sit, wearing headphones, for half an hour as the pianist and piano progress slowly and silently on a moving platform down a runway into the center of a circle of deck chairs. As the work is then played, the piano makes a single revolution while the lighting steadily dims.The two-hour production, which runs through Saturday, caps a busy stretch for Mr. Levit, including the release in October of a three-disc recording of three sets of variations: the Bach, Beethoven’s “Diabelli” Variations and Frederic Rzewski’s “The People United Will Never Be Defeated!” After a recent performance, he spoke in his dressing room at the Armory. Here are edited excerpts from the conversation.Q. As you have been inching along that runway, what have you been thinking about?A. I’m a sponge, usually. So what happened during those 30 minutes was that I really started to experience the space, to think about the piece, really to get into the mood, whatever that mood is. After I’d done it a few times, I wished that I could do it for more than just half an hour.Q. The idea of “Goldberg” is to create an enhanced intensity of listening. How does that differ from playing in a normal concert hall?AdvertisementA. Last June, I played a concert at the Wigmore Hall in London, a very political program with works by Frederic Rzewski and Cornelius Cardew. I knew people there, and relating to people is what makes it possible for me to work the way I work. Of course, the Wigmore Hall has the most incredible acoustic, but what do I care about the acoustic if I don’t know who works there? It became a living space, a space alive.AdvertisementQ. So, wherever and whatever you are playing, are you trying to create a sense of community?A. Yes, and in that sense I’m very political. But not political in that I’m telling people what they should believe in.Q. Some artists, though, would say that art and politics are separate matters.A. I could never really interact with colleagues who would tell me that what we do with music is bigger than daily life. A few years ago, I would have said I hated it; today I just find it boring.I would always respond by saying: “What the hell is bigger than daily life? What on earth can be bigger than that?” How can you possibly say that being a musician allows you to say, “I am not responsible, I am above things, leave me in peace?”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. But for “Goldberg,” the audience is asked to try to leave the world outside. You play literally above people, high on a pedestal. How does that correlate with your politics?A. That’s interesting. This environment would not have worked for “The People United.” God, no!Q. So Ms. Abramovic’s approach would work only with Bach?A. This specific setting would not work for any other piece. When I played for Marina in her barn in upstate New York, I explained the “Goldbergs” step by step: about the variations, the canons, the aria, which comes back, the idea of a circle.The approach to the “Diabelli” Variations would have been an entirely different one. There we are speaking about a piece built out of four or five atomic motifs. For “The People United,” we speak about six groups of variations: five fingers of a hand and then the sixth, which makes the fist.Without Frederic [Rzewski], I would never have done something like “Goldberg.” After we spent time together earlier this year, he flew to Pittsburgh, and he played “The People United” in a bloody fish market! He made this space into the perfect concert hall for that very moment. “The People United” isn’t a metaphysical piece. But the “Goldberg” Variations is. So we created this space.I spoke to Marina and said: “Let’s keep going. And if we keep going, the next thing will be completely different. You can use your headphones and whatever. But the setting, the space, the atmosphere, will be completely different.”A version of this article appears in print on December 18, 2015, on Page C12 of the New York edition with the headline: Before the Music, a Moving Silence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.