
Inside Art By                     
 ROBIN POGREBIN and
 

 HILARIE M. SHEETS
 
DEC. 17, 2015
During the culturally repressive late-16th and 17th centuries, Spanish kings often secreted away their nude paintings in rooms known as “salas reservadas,” where they could enjoy them in private.Eventually, these works made it out into the open and, in 1830, into a gallery at the Prado Museum in Madrid, where they remain among the finest of that institution’s holdings.This summer, the Clark Art Institute in Williamstown, Mass., will put on view 28 of these old master paintings, 24 of which have never before traveled to the United States. They include sensual, sumptuous canvases on an expansive scale by Titian, Rubens, Tintoretto and Velázquez.“These types of paintings were considered anathema,” said Kathleen Morris, the Clark’s director of collections and exhibitions. “The royals, the kings and their entourage found a way around the idea that they were not considered to be appropriate.”AdvertisementThe show, “Splendor, Myth, and Vision: Nudes From the Prado,” will also explore the role of significant patrons like Philip II and his grandson Philip IV.The exhibition, on view from June 12 through Oct. 10, is the second offspring of a collaboration between the Clark and the Prado that began six years ago. In the first joint show, “Passion for Renoir,” in 2010 — the fourth most visited exhibition in the Spanish museum’s history — the Prado presented 31 of the Clark’s works by Renoir.Ms. Morris said that the Clark planned to provide guides to help people through the show of nudes.The paintings, of mythological, religious and allegorical scenes, can seem “a little foreign to us today,” she said, “unless we give people avenues to enter into the minds of those who were collecting these things and creating them.”Capitalizing on the reopening of the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art and the Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive early next year, the Fraenkel Gallery, known for photography, will experiment with all media at a new storefront outpost, FraenkelLAB, on Market Street next to the Zuni Cafe.“Every time I’ve gone to Zuni, I’ve walked out and looked at this space, which has a fantastic presence at night, and thought that could be really fun to commandeer,” said the gallery’s owner, Jeffrey Fraenkel. The space will feature a pop-up video installation by the British artist Oliver Beer from Jan. 13 to 17. Mr. Fraenkel has also invited John Waters to organize the inaugural show, “Home Improvements,” in April.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Everybody knows John as a filmmaker, but the art world and artists know him as an inspired collector and visual artist himself,” said Mr. Fraenkel, who wanted “something out of left field” to set the tone for the gallery.AdvertisementMr. Waters has selected 12 artists, including Karin Sander, Martin Creed and Gedi Sibony, who he hopes will make people both “angry and amused, always my favorite kind of art,” he said. In a sendup of the rules of home décor, he will show dirty mirrors by Tony Matelli, trompe l’oeil paintings of air-conditioning vents and plugs by Doug Padgett, a wall-mounted toilet-paper roll made of chiffon by George Stoll, and photographs of books facing the wrong direction on shelves by Moyra Davey.“It all makes you notice things about your house that you either wouldn’t want people to notice,” said Mr. Waters, “or you don’t even notice yourself.”HILARIE M. SHEETSA version of this article appears in print on December 18, 2015, on Page C26 of the New York edition with the headline: Once Naughty, Now Masterpieces.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »