By ROSLYN SULCASOCT. 7, 2015
“It’s like nothing we’ve ever done before,” Sara Mearns said as she rushed from one rehearsal to another just before the New York City Ballet season opened. “He wasn’t telling us what steps to do and where to do them.”Ms. Mearns, a principal dancer with the company, was talking about working with the Danish choreographer Kim Brandstrup, whose new piece for City Ballet, “Jeux,” set to the Debussy score, will have its premiere on Thursday. It will be the company’s fifth premiere this season after four  new works — by Robert Binet, Justin Peck, Troy Schumacher and Myles Thatcher — were shown at the fall gala on Sept. 30. But Mr. Brandstrup is different from those choreographers in a number or ways.At 58, Mr. Brandstrup is some three decades older than those four, and he came to dance late, at 23, and to ballet much later than that. His subsequent turn to choreography is highly unusual. Most dance-makers have had lengthy training and exposure to the art form, particularly in the rarefied world of ballet. (By contrast, those four younger choreographers all started ballet as children and were already trying their hand at choreography at an age when Mr. Brandstrup was taking his first dance classes.)“Because I’m not from a ballet background, I often don’t use codified steps,” Mr. Brandstrup said. “First you need the trajectory through the room, then later you can shape it, detail it and make the picture.”AdvertisementBorn in Aarhus, Mr. Brandstrup grew up in Copenhagen and was studying film in college there when he saw a performance by the Martha Graham Company.Advertisement“I was smitten,” he recalled at a coffee shop near Lincoln Center. “It was the first time I realized that dance was a serious art form.” Soon after, he went to Paris to see the Merce Cunningham Dance Company. “I realized that dance wasn’t just a physical activity but a coherent artistic language and that I wanted to learn it,” he said.Mr. Brandstrup, virtually unknown to American balletomanes, has created seven pieces for the Royal Ballet in the last decade as well as five works for the Royal Danish Ballet (with another coming up next year). “All we knew was that he was Danish,” Ms. Mearns said. “We looked up a few things online and saw he had done some films. I was excited, because it seemed different.”At the beginning of the process, she said, this was slightly nerve-racking for her and Adrian Danchig-Waring, her partner. “We couldn’t really get it,” she said. “It was like, how big a jump would get you over here, or what kind of turn would work there? Then we realized, we are out of our comfort zone, but we are really free. He is directing us, but he will let us go where we want with the movement.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Brandstrup’s working method is influenced both by his film studies and his training in contemporary dance. Because there was nowhere in Denmark for an adult student to train seriously, Mr. Brandstrup went, in 1980, to the London School of Contemporary Dance. He has lived in Britain ever since, founding his own company, Arc, in 1985, and quickly establishing a reputation for thoughtful, innovative work.“Kim was very unusual, because he was a modern dance choreographer, but dealing in a lot of narrative, which wasn’t at all fashionable at the time,” Debra Craine, the chief dance critic of The London Times, said in a telephone interview.Mr. Brandstrup dissolved his company in 2006, by which time he had established a thriving career as a freelance choreographer, working frequently with opera companies. Although he created work for ballet troupes beginning in the early 1990s, a series of commissions from the Royal Ballet starting in 2005 propelled him firmly into the classical dance arena.“It was Monica Mason, the director of the company at the time, who really pushed him,” Ms. Craine said. “He already liked a long, elegant line and a length of phrasing, so you can see why ballet directors saw potential in the work.”For City Ballet, Mr. Brandstrup said he chose the Debussy score, famously choreographed by Nijinsky (and, later, by a number of other choreographers), after a stipulation by Peter Martins, the company’s ballet master in chief (and a fellow Dane), that he use a “substantial” piece of music.Mr. Brandstrup had choreographed to the music before in an opera context and said he had remained fascinated by its difficulty. “It has a sense of mysterious drama and atmosphere, but there is also really soaring orchestral music in there, with constant time and sonority changes, and a sweeping waltz that comes and goes,” he said. “I have kept some references to the ideas of game and sexual play in the original ballet, but it’s not exactly a narrative piece.”AdvertisementWorking with the City Ballet dancers, he added, had been a revelation: “The speed of how they process the music and the material has made me run faster. When I first started working with ballet, the important thing for me to understand was that it’s not an aesthetic or a style, it’s a science of motion. If you can free yourself from the aesthetic of 19th-century ballet — and when you have dancers like this — you have a bomb of power in your hands, and you can go anywhere.”A version of this article appears in print on October 8, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Another Path Taken to a City Ballet Debut.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.