By BRIAN SEIBERTDEC. 17, 2015
Accustomed to expressing high passion and fatalistic ideas through music and movement, flamenco companies are better equipped than most theatrical troupes to take on Greek tragedy. In “Antigona,” an adaptation of Sophocles’ “Antigone” by Noche Flamenca, the forms combine so naturally that you might wonder why they aren’t married more often.At West Park Presbyterian Church, where the 90-minute production has returned after a four-week run last summer, an 18-person ensemble of musicians and dancers serves as a vibrant, teeming chorus. Add some simple props — masks, fabric — and all the requisite elements are in place.Soledad Barrio, the lead performer in Noche Flamenca’s “Antigona,” practices the scene “El Entierro de Polineices” in which she buries her brother.For much of its first half, though, the production undercuts itself with cartoonishness: Antigone’s sister talks like a Valley Girl; Antigone’s brothers feebly face off with krumping and pelvis-thrusting flamenco; musicians play kazoos. Aiming for a fourth-wall-dissolving informality, the direction of Martín Santangelo exposes amateurishness and awkwardness instead.Fortunately, the show finds its bearings, focusing on the searing performance of its star, Soledad Barrio, in the title role. Relying on her is the fail-safe method of all Noche Flamenca productions, although this one counts as a breakthrough in terms of group choreography. Merely decorative in previous shows, the dancers framing Ms. Barrio here subtly mirror and amplify her emotions with cutting shapes and percussive exclamations. In this Greek mode, the group has discovered a better way of handling its greatest asset and liability: the overpowering force of Ms. Barrio.She is as extraordinary as ever, her tragic intensity perfectly matched to the part. Sentenced to death for disobeying the king’s order not to bury one of her brothers, she takes off her shoes to step into the river of Acheron. A barefoot Ms. Barrio is a newly vulnerable one. Exiled in a cave, she dances a long solo of anguish, an aria of lament that leads inexorably to her suicide, exerting a gravitational pull that makes the terrible, sudden pileup of suicides in its wake seem inevitable. That’s how Greek tragedy is supposed to work.“Antigona” continues through Jan. 23 at West Park Presbyterian Church, 186 West 86th Street, Manhattan; 212-352-3101, nocheflamenca­.com.A version of this review appears in print on December 18, 2015, on Page C11 of the New York edition with the headline: A Heroine’s Anguish, Percussively Amplified.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.