
The Knick By                     
 MIKE HALE
 
DEC. 19, 2015
Is Thack alive? It’s up to Cinemax. And probably Steven Soderbergh. And maybe Clive Owen.“The Knick” went into its Season 2 finale this week with no promise of renewal, just discussions. In one corner, a channel carrying a critically praised but sparsely watched program. In another, an auteur with a full schedule who’s directed, shot and edited every episode of the show for two seasons. And over here, a major TV, film and stage actor who signed on for two seasons of said sparsely watched cable drama.So the episode became a test case for having it both ways — tying up all the loose ends in ways that were open to future complication. Mr. Soderbergh and the show’s writers, Jack Amiel and Michael Begler, did everything to kill off their main character, Mr. Owen’s John Thackery, except actually admit that he was dead. If Season 3 happens — and Cinemax has reportedly ordered a script for a first episode — there could be a miraculous resurrection or, if Mr. Owen decides not to return, a new iteration of the show focused, you would hope, on Andre Holland’s Dr. Algernon Edwards.Before getting to Thack’s gruesome and, let’s just say it, kind of ridiculous fate, I’ll detour through the other story lines. This gives me the chance to say I was right — Henry Robertson was behind the criminal activity at the family shipping company, and he showed his ruthlessness by threatening to throw his sister, Cornelia, down the stairs when she figured it out.But I was also wrong — it was Henry, not Herman Barrow, who was responsible for the fire at the new Knickerbocker Hospital site, the fire that killed his own father (as we found out early in the episode). Barrow — my favorite character in Season 2, as portrayed by the acidly effervescent Jeremy Bobb — was a suspect, but he once again wriggled out of a bad spot when Henry paid to have the situation go away.AdvertisementChris Sullivan, as the gruff ambulance driver Tom Cleary, has been another highlight of Season 2, but his character’s arc was less interesting than that of the squirrelly, conniving Barrow. There was a parallel going on all season involving lovestruck men — Henry Robertson with Lucy Elkins, Barrow with the prostitute Junia and Cleary with Sister Harriet, real name Rose Dolan. As you could have guessed, the writers finally went sentimental with Cleary and Dolan — after repeatedly rebuffing his proposals of marriage, she came to the breakfast table wearing his ring.AdvertisementThe romance of Bertie Chickering and the journalist Genevieve Everidge wasn’t revisited, though she showed up in the gallery to look anxious during Thackery’s surgery. Lucy Elkins was preparing to spend the summer in Newport with Henry, presumably having wheedled some sort of commitment from him. Cornelia was last seen sailing away from New York, heading to Australia to get as far away from her brother as possible. Everett Gallinger was on the brink of accepting an invitation to promote eugenics in Europe, beginning in Germany, “As good a place as any, I suppose.” Opal Edwards showed up for just a second, comforting Algernon’s mother at the funeral of Robertson père. The role of Edwards himself, diminished throughout the latter stages of Sesaon 2, was slightly less secondary. He had a tense, touching conversation with his father about race, and he figured largely in the coda that presumably would serve as the setup for a third season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the main event was Thackery’s self-surgery, a circuslike scene that could be explained in terms of the character’s arrogance, obsessiveness, guilt and intellectual curiosity — and because he’s a deranged cokehead — but that still barreled past plausibility. That a gallery full of New York’s most respected doctors, including Zimberg of Mt. Sinai, would sit and watch a colleague cut himself open, pull his bowel out of his midsection and start to carve away pieces of it was a little more creative license than I was willing to grant. (It was especially hard to accept given the good will the show has built for its realistic depictions of early medicine.)Still, it was something to watch. Mr. Soderbergh orchestrated the horror-movie and medical-thriller aspects of the scene so well that you could gloss over the sheer insanity and enjoy the details: Edwards sliding down the gallery as Thackery cut closer and closer to various major blood vessels; Thackery quietly narrating the signs of his approaching death; and, in a twist set up weeks ago, Chickering dashing away to find the adrenaline and coming back to plunge a needle into Thackery’s heart.In the aftermath, elegiac shots of a clean operating gallery and a melancholy conversation between Edwards and Henry Robertson suggested, but didn’t confirm, that Thackery had died. Edwards planned to use his inheritance from Henry’s father to continue Thackery’s studies in addiction — “I owe him at least that” — even though only the one patient remained in the Knick’s addiction ward. In a quiet, lovely final scene, he sat down with the patient to continue the therapy sessions that Abigail had begun (before she died on the operating table, triggering Thackery’s self-immolation). “I have bad dreams,” the man said. “Really,” Edwards answered, taking a long, thoughtful pause. “Tell me about them.”If those were the final words of “The Knick,” it was a nice way to go. If they weren’t, maybe Edwards can try to get Thackery off the cocaine and heroin in Season 3. Here’s hoping.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »