By KATHRYN SHATTUCKDEC. 19, 2015
Relish a true-crime mystery? Check out “Making a Murderer,” which is as close to reading a book as streaming gets. On TV, worlds collide and tears flow in “The Longest Ride,” the latest from the Nicholas Sparks brand. And Tina Fey and Amy Poehler make like sisters on “Saturday Night Live.”MAKING A MURDERER on Netflix. For fans of “The Jinx” or “Serial,” there’s this true-crime series about Steven Avery, who spent 18 years in prison for rape before being exonerated by DNA evidence. But two years after his release, he was convicted of murder and sentenced to life. Did he do it? Or was he framed? Laura Ricciardi and Moira Demos investigate. “Even in the age of the high-quality limited series, it’s rare to come this close to the feeling of reading a book — immersive, compulsive and unpredictable, but also exhausting and sometimes mundane and repetitive,” Mike Hale wrote in The New York Times. Still, “for the most part, the series’s novelistic qualities carry the day.” (Image: Mr. Avery)THE LONGEST RIDE (2015) 8 p.m. on HBO. Scott Eastwood, sharing the jawline and hint of a smile of his father, Clint, plays Luke Collins, a derailed bull rider longing to get back in the saddle. Britt Robertson is the art history student headed to New York whose baby blues catch his eye. And Alan Alda is the sage whose own lost love serves as inspiration for their star-crossed affair. It’s a Nicholas Sparks movie, this time incorporating a Hebrew prayer book, avant-garde paintings and a beast named Rango, along with the requisite kissing under a spray of water. “Someone put together a listicle!” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “That’s the kind of criticism this brand was made for.” (Image: Mr. Eastwood)NEW HAMPSHIRE: THE DEMOCRATS DEBATE 8 p.m. on ABC. Hillary Clinton, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont and former Gov. Martin O’Malley of Maryland face off at St. Anselm College in Manchester, N.H.THE WIZ LIVE!  8 p.m. on NBC. Didn’t catch it the first time around? Watch as the newcomer Shanice Williams, playing Dorothy, eases on down the road, with Queen Latifah as the Wiz; Mary J. Blige as Evillene, the Wicked Witch of the West; David Alan Grier as the Cowardly Lion; and Stephanie Mills, who starred as Dorothy in the original Broadway production, as Auntie Em. (Image: Ms. Blige)IMAGINE: JOHN LENNON 75TH BIRTHDAY CONCERT 9 p.m. on AMC. Yoko Ono headlines this tribute to Lennon’s legacy, taped on Dec. 5 at the Theater at Madison Square Garden and featuring John Fogerty, Aloe Blacc, Sheryl Crow, Peter Frampton, Kris Kristofferson, Willie Nelson, the Roots and Steven Tyler. Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr make video appearances. (Image: Ms. Crow and Mr. Tyler)SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE 11:30 p.m. on NBC. Tina Fey and Amy Poehler, who play the yin and yang of siblings in “Sisters,” host. Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band perform.A version of this schedule appears in print on December 19, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Watch Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.