AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasFall for Dance continued its eclectic offerings at City Center on Tuesday night with its third mixed bill, and at this festival, where the new can sometimes look strangely old-fashioned, it was both right and wrong that the most momentous piece on the program turned out to be a 27-year-old work by an 85-year-old choreographer anchored in modern dance. Yes, that would be Paul Taylor.Until the curtain rose on his “Brandenburgs,” however, there were three other pieces, beginning with a premiere by Companhia Urbana de Dança, a Brazilian company that blends street dance, hip-hop and contemporary dance and that made a memorable appearance at the festival in 2010. Why did its return visit fail to give off the same spark? In “Eu Danço — 8 Solos No Geral” (“I Dance — 8 Solos Overall”), Sonia Destri Lie, the company’s artistic director, has reworked an older piece. From the steady beat of the commercial-flavored music by Rodrigo Marçal to the patchwork choreography, “Eu Danço” showed only glimpses of the company’s usual zest.A program note states that to dance “is to be alive,” and in this work, that sentiment soon becomes sentimental, even as dancers, particularly the slender, grounded Tiago Sousa, show their dexterity, swerving swiftly in forward and backward circles that create clusters of frenzy, or pulling away from the group to whirl onto the floor. In the past, what stuck was the dancers’ refined, fresh presence; here, they forced it.What happens when two stars collide? In “Pheromones” — choreographed by Fang-Yi Sheu, formerly of the Martha Graham Dance Company, for herself and Herman Cornejo, of American Ballet Theater — we get an innocuous work for two extraordinary dancers. Set to Philip Glass’s “Facades,” this duet features the pair sinuously weaving around each other’s bodies like magnets and seemingly sniffing each other’s silhouettes. It would be appalling if it weren’t so silly.The Houston Ballet offered “Maninyas,” a work for five couples by the company’s artistic director, Stanton Welch, that focuses on the idea of veils, or the barriers we put up between each other. Mr. Welch takes this on literally in his overwrought dance, set to music by Ross Edwards. Women walk through long pieces of fabric that drape the back of the stage or cover their faces with their hands while bare-chested men, like shadows, dominate. All the while, Mr. Welch’s brittle sense of musicality takes every note into account without enhancing any.It seemed misguided to place that dance next to the lucid, deftly structured “Brandenburgs,” which was given a scintillating performance by the Paul Taylor Dance Company. Set to Bach, this spirited work begins and ends with a still pose in which three women — Michelle Fleet, Parisa Khobdeh and Eran Bugge — stand with their hands on Michael Trusnovec’s shoulders while five men, like the reverse of a female corps de ballet, frame them. Throughout, Mr. Taylor switches between still poses and slow-turning attitudes with lightning-fast leaps that burn across the stage. By its final movement, “Brandenburgs” is a gasp-inducing display of jubilation. Everything else plodded along, but how those Taylor dancers flew.The Fall for Dance Festival continues through Sunday at City Center, Manhattan; 212-581-1212, nycitycenter­.org.Advertisement