AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon ParelesFor the Philadelphia band Beach Slang, every song is a manifesto: The declarations of an outcast saved by rock. “I never fit. I never tried./I need the struggle to feel alive./All I want are records on my stereo,” James Alex sang in “Dirty Cigarettes” as the band started its set at the Knitting Factory on Thursday night. He had just announced: “We’re Beach Slang. We’re here to punch you right in the heart.”It’s a punch they derive from one band in particular. That’s the Replacements, the Minneapolis band that arrived in the 1980s with songs full of cranked-up guitars and churning emotions: yearning, defiance, frustration, uncertainty, nerve. True to their punky roots, and despite the melodies within their scrappy playing, the Replacements never garnered hits, just ardent, loyal fans, particularly among musicians.Beach Slang has just released a debut album, “The Things We Do to Find People Who Feel Like Us,” full of tracks that play like sequels to the Replacements’ “Bastards of Young,” one of the two Replacements songs among its many encores. Beach Slang has soaked up the Replacements’ style, from the major-ninth guitar chords to the way arrangements pivot between vulnerability and blare. James Alex (who was previously known as James Alex Snyder) made his voice scrape and rasp with urgent sincerity while he jittered around the stage, sometimes jumping with splayed legs — and, at one point, missing an exuberant move and falling down. The Replacements, in their rambunctious prime, would have approved.Mr. Alex was one of the singers and songwriters in the pop-punk band Weston, which lasted from 1990 to 2006. The Replacements, which broke up in 1991, were immediate precursors for him. But a decade later (and after a Replacements reunion), more indie-rock nostalgia has encrusted that sound; it’s still a blast, but one from the past. Mr. Alex’s lyrics grapple with fading youth in songs like “Too Late to Die Young,” but in most songs he simply clings to noise and music to keep feeling “young and alive.”Mostly, Beach Slang depends on the music’s own pleasures to barrel past any misgivings. Building on a received style, the band is a little less reckless than the Replacements were; Ruben Gallego’s lead-guitar hooks are neatly placed, and the rhythm section of JP Flexner on drums and Ed McNulty on bass has obviously planned out when the music will surge. Onstage, the band clings to indie-rock scruffiness; Mr. Alex joked that a new drum head with the band’s name on it might be moving Beach Slang too close to professional production values.The band’s heart and adrenaline came through every song. And during the set (and on a so-called “mixtape” it released in October), Beach Slang did play songs from bands other than the Replacements: Senseless Things, Jawbreaker, snippets of the Misfits and George Thorogood. It’s a promising sign. To truly leave nostalgia behind, Beach Slang would do well to broaden its sources.­Beach Slang performs on Saturday at the First Unitarian Church in Philadelphia; beachslang.bandcamp.com.Advertisement