By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMDEC. 18, 2015
The debut recording and debut recital of a chamber ensemble are often made up of the same music. It’s only efficient, after all, to apply the hard work from the recording studio to the high-pressure environment of the concert hall. But when the impressive Danish Piano Trio gave its American debut at Carnegie Hall’s Weill Recital Hall on Thursday, the program contained only one of the little-known gems from its inaugural disc, “Danish Romantic Piano Trios.” Instead, the ensemble’s members, the pianist Katrine Gislinge, the violinist Lars Bjornkjaer and the cellist Toke Moldrup, took the opportunity to introduce themselves as players of wide-ranging interests in two contemporary works.The concert opened with the melodic and impetuous Piano Trio in F (Op. 42) by Niels Gade, a Danish composer who studied with Mendelssohn and briefly succeeded him as chief conductor of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra. It closed with a fluid and energetic rendition of Mendelssohn’s own well-loved Piano Trio No. 1 in D minor, offering a study in similarities and inviting reflection on what made one a repertory staple and the other an obscurity.Two contemporary works that were written for the players showed a different side of their artistry. One was the piano trio “Abgesänge” by the Danish contemporary composer Bent Sorensen, the other Geoffrey Gordon’s “Fathoms,” a cello-and-piano suite based on Shakespeare’s “The Tempest,” for which the American pianist Steven Beck joined Mr. Moldrup.It made sense to shine a spotlight on Mr. Moldrup: With his big-hearted sound and deeply communicative playing, he is the star of the trio and a soloist of growing renown in his native Denmark. Ms. Gislinge played with a poetic touch but a relatively narrow color spectrum; Mr. Bjornkjaer, who appeared nervous, sometimes forced his sound, lending it a dry and metallic edge.But the interaction among the three players was always eloquent, their attentiveness to one another’s gestures and phrases consummate. It was interesting to see the Old World lusciousness with which they approached Gade and Mendelssohn preserved, in pared-down fashion, in “Abgesänge,” an alluring collection of brittle but lyrical swan songs. (The German title translates as “valediction.”) Despite the difference in musical language, there was a heart-on-sleeve vulnerability in this music that sat easily alongside the 19th-century selections.The engaging and colorful “Fathoms” links to the past with unabashedly programmatic, extroverted storytelling. Using a range of extended techniques and unusual textures, Mr. Gordon vividly sketches characters and scenes from “The Tempest.” Caliban’s gruffness, Ariel’s quicksilver curiosity, the glowing romance between Ferdinand and Miranda all came alive in Mr. Moldrup and Mr. Beck’s intense playing. The final movement imagines Prospero drowning his book, with Mr. Moldrup gradually tuning the bottom string of his cello downward, creating the unnerving sensation of something sinking, slowly, to ever darker depths.A version of this review appears in print on December 19, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Well-Loved Sounds and Little-Known Gems From Denmark.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.