By MELISSA EDDYDEC. 18, 2015
BERLIN — A court-ordered report has found that the German art dealer Cornelius Gurlitt was of sound mind when he drew up a will leaving a collection of some 1,200 works to a Swiss museum, lawyers for a relative who has contested the validity of the will said Friday.The collection, which includes works by Gauguin, Renoir, Monet and Cézanne, was amassed by Mr. Gurlitt’s father, Hildebrand Gurlitt, a Nazi-era art dealer. It was discovered in 2012 when officers searched Cornelius Gurlitt’s apartment in Munich as part of a routine tax investigation.The reclusive Mr. Gurlitt died in 2014 at age 81, leaving the art to the Kunstmuseum Bern. A task force set up by the German government to determine the provenance of the works has determined that a handful were either looted by the Nazis or bought at below-market prices. A full report by the commission is expected in January.After Mr. Gurlitt’s death, a cousin, Uta Werner, contested his decision to bequeath the artworks. An expert opinion on Mr. Gurlitt’s mental state was ordered by the Munich state court as part of her legal challenge.AdvertisementThomas Pfaff, a spokesman for Ms. Werner, said Friday that her legal team had received the report and had until Feb. 1 to respond to its finding that despite “severe psychological ailments in the days directly before and after drawing up the will,” Mr. Gurlitt was not impaired.“Ms. Werner will now have this opinion examined by legally and medically qualified experts,” Mr. Pfaff said.AdvertisementThe Munich court confirmed that the opinion had been received and distributed to both sides but refused to comment on its contents, pending its ruling on the case. A lower court struck down Ms. Werner’s claim to the trove in March.A version of this article appears in print on December 19, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Court Report Issued on Gurlitt’s Will.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.