By GIA KOURLASDEC. 18, 2015
Anastasia Meskova isn’t your ordinary Bolshoi ballerina. A first soloist, Ms. Meskova is a single mother — her son will turn 10 in January — and has a parallel career as an actress. (She appears on a Russian drama series.) In the documentary “Bolshoi Babylon,” which explores the state of the Bolshoi after the 2013 acid attack on Sergei Filin, she explains that she works in the Bolshoi, but not the one that she dreamed of. “Let’s hope,” she says, “it’s a sickness that will pass.” Ms. Meskova spoke about the film, through a translator, from Moscow. Here are edited excerpts from the conversation.Q. In the film you talk about how dancers are trained not to show emotions, but you have big emotions. Why did you decide to display them in the documentary?A. I’m slightly different from most ballet dancers. I am a very open, very emotional person who speaks her mind.Q. At first you don’t have a lot of roles to dance, which upsets you. By the end, you are suddenly overwhelmed with parts. It’s kind of abrupt. What changed?AdvertisementA. I think it’s just the cycle of life. Now this autumn is not a good autumn for me. There are a lot of things that I would want to be dancing, which I’m not, and it worries me, but then I just know that that’s the way things are.AdvertisementQ. Has the overall atmosphere changed much since the acid attack?A. It’s almost as if no one really remembers the acid attack inside the company. Of course people remember it, but they’ve all moved on.Q. What is the main tension now?A. One issue now is that we’re very much in a state of limbo because we’re at the end of the Filin years. He’s officially been in charge for the last few months but has not been as present as he could have been. We’re waiting for the new guy to come in. You don’t really know where you stand and what the future holds, and so there’s an insecurity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. How did you see yourself in the film?A. Compared with the other ballerinas, I think I look a bit flimsy and superficial. They’re all talking about big issues and big problems and philosophizing, and I’m just basically going on about my problems in my world and my life.Q. But I think that you’re the only modern character in this film.A. My first impressions were, my God, I look unserious. No depth. But then I watched it again, and I understand what people mean. There are certain stereotypes of ballerinas, that she’s very composed and looks sort of grand and so on — the primas. I’m the one crying with a handkerchief. That’s the way I am. I kind of recognize myself as being quite open in the film.Q. What do you think of Vladimir Urin?A. [Laughs] I don’t think about him. He’s our director. I’m not directly under him, because our most important boss is the artistic director. I see him. I respect him. No big deal. My boss is Filin. From the artistic point of view, I can’t say that I have seen any extraordinary premiere yet under his rule. Some strong new ballet. And opera as well. However, there is also a repertoire that he has inherited, and that was certainly true of the last season. This is the first season now that he’s really started doing his own thing.Q. After the acid attack, people within the Bolshoi were on different sides. Where were you?A. I was in the middle. All the people who were part of this conflict were people who were close to me, so it was very painful. From both sides. I was on very good terms and was a friend of [Pavel] Dmitrichenko [who was found guilty of arranging the attack and sentenced to five and a half years in prison]. We danced together and were in the same class at school. Ten years together. We were friends, so that was very painful. And with Filin also, I had a good relationship. It was very difficult for me. I felt torn.Q. Is it a struggle for you to meet with Mr. Filin?A. He’s often away. He’s very hard to catch, and he’s obviously thinking about his own future. When he was in the building a few days ago, I was able to talk to him and it was fine. Obviously I’m not spending all day outside his office trying to see him. At the beginning when he first came, he had an open-door policy. He was saying: “Come, come, come. If you have an issue, come and see me.” He probably didn’t realize that people would really take him at his word.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.