AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasMaria Alexandrova, a principal at the Bolshoi Ballet since 2004, rarely grants interviews. But she decided to participate in the film “Bolshoi Babylon” because after watching the filmmakers Nick Read and Mark Franchetti work, she felt she could trust them. In the documentary, she fights her way back from an injury and speaks bluntly about the state of the Bolshoi after the 2013 acid attack on its artistic director, Sergei Filin. In advance of the film’s HBO release, Ms. Alexandrova spoke from Moscow through a translator. Here are edited excerpts from the conversation.Q. Do you have much contact with Sergei Filin?A. We practically have no relationship. He just basically publishes on the board what performances he wants me to dance, and I dance them. We say hello to each other as civilized people, but we have no relationship whatsoever. I’m not outside his office begging for parts. He gives me the parts. I dance them. And what he gives me, I use the opportunity and what he doesn’t, I use that opportunity to be involved in other projects.Q. Was it like that before the acid attack too?A. Before that, when he was dancing, he was my main partner for eight years. [Nikolai] Tsiskaridze and Filin were my main two partners. You don’t necessarily have to love or hate someone; you just get on with it. There was no conflict. In Russian ballet, there are no easy people. We’re all difficult characters. Some are more intelligent and some are less intelligent, but you don’t have any people in Russian ballet who are angelic with easy characters. We live in a difficult country; we work in a difficult theater; we depend only on ourselves or you find whichever other way you want.Q. Within the Bolshoi, people took sides after the acid attack: Filin’s or Dmitrichenko’s? [The dancer Pavel Dmitrichenko was found guilty of arranging the attack and sentenced to five and a half years in prison.] Which were you on?A. I chose the theater. I chose my profession. The hardest thing is to explain to people within the company, yes, a terrible tragedy has happened, but it’s part of life, and we should not take sides and divide people between good and bad and black and white. That was always my position. We should think of our profession; we should think of our theater. Even now, I am absolutely deeply convinced that we still don’t know the truth of what really happened and why it happened.Q. One part of the film is about your returning from a serious injury. Why did you want to show that vulnerable side of yourself?A. Injury is part of our profession and part of our life. It’s a ballet dancer’s worst nightmare. Everything relies on your two legs. It’s the fear of not being able to dance again and not being onstage and not having that connection with the audience.Q. What do you think of Vladimir Urin, the Bolshoi’s general director?A. He’s very professional in the sense that he knows how to find common ground with people. He is intelligent, crafty; he’s an operator, and he has a strong character. Under him, we have not had any conflicts. People know where he stands.Q. Have you been able to dance what you’ve wanted to dance since he took over as general director?A. I’d say this to his face: He’s the director of the Bolshoi. He’s not the director of the ballet company, and obviously he has knowledge, but not sufficient artistic knowledge to make those sort of decisions. It’s not up to him. It’s up to a professional ballet person to make those decisions. I’ve always been very fatalistic about what the future might hold.Q. How so?A. I’m a professional person, and if suddenly I am not needed in the Bolshoi anymore, then I’ll just live with it, and I’ll have to move elsewhere. I’ve had quite a lot of contact with the director in terms of management, because I’ve had meetings between the company and the director about trade union pay and nitty-gritty work issues. I’ve never discussed my own private issues with him. He’s not the person that I would talk to about these things. Some people, because of the way that Russia is — where you use connection and access to powerful people as much as you can — will say that I sound silly saying that I don’t. But I’ve always been very independent within the company.Q. The film includes a company meeting, led by Mr. Urin, and during it you have a funny expression on your face — like you’re biting back a smile. What were you thinking?A. I was smiling about the fact of what a rare instance it was when someone like Urin, a director, especially in an institution like the Bolshoi, was actually meeting with the staff and being so direct and open. I was very surprised. It’s very unusual.Advertisement