By GIA KOURLASDEC. 18, 2015
Nearly three years ago, a real-life horror story struck the Bolshoi Ballet: Sergei Filin, the artistic director of the Bolshoi, was attacked with acid by a masked man outside his home. Pavel V. Dmitrichenko, a Bolshoi soloist, was eventually arrested and charged with ordering the attack. He was upset, prosecutors said at his trial, about Mr. Filin’s casting decisions — namely that his girlfriend wasn’t given the role of Odette-Odile in “Swan Lake.”Mr. Dmitrichenko was initially sentenced to six years in prison. Mr. Filin, whose contract runs out in March and was not renewed, has lost much of his sight.Like many who followed the scandal, the filmmaker Nick Read and the journalist and producer Mark Franchetti had little interest in ballet. But they became obsessed with the headline-making story. “I thought, God, what is going on at this extraordinary institution that has such a unique place in the consciousness of Russians?” Mr. Franchetti said in a telephone interview from Moscow, where he is a correspondent for The Sunday Times of London.“The interest was always way beyond the acid attack,” he said. “What does this tell you about what’s going on inside the building and also, to an extent, what does it tells you about contemporary Russia?”AdvertisementIt’s one thing to want to make a documentary; it’s another to gain entry inside the secretive world of Russian ballet. Making “Bolshoi Babylon,” which documents the climate of the company after the acid attack and airs on HBO on Monday, the filmmakers had rare, uncensored access. “It’s very much to Mark’s credit,” Mr. Read said from London. “His achievement was not only getting us in in the first place, but sustaining the access to the whole season — we were inside for about six months.”AdvertisementThere was no written agreement. “There was the possibility that we could make a wrong move or someone could turn against us,” Mr. Read said. “But we worked very hard at maintaining relationships with the management and with the dancers. It took us a long time to win their trust. We went in without cameras and then with cameras and just established a presence.”When they were first allowed in, Anatoly Iksanov was the general director; he was replaced by Vladimir Urin, who had been running the Stanislavsky and Nemirovich-Danchenko Music Theater, and the filmmakers had to reapply for access. Mr. Urin granted it. “I think we should be open in everything that concerns the creative and public work of Bolshoi,” he wrote in a recent email. “Even complicated topics should be discussed honestly and openly.”In interviews with dancers, including Maria Alexandrova and Anastasia Meskova, as well as at a company meeting that shows the tension between Mr. Urin and Mr. Filin, the complexity of the time after the attack is clearly evident.Mr. Filin was the artistic director of ballet of the Stanislavsky and Nemirovich-Danchenko Music Theater before he abruptly left to return to the Bolshoi, where he had been a principal dancer. In the film, Mr. Urin says, “I believe my appointment to this theater wasn’t the happiest day” for Mr. Filin. In 2011, when Mr. Filin became artistic director of the Bolshoi, they parted, Mr. Urin says, on bad terms.Mr. Filin, who will be replaced by Makhar Vaziev in March, is a slippery character in the film. He speaks with surprising frankness about “all kinds of intrigues” that troubled him. And there is a strange, telling scene in which he is shown speaking — in hushed tones — to the principal dancer David Hallberg about changing partners for a coming ballet. “Unlike Urin, who makes decisions very quickly and tells you to your face what his position is, Filin just doesn’t play a straight bat,” Mr. Franchetti said. “I certainly found him pretty frustrating to deal with just as a human being.”It took some time to secure an interview with Mr. Filin, but Mr. Read and Mr. Franchetti wore him down. “We knew he was a crucial component to our story, and we had to be very patient,” Mr. Read said. “Then when we met him, we realized one of the reasons why he’s such a divisive character: He’s very evasive — literally and in terms of his personality. Everything’s whispered words and behind cupped hands, and his door is always closed. He’s the only person in the building you have to queue to get into his office. In the 11th hour, we managed to pull it off.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Why did he agree to participate in the film? “I think he was just desperate to get rid of us,” Mr. Read said, laughing. “We were very persistent, and I think he understood that with the scale of our project that he needed to go on the record.”Mr. Urin said he wanted Mr. Filin to remain at the Bolshoi in some capacity. “We discussed with Sergei projects that he could manage a few days ago,” Mr. Urin said in an email. “It seemed that he was interested. But it’s only Sergei’s choice.”Advertisement“Bolshoi Babylon” offers no easy answers to the questions it raises: Is Mr. Filin a villain or victim? Does Mr. Urin really believe, as he says he does, in transparency? (Mr. Read said he asked Mr. Urin if he believed in democracy; Mr. Urin just laughed.)One of Mr. Urin’s goals was to make casting decisions less mysterious, but not much has changed, Ms. Meskova, a first soloist, said. “Nyet, nyet, nyet, nyet,” she said, laughing in a phone interview. “It’s very difficult to turn your promises and words into actions.”Beyond the more salacious aspects of the story, the film looks at the Bolshoi as a self-contained world, with around 3,000 employees — from cleaners and ushers to dancers and ballet masters. Ms. Alexandrova is shown in the studio as she fights her way back from an Achilles’ tendon injury. One of the Bolshoi’s most revered principals — and a candid one at that — she doesn’t normally grant interviews; it took the filmmakers some time to persuade her to take part.“It was about giving something back to the theater,” Ms. Alexandrova said in an interview from Moscow. “I love that place very much. Yes, it’s difficult. Yes, it’s got problems. But one of the reasons I agreed to be in the film was because I wanted people to understand that, at the end of the day, it’s a wonderful place. No matter what.”A version of this article appears in print on December 19, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Exploring Intrigue and Power of Bolshoi.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.