AdvertisementSupported byThe AffairBy Mike HaleAs promised, the season finale of “The Affair” solved the show’s two-season-long mystery — Who Killed Scotty Lockhart? And in the ripely melodramatic spirit of the show, one killer wasn’t enough. The two central female characters, Helen and Alison, unknowingly joined forces to do away with the show’s most disruptive male force. (Noah is a disruptive male force too, but at least he changes diapers.)Their motive? Oh come on, this is “The Affair.” We laugh at motive. Helen was drunk off her keister and distracted by Noah, so it wasn’t really her fault that she ran Scotty over. Alison was fighting off his unwanted advances, so it definitely wasn’t her fault that she threw him in front of the oncoming car. Perhaps you could say it’s the writers’ fault that Scotty’s death resulted from such a stunning coincidence.Here’s what you need to know about Sunday’s episode in 11 quotations.Alison: “I don’t know who Joanie’s father is.”It was the day of Cole and Luisa’s wedding and feelings were being stirred left and right. Having fled the ceremony (as seen from Noah’s point of view in the opening chapter), Alison admitted that she had slept with Cole.Noah: “Don’t take this the wrong way but I never want to see you again.”Even the “good man” has his limits. Noah cut off Alison and went to the bar, where he downed a wine glass of liquor and ran into Helen. Soon he and Helen were both doing some heavy drinking and reminiscing on the beach.Helen: “It does seem to be a sort of never-ending” sideshow, doesn’t it?Just because I love that line. Shortly afterward, drunk Helen and Noah went for a swim in the ocean, allowing Dominic West to take off most of his clothes one last time.Chris Isaak: “I still love, I still want you, I still need you.”Mr. Isaak’s “San Francisco Days” was apparently a favorite song of Helen’s. Behind the wheel of Noah’s car — because the new, more responsible Noah, with two season’s worth of tortured dialogue flooding through his drunken brain, had pulled over and insisted she drive — she sang along as her still besotted ex stared at her. Then he put his hand over hers, distracting her. Then there was a big bump. (So it was his fault, after all.) Scotty was road kill, and Noah insisted that Helen pretend she had never been in the car. “I love you,” she said as she walked up to her mother’s house. Everybody loves everybody on this show, except poor Scotty.Cole: “I think I always thought I was going to get to be a father again.”This wasn’t central to the murder plot, but Cole’s whining to Alison about Luisa’s inability to have children was just one of the carefully layered ironies. Cole doesn’t know that he already has the child he wants. Noah learns that he can have his solo trip to France after all, because Alison’s too busy with the Lobster Roll to want to go with him.Scotty: “I hope you can understand that and maybe forgive me.”Scotty showed up at the wedding, nearly done with rehab, and apologized for his recent behavior toward Alison. The implication was that now he wouldn’t tell Cole he was Joanie’s father. For just a moment, it looked as if Alison wouldn’t have any motive to kill Scotty.Oscar: “Bailey, you OK? You look a little pale.But nothing stays the same for more than six minutes on this show. Scotty realized that Cole and Alison planned to freeze him out of the management of the Roll and promptly started drinking. Then he sang a long, slow version of “House of the Rising Sun” which, in Alison’s version of the show, prompted her to tell Noah that he definitely wasn’t the father. Alison was upset, and Oscar, who had been hanging around in the background of the wedding, got his one line of dialogue.Alison: “I pushed him.”Alison encountered a drunken Scotty sleeping it off in the boat planter, and when the conversation went badly, he tried to force himself on her. After she accidentally pushed him into the road and saw Helen hit him, she hid in the bushes but emerged to tell Noah the truth. (This tied up a loose end from Noah’s chapter — always protecting her, he left her out of his memory.)Noah: “Come dance with me.”In the episode’s most touching scene — though it might have just been the band playing “April Come She Will” — Noah reappeared at the Roll and took Alison to the dance floor where he told her he loved her (despite the Cole baby). She didn’t answer.Alison: “Then you’ll have to choose.”Jumping to the future, Noah had two choices if he wanted to avoid being convicted. He could let Detective Jeffries testify that he had found a stone place card from the wedding with Alison’s name on it at the crash site, implicating Alison and creating doubt in the jury’s minds. Or he could tell the truth about Helen’s being the driver. Alison or Helen, Helen or Alison. Two seasons of this!Noah: “I’m guilty. I killed Scotty Lockhart.”Finally, Noah, always more sap than coldhearted lecher, took the rap himself. Since it’s “The Affair,” he changed his mind within a matter of seconds, first telling Gottlief to call Jeffries and then leaping to his feet to confess. And as Noah stared at Alison in the gallery, about to head to jail for a death two women caused and wouldn’t be convicted of, there’s your cliffhanger for Season 3!Give us your guesses — Noah in jail or not? — and thanks to everyone who’s contributed to our 12-week post-mortem.Advertisement