By KATHRYN SHATTUCKDEC. 20, 2015
Season 2 sinks back into the ocean, but it’s not the end of “The Affair.” Can’t stand all that drama? Sing along to “The Sound of Music,” or tour some of Britain’s stately homes with Julian Fellowes, the creator of “Downton Abbey.”THE AFFAIR 10 p.m. on Showtime. Season 2 comes to an end — and with it, perhaps, resolution. Who knows? But the drama is far from over. (A third season has been ordered.) For now, a startling admission causes Noah to withdraw from his new life. Alison finally comes clean. A dispute between Cole and Scotty results in calamity. And what happens at the trial is downright shocking. The season finale of “Homeland,” in which the clock runs out, leads in at 9. (Image: Ruth Wilson as Alison)THIS WEEK 10 a.m. on ABC. Fresh off Saturday’s Democratic presidential debate, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont talks about his performance and his campaign’s data breach here and on “Meet the Press,” at 10:30 on NBC. The Republican presidential contenders also promote themselves, with Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey and Donald Trump here; Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky on “State of the Union,” at 9 on CNN; Carly Fiorina on “Fox News Sunday,” at 10 on Fox; and Senator Marco Rubio of Florida and Jeb Bush on “Face the Nation,” at 10:30 on CBS. (Image: Senator Sanders)THE OPEN MIND 3:30 p.m. on World. Karenna Gore, the director of the Center for Earth Ethics at Union Theological Seminary, talks about establishing a value system to drive economic, cultural and civic decisions.AdvertisementTHE 64TH ANNUAL MISS UNIVERSE PAGEANT 7 p.m. on Fox and Azteca America. Paulina Vega of Colombia will crown her successor from among the beauties competing in Las Vegas.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.THE SOUND OF MUSIC SING-A-LONG 7 p.m. on ABC. Go karaoke to “Edelweiss,” “My Favorite Things” and “Climb Every Mountain” in this 1965 Rodgers and Hammerstein classic.GREAT HOUSES WITH JULIAN FELLOWES 7 p.m. on PBS. Mr. Fellowes, the creator of “Downton Abbey,” learns about the romantic intermingling of royalty and commoners at Burghley, built in the mid-16th century by Queen Elizabeth I’s treasurer. At 8, he sleuths out illicit goings-on at Goodwood, for more than 300 years the home to the Dukes of Richmond; the first duke was the illegitimate son of King Charles and a French spy. (Image: Mr. Fellowes)AdvertisementTHE ART OF MORE on Crackle. Feeling excessive? Binge on the bling in this drama about the ugly side of pretty things. Dennis Quaid and Cary Elwes star as conspicuous consumers of smuggled art. Christian Cooke is their auction-house enabler. Neil Genzlinger of The New York Times called it “tasty.” All episodes are now available. (Image: Mr. Quaid and Kate Bosworth)A version of this schedule appears in print on December 20, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Watch Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.