AdvertisementSupported byBy Vivien SchweitzerJohn Cage would surely approve of the 21st-century version of his “prepared piano” that made its debut at Le Poisson Rouge on Tuesday evening. Cage inserted objects beneath and between the strings of a grand piano to create unusual sounds when the pianist pressed the keys.There is already a Prepared Piano App, which lets users click on pictures of the materials Cage used and hear a sampled sound. But the composer and fiddler Dan Trueman takes the concept much further with his “prepared digital piano” app, the high-tech equivalent of Cage’s screws and bolts.Since an electronic keyboard has no strings to tamper with, Mr. Trueman has developed software called the bitKlavier to change the instrument’s basic algorithms. After the keyboard is connected to a laptop or other device with the software, a chord might, for example, trigger a metronome and create an unexpected pulse. Pressing an F could produce a different note; another key might be muted. The app responds to the performer, and thus the effects change as the pianist plays.Mr. Trueman has written a set of eight études called “Nostalgic Synchronic,” inspired by Cage, Ligeti, Nancarrow and Bach, to be performed using the software. Adam Sliwinski, a member of So Percussion who recently recorded the pieces, performed six of them at Le Poisson Rouge.The études, some fast and virtuosic, others spare and introspective, unfolded to beautiful and haunting effect in a haze of pitch-bending, echoes, distorted rhythms and eerie timbres. The psychedelic “Marbles” evokes a cascade of glass balls landing on different surfaces in vigorous rhythmic patterns. One of the études is influenced by Norwegian folk tunes, which Mr. Trueman played unaccompanied with flair on his Hardanger fiddle, an instrument whose scales inspired one of the bitKlavier’s tunings. The system also uses the equal-tempered tuning of modern pianos, as well as the more antiquated just intonation, the combination of which results in myriad colors.To provide a contrast with the bitKlavier’s sometimes unstable tunings, Cristina Altamura (who is married to Mr. Sliwinski) performed five preludes from Bach’s “Well Tempered Clavier” book one on an old-school piano.Mr. Sliwinski and the other members of So Percussion opened the program with Mr. Trueman’s “120bpm” for percussion quartet and laptop, the second section of a work called “Neither Anvil nor Pulley.” Subtitled “What is Your Metronome Thinking?,” the movement incorporates snare drums, woodblocks attached to microphones and the pull cords of a golf video-game controller to create an entrancing variety of rhythmic patterns.Advertisement