AdvertisementSupported byBy Jori FinkelSAN FRANCISCO — As the host of an unorthodox dinner party, Carlie Wilmans held a red Bic lighter up to a pair of propane canisters hanging on stiff wires from the ceiling until one ignited.She then brought the pair tip to tip, so they both flamed and swung wildly — a jury-rigged chandelier sending light bouncing off the distressed surfaces of an otherworldly room, where the cracks of age had been sealed in layers of polyurethane that gave it all an amber sheen.The dozen guests — a mix of Bay Area artists, collectors and curators — applauded. “That looked dangerous,” said Bob Fisher, the chairman of Gap Inc. “Carlie is brave.”But Ms. Wilmans’s real bravery has little to do with handling fire. Rather, she has undertaken an often-daunting preservation project that nobody else wished or dared to assume: buying, stabilizing and preserving 500 Capp Street in San Francisco, the longtime home and studio of the Conceptual artist David Ireland (1930-2009), along with its unruly contents.Starting in 1975, when he bought the Italian style rowhouse in the Mission district, Mr. Ireland turned his home into a vivid stage set for his sculptures and assemblages, many devised from the detritus of former owners. It was not unusual to see gnarly wire “drawings” jutting out of walls or brooms bound together into a Duchampian-worthy ready-made.Mr. Ireland refused to reverse the ravages of time on the 1886 building, preserving its marred and stained walls, ceilings and floor with a polyurethane finish. Some visitors look on the home as a giant abstract painting, while others celebrate it as an early example of architecture as social sculpture, long before Jorge Pardo and Rirkrit Tiravanija turned domestic environments into exhibitions.“I think it’s a manifestation of creativity particular to David,” said Lawrence Rinder, the director of the Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive, and a guest at the dinner.Most agree that the house — which Mr. Ireland opened to the public in 1978 — was the great life’s work of a man who rejected hard and fast distinctions between art and life. “Art occurs in the process of life itself,” Mr. Ireland said in a 1983 radio interview. “It’s all there, and you just tap into it.”Now, for its public debut, the house has been restored — and the objects in it arranged — to evoke his early occupancy. Ms. Wilmans, 47, a granddaughter of the lionized San Francisco arts patron Phyllis Wattis, who runs a cultural foundation in her grandmother’s name, bought the house in 2008 and is opening it starting Jan. 15 with regularly timed tours led by local artists. “There were challenges,” Ms. Wilmans said. “But I never had a moment when I wanted out.”Born in Bellingham, Wash., Mr. Ireland worked as an insurance agent, an architectural draftsman, a carpenter and an importer of African goods before studying at the San Francisco Art Institute in his 40s. There he met conceptualists such as Tom Marioni and Paul Kos and began doing projects in alternative art spaces, acclaimed locally if not always beyond.“These artists weren’t seeking publicity; they were making art for each other,” said Ed Gilbert of the Anglim Gilbert Gallery in San Francisco, which has organized a show on Mr. Ireland and his circle beginning Jan. 20, to coincide with the house’s opening. “Also, a lot of the work was destroyed. He would do architectural installations that were taken apart, and maybe that was a handicap.”One example is a “waterfall” that Mr. Ireland made at the San Francisco Art Institute in 1987 by pouring concrete down a stairway. The school is now recreating the work for its own January show, co-curated by Connie Lewallen, an Ireland scholar.When Mr. Ireland bought 500 Capp Street in 1975, for $50,000, he initially thought he would use his construction skills to do a gut renovation. Instead, the odd, persistent history of the house moved him.He filled a glass jar with rubber bands left by a previous occupant, a Swiss accordion maker whose name (“P. Greub”) still appears in gold leaf on the ground-floor window, and added a soundtrack of rubber bands being removed from a newspaper. He found 18 leftover brooms and stood them on their bristles like an upside-down bouquet, leaning against a counterbalance with a concrete base for stability.Even sweeping the house, a repetitive everyday task in which he found a Zen-like meaning, yielded odd fruit: Mr. Ireland collected the dirt or sawdust in jars for display. Another favorite ritual: throwing concrete from one gloved hand to another for hours on end until it formed a perfect sphere, which he called a “dumbball.”At the same time he worked on the house itself “like an archaeologist,” as he often said, peeling paint and wallpaper back to reveal marks and pits and cracks — some surely the sign of earthquakes — and using the polyurethane to preserve them. He removed baseboards here and window trim there, often exposing the sash weights that balance glass panes.For one installation he replaced a broken windowpane with the kind of copper plate usually used for etching. But he also created and placed nearby an audio recording in which he rapidly describes the view from the now-obscured window, including neighboring houses, a church spire and the city skyline.That concealing but revealing installation made a strong impression on Ms. Wilmans during her first visit, in 2008, at a point when it seemed nearly certain that the house would be sold and gutted or torn down. Residing in assisted living at this point, Mr. Ireland had made the decision to sell it and had tax reasons to do so quickly. Friends including Mr. Gilbert, the dealer; Ann Hatch, founder of the Capp Street Project, a nonprofit originally based in another Ireland house made of corrugated metal; and Jock Reynolds, the artist-curator who now runs the Yale University Art Gallery, mobilized to find a benefactor.Ms. Wilmans knew Mr. Ireland’s work a bit from serving as a trustee at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, which acquired “Broom Collection With Boom” in 2007 (and is loaning it to the house on a short-term basis).“My jaw dropped; I was like a wide-eyed kid in there,” she said. “ I didn’t know what I wanted to do with the house. But I knew that I didn’t want it to go away.”She was particularly moved by the window installation, which preserves an irrecoverable moment in the fast-moving history of Mission District gentrification. “You can’t cut this work out from the house and hang it on a gallery or museum wall and have it mean anything,” she said.She purchased the house with personal funds for $895,000 and had the chance to meet Mr. Ireland a few times before his death. “He was a total flirt — he asked me to run away with him,” she noted. He did not, however, provide “instructions for what to do or even preferences of what he wanted,” she said. In effect, he gave her a mission not unlike his own, of sorting through the odd remnants of the previous occupants.She brought Ms. Hatch and Mr. Reynolds onto the board of her newly formed 500 Capp Street Foundation. Their biggest challenge was securing the house’s foundation.“It was during escrow, during my inspection period, that I saw the basement for the first time: It was a dirt cave, basically, that had been carved away, dug out with picks and hammers. It looked like a mine shaft,” Ms. Wilmans said. Four-by-fours propped up the first floor “like toothpicks holding up the house.”“It was very cool looking, wild aesthetically, but one of the most frightening things I’ve ever seen,” she said. She thought at first they would have to jack up the house, but in the end her team of architects, contractors and consultants managed to build a new foundation piecemeal without moving the house at all.Other work included stabilizing the walls by injecting adhesive between the lath and plaster with a veterinarian’s needle and transforming a small bathroom into an elevator shaft.A desire for public access guided a number of these decisions. “We don’t want to put a bell jar over the house,” Ms. Wilmans said, mentioning plans to change the particular installation of objects three times a year, drawing on the more than 2,000 works donated to the 500 Capp Street Foundation by the Ireland estate in 2011. “We want this to be an ongoing, living, breathing thing.”Mr. Reynolds agreed. “I don’t want to be mean, but I remember visiting Donald Judd’s home in Marfa and having someone tell me: ‘Don’t move that pencil.’”He added, “We don’t want this to be that sort of sacred time capsule.”In this Ms. Wilmans and Mr. Reynolds are taking their cue from Mr. Ireland, who often rearranged the contents of the house but didn’t fundamentally alter his preservation of its walls and other surfaces.As the artist wrote in a small notebook that was recently donated by his sister’s family and now rests on the fireplace mantel, he sought to turn 500 Capp Street into a sort of “tomb for the living.”“I sealed it forever,” he added, “to protect it from the arbitrary attacks of the future.”Advertisement