By BEN RATLIFFDEC. 16, 2015
This was a year of muchness.When I listened to many records from this year — Kamasi Washington’s “The Epic,” a nearly three-hour jazz windfall with strings and choir; or Kendrick Lamar’s 78-minute audio biomythography “To Pimp a Butterfly,” shouldering vast amounts of pride and guilt; or Titus Andronicus’s two-disc punk opera, “The Most Lamentable Tragedy,” which outlines the manic-depressive cycle; or Joanna Newsom’s “Divers” and Elysia Crampton’s “American Drift,” two dense concept-album allegories about land and time; and even Adele’s two singles, “Hello” and “When We Were Young,” each almost five minutes long — I thought about what I used to call saturation points. They seemed less important, somehow. I felt them only dimly. Are they real? Were they ever?At the same time, I was noticing myself and other readers gulping down thousands of pages of Elena Ferrante’s Neapolitan quartet and Karl Ove Knausgaard’s “My Struggle,” as well as the entire translated opus of Clarice Lispector, enlarged significantly this year by the publication of her collected stories.Life may be coming at us in brief and shallow bursts, but it also now involves streaming a full series on Netflix in one go, which has joined the short list of things the average person might do in very long stretches, like work or travel or surgical procedures. It also involves listening to long podcasts about minutiae, or gazing into music videos significantly longer than the songs they are promoting. (A renowned example this year was Rihanna’s “Bitch Better Have My Money,” but nearly every regional Mexican hit has a video like this.) Quentin Tarantino’s new movie runs three hours, with an intermission; Matthew Barney’s, twice that. More than a million people, in person, saw U2 play a concert this year called “Innocence and Experience,” a thematically grand entertainment about those things but also idealism and generosity, childhood and heroism, love and hate, ambition and fear, and pretty much everything else under the sun.Let’s be clear: Length and immersiveness and density in art are not exclusive of other attributes, and they’re nothing new, in popular music or anything else. There was Proust and Wagner and minimalism and raves and the Sanskrit epics. (Mr. Lamar’s last album was pretty dense, too.) Also, muchness is only a counterforce: The concise three-and-a-half minute pop single has not gone away. Justin Bieber and Carly Rae Jepsen made a few of them lately, and the four-word chorus of Ms. Jepsen’s biggest hit this year — “I really really really really really really like you” — represented a feat of simplicity, though it worked pretty hard for it.The normalization of muchness might not be more than the mechanical outcome of a changing business model. Format dictates form. The technological constraints of the 78 r.p.m. record a century ago led to the three-and-a-half minute single. So terrestrial radio is losing its primacy, fewer people are buying 40-minute albums, and artists can connect with their fans directly to create a new measurement of success? O.K. then — many musicians will make the records they want to make without limits, which are probably longer. Or just greater in number: They’ll put out a few albums in a short period, not as a primary and an alternate — just two records, as Prince and Beach House both did this year. (“Just experimentin’,” Beach House tweeted after releasing the second one.) By doing so, they design their own audiences. It’s more than weeding out the spectators and keeping the participants; it’s a process of teaching them how to listen, and it has no end. In 20 years, we might be talking about the half-hour hit single, and we may not remember then what we mean now by the term “hit.”At any rate, muchness seemed to take on a new importance this year. In Buddhism, there is a concept called Tathata, commonly translated as “suchness,” which is used to denote the indisputable and ultimate nature of any given thing. At some point, the all-or-nothingness of all this music no longer appeared to be a fluke or a liability or a risk, or a way to make a record stand out or seem unusual. In each case, it felt central to the task, normative, the state of things as they are and must be. On a large scale, in this year’s nonclassical music, muchness found suchness.There is a long tradition of musicians training us how to listen. But there is also a tradition of dancers on the floor influencing the band on the stage, as it were, and as it is: At Time Warp festival in Brooklyn this year, Seth Troxler and Jamie Jones played a four-hour set, trading songs back to back. It’s not clear whether audiences are actually demanding a three-hour album or a four-hour D.J. set or a 3,000-page novel, but you can make a case for why they would.Don’t you feel a general sense that time, for all of us and in many different ways, is running out? (Molly Lambert, formerly a staff writer at Grantland — whose time ran out this year — recently posted a tweet headed “The Top Ten Best Songs of 2015,” followed by these 10 words in numbered order: “the world is melting and fascism is on the rise.”) Don’t you feel that the remaining moments count more? And doesn’t that make you want to stay longer with what you like — maybe for solace, or to help you to feel stronger once back out in the world, or just as a reaction against the daily insult of distraction?There was a previous era of muchness in pop: the mid-1970s to early 1980s, when record-business riches and technology advances became clear and sort of fascinating. Therefore, the literal precedents for all that we’re seeing now: an album like Yes’s “Tales From Topographic Oceans” — four sides with one track each, remember? — and a 13-minute video like Michael Jackson’s “Thriller.” That may have been a result of time and money and resources. This new development seems to be coming from the opposite circumstances: less time, less money, fewer resources, but more knowledge.We all know now that most of us have a strange ability to take in huge amounts of information in a short time. And we all know that what we need most may be going away, starting with the land we’re standing on. What can brevity and concision do to help that?A version of this article appears in print on December 20, 2015, on Page AR20 of the New York edition with the headline: Time Is on Their Side.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.