By JAMES R. OESTREICHDEC. 16, 2015
Avid P. D. Q. Bach followers, and there were many, knew the routine cold. The stage was set, the orchestra was ready, the announced time for the concert had arrived. But the star of the evening — its perpetrator and host, Peter Schickele — was nowhere to be found.Bill Walters, the droll stage manager audiences loved to hiss, would saunter out, upbraid latecomers, peer at his watch, shrug his shoulders and slouch back to the wings. Time dragged.Then a shout rang out, and Mr. Schickele would materialize in a box or balcony, hopelessly disheveled in formal dress and work boots. He would clamber over the rail, shimmy down a rope to orchestra level and mount the stage, and the show was on.Mr. Schickele, a prolific composer in his own right, begat the ill-begotten P. D. Q. — “the last and least of the great Johann Sebastian Bach’s 20-odd children, and the oddest” — while a student at the Juilliard School in 1954. In 1965, he began annual P. D. Q. Bach concerts in New York, rich, inimitable mixtures of slapstick and sophistication, parody (as in “Oedipus Tex,” P. D. Q.’s “infamous Western oratorio”) and sincerity.AdvertisementIn the early days, he sometimes swung onto the stage like Tarzan from a high balcony or risked his neck in some other way. But decades pass, and age happens. Mr. Schickele stopped the New York run 10 years ago.Advertisement“I had health problems during that time and was in and out of the hospital,” he said recently in the Upper West Side apartment that serves him and his wife, the poet Susan Sindall, as home and office.But on Dec. 28 and 29 at Town Hall, Mr. Schickele is bringing it all back in “P. D. Q Bach: The Golden Anniversary.” Well, not quite all. The acrobatic entrance will have to go, and the physical humor that was so much a part of the performances will be curtailed. Mr. Schickele turned 80 in July, and he now walks with difficulty, using a cane. He will do the concerts in a wheelchair.“That way I won’t have to worry about balance problems,” he said. “It relaxes me a lot.”As Mr. Schickele surely knows and undoubtedly intends, the wheelchair will draw laughs, the audience thinking it’s part of the show. Something similar happened when the timpanist Benjamin Herman joined him on stage in a P. D. Q. show in 1983 with crutches and a full-length cast on a broken leg. The audience found it hilarious.“What we’ve learned over the years,” Mr. Walters, the stage manager, said in a recent interview, “is that no matter what happens at the beginning of a show, people think it’s a joke.” Expect Mr. Schickele to play the wheelchair bit to the hilt.Mr. Herman, a perennial, is back this year, as the excellent timpanist and the contractor of the New York Pick-Up Ensemble, the performance’s orchestra. The announcement of the Dec. 28 concert, he said, sent a thrill through the New York freelance community, so beloved is Mr. Schickele among musicians. Looking to hire 35 players, he needed to make only 36 phone calls: One person had out-of-town plans. Everyone else signed on immediately, some canceling more lucrative engagements to do so.“Absolutely everybody is on board with this thing,” Mr. Herman said, adding of Mr. Schickele: “He’s a miracle of a man. He has brought about so much love and affection and respect and joy in so many people.”Also back are Mr. Walters and Jorge Mester, who conducted many of those early P. D. Q. Bach concerts more than 50 years ago. The repertory, too, will be familiar to longtime fans. Not all of the music is by P. D. Q.; some is by composers actually competent, like Beethoven.Advertisement“New Horizons in Music Appreciation” presents the first movement of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony in the form of a sportscast. Mr. Schickele does the play-by-play, and Mr. Walters is the referee, assessing penalties of, say, five or 15 measures for contrived infractions, to be played by a conductor-less orchestra or gesticulated by an orchestra-less conductor.A local personage has generally played the role of color commentator on Mr. Schickele’s tour programs. At Town Hall it will be Elliott Forrest of WQXR radio, and he will have big shoes to fill, notably those of the veteran sportscasters Curt Gowdy and Dick Enberg, once a one-two punch at the Los Angeles Philharmonic.Other legitimate composers will be heard fleetingly in “Uptown Hoedown,” one of Mr. Schickele’s trademark pastiches of familiar classical tunes. The rest of the program is pure P. D. Q. Bach, if that is not a contradiction in terms. (P. D. Q.’s plagiarism, Mr. Schickele likes to say, was limited only by his faulty technique.)There will be the “Perückenstück (Hairpiece from ‘The Civilian Barber’),” “the only surviving aria from P. D. Q. Bach’s hopelessly lost opera”; “Swing Sweet, Low Chariot,” “a folk song derangement for tenor profondo and orchestra”; and, yes, selections from “Oedipus Tex.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Schickele was ahead of his time with his motley pastiches. Mash-ups, such manipulations are called today, and, together with samples and remixes, they are all the rage. But the P. D. Q./Schickele phenomenon was also very much a product of its time.“The mid-60s were the heyday of the L.P.,” Mr. Schickele said. “The Baroque boom had set in, and the time was ripe for a Baroque backlash. It would be very difficult to start doing this now.”What’s more, while a certain basic familiarity with classical music may not be essential to appreciating most of the show’s humor, it certainly helps with the myriad subtleties. And such familiarity can no longer be assumed of younger listeners (or indeed, many older ones) in a time of vanishing music education.Still, Mr. Schickele does not worry over about how much of the humor is lost. “I’ve always gone by what I think is funny,” he said. “If someone doesn’t know that Elgar’s First Symphony has four flats, it doesn’t matter. Either the jokes will go by you, or you’ll get them.”Understandably, and mercifully, P. D. Q.’s compositional activity has slowed in recent years, but as Mr. Schickele pointed out, P. D. Q. is the only dead composer who still accepts commissions. The pianist Jeffrey Biegel has commissioned a P. D. Q. Bach concerto, which occupies Mr. Schickele at the moment. Mr. Biegel has lined up a consortium of orchestras to perform it, starting with the Colorado Symphony in September.Advertisement“This will be the first concerto not played by me,” Mr. Schickele said, “so I can let loose. I don’t have to keep a lid on it.” Mr. Schickele’s own ambitions as a pianist were cut short when he contracted polio at 19. He ended up with limited use of his left hand and a left foot that flops, all of which makes his earlier physical exploits seem even more remarkable.Mr. Schickele’s compositional activity under his own name continues apace as well. He is finishing another big work, his Third Symphony. By and large, his music is as open, approachable and amiable as he is. Here, too, he was always a little ahead of his time, standing apart from the atonalism and serialism once in vogue and taking a view that many young composers have come around to today: In the words of the slogan of his former radio broadcast, “Schickele Mix,” “all musics are created equal.”Mr. Mester said of Mr. Schickele’s own music: “It is beautiful, American and nostalgic. He is a really great composer for orchestra, and it makes me sad that his big orchestral works have never been recorded. He’s one of the few composers who always knows what he wants. He’s a very, very serious guy.”That may well be, but for now, at least, it’s down to unserious business for all concerned. Mr. Herman, the timpanist and orchestra contractor, described some of the preparations for the concerts, including a session with Mr. Walters, the stage manager, and Susan Palma, the principal flutist.The “Perückenstück” calls for one of Mr. Schickele’s many outlandish instruments: No, not the left-handed sewer flute, but the pumpflute. It requires two players, one to pump and one to, well, flute. Mr. Walters warned that if pumped too hard, the instrument will overblow. “But that’s not really a bad thing,” he added.This is in keeping with the guiding principle of the enterprise, as summarized by Mr. Herman: “If anything can go wrong, hopefully it will.”Mr. Schickele grew reflective at the end of the interview. “Years ago I used to watch Victor Borge, still concertizing in his 80s,” he said of another brilliant and formative classical music humorist. “And it never occurred to me that I would do the same. I’m amazed that P. D. Q. has gone on for 50 years. It just goes to show, some people never learn.”A version of this article appears in print on December 20, 2015, on Page AR10 of the New York edition with the headline: Here’s Hoping a Lot Goes Wrong  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.