By ALASTAIR MACAULAYDEC. 16, 2015
Ballet exudes tradition, is surrounded by conservatism and still depends on a small core repertory of 19th-century classics. This century, though, it’s been showing multiple signs of changing its character. Some reforms remain too few: Misty Copeland’s historic ascent to become American Ballet Theater’s first African-American female principal, for example, will dwindle into mere tokenism unless other black ballerinas soon start to make an equal impact. Still, there have been important dances reflecting the racial diversity of the Western world. More generally, ballet has begun to reflect an altered society.What’s become evident, especially this year, is the new propensity shown by diverse choreographers to give equal weight to same-sex and opposite-sex couples. In his most recent ballet, “New Blood” (New York City Ballet, Oct. 1), Justin Peck addressed this equality as if it were his latest assignment. Characteristically, this precociously accomplished young man brought it off as a virtuoso compositional feat.“New Blood” has a chain-like series of duets in which B, having danced with A, now partners C. Then C partners D; and so on — until all of the cast’s seven men and six women have taken part. It happens that some of those duets are female-female and male-male; most are male-female. Though each of the 12 duets is different, the same-sex ones aren’t significantly different from the opposite-sex ones.You learn about modern ballet by watching Mr. Peck’s work; he’s learning it, too, as he goes along. His first professional ballet was in 2012, yet already he’s in demand across the nation and across the Atlantic. His most marvelous creation to date had its premiere at City Ballet in February: “Rodeo: Four Dance Episodes.” (At every New York performance I’ve witnessed, people have greeted it with wonderment and rapture, apparently proud to be part of the age that has brought it into being.)I’ve repeatedly praised its second movement, a men-only quintet. (A City Ballet devotee pointed out to me that only one of the five men is entirely Caucasian; it’s a sign of our era that this fact is of only incidental interest.) What’s miraculous is how a quiet adagio mood is sustained through an ensemble that involves gentle male-male partnering. These men’s sexuality is not an issue; they’re caught in a spell larger than one of love or sex. The result enlarges our idea of masculinity in dance.AdvertisementThis quintet, though beautiful, is nothing radical. Modern dance has been making a point of same-sex cooperation since the 1980s. Richard Alston, Bill T. Jones, Lar Lubovitch and Mark Morris were all in the vanguard back then. Ballet, however, has tended to remain what academics call heteronormative. (After you’ve said this horrid word four times, it trips off the tongue quite usefully.)AdvertisementI began labeling ballet “the sexist art” 30 years ago. True, the word “sexist” tends to be applied where women are being demeaned or overlooked, whereas ballet has long privileged and glorified women. What’s more, the 20th century’s greatest ballet choreographer, George Balanchine, made a series of classics in which women do not live for love and often seek independence from the male partners whom they also need.Yet ballet remains the sole art that is predicated on a dichotomy between female and male. She rises on point; he does not (except as a clowning or animal effect). He must partner her; she is not expected to return the compliment.This doesn’t correspond to a society in which wives and mothers also hold the same jobs as men; it doesn’t reflect the strength shown by many women in supporting their men, financially and/or emotionally. And none of it matches a Western society in which civil unions and marriages between people of the same sex have become a prime topic (let alone a ballet culture where the quotient of gay men is high).Actually, ballet has always contained scope for variety. There were female-female duets when the genre was young in the 17th century. A woman supporting another woman is seen in Balanchine’s “Symphonie Concertante” (1947), a man another man in his “Orpheus” (1948). Still, these moments have been exceptions to the rule.In recent decades, the male-female pas de deux, rather than develop along equal-opportunity lines, has increasingly turned into the acrobatic manhandling of one sex by the other. (Guess which.) Many 21st-century choreographers — Christopher Wheeldon and Liam Scarlett are prime examples — seldom allow a man to dance while a woman is nearby. Instead he bends her, lifts her, turns her, manipulates her, allows her no space of her own. She shines, but only on his terms. And male dancing tends to be a closeted activity: He does it only when she’s out of sight or not looking. There’s no equality in the work space and little of the freedom that Balanchine conferred upon his women.Fortunately, several other choreographers have been pushing the envelope for some years. Mr. Morris, though usually at his finest when working with his own Mark Morris Dance Group, tends to be interestingly provocative when creating for ballet troupes; he’s made a series of works that have shaken up the audience’s ideas of gender. The most fascinating of his experiments along these lines has been “Beaux” (2012, to Martinu music), made for nine men alone.Three other City Ballet world premieres occurred at the same gala as Mr. Peck’s “New Blood.” All of them — Robert Binet’s “The Blue of Distance,” Troy Schumacher’s “Common Ground” and Myles Thatcher’s “Polaris” — showed the same calm about sexual parity. “Common Ground,” like some earlier pieces by Mr. Schumacher (he has his own company, BalletCollective), also shows men and women sharing the stage, and sometimes duets, with a degree of give and take and mutual support that refreshes the genre. In a 2013 piece, “The Impulse Wants Company,” a man (Harrison Coll), while dancing on a large scale, was physically supported by a woman (Kaitlyn Gilliland) and others in an image that, again, added to our idea of masculinity in ballet.AdvertisementThese surely are only beginnings. Ballet has contained searching and intimate statements of heterosexual love and eroticism for decades; so far its homosexual duets have been politely decorous affairs. (Modern dance, again, has gone much further.) It’s alarming how few ballets are being made by women. Balanchine shared his era with the female choreographers Bronislava Nijinska, Ninette de Valois and Agnes de Mille, all of whom left enduring works. Once you’ve mentioned Twyla Tharp, where are their equivalents today?A few of Ms. Tharp’s ballets are modern classics. I wish, though, that some were better known. In “Waiting at the Station,” her 2013 creation for Pacific Northwest Ballet, the ballerina Carrie Imler was a character like nobody else in ballet repertory: a comic hausfrau in dress and cardigan, far from amused by her husband’s interest in another woman, breezing across the stage in powerful leaps and rippling to the music (a commissioned score by Allen Toussaint, on the cusp of jazz and R&B), with a forceful vehemence that turns her into a deity, bizarre, uproarious and disturbing.Though not all the “Waiting at the Station” narrative was clear, its dancing was too irresistible for that to matter. Here was that rare species — a ballet about real people in our world, set to new music.A few years ago, it looked as if the main breakthrough in dance theater lay in video and computer technology, which can create other planes of existence around the dancers, and can change our idea of the world onstage. (Why have there been so few important experiments along these lines of late?) The way, here as so often, was pointed by Merce Cunningham, whose 1999 “Biped” (immediately hailed as choreography for the 21st century) created a poetic interplay between live dancers and computer-generated dance imagery. This, though made for modern dancers, has already joined the repertory of one ballet company (the Bayerisches Staatballett in Munich); as Juilliard Dance performances this spring reminded us, it’s a classic by which our age should be remembered.Another visual change is now widespread in modern ballet: the omission of tights. Mr. Peck’s “Rodeo” is one instance among many. Its lone woman has legs bare from point shoes to leotard, and the five men of that quintet have similarly exposed thighs and knees. I don’t mean to underrate the surface beauty of finely trained dancers’ flesh; but the effect, as I’ve argued before, radically changes ballet aesthetics. Show us bare muscles, bare knees, and we’ll stop noticing the transcendent line and geometry of ballet in favor of flesh, sinews, joints. Ballet for centuries has given us the ideal form in ways correspondent to the nude in art; many new ballets instead show us nakedness and exposure.It’s quite possible that, as ballet goes on changing in the 21st century, it will grow less splendid than the art many of us fell in love with in the 20th. That art reached extraordinary peaks in the perfect and ceremonious hierarchies of “The Sleeping Beauty” (1890) and “Symphony in C” (1947); it’s hard to imagine any choreographer wanting to create comparable realms today. What matters, however, is that the art is not fixed in amber. We can go to see new ballets and recognize in their stage societies aspects of the world we know.A version of this article appears in print on December 20, 2015, on Page AR9 of the New York edition with the headline: Duets That Reflect the World Offstage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.