
Playlist By                     
 NATE CHINEN
 
DEC. 16, 2015
LOTUSEvery year as the lists of best albums are published, there comes a heartbreaking late arrival, an entry that probably could have been a contender with a few more months (weeks? days?) of exposure. For me, “Lotus” (World Culture Music), the fifth release by the jazz guitarist Mike Moreno, is one of these: an album with such an attractive glow of intuition, and such accomplished musicianship, that it can only be a source of second-guessing. Mr. Moreno, whose temperament runs cool but intense, works here with a post-bop precision strike team: Aaron Parks on acoustic and Fender Rhodes pianos, Doug Weiss on bass and Eric Harland on drums. The compositions are thoughtful but unfussy, with subtle contours, a floating momentum and a prevailing emphasis on melody. Mr. Moreno, playing acoustic and electric guitars, never settles for an ungainly or overfamiliar idea, and his band mates work intently in the service of the whole.FACTORY GIRLThe slyly antiquarian Southern folk singer Rhiannon Giddens made “Factory Girl,” a five-song EP, out of the leftovers from her sessions for “Tomorrow Is My Turn.” But the EP, which like the album is on Nonesuch, shouldn’t be understood in subordinate terms. It’s a clutch of tunes that work together like the cards in a winning poker hand. Ms. Giddens, singing with clarion power, alludes to Sister Rosetta Tharpe, Ethel Waters and Gaelic mouth music. Her accompaniment, by the fiddler Gabe Witcher and others, points to an ageless gold standard for American roots music. The crux of the EP is a pair of storytelling songs — the title track, an Irish dirge with new lyrics inspired by a deadly factory collapse in Bangladesh, and “Moonshiner’s Daughter,” a stomping ode to Giddens family lore that Ms. Giddens wrote with her sister, Lalenja Harrington, and her producer, T Bone Burnett.KNEEDELUSHybridism often leads the agenda when an electronic producer aligns with a jazz ensemble — but what if both parties are already hybridized to the hilt? The Los Angeles label Brainfeeder has lately been in the business of answering that question, with albums like “Kneedelus,” a convergence of the chamber-groove ensemble Kneebody and the atmospheric beat alchemist Daedelus. Available in digital formats, it feels less like a meeting than a melding, benefiting from a long collaborative history: Ben Wendel, the saxophonist in Kneebody, knew Daedelus, a.k.a. Alfred Darlington, as a jazz bassist back in high school. So in addition to flashes of hyperkinetic fusion — on “Platforming,” featuring an uncorked solo by Mr. Wendel, and “Loops,” with strong work by the trumpeter Shane Endsley and the drummer Nate Wood — there are calmly brooding tracks with no apparent point to prove. The standout is “Home,” with a near classical melody and a meditative drift evoking Miles Davis’s “In a Silent Way.”CELESTIAL WEATHERThe trumpeter Wadada Leo Smith and the bassist John Lindberg have been associates in the jazz avant-garde for more than 35 years, and steady partners over the last decade. But they hadn’t made a duo album before “Celestial Weather,” a work that underscores the acuity of their rapport. Recorded in 2012 but just released on the Finnish label Tum, it includes “Feathers and Earth,” a soulful two-part invention by Mr. Lindberg, and “Celestial Weather Suite,” a series of five expressionistic set pieces by Mr. Smith. The playing is measured and deeply responsive, with Mr. Lindberg often bowing his bass on equal footing with Mr. Smith, whose tone is focused and clear. Some of the most riveting interplay comes in Mr. Smith’s memorial tribute to a colleague in the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, “Malachi Favors Maghostut — A Monarch of Creative Music.”YE OLDEOn his admirably bonkers new album, “Ye Olde” (Yestereve), the trombonist Jacob Garchik fuses elements of prog-rock overtures, medieval fanfares and downtown New York skronk-jazz. He has concocted a tongue-in-cheek narrative for this music — something about a retro-futurist quest inspired by all the gargoyles and grotesques on the apartment buildings of Flatbush, Brooklyn. His band features Vinnie Sperrazza on drums and three sonically adventurous guitarists: Jonathan Goldberger, Mary Halvorson and Brandon Seabrook. They work as a team, spreading out across the spectrum, so that you might hear a wobbly twang, a fuzztone bark and a molten gnarl, all within the same phrase or two. But Mr. Garchik, the in-house arranger for both Banda de los Muertos and the Kronos Quartet, keeps the music smartly coiled. The intricacy and the audacity are natural partners here, and the band attacks both with fearsome commitment.A version of this article appears in print on December 20, 2015, on Page AR20 of the New York edition with the headline: A Guitarist’s Jazz Intuition, American Roots and Double Hybrids.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »