Bill Cosby is suing another one of his accusers for defamation.The woman, Beverly Johnson — the first black model to appear on the cover of the American edition of Vogue, in 1974 — had accused the entertainer of drugging her.The lawsuit, which was filed in Los Angeles County Superior Court in California, calls accusations by Ms. Johnson “false, malicious, opportunistic and defamatory” and says she made them in an “attempt to revive her flagging career.”In a statement, Mr. Cosby’s lawyer, Monique Pressley, said, “Mr. Cosby states that he never drugged defendant and her story is a lie.”The lawsuit contends that a chapter in Ms. Johnson’s memoir, “The Face That Changed It All,” which was published in August, focused on a “false account” regarding her interactions with Mr. Cosby that included her accusation that he drugged her. Mr. Cosby’s suit seeks an injunction to remove the chapter about him.The lawsuit also says Ms. Johnson gave defamatory statements on television shows and in articles that appeared in publications including Vanity Fair and People magazine.During one television appearance, the lawsuit says, Ms. Johnson said that she saw Mr. Cosby in an airport after her memoir was published and that he appeared shocked and walked by her. Mr. Cosby denies Ms. Johnson’s allegations about the encounter, saying in the lawsuit: “Mr. Cosby has suffered from a degenerative eye condition for years,  which has steadily worsened recently to the point that he for over a year has been legally and functionally blind.”A representative for Ms. Johnson could not immediately be reached for comment.Mr. Cosby’s latest legal action follows his move last week,  when he struck back against seven other women who had accused him of sexual assault and defamation by, in turn, suing them for defamation and denying their allegations.Ms. Johnson, one of many women who have come forward in the past year to accuse Mr. Cosby of drugging or assault, had not taken legal action against the star.Ms. Johnson had said, originally in a first-person account to Vanity Fair, that Mr. Cosby put a drug in her coffee at his New York home in the mid-1980s, when she had gone there to read for a small part in “The Cosby Show.”When she objected, she wrote, Mr. Cosby dragged her out onto the street while she was feeling woozy and put her in a taxi.A version of this article appears in print on 12/22/2015, on page C4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Cosby Sues Accuser.