AdvertisementSupported byTransparentBy Rachel SymeAfter the intense end of Episode 9, the season finale feels a bit like a hangover: a slow, slurry reckoning with all of the pleasures, prejudices and pain the long weekend bore out. As Leslie tells Ali, sometimes the Idyllwild hangover lasts for days; sometimes for weeks. One has a feeling that for the Pfeffermans, the fallout is going to last significantly longer than that.All three Pfefferman women emerged from the woods with new knowledge about themselves. Sarah found a way out of her foggy depression by giving in to her submissive side; the look of glee on her face when Pony slaps her bottom is the happiest we have seen her all season. Ali’s sexual encounter with Leslie invigorated her; as she walks through the UCLA campus while a jazzy cover of Joni Mitchell’s “All I Want” plays, she has a new swing in her step and a new hyper-femme look, complete with a Marilyn Monroe plunging halter neckline and her grandmother’s pearl ring slung around her neck. She has started to explore her girlish femininity; something about making love to Leslie ignited that aspect of her identity.And then there’s Maura, who left the festival in an dejected huff, feeling spurned by the very women that she thought would be her allies and protectors. But this abrupt exit led her to Vicky and to their romantic rendezvous in the rundown motel, which feels like a real turning point for Maura and her acceptance of her new body at last.A big theme of this season has been Maura coming to terms with herself as everyone around her is still coming to terms with her transition; she is realizing that you cannot magically leap into a new identity and feel at home there. She has had to confront her past misogyny, the current misogyny of others (trying to date as a 70-year-old woman in our culture leads to quite a bit of it), her prejudices within the trans community (her friend-break with Davina shows that she is still unsure how to navigate with grace through her adopted L.G.B.T. world), and even ostracization from liberal feminists who cannot quite find a place for Maura in their ranks. It has been a tough road.But here is Vicky, who is warm and kind in the motel, who offers to be the big spoon in their coupling (allowing Maura to be the “spoonee” is such an act of compassion). When they finally have sex, Maura starts as confused — she doesn’t know what to do with her body, which still has male genitalia; she doesn’t know how to express herself erotically. Vicky is an empathetic and patient lover; she asks Maura for consent, and then shows her own mastectomy scars to make Maura feel comfortable. Anjelica Huston, who plays Vicky, is so moving: When Vicky removes her shirt, she allows Maura to see that all bodies have wounds and can still be beautiful. Their consummation frees Maura to love her own physical form, and when Vicky later asserts her boundaries, it is clear that she is going to be an extremely healthy partner for Maura if they can continue to bond moving forward.As Maura celebrates new life, Josh finally mourns for his father’s death in Buzzy’s arms. Josh has been flailing for a few episodes: panic attacks, manic episodes, living in squalor in an empty house. When he picks up the wounded duck with Buzzy, he looks fearful to be holding a living thing, as if he might crush everything he touches. But as the duck paddles back to health in the bathtub, Buzzy gives Josh what he really needs to heal himself: fatherly love, and the openness to grieve for the lack of it. Josh has not really dealt with what it means to be the only cisgender male left in his family after his father’s transition. But on Buzzy’s shoulders, he can collapse, he can be a little boy again. Buzzy is now the family M.V.P.: most vulnerable (and valuable) patriarch.Though Sarah and Ali have found new ways to connect with their families, they are also spinning outward again, as Pfeffermans always do. Sarah feels she needs to explore her Judaism, so she does the one thing Josh asks her not to do and goes to visit Raquel. Ali should be running the other direction from Leslie after the way she treated her moppa (and after she propositioned her in her office, a classic power move of an older scholar taking advantage of a younger acolyte), but instead she is drawn further into the Mackinaw orbit and will become Leslie’s T.A. and devotee. Maura warns Ali to stay away from feminist dogma, but that is exactly what Ali thinks she needs to move forward; next season will likely be about this decision and its consequences, but moppa and daughter are able to set the tension aside briefly for their visit to see grandma Rose.The moment Maura comes out to her mother is cathartic for her, but Rose has a blank reaction to it. She is old and cannot communicate well, but she does grab Ali’s necklace, drawn back to Gittel and this physical remembrance of her lost sibling. As Bri walks in to find Maura with her mother and flashes a look of dismay, the scene jumps back in time to Rose’s first days in Los Angeles. Yetta and Rose locate her father but, surprise, he has already remarried a shiksa and forgotten about his family back in Germany. Rose’s teen vitriol bubbles up into a withering gaze, a gaze that contains all the hatred she has ever felt for the men who have disappointed her in her life. Men are the ones who killed Gittel. A man abandoned her mother and left her back in Germany to fend off the Nazis for herself. Her husband is a midcentury mansplainer who smokes cigars and wants to name his daughter “Fay Pfefferman” so she will grow up to be a movie star.But there is no daughter: Rose has given birth to a boy. As she flops back on the doctor’s table, she looks exhausted and disappointed. She has brought another man in the world. That Maura reveals herself to be a woman all along, but too late for Rose to really register it, is the great tragedy at the end of this season. As they stare out over the horizon, three generations of Pfefferman women contemplate all they have lost and all that stands before them, their female bodies swathed in matching pastels. They are all connected, a matrilineage. And yet the gaps between them still feel as wide as the ocean.Advertisement