AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckThe show must go on at the Bolshoi Ballet, even after the 2013 attack on its artistic director. James May of “Top Gear” finds unusual uses for classic toys. And “A Place to Call Home,” an Australian soap resurrected from cancellation, begins a new season.BOLSHOI BABYLON (2015) 9 p.m. on HBO. In January 2013, Sergei Filin, artistic director of the Bolshoi Ballet, was attacked with acid by a masked man outside his home, leaving him scarred and partially blind. Pavel V. Dmitrichenko, a Bolshoi soloist, was eventually charged with ordering the attack. Nick Read’s documentary examines the climate at that celebrated Russian company as it follows dancers, managers and crew members through a new season rife with turmoil and mistrust. (Image: A scene from the film)ELF (2003) 6:30 p.m. on ABC Family. Will Ferrell plays Buddy, an overgrown human child adopted by Santa’s chief elf. Buddy journeys to New York to find his biological family and revive the spirit of Christmas in the process. Bob Newhart; Ed Asner; James Caan; and Jon Favreau, who directed, play the men in Buddy’s life. “The movie succeeds because it at once restrains its sticky, gooey good cheer and wildly overdoes it,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. (Image: Mr. Ferrell, far right)JAMES MAY’S TOY STORIES  9 p.m. on BBC America. Mr. May of “Top Gear” fame puts classic toys to the test in some hard-core experiments, starting by building a motorcycle and side car entirely of parts from Meccano model construction systems. At 10 p.m., he tries to make an Action Man doll travel faster than the speed of sound.CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON (2000) 10:10 p.m. on Starz Cinema. A martial arts legend tracks his master’s killer. And a governor’s daughter turned fighter is on a mission to steal an invincible blade. This Academy Award-winning film, directed by Ang Lee, was described as “a heady and delirious brew” by Elvis Mitchell of The Times. (Image: Zhang Ziyi as the governor’s daughter )A PLACE TO CALL HOME  on Acorn TV. Season 3 of this “Downton Abbey”-esque soap, set in 1950s Australia, begins with the Season 2 cliffhanger that wasn’t broadcast when the series was canceled by one network before being picked up by another. Then it’s time for more suds in the life of Sarah Adams, the nurse with the mysterious European past (played by Marta Dusseldorp), now torn between her feelings for the sensitive landowner George Bligh and her responsibility to her risen-from-the-dead husband, René. The cliffhanger and first three episodes will drop this Monday, with two new episodes available each Monday.OH MY VENUS  on DramaFever. A trainer to the stars tries to whip an overweight lawyer into fighting shape after her longtime boyfriend dumps her for a skinnier woman in this addictive Korean series.Advertisement