By BRIAN SEIBERTDEC. 20, 2015
In its Soviet years and after, the Bolshoi Ballet earned a reputation for valuing spectacle over substance, offering heroic force in place of refined artistry. “Bolshoi Babylon,” a documentary about the Moscow troupe that has its debut on HBO on Monday at 9 p.m., upholds that reputation without fully exploiting it. The film, directed by Nick Read, is full of sumptuous images — it’s more attractive than illuminating — yet despite the tabloid-bait subject matter provided by recent scandals, it’s surprisingly short on drama.In January 2013, Sergei Filin, then the Bolshoi Ballet’s artistic director, was splashed in the face with acid by a masked assailant. It made international news. A few months later, a soloist in the troupe, Pavel Dmitrichenko, admitted to having arranged the attack — he said he believed that Mr. Filin was professionally inhibiting him and his girlfriend — and was eventually sentenced to six years in prison.Through interviews, court footage and backstage glimpses of rehearsals and performances, “Bolshoi Babylon” tells this story adequately, if unimaginatively. Rather than delivering factual revelations or fresh interpretations, it serves up a standard contrast between the idealizations of theater and the grimy truths of life, tracking not just the company’s reaction to the attack but also several ballerinas as they recount the difficulties of their mayfly careers.To many of those interviewed, the attack carries greater significance — as a symbol, a symptom of a sickness that has infected Russia. The film sets out the close historical connections between the Bolshoi and the Kremlin. (No less than Russia’s prime minister, Dmitri A. Medvedev, calls the Bolshoi “our secret weapon.”) Insinuations of corruption and political meddling, along with some heavy-handed underscoring, establish an atmosphere of intrigue but nothing more substantial than a stage-fog of rumor.The film comes closest to giving viewers an inside look through the figure of Vladimir Urin, who was appointed general director after the scandal. Speaking to the camera, he’s an ambiguous character: a tough bureaucrat, possibly a reformer. He admits to bad blood between him and Mr. Filin, whose serpentine evasiveness contrasts with Mr. Urin’s seeming candor.In a late scene, by far the most gripping in the film, Mr. Urin asserts his power during a company meeting, shutting up the still-recovering Mr. Filin. The big political drama condenses into the personal, and for once, it feels real.A version of this review appears in print on December 21, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Documentary Looks at the Bolshoi in a Scandal’s Harsh Glare.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.