AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayThough Meredith Monk is often spoken of as if she were a soloist, she’s very often a collaborator, and a marvelous one. On Friday, she shared a program at Danspace Project with the poet-performer Anne Waldman and three other female colleagues. The evening’s sole soloist was Ms. Waldman, in the long opening number, “Entanglement Variations,” a work in progress.In the second third of the 85-minute concert, Ms. Monk was joined in five vocal trios by Katie Geissinger (voice), Allison Sniffin (voice and keyboard) and Ellen Fisher (whom the program labeled a “dancer at large” — a term I hope to employ again); the singing was both with piano and (more often) a cappella. Finally, Ms. Waldman and Ms. Monk closed the program in duet. Ms. Fisher’s contribution was small; this was an evening of musical theater rather than dance. But dancers and choreographers can learn from Ms. Monk’s use of space, and no other artist’s work so memorably animates the spatial dimensions of the beautiful interior of St. Mark’s Church. (Alas, the heating was much too high on Friday: It is hard to stay alert in such conditions.)At first, Ms. Waldman and Ms. Monk seemed to belong to opposite species. Ms. Waldman’s “Entanglement Variations” was an intensely self-conscious speech-cum-song monologue-cum-cantata. In each of of its three parts, “Melpomene,” “Assorted Selection” and “Entanglement,” she came across as all studied effects, self-fascinated yet never quite sincere. Here and there, she added hammy tremolo to her speech. When she was singing, her voice swooped and scooped over nearly two octaves without anywhere sounding relaxed. There was plenty of physicality to her performance: She walked, knelt, bent and took the poem from upstage to downstage. Her references to “Sprechstimme,” “larynx,” “phonemes,” and “the original Anne” (presumably a reference to herself) only added to the artful preciosity of her poem.The twinklingly collegial mood of Ms. Monk’s vocal trios were a tonic after this, and so was the spruceness of their rhythm. Brilliant dynamics are crucial to her work. Though the word “staccato” is often used to mean a short note sung with attack, she exemplifies its true meaning of a note cut short; endings are as keen a pleasure as beginnings, and she builds whole numbers out of staccatos. Sometimes, as in “The Tale” (her group’s final number), she uses words, sentences, grammar; sometimes she plays with isolated syllables. And playfulness on Friday was a vital ingredient even in the quietest and tenderest numbers.Musical harmony was central here, and this was echoed by the spatial harmony of the performers’ spacing. Better than any individual movements was how Ms. Monk spread the three singers around the stage: Triangles and horizontal lines all felt taut, implicit with happy drama.When Ms. Waldman performed with Ms. Monk in six numbers at the concert’s end, the play between the two women was delightful. Here Ms. Waldman showed the same generally objective manner as Ms. Monk, shaded by wit, calm, naturalness and fun. They moved easily around the space; the distance between them stayed suspenseful.Many kinds of sonics were employed: Ms. Waldman’s chest register was often contrasted with Ms. Monk’s complex head-register warblings. The diction of “Rat Tat Tat Tat” stayed sharp up to Ms. Waldman’s final pouncing “Tat.” This was a one-off event. It’s to be hoped it soon has a sequel.Advertisement