AdvertisementSupported byBy Siobhan BurkeIt helps to be young, or at least youthful in body, to perform the work of Ohad Naharin, the Israeli choreographer and artistic director of Batsheva Dance Company. His oozy style, grounded in Gaga, his trademarked and globally disseminated movement method, calls for a special litheness and resilience, the kind that facilitates, say, a precipitous backbend and its swift reversal, or a knock-kneed crumpling to the floor, or a deliberately high-impact collision with a partner.Watching Batsheva’s junior branch, the Young Ensemble, which began a weeklong run at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday, is hardly a downgrade from seeing the main company. Many of the dancers, ages 18 to 26, are as superhumanly spry as their counterparts in the main troupe, if not more so, though some are still outgrowing a teenage gawkiness. They’re less mature as actors, though dramatic persuasiveness can be lacking in the senior company, too. Suspicion and rage flow close to the surface in much of Mr. Naharin’s work, but their motivation often remains obscure.The ensemble’s Joyce program is the mix-and-match “Decadance,” in which Mr. Naharin assembles excerpts from the Batsheva repertory, swapping in new ones as desired. The samples in this 80-minute rendition date from 1990 (“Kyr”) to 2011 (“Sadeh21”), ending with the explosive “Secus,” a 30-minute chunk of “Three” (2005) for the whole teeming group.The show reads like a catalog of Batsheva hallmarks: the pack formations, the vocal eruptions (“Hey! Ho!,” the dancers shout in one section), the hyper-articulate convulsions, the cacophony snapping into unison and splintering back out, the defensive stance toward the audience. The dancers periodically stand still, dispersed across the stage or lined up at the front, staring at us with a cool but untrusting alertness. It’s like encountering animals in the wild: They could flee or charge, or just walk away, another Naharanian maneuver.That guard lowers most obviously in a reliably joyful segment, when the dancers pull unsuspecting spectators onstage for a smoldering slow dance to Dean Martin’s “Sway.” Tuesday’s chosen few were especially game for their surprise turn in the spotlight.Some dancers seem ready for promotion, particularly Korina Fraiman, an expansive, molten mover. But “Decadance,” on the whole, highlights the group over individuals. They end with a hesitant welcome, to “You’re Welcome” by the Beach Boys, opening their arms out wide, then flinching and shielding their heads, dodging something only they can see.­“Decadence” runs through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, Manhattan; 212-242-0800, joyce.org.Advertisement