AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenThe Little Sparrow dipped and soared through Town Hall on Saturday evening, as a roster that included many downtown performers sang the praises of the French chanteuse Édith Piaf in a swift, dramatically charged centennial celebration. You may not have known, because the deafening clamor surrounding Frank Sinatra’s 100th birthday has largely drowned out appreciations of Piaf, who was born in Paris seven days later, on Dec. 19, 1915, and is as important a figure in popular music in France as Sinatra is in the United States. In their ability to convey the raw essence of experience, both had the instincts of wild animals.Amid all the hosannas, none of Sinatra’s contemporary descendants came close to capturing Ol’ Blue Eyes’ honesty and emotional presence. So it was with Piaf’s admirers, except for the remarkable Vivian Reed, whose renditions of Jacques Laure’s “Heaven Have Mercy” and Charles Dumont and Michel Vaucaire’s “Mon Dieu” shot bullets straight to the gut. Piaf never held back, and neither did Ms. Reed, an heir of Lena Horne in the cold firepower of her majestic rage.Because Piaf came from the streets, it made sense that a number of the celebrants at “Piaf: A Centennial Celebration” belonged to cabaret’s bohemian fringe, whose center is Joe’s Pub at the Public Theater. The most compelling of several oddballs was Little Annie, a.k.a. Little Annie Anxiety Bandez, a waifish performance artist with a low voice who sang “Ne Me Quitte Pas.”Robert Osborne, of the Turner Classic Movies channel, made an appealing, erudite M.C. of a program that was as much a survey of period French chanson, with its emphasis on waltzes, as a salute to a star.As much as any individual singer, what warmed the evening was the sumptuous lilt of the 15-piece American Pops Orchestra, conducted by Luke Frazier.The evening’s headliner was the British musical theater star Elaine Paige, who starred in an early-90s London revival of Pam Gems’s play “Piaf.” Ms. Paige didn’t attempt a vocal impersonation yet succeeded in evoking a distant resemblance. She has an innately sunny temperament but conjured just enough of Piaf’s feral intensity to bring weight to “Non, Je Ne Regrette Rien” and grandeur to “Hymne à l’Amour,” a.k.a. “If You Love Me, Really Love Me.”The performers who sounded the most like Piaf were Gay Marshall, a celebrated interpreter of Piaf who sang “Pigalle” and “La Foule,” and Amber Martin, a singer and comedic performer who appears regularly at Joe’s Pub. But neither began to capture the body language and hand gestures that made a Piaf performance spellbinding. The mischievous international diva Meow Meow delivered a confident “La Vie en Rose,” and encouraged audience participation by handing out red roses to front-row patrons to toss onto the stage.Kim David Smith, an Australian singer, suggested that “Padam, Padam” was Piaf’s “The Man That Got Away.” The ageless and ever-reliable Marilyn Maye sang two Cole Porter songs, and Molly Pope brought some heft to “Milord” despite a vocal wobble. The jazz violinist Aaron Weinstein gave the evening a welcome lift with jokes about playing the violin in French. The show was just the right length: a concise, lively 90 minutes of Gallic esprit.Advertisement