By MEKADO MURPHYDEC. 20, 2015
In 2003, Steven Avery, a Wisconsin man who had served 18 years in prison for sexual assault, was exonerated through DNA evidence. The victim in the original crime apologized to Mr. Avery and a state bill devised to minimize such wrongful convictions took his name. The high-profile case became a calling card for the Wisconsin Innocence Project, a local version of the national nonprofit devoted to helping those wrongly accused.Two years later, he was arrested again and charged with a new crime: murder. Despite Mr. Avery’s claims that he was being framed by officials because of his $36 million dollar lawsuit against county officials over his previous conviction, he was found guilty and is now serving a life sentence.Mr. Avery’s saga is the subject of “Making a Murderer,” a new 10-part Netflix documentary that became available last week. The creators, Laura Ricciardi and Moira Demos, spent a decade following the case, compiling a riveting true crime story that arrives after HBO’s critically acclaimed series “The Jinx” and the hit podcast “Serial.”“Making a Murderer” diverges significantly from both, however. Unlike “The Jinx,” about the strange tale of the real estate heir Robert Durst, there are no artful re-enactments of grisly deaths. And where “Serial,” which explored the 1999 murder of a Maryland high school student, leaned heavily on the likable voice of its host, Sarah Koenig, the Netflix series does not use narration. Instead, it relies on title cards, interviews, news reports and hour upon hour of courtroom and police interrogation footage. In its meticulous assemblage of almost 700 hours of footage, the series is, as Mike Hale of The New York Times puts it, “immersive, compulsive and unpredictable, but also exhausting.”AdvertisementIn 2005, Ms. Ricciardi, 45, and Ms. Demos, 42, were a pair of graduate film students at Columbia University who had been dating for two years. In the midst of planning their individual thesis work, they read about Mr. Avery’s case in an article in The Times  and thought it could be an opportunity to shoot a documentary.AdvertisementThat December, the two traveled to Manitowoc, Wis. “We rented a car and we borrowed a friend’s camera,” Ms. Demos said. “It was really to test the waters and see if there was a story.”They arrived at a preliminary court hearing overflowing with the news media and onlookers. After his release, Mr. Avery had become a local celebrity. His rearrest for murder made him notorious. At the hearing, Mr. Avery was steadfast about his innocence.“Because trials are inherently dramatic, we knew we could come out and shoot it vérité-style,” Ms. Ricciardi said. “What we hadn’t anticipated was the depth and breadth of what we would uncover along the way.”In January 2006, the filmmakers sublet their apartment and moved to Manitowoc, making occasional trips to New York to earn money to support the nascent project. Ms. Demos worked as a lighting electrician on television productions and films while Ms. Ricciardi, who was a lawyer before film school, procured hourly legal work. Ms. Ricciardi’s legal background was one element that drew her to the project and helped the two understand the legal documents they had to plow through.For a year and a half, the pair lived in town. “It often worked in our favor that we could be ‘students’ who were just doing this little thing,” Ms. Demos said. “Some people were curious and wanted to get to know why we were making this project. And other people put up walls right away.”The pair eventually returned to New York to work, but would go back to Manitowoc for brief stretches (a week or three weeks at a time) to work on the documentary.As the details of the case grew, so did the pair’s footage. In the end, they shot over 500 hours of interviews and visuals, then recorded another 180 hours at trials. Their story extended, to cover Brendan Dassey, Mr. Avery’s nephew who was also tried and convicted of participating in the same murder with his uncle. The filmmakers also talked to Mr. Avery’s parents.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Demos and Ms. Ricciardi gained a number of emotional interviews from the Averys, who opened up to the filmmakers while they also soured on the local news media. The filmmakers credit this to what they saw as their more tempered approach to interviews, as opposed to what they describe as the invasive approach of some news stations.AdvertisementOthers weren’t so welcoming. Ken Kratz, the prosecuting attorney in Mr. Avery’s trial, ignored several requests from the filmmakers for an interview. And while they have many interviews with Mr. Avery by phone, the filmmakers said they were denied the opportunity to interview him on camera by the sheriff and by prison authorities. “They said we were a security risk,” Ms. Demos said.As the directors pieced together their documentary, they also sought ways for it to be seen. Three years into production, they met with executives from HBO, PBS and various networks, but at the time, those networks lacked an appetite for such projects.The two continued to work on it, but it wasn’t until they submitted a rough cut of three episodes with a proposal to Netflix in 2013 that they got results: a meeting with Netflix executives and ultimately distribution on that service. The company saw something in the footage.“What was clear was that they were going to need a platform where the series could unfold in the well-paced, immersive way the story demanded,” said Lisa Nishimura, vice president for original documentary programming at Netflix.Initially conceived as an eight-episode series, it was expanded to 10. And where once a serialized true crime story of this length might have turned off viewers, “Making a Murderer” slides right into a space that has been cleared for it.“With the amazing success of ‘The Jinx’ and ‘Serial,’” Ms. Demos said, “thank God it took us 10 years to pull this together.”A version of this article appears in print on December 21, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: The Story Behind a True Crime Documentary a Decade in the Making.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.