AdvertisementSupported byBy David AllenBERLIN — After a long tour with the complete cycle of Beethoven symphonies, which took in Paris and Vienna on its way to five largely sold-out nights at Carnegie Hall in November, the Berlin Philharmonic and its conductor, Simon Rattle, have returned to normal scheduling.Or not so normal, as it turns out. Once again, they have joined forces with the director Peter Sellars, who is an artist in residence with the ensemble this season, to create a performance that steps beyond ordinary concert life. In the past few years, they have conjured what Mr. Sellars calls “ritualizations” of Bach’s “St. Matthew” and “St. John” Passions, building writhing stagings of music that sit only on the cusp of drama. This time they have turned their attention to a pure opera, albeit one that lives not in grand gestures but in shadows and whispers: Debussy’s “Pelléas et Mélisande.”The result surpasses even the expectations raised by the Bach Passions, or at least it did during Saturday night’s performance at the Philharmonie here. While using the concert hall in a distinctive way, Mr. Sellars’s staging completely captures the human essence of Maurice Maeterlinck’s play, a love triangle of both ethereal delicacy and shocking violence.If not always convincing in their French, the singers are as fine as one could wish for, led by Magdalena Kozena as a Mélisande by turns dreamy and distraught. Christian Gerhaher is an exquisite Pelléas, while his brother and Mélisande’s husband, Golaud, is made brutal, sarcastic and embittered by Gerald Finley. Bernarda Fink’s Geneviève is luxury casting of the most velvety kind; Franz-Josef Selig booms with authority as the aging King Arkel even as the character’s ebbs away.And Mr. Rattle and his orchestra? Perfectly sublime. Beethoven may not be this conductor’s thing, but “Pelléas” is rightly his signature piece. He had conducted this orchestra in this opera before, in Salzburg and Berlin in 2006. As long ago as 1993, he and Mr. Sellars oversaw a production at the Dutch National Opera that turned its wispy symbolism into gritty realism. Moreover, Mr. Rattle has often used “Pelléas” to make important debuts, as at the Staatsoper here in 2008, and in his incandescent, surprisingly late arrival at the Metropolitan Opera in 2010.Mr. Rattle’s conducting was sensational then and is more so now. “Pelléas” perfectly suits his ability to craft pillows of sound, to build tension through color and balance, to sculpt phrases that are stretched taut and to refine dynamics to the most astonishing, distinct grades.Here he turned his orchestra into another character, one representing the subconscious urges of the protagonists. Time and again just a handful of notes proved revealing: the naïve delight of a harp as Mélisande tossed her hair; the tender empathy and veiled eroticism of Emmanuel Pahud’s flute as Pelléas and Mélisande were first seen alone; the deep foundations of Arkel’s castle, in low instruments so stony they felt cold to the ear; the savage attack of the cellos as Golaud demanded that his son, Yniold (a touching Elias Mädler), spy on the lovers in their bed.As a concert performance, Mr. Sellars’s new production — his first opera at the Philharmonie — is necessarily sparse, and billed only as a “semi-staged” opera. Although it’s patently not fully staged, the half-designation puts it too modestly. He pushes far past the edges of the apron, enlarging the Philharmonie’s stage to the very last row of seating, yet makes the drama ever more intimate, ever more focused on the most important action, taking place down at the conductor’s left hand.There, a long black box lies between the first and second violins, who swap their usual positions. It acts variously as a castle tower, a well’s edge and Mélisande’s deathbed, but the enduring imagery is that of a tomb, of a death that hovers forever at hand. Props are scarce, with even Golaud’s sword absent, implied solely by Mr. Finley’s tense, outstretched thumb. The lighting, so important to this drama of emotional murk, is only suggestive in Ben Zamora’s design. Tubes of neon light dot the hall like lightsabers in an invisible armory; blocks of brightness suggest an off-color world.Minimalism and maximalism seem to go hand in hand here. Not only does Mr. Sellars draw acute, ultimately devastating acting from his cast, clad entirely in ordinary black clothes, but he uses the peculiar architecture of the Philharmonie with innate sense. So closely does his action track the hall’s interior, with its labyrinthine passages, open staircases and pentagonal shape, that it is hard to see how the production will travel happily when it visits the more conventional Barbican Center in January for performances with the London Symphony.Barely an inch of the hall goes unused. The singers bound through its asymmetrical tiers, tracing a clear path from the orchestra to the roof, always in view. In Act IV, when Golaud and Yniold surveil the forbidden lovers (who, in a rare display of Mr. Sellars’s tact, remain chaste throughout), they do so from high above the violins, having fought through the legs of a line of audience members to find the corner of a row. When Pelléas retreats from Golaud’s threats in Act III, he must climb up backward step after step, reaching, uncertain, for his next foothold as his eyes remain on his assailant. At times each brother hides near the roof, lit only by a dim fluorescence, to eavesdrop on conversations that might be left unheard.Mr. Sellars’s modest interventions occasionally obscure without need: There’s an oddly specific (though still obtuse) moment when the sheep specified in the libretto for Act IV have their identity papers checked by a bouncer-cum-shepherd. Too often sightlines are obscured, and too often the eye is drawn to a patron descending to an exit to use a restroom, mistaking her for a character on the prowl.But not every liberty is out of place. Mr. Finley is such a volcanic force here that when he stops pulling the pregnant Mélisande’s hair in anger and kicks her in the stomach, disgusted by her apparent treachery and backed by terrifying orchestral violence, it is shameful, horrific and entirely believable. That Mr. Rattle and Mr. Sellars make that possible is a sign of how remarkable this “Pelléas” really is.Simon Rattle conducts the London Symphony Orchestra in Peter Sellars’s production of Debussy’s “Pelléas et Mélisande” at the Barbican Center in London on Jan. 9 and 10; lso­.co­.uk.Advertisement