By BRIAN SCHAEFERDEC. 20, 2015
Gemze de Lappe clapped her hands in frustration, and the piano went silent. She walked to the center of the studio, which overlooks 42nd Street, and demonstrated to a dancer how to properly swoon over a man. “It’s, ‘Oh my God, he’s so beautiful,’” she said, clutching her heart and then spreading her arms. “This time, don’t be fancy.” Another attempt, another correction, and then Ms. de Lappe walked away, satisfied for the time being.Ms. de Lappe, 94, was polishing Agnes de Mille’s “Dream Ballet” from the musical “Oklahoma!,” a work she knows well, having danced the lead in the show’s first national tour in 1943 and having been de Mille’s assistant for years. “Dream Ballet” and more than a dozen other classic Broadway dances are to be performed starting on Monday at the Joyce Theater as part of the two-week engagement of American Dance Machine for the 21st Century.“When shows close, the book remains, the score remains, but there’s really no notation for choreography,” said Nikki Feirt Atkins, the producing artistic director of Dance Machine, which is committed to passing on musical-theater dances from one performer to the next. She gestured toward Ms. de Lappe, who was showing some young men how to rein in their imaginary horses. “This is the living mission statement of the company.”It is a calling that Ms. Atkins inherited from Lee Theodore, a Broadway dancer and choreographer who founded and ran the original American Dance Machine from 1976 until her death in 1987. Ms. Atkins danced with that company until an illness forced her to quit, then turned to a career in medicine. Yet in 2012 she rebooted Dance Machine, and last year she left her private pathology practice to focus on dance full-time. “This was a way to complete my creative journey,” she said.AdvertisementTo help her dust off vintage dances and continue Ms. Theodore’s vision, Ms. Atkins has recruited an all-star team of Broadway veterans, including Ms. de Lappe, to restage works for Dance Machine’s corps of 20 dancers. The afternoon after the recent “Dream Ballet” rehearsal, several of them gathered to reminisce about choreographers they had danced for, consider the current state of dance on Broadway and discuss the challenges of handing down a dance.AdvertisementEd Kresley, who assisted the choreographer Gower Champion and was the supervising archivist of the original Dance Machine, said that before video was widely available to capture choreography, he would round up as many people as possible from the original show, “lock them in a studio and let them fight about the number.” Now that the steps can often be watched on video, the veterans enlisted by Dance Machine have a different purpose.“We’re trying to give the choreographer’s voice and recreate an experience,” said Robert LaFosse, a former ballet star who worked closely with Jerome Robbins and staged a number from “Jerome Robbins’ Broadway” for this year’s showcase. “A lot of Jerry’s work has to do with energy,” he said, demonstrating by lifting an arm. It hovered statically for a moment, then came alive as Mr. LaFosse stretched it slightly, flooding the gesture with purpose. “It’s these fine little details we’re working on, and it takes a lot of hours.”The dancer Pamela Sousa recalled lessons learned from Bob Fosse, who directed her in the original 1972 production of “Pippin.” “Bobby always said, ‘Make them come to you,’” she said, meaning that the dancer should quietly seduce the audience rather than project a forced charisma. She imparted that advice to members of Dance Machine when teaching them the “Manson Trio” number from “Pippin,” in which three entertainers swivel their hips to distract the audience somewhat from the brutal scenes of war depicted around them. For Ms. Sousa, that context is as important as the moves. “I don’t even care if the audience gets it,” she said. To her, what is vital is that the dancers do.The veterans said they were careful not to be too prescriptive or to nail down a “right way.” For Donna McKechnie, the original lead in Michael Bennett’s “A Chorus Line” (1975), the goal is the opposite: “I want to give her the freedom to create her own story,” she said of teaching a Dance Machine dancer her solo from that show.As Wayne Cilento, another original cast member of “A Chorus Line,” put it, the dancers “need the permission to express themselves as individuals.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It would be difficult to settle on one right way to do a dance in any case, the veterans pointed out, because the original choreographers were constantly fiddling with steps and adjusting them to new performers. “I have three different videos of ‘Cool,’” Mr. LaFosse said, referring to a gang dance in Robbins’s “West Side Story” that he has restaged for Dance Machine. “And Jerry had a hand in each of them, and they’re all different.”Reflecting on yesterday’s great dances inevitably led to a conversation about dance on Broadway today, which inspired some hand-wringing. “It’s just all tricks nowadays,” Ms. de Lappe said about the flashy flips and spins. “Which is wonderful to watch, but it leaves you cold sometimes.” The group bemoaned a new economic reality in which increasingly expensive shows aim for 10-year runs. Because dance requires ample time and space and lots of performers for the sake of experimentation, it can be considered too big a creative and financial risk to let it drive the story.It’s not that there is no good dance on Broadway today. The veterans praised Joshua Bergasse’s work for the recent revival of “On the Town” and Christopher Wheeldon’s ongoing “An American in Paris,” which earned him a Tony Award for best choreography. But the first was a revival that paid homage to Robbins and the second an adaptation of a traditional 1951 movie musical.By celebrating the past, though, Dance Machine hopes to encourage a new generation of choreographers to embrace the storytelling spirit of earlier Broadway dance-makers like de Mille and Robbins and to discover their own singular style.AdvertisementMia Michaels, who recently choreographed her first Broadway show, “Finding Neverland,” was invited by Dance Machine to contribute one of her popular dances from the television show “So You Think You Can Dance” to the Joyce performances, suggesting that a memorable piece from any medium can become a modern classic. Echoing the ethos of Dance Machine, Ms. McKechnie told Ms. Michaels admiringly: “You always tell stories. You always go deep.”A version of this article appears in print on December 21, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Vintage Broadway Steps, With an Assist From Veterans .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.