AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott ReyburnLONDON — In the 1970s, the British comedian Tommy Cooper used to tell a joke about asking an auction house to value a violin and a painting that he had discovered in an attic. The good news, he was told, is that they were made by Stradivarius and Rembrandt. The bad news was that the painting was by Stradivarius and the violin was by Rembrandt. He then proceeded to ram the violin through the canvas.In those days, of course, Rembrandt was the gold standard. But the Dutchman and his fellow old masters have fallen out of fashion and are no longer as coveted by collectors and investors.As a measure of that fall, 10 works have sold at auction for more than $100 million since 2004, and all of them were made by modern or contemporary artists in the past 120 years. Older paintings have seen their value, in relative terms, level off or decline. The trend was plain to see in recent weeks, as London’s auction houses tried to find buyers for their latest tranche of old masters. As has been the case in recent years, there were few works by major names.Christie’s biannual evening sale on Dec. 8 raised just 6.5 million pounds with fees, about $9.7 million, against a low estimate of £12.7 million. Nineteen of the 45 works, or 42 percent, failed to sell, including the two most highly valued lots — a 1582 watercolor study of a hare among plants by Hans Hoffmann, a pupil of Albrecht Dürer, and a fine 1770s Francesco Guardi view of the island of San Giorgio Maggiore in Venice, carrying low estimates of £4 million and £1.5 million respectively.Anyone can have a bad day at the office, but this disappointing performance at Christie’s followed an old masters sale in July that took in £19 million against a low estimate of £31.5 million.Little wonder, then, that Christie’s, the dominant player in the auction market for modern and contemporary art, is re-marketing its old master paintings as “classic art.” It will be offering old masters and other historical pieces next year at its Rockefeller Center sales in April, rather than January. The week will feature a themed sale that includes 20th-century works. And its “classic art” format will debut in London in July, Christie’s said on Friday.At its own auction the following evening, Sotheby’s achieved a far more respectable total of £22.6 million with fees, although it was just above the low estimate of £21.8 million based on hammer prices. Of the 44 lots offered, 15 did not sell, or 34 percent.A lone European telephone bidder paid a top price of £9.1 million for a smaller 1825 version of John Constable’s admired but difficult-to-love 1824 vertical landscape, “The Lock,” that had been in the same British family since 1855.As a point of comparison, the combined £29.1 million total from those old master sales was 34 percent less than the £44.2 million Christie’s and Sotheby’s took in at equivalent events five years ago, in December 2011.“The auction market is extremely selective,” said Henry Pettifer, the head of old master paintings at Christie’s, whose sale total had been dented by a 15th-century Flemish Madonna and child by Hans Memling that the auction house had sold privately for more than £3.5 million and had withdrawn from the sale. “The availability of fresh material is limited,” he added, alluding to how few museum-quality works are in private hands. And, thanks to Artnet and other databases that list auction results, wealthy people who buy art have become all too aware of how hard it is to make a profit on old masters.In one example, Christie’s was offering the mid-18th-century canvas “Rebecca and Eliezer at the Well” by the Venetian artist Francesco Fontebasso at a low estimate of £120,000. The pleasant piece of rococo decoration had been bought at auction in 1990 for $286,000, according to Artnet. At the Dec. 8 sale it fell to a single telephone bid of £115,000, about $170,000, before fees. Investors do not expect to incur a loss of about 40 percent a quarter century after buying a Warhol or a Basquiat. Reselling an old master can be even harder when that painting has been languishing in a dealer’s gallery.On Nov. 24 and 25, Sotheby’s auctioned the collection of the fourth-generation Munich dealer Konrad Bernheimer, who owns the historic London gallery Colnaghi. Mr. Bernheimer, 65, has decided to scale down his operations. He is closing his Munich gallery, selling his grand Bavarian home, Marquartstein Castle, and is merging Colnaghi with a fellow London dealer, Coll & Cortes.Despite Sotheby’s branding the two-part auction as “The Bernheimer Collection,” his stock proved a hard sell. Only 22 out of the 42 lots at the Nov. 24 evening sale found buyers, with a top price of £197,000 with fees for the 1732 Nicolas Lancret painting, “Le Menuet” — a frothy “fête champêtre” scene with childlike dancers — that had been purchased for $744,000 at auction in 2005.Two weeks later, Mr. Bernheimer was among the dozens of long-established old master dealers attending the London evening sales. In the past, they would buy at these auctions to stock up for the Maastricht European Fine Art Fair in March in the Netherlands. But with sellers encouraging Sotheby’s and Christie’s to compete for their business with ever-higher valuations, and auctions now marketed to a shallow pool of wealthy buyers, there was conspicuously little trade bidding.“It’s naïve not to recognize we’re at a pretty serious moment,” said Anthony Crichton-Stuart, director of the London dealer Agnew’s. “There has been a massive taste shift. But when a good old master does come up at auction and it is priced correctly, you do get some excitement.”One of the few lots to sell significantly above its estimate, at Sotheby’s, was a 1780 landscape by Joseph Wright of Derby showing a cavern in the Gulf of Salerno with the figure of Julia, the banished daughter of Emperor Augustus.Wright is one of the most original figures of British Romantic painting, and this composition, held in the same private collection in Derbyshire since 1840, had an approachable low estimate of £100,000 because of condition issues and — not insignificantly — the fact that it was a charity donation to benefit Syrian refugees. As a result, at least three bidders pushed the price to £665,000 with fees.“The new money is interested in old masters, but it wants what Duveen sold to the robber barons. It wants names,” said Hugo Nathan, a co-founder of the London advisers Beaumont Nathan. He was referring to Joseph Duveen, the British art dealer who was responsible for bringing many great works of art to the United States.Mr. Nathan was among the few dealers actively bidding at the evening sales. Buying on behalf of a client, he paid £506,500, or twice the estimate, at Christie’s for Charles-Antoine Coypel’s 1737 painting, “The Destruction of the Palace of Armida.”“Today you have to shop by image,” Mr. Nathan said. “But if you are brave and don’t follow fashion, there are opportunities.”People are still looking at old masters for pleasure, if not as lucrative investments. Sotheby’s said 6,000 people visited its Dec. 5 to 9 viewing, compared with the 6,400 who saw its Impressionist and contemporary sales in June. At the lower end of the price scale, many historic paintings do find a market — Christie’s and Sotheby’s day sales of old master paintings on Dec. 9 and 10 had solid-enough selling rates of 67 and 65 percent apiece.But there remains a mass of old master paintings in dealers’ stocks — and in collectors’ minds — whose asking prices still hark back to the age of Tommy Cooper. Unfortunately, in today’s market, and at those prices, many of these paintings will be as sellable as that Stradivarius canvas with the hole in it.Advertisement