The Dallas Symphony Orchestra said on Tuesday that it was postponing its planned tour of Europe this April, citing safety concerns in the wake of the recent terrorist attacks in Paris and San Bernadino, Calif.“Due to the recent and tragic events in Europe and the United States, and based on extensive conversations with national and international security professionals, the Dallas Symphony’s executive board along with its executive management and artistic leadership have made the very difficult decision to postpone the April 2016 European tour,’’ the Dallas Symphony Association said in a statement.“After careful deliberation,” the statement continued, “we believe that there is an elevated risk to the safety of our musicians and their families, guest artists, D.S.O. personnel and traveling patrons, and therefore will not be proceeding with the tour at this time.”Canceling the tour was an unusual step. Eagles of Death Metal, the American rock band that was performing onstage at the Bataclan concert hall when terrorists began firing on the crowd, returned to Paris earlier this month to play a concert with U2, which had postponed two concerts in the immediate aftermath of the attack but returned weeks later to perform. The League of American Orchestras said it was unaware of any other orchestra tours being canceled for safety reasons.An orchestra official said the cancelation was made for safety reasons, not economic concerns. The orchestra ratified a new two-year contract with its musicians in September that called for a three percent increase in the musicians’ base wages in both years, after a long period in which wages were either frozen or the musicians were given minimal raises. The music director of the Dallas Symphony, Jaap van Zweden — who is one of the conductors mentioned as a possible successor to Alan Gilbert as the music director of the New York Philharmonic — said in a statement that he would continue to conduct internationally. “As an individual, I continue to travel around the world for my various conducting engagements,” he said. “However, I respect the decision that has been made, as the safety of our D.S.O. musicians and our extended touring group is primary.”The tour, which was to have run from April 6 to 21, had been expected to take the orchestra to the Netherlands, Scotland, England, Germany, Switzerland, Austria and Spain. Two programs were planned: one of Beethoven’s Symphony No. 5 and the first act of Wagner’s “Die Walküre,” and the other of Mozart’s Piano Concerto No. 24 (with David Fray as the soloist) and Shostakovich’s Symphony No. 7. The orchestra last toured Europe in 2013.A version of this article appears in print on 12/23/2015, on page C6 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Orchestra Cancels Tour, Citing Terror Concerns.