By ALASTAIR MACAULAYDEC. 22, 2015
Sugarplums and Cavaliers Not only does New York City Ballet plan to present a record number of Sugarplum Fairy ballerinas this year (22) and Cavaliers (17) in “George Balanchine’s ‘The Nutcracker,’ ” but it’s also giving audiences a bumper crop of debuts in the roles: six new Sugarplums, four new Cavaliers. Apart from Ashly Isaacs, who made her (admirable) debut on Dec. 12, all these performances take place this week.Megan LeCrone — who, like Ms. Isaacs, is a company soloist — makes her debut on Wednesday afternoon. The others are all corps dancers: Peter Walker and Joseph Gordon as the Cavalier on Wednesday evening and Thursday afternoon; Unity Phelan and Cameron Dieck as the couple at the Saturday matinee; Indiana Woodward as Sugarplum that evening; Claire Kretzschmar and Silas Farley together on Sunday at 1 p.m.; Ashley Hod as Sugarplum at the 5 p.m. performance that day.None of these dancers are unknowns. None of them is well known either, though several are very carefully watched by company devotees. It’s possible that this will prove a historic week for at least some of them (though a debut in these roles is no guarantee of other lead roles or of promotion) and therefore for the company.Danilova’s Sugarplum Dance The original “Nutcracker” was choreographed in 1892 by Lev Ivanov. (Marius Petipa, then in his 70s, fell ill early in rehearsals, though it was he who planned the ballet with Tchaikovsky.) It’s too bad that no production anywhere uses his Snowflakes Waltz (Peter Wright’s version for the Royal Ballet takes some of its ideas but wrecks their point), which was revelatory for many Russian observers. Just to look at its patterns in the Stepanov notation in the Harvard Theater Collection (you can see them online) is tantalizing. And it’s too bad that few New Yorkers know Ivanov’s choreography for the Sugarplum Fairy.As a Christmas gift to its patrons, the archive at Jacob’s Pillow has sent out this wonderfully vivid clip of Alexandra Danilova in the Ivanov Sugarplum solo. A few points are worth noting — and let’s talk technique a little. This is a silent film to which music has been attached. At least one of its repeated steps (piqué arabesque with an immediate, focus-changing fouetté into passé) also occurs in George Balanchine’s version. Another step, the diagonal of sideways-jumping pas de chat (each followed by a quick soutenu turn) was Ms. Danilova’s alternative for the original chorography’s trickier gargouillades (pas de chat in which each foot quickly writes rings in the air) of the original choreography. And the solo ends as Ivanov planned, without the musical coda that has been restored since the mid-20th  century.AdvertisementIt’s worth comparing Danilova’s performances with that of her great friend Alicia Markova (below). Markova — who danced the Sugarplum in the first complete Western production of “The Nutcracker” (1934) and continued in the role well into the 1950s — certainly does the gargouillades, but that doesn’t mean she’s altogether better.In her autobiography (one of my favorite books), Margot Fonteyn relates a story told to her by Frederick Ashton after he had watched Markova and Danilova rehearsing the same role. “Markova was dancing with her effortless grace and creating a great impression on the surrounding corps de ballet. Danilova, when it came her turn to rehearse the same dance, announced: ‘I am Russian. I dance strong!’ Whereupon she went into a spitfire attack on the same solo. From that day I danced strong, with every bit of energy I could muster.”Hans Christian Andersen, ‘The Most Incredible Thing’Now — before the New Year brings new companies and changes of repertory — may be a good time for advance reading. Hans Christian Andersen wanted to be a dancer; his fairy tales have been choreographed by August Bournonville (his friend and contemporary), Bronislava Nijinska, George Balanchine, Frederick Ashton, David Bintley and many more. Feb. 2 brings the world premiere of Justin Peck’s first narrative ballet, a treatment of Andersen’s “The Most Incredible Thing,” to a commissioned score by Bryce Dessner, at City Ballet.AdvertisementIt’s to be Mr. Peck’s biggest production to date: 50 company dancers, 11 dancers from the School of American Ballet, designs by Marcel Dzama. Curiously, there is an American connection. “The Most Incredible Thing” was first published here, in an English translation in September 1870, one month before the Danish version was published in Copenhagen.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.