By KATHRYN SHATTUCKDEC. 22, 2015
Two best friends warily circle each other in “Queen of Earth,” Alex Ross Perry’s Bergman-esque thriller. ABC News casts a gimlet eye on the year’s biggest headliners. And some courageous chefs cook with raccoon.QUEEN OF EARTH(2015) on iTunes and Netflix. A woman on the verge of a nervous breakdown — her beloved father, a famous painter, has recently died and her lover is leaving her for another woman — spends a week with her best friend at a secluded lake house and discovers that they aren’t as close as they used to be. Elisabeth Moss and Katherine Waterston star in Alex Ross Perry’s art-house thriller. “Ms. Waterston, a Modigliani in motion and often in black, easily holds your attention,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times, “but it is Ms. Moss, with her intimate expressivity, who annihilates you from first tear to last crushing laugh.” (Image: Ms. Moss)THE CRYING GAME(1992) 8 p.m. on Flix. After an Irish Republican Army kidnapping goes wrong, a terrorist goes into hiding in London, where he takes up with his victim’s lover. But nothing is what it seems in Neil Jordan’s thriller starring Stephen Rea, Jaye Davidson, Miranda Richardson and Forest Whitaker. When the subplots are stripped away, Vincent Canby wrote in The Times, “‘The Crying Game’ becomes a tale of a love that couldn’t be but proudly is, although even this love could be a substitute for another love that never quite was.” (Image: Ms. Richardson)THE YEAR: 2015 9 p.m. on ABC. Robin Roberts anchors this retrospective of 2015’s most memorable people and events — among them, Amy Schumer, the breakup of Ben Affleck and Jennifer Garner, the Supreme Court’s ruling in favor of marriage equality, Pope Francis’s visit to the United States, football’s Deflategate controversy and the Ashley Madison hacking scandal. (Image: the Supreme Court)AdvertisementKNIFE FIGHT 9 p.m. on Esquire. This underground cooking competition enters the semifinals — and gives new meaning to roadkill — with blue-foot chicken and raccoon as the main ingredients.ADAM RUINS EVERYTHING 10 p.m. on TruTV. Adam Conover puts a damper on death, and the medical decisions and funeral planning that generally precede it.AdvertisementBIUTIFUL(2010) 10:05 p.m. on Starz Cinema. An underworld figure dealing in the black-market labor of illegal immigrants in Barcelona tries to put his affairs in order for his children and mentally unstable ex-wife after receiving a terminal diagnosis. Javier Bardem brings “admirable passion to a gritty story that amounts to a lower-depths, urban version of the Passion,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times about this Alejandro González Iñárritu drama. (Image: Mr. Bardem)A version of this schedule appears in print on December 22, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Watch Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.