AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon CaramanicaThe other day, on his Snapchat, DJ Khaled trained his phone camera on his wall of gold and platinum albums and asked, “You think they want me to have all these plaques?”Here are some other things that, according to DJ Khaled, they don’t want you to do: eat breakfast, eat lunch, be in a Wraith with stars in the roof, have a No. 1 record, be on a Jet Ski doing 360s, have a fresh cut, smile.But DJ Khaled — the hip-hop Zelig figure who’s orchestrated some of the most anthemic hits of the last decade — is too busy walking the pathway to more success to let naysayers tell him what he can’t do. Every day he films a combination of inspirational talk, outrageous adventures and mundane minutiae of life, a mix that in recent weeks has become social media core curriculum.Occasionally there is a marriage of artist and medium so perfect it trumps everything that came before: think Drake’s ability to anticipate and generate memes, or Rihanna’s early Instagram. But no one has mastered Snapchat — the outlet where publicly posted pictures and videos live for 24 hours, then disappear — like DJ Khaled, who has become a social media celebrity in a way that outpaces his musical fame. (His handle is @djkhaled305.) His effectiveness and addictiveness in the medium have elevated him from carnival barker to transcendent public figure. It’s not clear how many followers DJ Khaled has, but a screen grab of his Snapchat data he posted suggests that about two million people are seeing each post.His Snapchat is a renewable source of relentless positivity, a kind of choose-your-own adventure motivational talk. It succeeds in the space between laugh-with and laugh-at; he endlessly replays the same scenes and motifs, a Groundhog Day of braggadocio and encouragement. His catchphrases — “Another one,” “Bless up,” “They don’t want you to … ” — have become a lingua franca. He is now the foremost user of the key emoji, and, in his discussions of “major keys of success,” has rescued that emoji from obscurity.Devoted followers compile his short videos and pictures and repost them on Twitter and YouTube. There is, naturally, a parody Twitter account, a Reddit thread that compiles his statements and even a single-serving website, theydontwantyouto.win, that serves up his aphorisms with the click of a button that says “Another one.”This sort of portable motivation has become the DJ Khaled trademark. In hip-hop, he functions as a professional enthusiast, but his Snapchat takes that energy off the radio and recasts it in a more personal setting. When you’re alone with your phone, DJ Khaled is there to urge you on.In his public Snapchat stories, which span the full arc of his day in and around his Miami home, DJ Khaled shows an innate understanding of narrative, and a grasp of how to brand an idea instantly: say, watering his plants, which he calls his “angels”; greeting the lion statue in his garden, shouting “Lion!”; or running the camera over the length of his body and landing on a fresh pair of sneakers, punctuating the moment with “Another one!” “Special cloth” is the all-purpose term he uses to describe anything fancy or impressive. Each day, he invites viewers to “walk with me on the pathway to more success” as he films his feet. (You’ll never be as familiar with a star’s feet as with his.)He even has a familiar supporting cast: Chef Dee, his personal cook, who prepares meals with an unimpressed air; Benjamin Kickz, his teenage sneaker dealer; and the Miami Heat center Hassan Whiteside, who seems to have ample free time to lounge by DJ Khaled’s fire pit. And of course there’s DJ Khaled’s wife, who is often heard but not seen; sometimes he’ll train the camera on himself as he’s whisper-barking declarations of dedication to her. Whether her eyes are rolling or her eyelashes fluttering, we don’t know.Other hip-hop artists tend to use Snapchat as a more blatantly promotional tool, or at least aren’t as comfortable spotlighting their moment-to-moment activities. But DJ Khaled has no such inhibitions. He films himself, nimbly, while in the shower. He shoots himself slathering his body with cocoa butter. He posts clips of his pedicures and massages. A recent story line revolved around the installation of a new hammock: “It took me over 25 years blood, sweat and tears to swing in this hammock.” He once referred to his genitalia as “the theory.” (With the evanescence built into Snapchat, it can sometimes be difficult, the morning after, to distinguish real life from fever dream, but he did indeed say that.)Several times he has filmed himself as he’s receiving speeding tickets out on the ocean. One recent afternoon, he recorded himself as he was lost at sea — it was genuinely riveting, and also comic.What you rarely see DJ Khaled doing is working. Maybe that’s because there are corporate secrets he’s protecting, or maybe that’s because there has always been something ineffable about his success. He doesn’t produce or rap or sing on the many hits he’s released — instead, he serves as a Greek chorus of chest-puffing, shouting catchphrases that become hip-hop essentials.But there was a hint of his skill on his Snapchat the other day. He was filming himself in the studio, speaking to an unidentified performer. “The tone right there,” he said. “If you get that tone and we put words to it, it’s gonna be a vibe. That’s the tone. That’s the tone. I’m telling you — hit tone.”Often DJ Khaled will capture fans reacting to seeing him out in the wild. “They don’t want you on yachts!” they shout at him from their boats as he roars past them. A fan building a small business approached DJ Khaled at a home improvement store, telling him that his persistent positivity was a huge motivation. And celebrities far more famous than he have adopted his lingo on Snapchat. Drake, in a bow tie: “They don’t want you on G4s. They don’t want you to wear bow ties.” Justin Bieber, sitting on a yacht and playing cards: “They don’t want you to jam Elton John on the yacht. Go fish.”It’s possible, though, that the peak moment of pure DJ Khaled, untrammeled by commercial imperatives, may already have passed. On Friday, about a third of his posts included Cîroc Apple, in what felt like a paid placement. And, increasingly, he’s pointing viewers to his recently opened online store, wethebeststore.com, where he sells T-shirts ($25) and flip-flops ($55) emblazoned with his signature phrases. But that’s just making literal the viral spread that’s already happening. Around the country — the world, probably — people are adorning themselves with DJ Khaled’s signature phrases. The pathway to success now has tributaries.Advertisement