By VIVIEN SCHWEITZERDEC. 21, 2015
On Sunday afternoon at Town Hall, members of the Knights performed works by Judd Greenstein, Toru Takemitsu and Ravel without taking a break to highlight the three pieces’ similarities. When the lights dimmed after the violinist Colin Jacobsen played Mr. Greenstein’s lyrical, lilting “Be There” (2008) with the pianist Lise de la Salle, he barely paused before walking across the stage to perform Takemitsu’s “Rocking Mirror Daybreak” (1983) with the violinist Guillaume Pirard.In Mr. Greenstein’s work, a gentle violin melody unfolds over a rippling piano accompaniment before evolving into more fragmented, insistent patterns. It was a fitting prelude to the fractured, sometimes dissonant exchanges between the two instruments in the Takemitsu piece. Inspired by the poetry of Thomas Fitzsimmons and Makoto Ooka, “Rocking Mirror Daybreak” has echoes of Ravel, as do the enigmatic opening mood and textures of “Be There.”Mr. Jacobsen joined the cellist Eric Jacobsen (his brother) and Ms. de la Salle for an impressive rendition of the Ravel Trio in A minor, this pianist’s limpid touch alluring in the mysterious opening section. Her colorful, technically assured playing balanced the richly toned, passionate contributions of the Jacobsens.Ms. de la Salle’s fluid playing also proved appealing when she and Eric Jacobsen joined Mr. Pirard and the violist Kyle Armbrust for a vividly shaped, elegant interpretation of Mozart’s Piano Quartet in G minor.The program opened with Martinu’s “Three Madrigals,” written for the violinist Joseph Fuchs and his sister, the violist Lillian Fuchs, who both performed frequently at Town Hall in the 1940s. Mr. Pirard and Mr. Armbrust offered a performance notable for its soulful flair and liquid trills.The event was presented by the admirable Peoples’ Symphony Concert series. It offers first-rate artists at reasonable prices, with  substantial discounts for students under 35, although, if the demographics on Sunday were any indication, few young people have taken advantage.A version of this review appears in print on December 22, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Piano and Strings,  Traveling Through Time.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.