AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenThirty years: That’s how long Michael Feinstein, the astutely nicknamed “ambassador of the Great American Songbook,” has been performing in New York City. This former boy wonder, who once worked as Ira Gershwin’s assistant, recently turned 59. And on Sunday evening, he began a new chapter of his career with his triumphant opening-night performance at the club that now bears his name, Feinstein’s/54 Below.Backed by a trio — the musical director, Tedd Firth, on piano; Mark McLean on drums; and Sean Smith on bass — he delivered a far-reaching show that nodded cursorily to seasonal material but was really a personal career retrospective. In honor of the room, known informally as “Broadway’s supper club,” Mr. Feinstein sang a medley of Broadway songs spanning a century, dedicated to the notion that nothing about the Great White Way has really changed that much.The medley was wound around a rendition of “Lullaby of Broadway” that evolved from dreamily surreal to brassy and peppy, and included a jokingly disparaging version of “New York, New York,” outfitted with comic lyrics in which he pleaded not to have to sing that song again.In the past, Mr. Feinstein’s insistence on vocal polish and smoothness has sometimes impeded his ability to dig into the essence of a song. High-gloss crooning can carry a singer only so far. On Sunday, Mr. Feinstein transcended his perfectionistic tendencies to deliver the most emotionally wrenching performances I’ve heard him give. The Mildred Bailey hit “Don’t Take Your Love From Me,” joined to the old Ink Spots song “The Gypsy,” became a troubling confession of emotional insecurity and doubt about the stability of a relationship.A tribute to the singer-songwriter Peter Allen, who died of AIDS in 1992, featured two of Mr. Allen’s strongest collaborations with the lyricist Carole Bayer Sager: “You and Me (We Wanted It All)” and “I’d Rather Leave While I’m in Love,” which both dissect the narcissism and insecurity of the kind of Hollywood romance in which reality can never live up to a couple’s fantasized expectations.Mr. Allen was married for seven years to Liza Minnelli, Ira Gershwin’s goddaughter and an important mentor to Mr. Feinstein, whose memories of these complicated connections brought him to the brink of tears. The concert’s dramatic peak was a ferocious rendition of “Fifty Percent,” from the musical “Ballroom.” When sung by a man, this declaration of loyalty by a husband’s mistress became a confession by one-third of a gay male triangle. Mr. Feinstein sang it flushed with passion.Over three decades, Mr. Feinstein has steadily evolved from an intimate piano bar performer into an accomplished traditional entertainer. He now is a man fully in charge.­Michael Feinstein continues through Dec. 30 at Feinstein’s/54 Below, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 646-476-3551, 54below­.com.slide showAdvertisement