AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RatliffIn the early aughts, the near-metal band Baroness was fully part of alternative culture, back when people still talked about “edginess” in music and could expect grave nods of understanding. Its first EPs were trippy and severe and grooving, alternately music for deep concentration or thrashing or long-division exercises. All in all, this felt like a new position.Baroness was one of a group of Southern rock bands, including Torche and Kylesa and Harvey Milk, which had nonexclusive relationships with metal and hard rock; they used only the parts of them they wanted to use. Because they weren’t building a new radio format or otherwise engaging with the mainstream, each moved in the directions that felt authentic to it, toward pop clarity or progressive twiddle or slovenly roaring.A slight aura of alternativeness still hovers around Baroness, but at the center of its music now — and on full display in a packed show at Saint Vitus on Sunday night — is well-worn, tractable euphoria, big-emotion sounds drawn from various kinds of FM radio playlists over the last couple of generations. Even if you still believe in edges, you won’t find them here.Over the last few years, Baroness has rebuilt itself. In August 2012, its tour bus fell from a viaduct in Bath, England, injuring all four members. John Baizley, the band’s lead yeller and principal songwriter, as well as one of its two guitarists, shattered his left arm; the drummer, Allen Blickle, and the bassist, Matt Maggioni, both suffered fractured vertebrae and left the group the following spring. They were replaced by Sebastian Thomson and Nick Jost, and Mr. Baizley — a visibly intense, detail-oriented kind of guy — soon started working on new material. Baroness has just released “Purple” (Abraxan Hymns), produced by Dave Fridmann, and has returned to the road to support it. The Saint Vitus show was the last of a string of small-club dates before the group plays bigger rooms in Europe next year.Baroness wouldn’t be big enough for the music on “Purple,” if it were to find its ideal circumstances. Mr. Baizley, who wore an elastic brace on his left arm, looks a little less muscular than before the accident, but there’s no depletion in his new work or in the almost preacher-ish intensity of his performance: He shot his hands up, widened his eyes and politely but firmly asked the whole room to sing along. The new songs, about a third of Sunday’s set, were triple-strength, supermelodic rock anthems. How you feel about them probably depends on how you felt about “Yellow & Green” — the band’s double album from 2012, which made a strong turn in this direction — and how you feel about grandiosity in all forms.The grandiosity comes, in part, from Baroness’s not-so-subtle influences: Queen, Pink Floyd, Metallica. (And Thin Lizzy, via twinned guitar solos and rousing Irish choruses.) It enters the symphonic chordal countermotion in “Shock Me,” played on keyboards by Mr. Jost. Another new song, “If I Have to Wake Up (Would You Stop the Rain?)” — think for a minute about how over-the-top that title is — uses a glockenspiel on the record to accent the chords of the huge chorus, à la Arcade Fire. That detail was missing at Saint Vitus, but nothing else was, including a drum groove that recalls, of all things, Toto’s “Rosanna.”In a recent A.V. Club interview, Mr. Baizley was frank about his admiration for that song and a lot of other popular, middle-of-the-road music of the ’70s and ’80s. The interview, “Purple” and Sunday’s show involve a kind of intellectual ambiguity. Is this honesty as subversion, the counterculture proclaiming its judicious love for the mainstream? Or is it just a guy approaching middle age and indulging in deep-dish comfort?Advertisement