By DAVID ALLENDEC. 21, 2015
Christmas can be a dispiriting time for the classical listener. The calendar devolves into endless performances of “Messiah,” while the recording market becomes overloaded with opera stars crooning their way through crossover albums.But amid the commercial dross, three new releases are worth their weight in mistletoe. On each, a fine choir provides a musical portrait of a historical Christmas; heard together, they provide an education that ranges through Europe and across the centuries.The earliest material is in Blue Heron’s “Christmas in Medieval England,” recorded live for this Boston group’s own label under the direction of Scott Metcalfe, who also provides accompaniment on harp. The superb vocalists progress from Advent to Christmas Day, switching easily between Latin and Middle English, building a collection of music that might have been heard in the 1440s.A listener then would have been lucky to hear these works brought off with such panache. The program is by turns pensive and lively, and the scholarship required to evoke stylistic accuracy is put totally at the service of performance. There’s a deeply affecting edge to the singing, whether in an atmospheric account of the still-familiar “Veni, Veni Emanuel,” or the glorious, elevated Sanctus from the anonymous “Missa Veterem Hominem.”AdvertisementAdd a few centuries and head east, and you arrive at the British duodecet Stile Antico’s “A Wondrous Mystery,” available on Harmonia Mundi. It’s the group’s second Christmas album, after a 2010 compilation of Tudor music by Tallis, Byrd and peers. This time Stile Antico’s characteristic smoothness, which privileges sonic blend over textual clarity just a mite too often, brings joyous results in Central European works, both Roman Catholic and Lutheran, from the 16th and 17th centuries.The title comes from Jacob Handl’s lurid “Mirabile Mysterium,” though the disc is arranged around Jacobus Clemens non Papa’s effusive “Missa Pastores Quidnam Vidistis,” loosely based on a motet of the same name. There are short, engagingly simple works by Hans Leo Hassler, Johannes Eccard and Michael Praetorius. Yet the centerpiece is Hieronymus Praetorius’s pealing “Magnificat Quinti Toni,” in which polyphony, plainchant and carols combine to form a jubilant whole.AdvertisementFast-forward a little further and we reach “O Heilige Nacht,” a delightful release of 19th-century Yuletide German songs on the Carus label, delivered with sublime control and poetic empathy by the Dresden Chamber Choir and its conductor, Hans-Christoph Rademann. Sung a cappella, these pieces combine melodic past and harmonic future, clothing ancient, often Reformation-era tunes in lavish chromaticism.Here too, there’s opportunity for discovery, for while Brahms predictably appears, so do Romantics largely forgotten. Franz Wüllner — conductor of Wagner premieres in Munich and mentor to Strauss — turns out to be a subtle painter in the lullaby of “Kindelein Zart,” and particularly in a luscious motet, “Nachtgruss.” Gustav Schreck hews more closely to the lineage of Bach in two hymns, and the inevitable arrangement of “Stille Nacht.” (He was cantor at Thomaskirche in Leipzig, Bach’s own church.) And there’s a rare outing for Robert Fuchs, who was admired by Brahms and taught Mahler and Wolf, in a dainty cradle song, “Schlaf, Mein Kindelein” and the perky “O Freudenreicher Tag.”Even so, Max Reger, the master of the chorale, shines brightest, in his tender “Lass Mich Dein Sein und Bleiben”; his regal, golden “Jesu, Grosser Wunderstern”; and the concluding “Das Alte Jahr Vergangen Ist,” to greet the new year.A Critic’s Notebook article on Tuesday about three new classical music Christmas albums misidentified a language the vocalists use on one, “Christmas in Medieval England.” It is Middle English, not Old English.A version of this article appears in print on December 22, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Classical Christmas, Over Centuries.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.