By FARAH NAYERIDEC. 21, 2015
LONDON — At an age when many artists have seen their creative output slow, Peter Blake says he has never felt less constrained — and, at 83, he considers himself fortunate to have good eyesight and a steady hand.Mr. Blake, who has inspired a thousand parlor games with his cover collage for the 1967 Beatles album “Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band,” has just opened a show at the Waddington Custot Galleries here. About half of the 78 works in it were produced this year.“What it means is, you can go daft, you can do anything,” he said in an interview in his light-filled London living room. “So I gave myself carte blanche to be in my late period, and be a slightly eccentric old man.”Mr. Blake’s eccentricities have been on display his entire career. The Waddington show, “Peter Blake: Portraits and People,” which runs through Jan. 30, revisits his favorite subjects: professional wrestlers, circus performers — people “outside the norm,” he said — and Elvis Presley, his lifelong idol.AdvertisementThe gallery’s central space is filled with oil paintings and watercolors derived from found images. A series of tattooed figures is based on 19th-century French prisoner photographs; another series depicts mostly imaginary wrestlers and entertainers. The teary, red-nosed “Krankie the Klown” riffs on a photograph of Robert De Niro. “Cowboy Jake Rodeo” has the eyes of Brad Pitt and the nose of the rugby player Mike Tindall.Advertisement“He’s got an extraordinary painterly touch,” said Martin Gayford, a British critic and author who has followed Mr. Blake’s career. Because of his subject matter, Mr. Blake has been branded a Pop artist, but Mr. Gayford said that label had never really suited him. “His roots come out of English folk art more than out of Pop,” he said, “as it’s understood in terms of Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein.”Mr. Blake, who received a knighthood making him Sir Peter in 2002, is part of a generation of British artists in their 70s and 80s who are still producing and showing works. Yet his name recognition, and prices, have lagged behind contemporaries like David Hockney, 78, who will have a portrait show opening at the Royal Academy of Arts in July.Christoph Grunenberg, a former director of Tate Liverpool and the curator of a 2007 Blake retrospective there, said the “quaint, eccentric nature” of Mr. Blake’s work was out of step with today’s art-world tastes. He is a “quintessentially British artist,” Mr. Grunenberg said. “He always harks back to some nostalgic vision of Britain.”Mr. Grunenberg, now director of the Kunsthalle Bremen in Germany, noted that Mr. Blake had also continued to make relatively small works in traditional media, even as artists like Mr. Hockney had produced large-scale pieces and experimented with new technologies.An electrician’s son from Kent, in southeast England, Mr. Blake went straight to art school after World War II and began depicting his passions, including the theater and rock ’n’ roll, considered somewhat subversive at the time.An early work, “Self-Portrait With Badges,” from 1961, now at Tate Britain, shows Mr. Blake wearing jeans and a denim jacket covered with badges and holding a magazine titled Elvis. Like much of his art, it is autobiographical: a frank representation of his young self and his obsession with popular culture.In the early 1960s he met and became friends with Paul McCartney, and through the intercession of an astute art dealer Mr. Blake received the commission to design the cover for “Sgt. Pepper,” which he did with his wife at the time, Jann Haworth.AdvertisementFew of his works since then have lodged themselves in the popular consciousness. Mr. Blake said he found that “quite often the work I was doing at any one time wasn’t fashionable at that time.”He said that he had made matters worse by boycotting New York for four decades — having received nasty reviews in a 1962 exhibition there — and by refusing to sell to Charles Saatchi, the British art world’s longtime kingmaker, whom he viewed as a dealer, not a collector. “A shot in each foot,” he said of those career moves, adding that he regretted neither.The highest price paid for a Blake work at auction was in June when “Boys With New Ties,” an oil painting from around 1955, sold at Christie’s for 662,500 pounds (just under $1 million). The watercolors at the Waddington show are priced at well under £100,000 (about $150,000) each; a mixed-media shrine to Elvis is the most expensive work in the show, at £400,000 (roughly $600,000).“I’ve never aimed to be very rich,” Mr. Blake said. “I’ve never done it for money.” He described himself as “comfortable now,” but not rich in the terms of Jeff Koons or Damien Hirst.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.These days, Mr. Blake is busy “clearing the desk, he said, adding, “There’s still a group of ambitions that I’m now trying to tick off.” Those include illustrating Molly Bloom’s soliloquy in “Ulysses” and F. Scott Fitzgerald’s “The Great Gatsby,” his favorite book, he said. He is also making additional illustrations of the Dylan Thomas drama “Under Milk Wood,” for which he previously produced 110 works on paper, which were published in a book in 2013.In his small study, Mr. Blake displayed portfolios of works in progress on an oak tabletop: delicate drawings and watercolors, some rough sketches and others nearly complete, of faces, bodies, boats, trees and flowers. He took out small sheets of paper presoaked and dried in preparation for the “Gatsby” watercolors.The shrine to Elvis, another of Mr. Blake’s desk-clearing projects, is subtitled “Portraits, Landscapes or Still Lifes?” and occupies a wall at the Waddington show. Memorabilia related to that musician — key chains, playing cards, figurines, license plates — crowd brightly colored tables that are pushed against a wall of thrift-shop paintings. The title, Mr. Blake said, refers to a question he was asked when he told people he was a painter.“Blake is very much an individualist,” said Mr. Gayford, the critic. “He seems to flow out of a romantic preoccupation with slightly marginal aspects of British life. There’s no one, really, who’s taken that path.”Despite that singular trajectory, Mr. Grunenberg said: “There will come a point when Peter Blake’s work will be rediscovered on an international scale. One day, he will get his due.”An article on Tuesday about the artist Peter Blake and a new exhibition of his work in London omitted a co-designer of the cover of the Beatles album “Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band.” Besides Mr. Blake, it was designed by his wife at the time, Jann Haworth.“Peter Blake: Portraits and People” runs through Jan. 30 at the Waddington Custot Galleries in London;waddingtoncustot­.com.A version of this article appears in print on December 22, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Pop Art or Folk, It’s Been Going in and Out of Style Since ‘Sgt. Pepper’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.