By MATT WOLFOCT. 7, 2015
LONDON — Self-love is on the increase on the London stage, and why not, in a capital that has long given theater pride of place? “Nell Gwynn,” the jolly new play that closes the outdoor season at Shakespeare’s Globe, takes an affectionate look at the real-life 17th-century orange-seller of the title who became that new breed of professional known as an actress.The playwright Jessica Swale’s larger topic is London’s passion for the stage — an enthusiasm that few among the Globe’s avid public four centuries on are likely to dispute.The achievement of the play, and of Christopher Luscombe’s giddy production, serves as an additional reminder that an address known for reanimating Shakespeare saves a particular place in its repertoire for new work.Whereas it once was during the initial decade or so at the Globe that premieres played to a dedicated coterie at best, the Thames-side theater has cultivated a crowd that is as clamorous for something fresh as they are for the latest go-round of “Measure for Measure” or “Richard II,” to name two of the Shakespeare titles with which “Nell Gwynn” has been playing in repertory. (The final performance is Oct. 17.)AdvertisementIt helps, of course, that Ms. Swale’s script is unapologetically saucy, its fleeting textual glances to “Henry V” and “Much Ado About Nothing” all but surrendering to illicit-seeming confessions on the order of “I’ve been waiting to see your Florimel for weeks.” That remark is spoken toward the end of the first act by Charles II (David Sturzaker) — a character described in the text as “the king, obviously” — as a way of sealing the amorous deal with his beloved Nell of the title. The brothel-keeper’s daughter was for a while the monarch’s mistress before dying herself at age 37, and she is here played by the fast-rising film actress Gugu Mbatha-Raw (“Belle,” “Beyond the Lights”) with the sort of quick-silver effervescence that makes you wish this stage-trained talent would remain in the theater.AdvertisementAs might be expected, Ms. Swale has a field day with the manners and mores of life on- and offstage. There’s a lovely sequence early on where Nell is coached in the various “attitudes” needed to make a career treading the boards. The fledgling performer takes her cue from Charles Hart (Jay Taylor), a prominent actor of the day who comes to rest on the word “love” only to realize that he might be in the early throes of it himself.Lest Nell’s rise from obscurity to renown go unchallenged, she meets comic resistance from Edward Kynaston (Greg Haiste, priceless), a volatile thesp who isn’t keen to discover that his exclusive purchase on roles like Desdemona may soon be at risk. “Enough!” he protests early on, communicating a fragile ego a prompter’s prod away from total meltdown. “No woman can play a woman as well as I can play a woman!”The production has been designed by Hugh Durrant with a luxuriant abundance of drapery and the like adorning the Globe stage, the visual elegance finding a counterweight in the odd scripted riposte from the crowd to heighten the immediacy that one has come to expect from this address. And the building’s very architecture feeds one of the evening’s most unexpected double entendres when Nell’s hard-drinking mother (the redoubtable Sarah Woodward) comes roaring into view in the second act, stopping to take note of this new world of the theater all around her. “Would you look at that!” she exclaims. “I have never seen such a very big pillar in all my life.”Medea, of all unlikely canonical figures, is referenced in passing during “Nell Gwynn,” though the actress spends much of Ms. Swale’s play getting to grips with a new work from John Dryden (Graham Butler, delightful). Elsewhere on the London stage, the local fascination with Euripides’s murderous heroine runs mighty deep, or so it would seem. Barely 15 months since Helen McCrory appeared at the National in a contemporary version of “Medea” for which its blazing leading lady went on to win a Critics Circle Award, the play has been announced to open next month at West London’s Gate Theater in a separate production directed by Anne-Louise Sarks.Not to be outdone, North London’s Almeida Theater has entered the fray with a newly opened “Medea” directed by Rupert Goold, that playhouse’s artistic director, and with his own wife, Kate Fleetwood, in the title role. But so removed is this peculiar telling of the time-honored tragedy from its essential pity and terror that one wonders whether the adapter, Rachel Cusk, might have been better off retitling a text that has been transposed to the here and now. That was the path taken by the playwright Patrick Marber in 2003 when he refashioned Strindberg’s 19th-century mainstay, “Miss Julie,” into something sufficiently updated and different (1945 England in that instance) to warrant the addition of an “After” before the title.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As it is, the story of a wife and mother driven to unimaginable extremes feels disorienting all right, but not in the way one might expect from peering so profoundly into the abyss of the human soul. Much like the current National Theater play “People, Places and Things,” about a young addict’s struggle to see her way clear of rehab, this particular “Medea” feels more like a thoroughgoing case study than a fully inhabited, properly felt drama.Ms. Fleetwood has a striking beginning, her long hair shielding her face from view like a protective carapace of sorts. But once the short (90 minutes, no intermission) narrative starts on its inexorable course, one is aware both of a world ganging up on this deliberately everyday figure who would like most of all to be left alone to write, but also of multiple lapses in logic. Why, among other things, does the adulterous Jason (Justin Salinger), the character here conceived as an actor awaiting his big break, not remark upon his onetime partner’s penchant for wielding knives with abandon? Faced with this evidence, I’d have grabbed the kids and gotten out.Nor, I think, does it work to undercut the putative immediacy of Mr. Goold’s approach with a lengthy finish, related to us in rhyme, that plays unnecessary tricks with so primal a story and that finds the fine actress Charlotte Randle appearing late on as an emissary of news and sporting an, um, eye-popping costume that elicited an unfortunate snicker or two from the house the other night.Ms. Fleetwood possesses the requisite fire in the belly to play this part (she was a 2008 Tony nominee for her Lady Macbeth on Broadway as directed by Mr. Goold), but I came away feeling as if I had been privy to an unpleasant set of proceedings in divorce court. This is Greek tragedy by way of “Kramer vs. Kramer”; those in search of Euripides either then or as he might speak to us now should look elsewhere.AdvertisementNell Gwynn.  Directed by Christopher Luscombe. Shakespeare’s Globe. Through Oct. 17.Medea.  Directed by Rupert Goold. Almeida Theater. Through Nov. 14.A version of this review appears in print on October 8, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.