AdvertisementSupported byHomelandBy Judith WarnerThis recap contains spoilers for Sunday’s episode of “Homeland.”Oh my god.Did Carrie just kill Quinn?And did Otto Düring just propose to her? I think he did, but it was all so yucky, I couldn’t be 100 percent sure. That’s what she gets for doing her seductive little head tilt at the man who has (almost) everything.“Just think about the scope and scale of what I’m proposing. The possibilities,” Otto says.Let’s not. And let’s hope we don’t have to, in any detail, next season.Back to Quinn.The terrorist plot has been foiled, and Carrie, a changed woman, has successfully fought off an attack of Cry Face in front of Saul. But, instead of joining in with the general celebration, is Rupert Friend abandoning us? Did he, like Jonas, lead us down the garden path in the “crazy” hope of a happily ever after, only to check out, presumably for another series? Leaving us only with the faintest trace of his voice in our ears: “Yours, for always now, Quinn.”“Did we do this to him?” Carrie gasps.How could “Homeland” do this to us?Our tiny glimpse of the real Peter Quinn (if Dar Adal is to be believed) — a boy found in a Baltimore foster home at 16, someone “real,” yet “pretty enough” to attract useful attention — has left us with an image of desperation, even exploitation, that brings to mind the trafficked teenagers holed up in the Russian not-so-safe house where Allison waits for transit out of Germany.It was so much nicer to believe the story Quinn told us himself: that he’d grown up on the Main Line of Philadelphia and had gone to Harvard. That he was from somewhere, rather than nowhere. That he was, perhaps, rebelling against parental expectations, rather than spiraling, with brief moments of “false glimmer,” toward the end point of his inner darkness.“Pity,” Dar said, in what has to be one of the cruelest understatements of all time, before letting Carrie know that a life of severe brain damage was Quinn’s “worst nightmare.” Was he counting on her to spare him such a fate?I wouldn’t put it past him — even if, just for a moment, asleep beside his sometime-prodigal son, he did look like a real human being.You don’t really get the sense that he is in on Saul’s plan to re-recruit Carrie; his line, “No telling when we might see each other again,” sounded like a goodbye to me.And yet, Saul is right. How could Carrie now permit herself to walk away from the C.I.A.? After what happened in the train station, can there be any doubt in her mind that she’s doing God’s work?Clearly there is, which is why we got the celestial light show as the episode drew to an end. Which, frankly, was pretty darn weird — a little too much of the “fate” or “destiny” or “horoscopes” kind of stuff that Quinn finds (found?) so distasteful.Just to tie up a couple of loose ends:I’m glad that Laura Sutton had the chance to redeem herself, saving Numan and acting for the greater German good, in helping get the story out that Faisal Marwan was an enemy of the state. This should, we hope, conclude her career in our viewing space. Good riddance.I’m glad, too, that Jonas has extricated himself from Carrie’s life, though not before taking care to enlighten her about her daughter’s reading habits, which, we presume, she will have plenty of time to explore on her own in the States, where she will “be a mom again for awhile,” before the action starts up again.Allison has gotten hers, though the real suffering, I suspect, came not so much from the sting of metal-piercing bullets as from the full realization that she had fallen into a world of pure evil: “This house is a transit site for human trafficking. Underage girls being sold into prostitution,” she complains. “Yes,” says her pitiless new female handler. “What is your point?”Saul appears to be back in the saddle. If there’s any lesson to draw from the whole Allison saga, it’s that he’s really, really good at revenge. But those lingering doubts I raised last week are now gnawing at me. “So you’ve devoted your entire life to an institution that’s now turning its back on you,” he says to Ivan. “The last illusion of the illusionless man.” Those final words are spoken by the mole, Bill Haydon, in John le Carré’s “Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy.” Is this deftly played scene Saul’s moment of truth?“It’s not for nothing,” he tells Ivan. “You are this close to painting a masterpiece. This close. And not many people can say that.”Can Saul? If so, what — or who — is his “masterpiece”?I do hope there’s something to these suspicions, or at least that they point to a new chapter in Saul’s character development next season. Unlike many of the viewers who have posted comments here, I’ve remained a big fan of “Homeland” this year. But Sunday night’s episode was — Saul and Ivan’s conversation and Quinn’s voice-over aside — a hot mess. The sarin drama ended too fast; Allison’s demise was too dreary; Jonas broke up with Carrie by giving her a sweatshirt, and the whole thing just had the feel of a desperate race to the close.Carrie is very, very alone now — and the thought of her so untethered isn’t pretty. I guess we will find out just how alone next season.Please add your thoughts below.Judith Warner, a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine, is the author, most recently, of “We’ve Got Issues: Children and Parents in the Age of Medication.”Advertisement