AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckThe Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. marches for voting rights in “Selma”; Robin Williams gives a final performance in “Boulevard”; and fans of “Mythbusters” can stay glued to the couch until the holidays are safely over.SELMA (2014) on Hulu and iTunes. The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., portrayed with grace and humor by David Oyelowo, and a throng of civil rights demonstrators march the road from Selma to Montgomery, Ala., in March 1965 to protest the denial of voting rights to Southern blacks. While Dr. King’s heirs did not grant permission for his speeches to be quoted in this Oscar nominee for best picture, the director, Ava DuVernay, turns that to her advantage in a fresh approach, writing “history with passionate clarity and blazing conviction,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. He added, “Even if you think you know what’s coming, ‘Selma’ hums with suspense and surprise.” (Image: A scene of the march, with Mr. Oyelowo, center)BOULEVARD (2015) 7:30 p.m. on Showtime. In what is billed as his final on-screen performance, Robin Williams plays Nolan, a 60-year-old bank officer with a childless marriage, a dying father and the same job for the last 26 years. Then one evening he takes a different route home and ends up going for a ride with a male hustler. But it’s not sex Nolan wants. “As truthful as it is, ‘Boulevard’ conveys little insight into characters who are believable and well acted but incapable of change,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “The movie is an unrelievedly depressing illustration of Henry David Thoreau’s observation that ‘the mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.’” (Image: Mr. Williams)I LOVE LUCY CHRISTMAS SPECIAL 8 p.m. on CBS. Two classics — “The Christmas Episode” and “Lucy Does a TV Commercial” — colorized in vintage hues. (Image: Lucille Ball)HOW MURRAY SAVED CHRISTMAS 8:30 p.m. on NBC. A cranky deli owner is forced to fill in for Santa Claus and, together with Edison Elf, finds that he has a gift for giving. Jerry Stiller and Sean Hayes lend their voices.ADELE LIVE IN NEW YORK CITY 9 p.m. on NBC. Hello again, for those who missed this Radio City Music Hall concert special the first time. (Image: Adele)THE GARDEN’S DEFINING MOMENTS 10:30 p.m. on MSG. The former New York Knicks coaches Pat Riley and Jeff Van Gundy weigh in on “Ewing’s Putback Sends Knicks to Finals.”MYTHBUSTERS HOLIDAY MEGA MARATHON Midnight on Science. Nowhere to go for the next 12 days? Every episode — from “Jet Assisted Chevy” to “Star Wars: Revenge of the Myth” — will be shown in chronological order in tribute to Adam Savage and Jamie Hyneman’s final season. That’s 248 episodes, 2,950 experiments, 1,050 myths and 900 explosions — and yes, they’re counting.Advertisement