By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIM, VIVIEN SCHWEITZER and ANTHONY TOMMASINIDEC. 22, 2015
“If you ever teach a yodeling class,” the comedian Jack Handey reflected in one of his “Deep Thoughts” segments on “Saturday Night Live,” “probably the hardest thing is to keep the students from just trying to yodel right off. You see, we build to that.”Mr. Handey might have had in mind the opening minutes of “Alpine Echoes,” a noontime performance in Washington Heights. The event, led by the singer and new-music specialist Joan La Barbara, had been described as “avant-yodeling,” and I was keen to get practical tips. But it took everyone a long time to build to the yodeling.Participants who had rehearsed beforehand had stationed themselves on the steep steps that cut an urban gorge from Fort Washington Avenue to Overlook Terrace at 187th Street, with Ms. La Barbara standing at the highest point. With hands cupped to her mouth, she sent little coos and yelps downhill to the next singer, who copied the vocal gesture and passed it down the line.Eventually, the chain of call-and-response began to sound like a flock of birds: Up on Fort Washington Avenue, two dogs joined in excitedly. Finally, there were guttural breaks of a yodel-like nature in some of the more emphatic whoops. It occurred to me that yodeling might be nothing more than cooing with conviction.AdvertisementAfter 10 minutes Ms. La Barbara signaled an end, and everyone followed her a short distance to Bennett Park for the second part of the performance. Forming a figure-eight chain around two stately trees, the singers again sent little vocalizations to one another, some embellished with tongue trills and ululating flutters. The group finished with a sustained drone.AdvertisementThough I still wasn’t hearing any truly Alpine echoes, the hoots, bleats and squawks conjured a pleasantly confusing world of birdcalls in which sea gulls seemed to be especially well represented. A few yards away, a peregrine falcon sat in a tree, perhaps sensing a potential lunch in all this commotion. It hadn’t swooped down by the time I walked away, but maybe it was building to that. CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMBefore his Make Music Winter event on Monday afternoon, the composer Ravi Kittappa urged participants who had gathered in Athens Square Park in Astoria, Queens, to “smile and engage” the public. But his quirky little parade of people, walking slowly as they played droning Indian shruti boxes (akin to harmoniums), acoustic instruments and various electronic devices, attracted little more than a few quizzical glances from passers-by.Mr. Kittappa, a Ph.D. fellow in composition at the University of California, Berkeley, writes music meshing rock, electronics and improvisation. He was inspired to write “Decantations III” after seeing children in India chanting names for a Hindu god in Sanskrit, a language they didn’t understand, often over the drone created by the shruti box.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some participants played shruti boxes and chanted; a handful played acoustic instruments, including a violin; and others (including this critic) downloaded drone files of differing pitches and intensity to play from electronic devices.The most alluring moments occurred when the drones interacted with neighborhood noises, meshing with the rumble of a subway train on the elevated track, honks from passing cars and a busking guitarist to create vivid soundscapes. The three groups converged back at Athens Square Park for the meditative finale, the drones ebbing and flowing next to a bronze statue of Socrates.VIVIEN SCHWEITZERDuring the Middle Ages, Christians who made the pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela in Spain surely had memorized the hymns and chants they sang along the way. But sight-reading while you walk is not so easy.That was the challenge faced by about two dozen people on Monday night who took part in “Pilgrimage,” a modern-day version of that medieval peregrination. Our little group was going to sing some of the same melodies and hymns as the pilgrims of centuries ago. First, though, we assembled at West Park Presbyterian Church on the Upper West Side, met by the baritone and choral conductor Malcolm J. Merriweather for a practice session. Mr. Merriweather passed out copies of the music and, just as essential, some nifty headlights: a small light on an elastic band to wear around one’s head to illuminate the scores on dark city streets. No medieval lanterns here.Then we set off on a two-mile trek toward our destination, the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine in Morningside Heights. But as we headed west on 86th Street, singing a 13th-century cantina, “Santa Maria, Strela do dia,” Mr. Merriweather realized that his pilgrims were at risk of bumping into lamp posts and stumbling on cracks in the sidewalks by walking with their faces fixated on sheet music. He suggested that the group stop at interim points, then sing for a bit. That worked better, over all, as we headed north on Riverside Drive. “Awesome,” Mr. Merriweather said, after his pilgrims sang a couple of 14th-century rounds.Once we arrived at the cathedral, we had the place to ourselves. The pilgrims gathered under the dome in the crossing to sing and then took seats in the choir rows to sing some more. Mr. Merriweather, also the choral associate at St. John the Divine, accompanied us on the organ, which certainly fortified the performance of “Coventry Carol,” a 16th-century piece in four-part harmony.AdvertisementThe youngest pilgrim by far was my nephew Cruz, just 18 months old, visiting from California with his parents. Cruz was riveted by the resonant sounds of the singing and the powerful organ. “Pilgrimage” made an impression on him. ANTHONY TOMMASINIA version of this review appears in print on December 23, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: In Make Music Winter, Critics Find Their Inner Yodelers and Pilgrims.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.