By JORI FINKELDEC. 22, 2015
LOS ANGELES — The 17th-century Dutch painter Isack van Ostade has long seemed tame, compared with his older brother, Adriaen, who is known for rowdy, sometimes cheeky scenes of peasants in everyday activities — often in the tavern. But recently, a painting in the British Royal Collection was cleaned, revealing the younger van Ostade’s own lowbrow humor in the figure of a man urinating in front of a dog. Now the Norton Simon Museum in Pasadena is sharing a similar discovery: Its newly restored 1641 Isack van Ostade painting of peasants butchering a pig shows a man defecating in the corner.“For a long time, people thought of Isack as being the more placid and less shocking of the two brothers, with sweet scenes of everyday life,” said Carol Togneri, chief curator of the Norton Simon, which put its restored painting back on display last month. “Now we are seeing his bawdy side as well.”Both brothers worked in their native Haarlem within the growing field of genre painting, distilling moments from daily life, as opposed to biblical, historical or mythological themes. Adriaen did more interior scenes, while Isack — remarkably prolific, considering that he died at 28 — gravitated toward peopled landscapes. In his restored painting in Britain, “A Village Fair With a Church Behind” (belonging to Queen Elizabeth and now in a survey of Dutch painting at Buckingham Palace), the man relieving himself crouches, apart from the crowd. He had been discreetly covered up with an overpainting of a bush, probably in 1903, to appeal to the tastes of the day. (Queen Victoria, for one, called the Dutch paintings in her collection “low style.”)It is not known when the Norton Simon’s painting, “Peasants Outside a Farmhouse Butchering Pork,” was touched up, or by whom. The California industrialist Norton Simon acquired it in 1969 from an Amsterdam dealer. By then it was showing signs of age, with yellowing layers of varnish and a horizontal crack along the center of the wood panel. The painting also had evidence of restoration in patches, including the lower left corner, where a man wearing green pants, seated on a stool, seemed to be taking in the scene of adults carving up a pig and children playing with its balloonlike bladder.In the area of the seated man, “the paint was smoother, more opaque, not as delicate in how it was applied, so I was a little bit suspicious,” said Devi Ormond, a conservator at the Getty Museum, who has worked on the painting on and off for the last two years for the Norton Simon. (Smaller museums often outsource their conservation work.) She said that studies, such as X-ray examination, were not revealing, so she “did a little test,” using a scalpel under high magnification to scrape off a minuscule amount of paint.AdvertisementUnderneath the green, she saw orange, which she initially assumed was the original color of the man’s pants. A colleague soon suggested that it could represent flesh, and she realized that the orange matched the skin tone of other figures. The stool was not original to the work, either, leaving a half-naked figure squatting over the artist’s signature — possibly a joke the painter was making at his own expense.AdvertisementMs. Ormond first saw this peasant in his exposed state in 2014, independent of the discovery made about Queen Elizabeth’s painting, yet she said she wasn’t able to complete her work on it until this November because of competing demands.“We had V.I.P.s coming in to visit the studio, so we sometimes turned the painting around,” she said. “We didn’t want to embarrass anyone by talking about a defecating subject.”Decorum also reigns at the Norton Simon, where a new wall label describes the conservation process: “In the course of this treatment, it was discovered that the man at lower left was answering a call to nature.”A version of this article appears in print on December 23, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: An Artist’s Intentions (And Subjects) Exposed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.