By JAMES PONIEWOZIKDEC. 21, 2015
In the Harry Potter universe, wizards teleport through fireplaces, people hold conversations with paintings, and characters fly on brooms in a sport won by capturing a winged golden orb. Yet, apparently, it’s a stretch too far for some fans, who are responding on social media, that a character in an adaptation be played by a black woman.Reactions to the announcement that Noma Dumezweni would play the now grown-up magic student Hermione Granger in the London play “Harry Potter and the Cursed Child,” based on the novels by J. K. Rowling, were mostly positive. But, the Internet being the Internet, there was more than a smattering of Harry Potter fans opposed to the idea completely.Ms. Rowling said on Twitter that the only “canon” description of Hermione is “brown eyes, frizzy hair and very clever,” and “white skin was never specified.” That Ms. Rowling should be the ultimate arbiter of her own intentions, as Marshall McLuhan was of his in a ticket line in Woody Allen’s “Annie Hall,” is hard to dispute.But it’s also a little beside the point. Whether Ms. Rowling had described Hermione as white, black, green or none of the above, casting an adaptation of a work is not the same as illustrating it.AdvertisementAn actress creates a character by embodying her spirit, not by resembling previous performers. The works of Shakespeare have been cast with any number of ethnicities; white actors, for example, have played Othello the Moor. That Lin-Manuel Miranda is of Puerto Rican descent does not make his portrayal of a white founding father in “Hamilton” any less powerful or authentic. In fact, his musical’s multiethnic casting underscores that America is a nation of immigrants better than any literal likeness could.Just so, any resistance to Ms. Dumezweni’s casting only proves how appropriate it is. After all, one of the most important aspects of Hermione’s character is that the bigots of her own world consider her impure and illegitimate.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Among many things, the Harry Potter series is an allegory about real-world prejudice. A central motivation of its villains is the belief that “pure” wizards — those descended from other wizards, rather than nonmagical “Muggles” — are superior.Hermione’s parents are Muggles. One of the unfortunate lessons she learns at the Hogwarts school is the term “mudblood,” used as a slur meaning “dirty” and of impure ancestry. This ugly streak in the wizarding community is a central part of the agenda of the series’s central villain, Lord Voldemort, and his followers, including the snooty Malfoy family.AdvertisementThe nature of the evil in the Harry Potter series is not just generically fantasy-wicked; it dramatizes, for its young-adult audience, the all-too-familiar history of programmatic bigotry, ethnic cleansing and fascism. (It’s probably no coincidence that we learn that Professor Dumbledore battled an earlier exponent of wizard bloodism, Gellert Grindelwald, in 1945, the year of Hitler’s downfall.)That Hermione, one of the most talented characters in the books, is dismissed for her birth as an inferior “mudblood” is not just a sidelight. It’s arguably the aspect of the saga that makes it more than the personal quest of one chosen boy to fulfill his destiny. And Hermione’s personal experience is reflected in her character’s activism, as when she founds a group to push for the labor rights of house elves. If anyone would argue for diversity in casting Hermione, it would be Hermione herself, the original, and proud, SJW (Social-Justice Witch).Certainly a white actress could play this character convincingly: Emma Watson did in the films. But like any iconic character, Hermione doesn’t need to belong to any one actress or be defined by a single appearance. It would be the most perverse kind of fandom for any Potterphile to argue against an actress, using the reasoning of a Malfoy.A version of this news analysis appears in print on December 23, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: Why Casting a Black Actress Underscores a Key Harry Potter Theme.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.