AdvertisementSupported byJane the VirginBy Pilot ViruetAh, it’s that familiar new-mother television plot: Jane has to find a babysitter. Not just any babysitter, but the perfect babysitter. That’s hard enough, but Jane has an additional, unconventional worry because she has no idea what Sin Rostro currently looks like and could, unknowingly, hire this evil woman to take care of her baby. “Jane the Virgin” is dramatic but, fortunately, not that dramatic. (At least not yet; who knows when and how Sin Rostro will pop back up in Jane’s life?)Instead, the conflict here is closer to home. Jane isn’t entirely ready to leave Mateo alone with a stranger for the first time and is extremely picky with the babysitters who come in to interview (for good reason), even though Rafael tries to get her to pick someone so the two can finally go on their first date. Jane eventually chooses a wonderful candidate named Chepa who checks off all the necessary boxes on Jane’s list. But it turns out the problem isn’t the babysitter, but Jane herself. On the night they are getting ready to have their date, Jane spends 83 minutes instructing Chepa how to take care of Mateo. She becomes so overwhelming that Chepa eventually bails on her.That’s not the only problem that Jane has this episode. “Chapter Twenty-Nine” finds Jane running into Michael (at a Target, of course, and on Black Friday) — remember, it’s now six months since they’ve seen each other — but he wants nothing to do with her. It’s hard what to make of that scene. I suppose its intention could be to elicit some sympathy for Michael who seems so utterly heartbroken that he can’t bring himself to even catch up and engage in mindless small talk with his ex-fiancée. His story gets even sadder when he shows up at Nadine’s funeral. (What? Nadine’s dead? “Jane the Virgin” just throws in these reveals out of nowhere) Through a flashback, we learned that she sacrificed her life for him. Then, there is another Michael reveal: He wasn’t fired but instead it was all a show for him to go undercover and get closer to solving the Sin Rostro case. The inclusion of Michael in this episode throws off the rhythm of the Jane/Rafael courtship but it serves two purposes: to further along the Sin Rostro plot and to complicate Jane/Rafael as they, as we see later in the episode, hit a rough patch.But before we get to Jane, let’s examine some of the other moments from this episode. There are two intriguing setups — Wesley Masters published his expose on the Solanos and we learn more about Luisa’s mother — that are going to make the midseason break feel longer than usual. Petra is attempting to have a real friendship with Jane but is foiled, twice, by her mother trying to get rid of Ivan’s body. I actually love how quickly this is dealt with; there are no long, drawn-out scenes featuring Petra and Magda trying to figure out what to do with Ivan but instead, Magda takes action and the episode ends with them burying the body — not the best activity for a pregnant woman.Perhaps my favorite subplot tonight was Rogelio’s continued quest to get back on television. He sank all of his money into “Hombres Locos” but the network passed on it, leaving him at a loss for what to do with himself. He needs to cut down on his budget (no more new pants Wednesdays or $10,000 in “smile maintenance) until he gets a new role and playing basically his old characters in one of those “special guest star!” episodes isn’t too appealing. What makes this story line interesting — what elevates it to more than just Rogelio-in-a-silly-hat comic relief — is the reason Rogelio is so reluctant to stick to a budget and change his big-spending ways. He grew up poor and struggling, and spent too many years eating ramen in his one-bedroom apartment. He tried to get out of that life and succeeded with his telenovela career but, like many people who escaped poverty, is terrified about going back. To Rogelio, even just one small step backward financially signifies a failure and a possible return to that one-bedroom. He eventually learns to be O.K. with it — having his family around makes the financial hardship a little easier.So that brings us to Jane’s big plot which was fine, as always. It was perfectly “Jane the Virgin”: She thought she found an adviser in one author (after drunkenly embarrassing herself, but then bonding over their shared motherhood) but then realized that the best adviser was actually her tough professor. But the most important development this week was the revelation of Rafael’s transgressions: He hired someone to go to the police and lie about Michael. Just when you thought the love triangle was over, it sucks you back in.Advertisement