AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Zachary WoolfeThe long, lovely career of Anonymous 4 ended on Tuesday the way it began: modestly, even austerely — without ostentation but with lots of thoughtful beauty.There was no extended, teary greatest-hits farewell for this well-loved a cappella quartet. “The Last Noel,” the program it performed in front of the grand Christmas tree in the resonant Medieval Sculpture Hall at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, was just an hour long, tightly conceived and carefully restrained.It was also vibrant and varied, artfully linking some of the group’s sprawling repertory with smiling emotion. Sticking to the theme of holiday celebrations through the centuries, the program nodded to the notion of saying goodbye — the title was hardly subtle — without wallowing or mawkishness.A stalwart of the music scene since its formation in 1986, Anonymous 4 announced last year that it would disband. At first, some may have doubted the seriousness of its threat. After all, the group once before claimed that it was coming to an end, saying a decade ago that it would retire from full-time activities.But that curtailment was never intended to be total. The lighter load allowed the members to pursue solo work while coming together for special projects, recordings and tours. This year their final album, “1865,” a poignant set of American songs of the Civil War era, was released, the latest stop on a journey that has brought the group from its initial focus on early music to forays into genres ranging from colonial Americana to post-Minimalism.“The Last Noel” didn’t touch on all of those periods and styles, but dotted with helpings of the group’s previous Christmas programs, it did give a sense of the curiosity that has kept Anonymous 4 from ever resting on its laurels. A keening traditional Irish solo shared the stage with restless, joyous Early American fugues and the spare, shining “Sainte Nicholaes,” by the 12th-century mystic Godric of Yorkshire.The bright “Intonent hodie,” its repetitions of syllables delightfully mimicking echoing bells, led without pause into the more sober, though no less soaring, “Gaudens in domino.” As ever with Anonymous 4, there was a subtle, compelling politics to the program, with hymns to Jesus’ mother more prominent than those to her son.The singing, it needs hardly be said, was wonderful from all four artists: Ruth Cunningham, Marsha Genensky, Susan Hellauer and Jacqueline Horner-Kwiatek. (Only Ms. Horner-Kwiatek was not in the ensemble at its founding, when Johanna Maria Rose was one of the members.) Their blend is still creamy and radiant; any slight loss of purity over the decades has been more than made up for in greater complexity of texture.Brought back by a warm ovation, they delivered an encore, just a few seconds long, that was as unassuming as the rest of the program: a medieval setting of “Ite, missa est,” the final words of the Roman Mass, dismissing the audience that has followed and loved the group for so many years with gratitude, sweetness and sensitivity.Advertisement