By MICHAEL COOPERDEC. 23, 2015
It was like a Sugarplum Fairy assembly line. As soon as one pink-tutu-clad dancer finished her variation at a stage rehearsal on Monday, Peter Martins, New York City Ballet’s ballet master in chief, offered notes or pointers, smiled and called out, barber-like, “Next!”Then another Sugarplum Fairy, in an identical tutu, would emerge from the wings and rehearse the variation, and then another, until seven ballerinas had prepared to dance what is perhaps the most important role in “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker,” most of them for the first time.“The Nutcracker” is all about transformations: Toy soldiers come to life, a family Christmas tree grows 41 feet tall, a nutcracker becomes a prince. And it allows young dancers at City Ballet to have transformations of their own. In recent years, Mr. Martins has used the week of Christmas to give members of the corps de ballet a chance to dance starring roles — the ballet equivalent of being plucked from the chorus line and given a lead part.“It’s kind of breathtaking,” said Unity Phelan, who will dance Sugarplum for the first time on Saturday. This year’s run of “Nutcrackers” will feature 11 debuts in leading roles: six Sugarplum Fairies, four young men as her Cavalier and one Dewdrop. Most of the debuts are being made this week, in the days just before and after Christmas.AdvertisementFor the members of the corps who have been chosen, it is an opportunity, at least for one performance, to stop being a snowflake or a parent in the party scene, and to step out into the spotlight. Silas Farley is normally one of the mice who battles the toy soldiers and the Nutcracker, but on Sunday he will be the Cavalier, partnering the Sugarplum Fairy in the climactic pas deux.Advertisement“It’s kind of fun to get to step out of the mouse costume and get to wear this beautiful role,” Mr. Farley said. He said his siblings had chipped in for tickets to fly his parents to New York from their home in North Carolina to see his role debut, which is on his father’s birthday.Mr. Martins said giving younger dancers a chance was a priority. And the debuts serve other purposes, too. They help the company field enough casts for a run of 47 “Nutcrackers” that will feature 22 Sugarplums this year, along with 17 Cavaliers and 16 Dewdrops. They allow balletomanes and critics to see something new in a ballet that is repeated every year. And they give principal dancers breaks that allow them to celebrate the holidays, or appear as guest artists in other cities where skilled “Nutcracker” dancers are in demand at this time of year.But the roles are not easy. The pas de deux that George Balanchine choreographed for the Sugarplum Fairy and her Cavalier — with its pirouettes, high lifts, dangerous-looking catches and heart-stopping fish dive — can be a minefield.“There are 13 places that are very precarious, that can conceivably go very wrong to the visible eye of the layperson, not just us,” Mr. Martins said. “So whenever I watch it, I’m like: 10 more to go, seven to go, four to go, O.K., only two left.”He paused. “Maybe that’s not a good thing to write because people will be watching for it.”The new dancers rehearse for three weeks before their debuts, a departure from the old days, Mr. Martins noted, when performers might get only a few days’ notice and a couple of rehearsals before stepping into roles for the first time.As Mr. Martins watched several couples rehearse the pas de deux on Monday — a pair of claps being the signal for them to stop — he offered advice. How the Cavalier should use his left thumb to better support his Sugarplum in turns. The proper diagonal line a Sugarplum should trace as she dances her steps. How the Cavalier should not crouch too low when catching Sugarplum in her fish dive (“They are watching you, too!”).Later, as the Sugarplums ran through their variations, alongside children from the School of American Ballet cast as angels, Darci Kistler, a guest teacher with the company whose Sugarplum was preserved in a 1993 feature film, looked on and gave practical tips.She also recalled her Sugarplum debut, when she was a teenage corps dancer. It did not go well.“We crashed and bombed,” she said. “I called home, and I said, ‘I think I’m going to be fired, Mom.’ And my mom said, ‘Oh, that’s O.K., come home and go to college.’”AdvertisementMr. Martins, who is now Ms. Kistler’s husband, said he had watched that troubled debut from the wings with Balanchine, and that the fault was clearly her partner’s. When the curtain went down, Mr. Martins recalled, Balanchine turned to him and told him to dance with her next time.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This year’s new Sugarplums include Ms. Phelan, Indiana Woodward, Claire Kretzschmar and Ashley Hod, who are all in the corps, and Ashly Isaacs and Megan LeCrone, who are soloists. The new class of dancers making the leap from the corps to Cavalier includes Mr. Farley, Peter Walker, Joseph Gordon and Cameron Dieck. Georgina Pazcoguin, a soloist, will dance her first Dewdrop.Dressing the newbies is a challenge: City Ballet’s costume department made four new mint-green costumes this year for its Sugarplums to wear during the pas de deux; it now has 17 of them. Marc Happel, the company’s costume director, said that he tried to make sure principal dancers had their own costumes but that younger dancers often shared.The wardrobe crew will make slight alterations between performances, Mr. Happel said, sometimes even between a matinee and an evening show. “Usually that might mean taking in a side seam or letting out a side seam,” he said. “In an extreme case, it might mean taking a bodice off of one skirt or tutu and putting it on another one.”The alterations can be a work in progress. On Monday, as Mr. Walker rehearsed, he found that the Cavalier costume he was sharing was still too tight around the arms, making lifts difficult. “I’ve got to get this taken out,” he said.Mr. Martins said that the dancers making their debuts this year all brought new things to the roles. “Everybody does the same steps, the same material, obviously, but they could not be more different,” he said. “That’s what’s exciting to me.”A version of this article appears in print on December 24, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Tapped by the Sugarplum Fairy’s Wand.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.