By STEPHEN HOLDENDEC. 23, 2015
The exceptional dramatic power of the Broadway baritone Norm Lewis could be measured by his volcanic performance of “Bring Him Home,” that semi-operatic war horse from “Les Misérables,” on Sunday evening. In the wrong hands, this stentorian plea to heaven can sound like bleating melodramatic kitsch. But as Mr. Lewis sang it in his new show, “Norm Lewis Wishes You a Swingin’ Christmas,” at Feinstein’s/54 Below, the histrionic showpiece became a thunderous howl of anguish. It gave me chills.Given material worthy of his gifts, Mr. Lewis can do no wrong. I’ll never forget his fearful interpretation of “Being Alive” on Broadway in “Sondheim on Sondheim.” His portrayal of Porgy on Broadway in “The Gershwins’ Porgy and Bess” was, in a word, shattering. And, on Sunday, his rendition of “I Got Plenty O’ Nuttin’” found layers of ambiguity in a superficially jaunty celebration of poverty.Mr. Lewis’s sexy rendition of “Fever,” delivered with a gleam in his eye and a tastefully bawdy sense of humor, was another revelatory moment. He infused “The Christmas Song,” which he named as his favorite holiday standard, with a lighthearted warmth.Mr. Lewis had a strong band, led by Joseph Joubert, that gave the show tunes the heft they needed. But drum-heavy arrangements of seasonal songs and carols weighed them down and impeded his expressiveness. A particular casualty was the Frank Loesser song “What Are You Doing New Year’s Eve?”Following his electrifying performances of Gershwin, his routine interpretations of “O Holy Night” and Schubert’s “Ave Maria” were a letdown. He didn’t seem entirely present. But Mr. Lewis recovered his mojo for a strong rendition of “Peace on Earth,” Rachelle Ferell’s despairing lament about the prevalence of domestic violence. The song asks, “How can we heal the wounds of the world if we cannot heal our own?” Peace, it concludes, begins in the home.Norm Lewis continues through Thursday at Feinstein’s/54 Below, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 646-476-3551, 54below­.com.A version of this review appears in print on December 24, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Baritone Heats Up Tradition With Some ‘Fever’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.