Artist & Empire: Facing Britain’s Imperial Past
Tate Britain
Through April 10This wide-ranging show explores how artists through the ages have depicted the British empire in their works. With around 200 paintings, sculptures and drawings, the show examines the issue from all angles. It includes early paintings that depicted life in the outer fringes of the empire with wide-eyed wonder, works created by artists in the colonies portraying British interlopers, and contemporary artworks that take a critical stance toward empires.Europe 1600-1815 Galleries
Victoria and Albert Museum
OngoingEarlier this month, London’s museum of design unveiled its new 17th- and 18th-century European galleries — a revamped, permanent display of design objects and clothing styles from the Continent. Some sections focus on objects and outfits designed for every day living, while others focus on those designed for special occasions, like masquerades and salons. Reviews of the new display have been excellent.Colors of Jazz. Discover Montreal of the 1920s With the Beaver Hall Group
Montreal Museum of Fine Arts
Through Jan. 31The Beaver Hall Group was a small collective of painters who studied and worked together in early-to-mid-20th-century Montreal. Though the group officially dissolved in the 1920s, their collaborations lasted for much of their lifetime. This exhibition brings together work from their early years, focusing on their depictions of Montreal’s urban architecture and its elite social set. Artists in the exhibition include Prudence Heward, Adrien Hébert and Randolph S. Hewton.Grayson Perry: My Pretty Little Art Career
Museum of Contemporary Art Australia
Through May 1The Turner Prize-winning British artist Grayson Perry’s artwork defies easy categorization. He is best known for vases that he painted with cartoonish collages that lampoon contemporary culture. Other works include a TV series about the British class system and a series of accompanying tapestries. Mr. Perry often crossdresses as his alter ego, Claire. This retrospective, the first ever of its scale in the Southern Hemisphere, surveys the artist’s career.Ingres
Prado Museum
Through March 27The French painter Ingres, who was born in 1780 in the country’s north, had an eclectic output that included buttoned-up state portraits, sensuous nudes and ecstatic religious artwork. This exhibition, the Prado’s major winter offering, explores his career from all angles, focusing on his portraits, which he produced in great numbers, but which he also perceived as a distraction from his real work: history paintings. Around 70 artworks are on view in the show, including his 1845 portrait of the Countess of Haussonville.Reading Paintings
National Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art, Deoksugung
Through Feb. 9This exhibition explores Korean painting from the first half of the 20th century. The show includes a variety of traditional landscapes as well as works from the mid-20th century, when artists began to up-end traditional styles in their artwork. Artists on view include Lee Sang-Beom, Park No-soo and Cho Seokjin. Several exhibitions are running in the museum’s various branches in and around Seoul, including a major solo show dedicated to the artist William Kentridge.La Damnation de Faust
Opéra Bastille
Through Dec. 29Hector Berlioz originally planned to rework his sprawling symphonic version of Goethe’s “Faust” to make it more feasible for stage productions, but he never finished the process. The epic is running at the Opéra de Paris now, with the tenor Bryan Hymel in the title role.New Year’s Eve and New Year’s Concert
Musikverein
Dec. 30-Jan. 1Each year, the Vienna Philharmonic plays a series of three New Year’s concerts. This year, the star conductor Mariss Jansons will lead the festivities. The concerts will focus on music by the members of Vienna’s leading music dynasty, the Strauss family. At this point, tickets are impossible to come by: Bidding for a seat at the following year’s concert begins on Jan. 2 and closes in February. But the concerts are broadcast on TV networks worldwide.A Viennese New Year
Hong Kong Cultural Center Concert Hall
Dec. 30 and 31Vienna is not the only city celebrating the Viennese music tradition this new year. The Hong Kong Philharmonic will also play two New Year’s concerts. The orchestra will play works by Josef Strauss, Strauss II, Kalman, Klughardt, Lumbye and Lehar (the latter artists were not native Viennese but had close ties to the city). Henrik Schaefer will conduct. The soprano Kari Postma and the oboe player Michael Wilson will also perform.What Ends Every Day
Museum of Modern Art
Through Feb. 14The Brazilian artist Laercio Redondo’s varied output includes mirror installations, photographs  and a video in which he  filmed — and then distorted footage of — a dancer performing to music on Cuban radio. A solo show of his artwork is running here. It includes several pieces in which Mr. Redondo pays homage to other art and architecture practitioners, like Lina Bo Bardi and Athos Bulcão.