AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel Graeber“LARD” isn’t something anyone has ever used for frying. But make no mistake: It’s cooking.An acronym for “Life’s a Real Dream,” the title captures the whimsy of Steven Erdman, the songwriter, cartoonist and animator who stars in this rollicking musical production at the 13th Street Repertory Theater. Taking the stage as his alter ego, the Human Lard Dog, he performs with his Band of Shy, delivering a rockabilly sound with what I’d call a Devo sensibility.Lard Dog actually hails from Belopio, supposedly our solar system’s last planet. (Sorry, Pluto, it’s your second dis in a decade.) Pretzels power everything there, and the inhabitants slurp noodles, dig holes upward and revere the number 23. If Lard Dog’s attire — a mix of flying ace and tennis nerd — is any indication, they dress funny, too.In other words, the planet is supremely silly, and so is this hourlong show, whose charming M.C., Louis Luminous (Patrick Holbert), offers each arriving audience member a choice of a prop to wave: a cartoon eye or a cartoon head (Lard Dog’s self-portrait), each mounted on a cardboard stick. When I declined to take one, he told me politely that I had to. (I give “LARD” points for insisting that adults behave like children.)Onstage, a screen shows words to shout, lyrics to sing and comical videos and images, including those of figures wearing LARD signs, like Oscar Wilde and a Tyrannosaurus rex. (Barry Goldwater has a cameo as Lard Dog’s dance instructor.)Surprises happen within the aisles, too. Lard Dog lands in his spaceship, a giant pretzel. Other objects, like cotton balls and balloons, take to the air. This is the only concert I’ve attended at which audience members sing “Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer” to the tune of “Louie, Louie.” It’s also the only one I’ve attended at which everyone performs lustily on a sadly underused piece of percussion: Bubble Wrap.The Band of Shy — Jeremy Beck, Akira Ohiso, Rosa Avila and Pablo Kessel — plays more conventional instruments as well, and Lard Dog and Honey Babe (the lovely-voiced Kendy Gable) provide vocals. The songs range from sizzling to soulful, and though the music sometimes muffles their lyrics, they address earthly concerns like shyness (Jason Dole portrays a bashful friend) as well as outer space lunacy. (Above, from left, Mr. Ohiso, Ms. Gable, Mr. Erdman, Mr. Beck and Mr. Kessel.)The group has two more performances and a CD release planned for March, so there’s still time to investigate Belopio. Don’t be shy.(Saturday and Jan. 2 at 11 a.m., 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, houseoflard.com.)Alvin Ailey Family Matinee Series (Saturday) Children can take their first steps as dancegoers by following the leaps and bounds of the members of Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater in these programs, which are followed by question-and-answer sessions with the dancers. Each family matinee concludes with Alvin Ailey’s own “Revelations,” the troupe’s signature work, inspired by spirituals. (Through Jan. 2.) Saturdays at 2 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org.‘The Amazing Max’ (Saturday through Wednesday) Max Darwin, a.k.a. the Amazing Max, may come across like the M.C. at a raucous bar mitzvah party, but he does know his craft, and now he’s bringing it back to New York City for a round of holiday shows. In this hourlong magic performance, he performs feats like mind reading, making objects disappear and then reappear, and sending coins raining from various parts of the body. The show includes lots of audience participation. Saturday and Monday at 1 p.m.; Sunday and Tuesday at 1 and 3 p.m.; Wednesday at 11 a.m. and 1 and 3 p.m.; Theater at Blessed Sacrament, 248 West 71st Street, Manhattan, 866-811-4111, theamazingmax.com.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Continuing) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing Middle Eastern artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (around 1900) where young archaeologists can dress in costume and portray early-20th-century immigrants to Palestine. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Ballerina Swan’ (Saturday through Wednesday) A lot of dancers compete for the opportunity to dance the lead in “Swan Lake,” but Sophie has special qualifications: She’s actually a swan. Revived by New York City Children’s Theater, this production is based on the picture book of the same title by Allegra Kent, former principal with New York City Ballet. Geared to ages 3 to 8, it tells the story of Sophie, who resides in Central Park but has bigger dreams. The 50-minute show features Tchaikovsky’s music, choreography by Michael McGowan, a book by Barbara Zinn Krieger and puppetry from Phantom Limb. (Through Jan. 3.) Saturdays and Sundays at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m.; Mondays through Wednesdays at 11 a.m.; Theater 3, 311 West 43rd Street, Clinton, 646-250-1178, nycchildrenstheater.org.‘Brooklyn Sewers: What’s Up Down There?’ (Through May 29) When it comes to subterranean infrastructure projects, New York City’s subway system seems to get all the attention. But a group of teenage curators at the Brooklyn Historical Society would like to introduce you to another underground marvel: Brooklyn’s sewer system, one of the city’s oldest and most extensive infrastructure projects. This exhibition explores engineering conundrums and courtroom battles and tells the story of the sewer system through photographs, drawings and maps. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.‘A Christmas Carol’ (Sunday through Wednesday) It’s time to haunt old Ebenezer again. Literally Alive Children’s Theater, which turns books into shows, takes on a holiday classic in this musical production, by Brenda Bell and Michael Sgouros (with additional music by Mr. Sgouros’s daughter, Emily). One bonus children may enjoy: A canine role in the production, which closes this week, is played by a real dog. And on Sunday and Monday, before accompanying Scrooge on his travels with the Ghosts of Christmas Past, Present and Future, young theatergoers can participate in a preshow workshop (starting one hour before the curtain) to learn more about the literary source and make a related craft. Sunday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; Monday at 1 p.m.; Tuesday and Wednesday at 3 p.m.; Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, scroogeinthevillage.com.‘Connected Worlds’ (continuing) Human choices and actions have an impact on the world’s ecosystems, but people usually can’t see the effects as they happen. That isn’t true in this new permanent exhibition in the renovated Great Hall of the New York Hall of Science. Consisting of huge screens (one is 38 feet tall), the show depicts six interconnected environments with a shared water supply. With the help of technology that responds to gestures, “Connected Worlds” allows children to use simple motions to plant, harvest, cut trees, create clouds and make other changes in the projected landscapes — and see how the native flora and fauna fare. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.‘The Discovery of King Tut’ (Through May 1) The Egyptian pharaoh Tutankhamen died when he was only a teenager, but the magnificent riches of his tomb have made him immortal in the public imagination. This touring show at Premier Exhibitions 5th Avenue recreates Tut’s tomb as it was when the British archaeologist Howard Carter discovered it in 1922. The display includes reconstructions of the tomb’s three chambers and reproductions of more than 1,000 treasures and ritual objects, accompanied by video documentaries and texts. 417 Fifth Avenue, at 38th Street, tutnyc.com.‘Evergreen Express’ (Saturday through Thursday) There’s a lot of locomotion going on in the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden at the New York Botanical Garden, and it’s all centered on trees. In this celebration, part of the botanical garden’s Holiday Train Show, children can investigate trails in search of evergreen trees and shrubs. At the Discovery Center Depot, they can investigate evergreen plant parts, make pressings of a conifer specimen and create a miniature pine sachet. Other activities include making an evergreen puppet, patterned after the work of the master artisan Ralph Lee, and putting on puppet shows in the Woodland Theater. (Through Jan. 24.) This week: Saturday, 10 a.m. to 7:30 p.m.; Sunday through Thursday, until 6:30 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.Family Art Project: Winter Birdy Marionettes (Saturday and Sunday) Not everything in life is black and white, but this drop-in workshop at Wave Hill, the public garden in the Bronx, celebrates three things that are: downy woodpeckers, chickadees and Eastern towhees. Children will be encouraged to look for these winter bird species making their homes in the garden. Then they’ll build bird marionettes and use them to create performances in the Sarah and Geoffrey Gund Theater. From 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, 718-549-3200, wavehill.org. (On Saturday, admission to the grounds is free until noon.)Family Overture Series: ‘The Pirates of Penzance’ (Sunday and Wednesday) Sailing on a comic voyage with Gilbert and Sullivan will be much smoother if children first have a grasp of the score and the plot. That’s the strategy behind the Family Overture series from the New York Gilbert & Sullivan Players, a matinee program that offers a free preshow introduction that includes learning about the music and history and hearing a summary of the story. This season the production is “The Pirates of Penzance,” a romp that involves the hero’s mistaken apprenticeship to a band of brigands. The Overture program is at 1:45 p.m., with the performance at 3. Wednesday is also Bring Your Grandparents Day, featuring a backstage tour with one of the characters after the show. Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, 566 La Guardia Place, at Washington Square South, Greenwich Village, 888-611-8183, nygasp.org.‘Fancy Nancy: Splendiferous Christmas’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company, which gave eager young audiences “Fancy Nancy: The Musical,” has revived its other show starring that inimitable little diva. Based on the book written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, “Fancy Nancy: Splendiferous Christmas” deals with Nancy’s fancy expectations for the holiday season. With a book by Cara Lustik, music by Randy Klein and lyrics by Matthew Hardy, the production, closing this weekend, revolves around Nancy’s purchase of a grand decoration for the top of the Christmas tree, and what ensues when her dreams don’t turn out quite as planned. At 1 p.m., Theater at St. Jean, 184 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org. (Tickets are limited.)‘Frolic!’ at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan (Through Dec. 31) You’re never too young to rock — and this space proves it. A new pop-up installation at the museum, “Frolic!” uses rock music and a themed décor to stimulate sensory play and learning in visitors ages 5 and under. In addition to a stage, a pretend ticket booth and ’70s-style props — including a Volkswagen mini-van to climb into — the 1,500-square-foot area has programs of workshops and live performances to help little ones get into the groove. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’ (Saturday through Wednesday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Saturday, and Monday through Wednesday, at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘The Greatest Pirate Holiday Spectacularrr!’ (Sunday through Thursday) My, that Scrooge was a scurvy knave: repossessing houseboats, stealing ugly sweaters, hiding his ill-gotten gains in a litter box. You’re probably thinking that Charles Dickens must be rolling in his grave over this, and he probably is — with laughter. Off Sides Entertainment, which also produced “The Greatest Pirate Story (N)ever Told,” is reviving this show, which combines a parody of piracy and “A Christmas Carol” with audience-assisted improvisation and a variation on the children’s fill-in-the-blank game Mad Libs. (Through Jan. 3.) At 11 a.m., Theater 54, 244 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 866-811-4111, greatestpiratestory.com.‘Holiday @ City Museum’ (Sunday through Wednesday) Workshops at the Museum of the City of New York, for ages 6 through 12, usually combine looking, learning and making. And this week, you can add eating: The museum is offering free city ice cream — from Blue Marble in Brooklyn — at its cafe. Here’s the lineup of drop-in workshops: “Flower Power: Holiday Bouquet,” on Sunday, will focus on creating paper poinsettias; “Watercolors of the Season,” on Monday, will encourage young artists to draw painterly inspiration from the museum’s art collection; “Snow Globes: Winter Wonderland,” on Tuesday, will center on making globes with city scenes; and “New Year, New City,” on Wednesday, will involve devising a journal in which to record visions of hope and change. All the topics tie in to current exhibitions. From 11 a.m. to 2 p.m., 1220 Fifth Avenue, at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org.‘The Hunger Games: The Exhibition’ (Through Jan. 3) What enterprising 12- or 13-year-old wouldn’t like to foment a little rebellion? Such a visitor can do so vicariously at this attraction at Discovery Times Square, stepping into the role of Katniss Everdeen, the teenage heroine of “The Hunger Games” and the ultimate leader of the resistance against her nation’s totalitarian government. Based on the Lionsgate film adaptations of Suzanne Collins’s novels, the show includes costumes and artifacts from the movies, as well as re-creations of Katniss’s journey and interactive, role-playing elements like a gamesmaker’s table and a chance to learn and practice stunt choreography. 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com, thehungergamesexhibition.com.‘If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home’ (Through Jan. 17) Maps present facts, but they can also engage the imagination. This new exhibition at the Children’s Museum of the Arts explores the intersection of cartography and art, showing work that expands upon, redefines or simply refers to maps. Among the eight artists represented are Matthew Cusik, who makes collages from map fragments; Joyce Kosloff, who layers images and textured paint onto maps; Loren Munk, who adds plaques of color and information to street maps; and Nikki Rosato, who subtracts from maps, cutting away all but roads and rivers. In the museum’s Cynthia C. Wainwright Gallery, 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.‘Jean-Michel Cousteau’s Secret Ocean’ (Through Jan. 10) Ever encounter a goby or a blenny? How about a Christmas tree worm? These small marine species, often unnoticed and uncelebrated, are among the stars of this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History. Filmed by Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau, and Holly Lohuis, a marine biologist, the film captures 30 species that are among the tiniest to inhabit the seas. Daily schedule: Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. (The museum is closed on Christmas Day.) Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘Klez for Kids’ (Friday) So maybe they’re a little young to be married. But children can still have fun playing the part of a bride, a groom or a guest in the re-creation of a shtetl wedding that will conclude this concert at the historic Eldridge Street Synagogue, now the Museum at Eldridge Street. The program will feature Greg Wall and his band Klezmerfest providing klezmer, Yiddish lessons and hora dancing. In addition to the 11 a.m. concert, the museum will lead synagogue tours at 10 a.m., noon and 1 p.m., and offer scavenger hunts throughout the day, which concludes at 3. 12 Eldridge Street, between Canal and Division Streets, Lower East Side, 212-219-0888, eldridgestreet.org.Kwanzaa 2015: ‘Energize, Recognize!’ (Sunday) African drums and a “human beatbox” — the rapper Doug E. Fresh — will be among the celebratory instruments at this festival at the American Museum of Natural History. The program, at noon and 3 p.m., begins with “Spirit of Resistance,” a dance and drumming piece created especially for the event by the Harlem School of the Arts Legacy Ensemble. Linda Humes, artistic director of Yaffa Cultural Arts, will lead an exploration of the seven principles of Kwanzaa. Then it’s on to hip-hop with Doug E. Fresh, who will teach his signature dance moves. The festival will also include a Kwanzaa marketplace from noon to 4 p.m. and a 4:30 p.m. screening of MK Asante’s film “The Black Candle: A Kwanzaa Celebration.” Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’ (Saturday and Thursday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.Music in Motion (Saturday) That motion is the gentle rocking of a boat for this series of family neighborhood concerts presented by Bargemusic, the floating barge at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge. As always, the material — announced just before the performance — is chamber music, but these programs differ in important ways from the regular Bargemusic fare: With unreserved seating, they last only an hour, include a post-show question-and-answer session with the musicians and are free. (Through March 26.) At 4 p.m. (doors open at 3:45), Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org.‘NYC + Me: A Little Bite of the Big Apple’ (Through Jan. 18) There’s one place where little citizens can safely run loose on the streets of New York: the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. This new interactive 3,000-square-foot gallery is a city microcosm for small visitors, allowing them to pretend to be taxi drivers, bus drivers, construction workers, street performers and, most impressively, the mayor. Activities include directing traffic, erecting a skyscraper, “ice skating” in their socks and investigating urban tales on the steps of the New York Public Library. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.Open House at ‘The Barber of Seville’ (Wednesday) The Metropolitan Opera is already promoting its production of this Rossini work as family-friendly — it’s a comedy, lasts just two hours and is sung in English — but on Wednesday, it gets even friendlier. Before the 12:30 p.m. curtain, the company is offering all ticket holders an open house with children’s activities. The schedule includes a behind-the-scenes tour, with demonstrations by the Met’s scenic artists and its lighting technicians; an instrument show-and-tell with members of the orchestra; and a dress-up station where young visitors can try on child-size costumes. (Anyone 18 or younger also qualifies for a half-priced ticket when attending with a paying adult.) At 11 a.m., Grand Tier, Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org.‘Oran Etkin’s Timbalooloo’ (Friday) Timba what? Timbalooloo is a method of teaching music fundamentals to children, developed by the clarinetist Oran Etkin. Incorporating games, stories and rhythms from many cultures, it will be on display at this concert at the Jewish Museum, which is to be open on Christmas Day with a full schedule of activities. (They include a drop-in family art workshop, “Sculptural Transportation,” also offered on Sunday.) Here, Mr. Etkin will present a new production, “Sing Sing Sing — Benny Goodman in the Kingdom of Swing,” which will introduce young listeners to Goodman as a boy, and how he grew up to reign over the swing phenomenon. Concerts are at 11:30 a.m. and 2 p.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Pedal Punk’ (Saturday, Sunday, Wednesday and Thursday) Daisy, never mind that bicycle built for two. In this circus show, you can look awfully sweet on a bicycle built for 11. Well, not exactly a bicycle, but the enormous Gantry Bike: a 22-foot-tall contraption consisting of bicycle parts. It serves as a platform and a series of devices for the inventive aerialists, contortionists, clowns and dancers in Cirque Mechanics, a company that you might say has reinvented the wheel. (Through Jan. 3.) Saturday and Wednesday at 2 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 5 p.m.; Thursday at 2 p.m.; 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.‘ReMake the Holidays’ (Sunday through Wednesday) With its cards, wrapping, decorations, boxes and cut trees, Christmas often devolves from a time of joy into a time of junk. The New York Hall of Science has an annual solution: “ReMake the Holidays,” which pairs young visitors with artists and educators to turn trash into treasure. This year, each day of the celebration has a different theme: Sunday is Textiles, with activities in fabric art and fashion; Monday is Metal and Glass, including wire sculpture, glass art and circuit building; Tuesday is Paper, with creations like origami and juice-carton racecars; and Wednesday is Plastic, featuring projects like jug masks and self-watering planters. The festival also offers ice sculpting demonstrations by Bill Bywater, who will sculpt a different extinct creature each day. Most projects run from noon to 4 p.m. (a detailed schedule is on the website), and advance registration is recommended for a few. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org/remake-the-holidays-2015.‘Shaun the Sheep Movie’ and Claymation Creatures Workshop (Saturday through Thursday) The title character of this film isn’t, well, sheepish. Although not much of a public speaker — his vocabulary consists of bleats and baas — he decides to lead his flock in an uprising against Mossy Bottom Farm in this project from Aardman Animations, creator of the Wallace and Gromit adventures. Released in theaters last summer, the movie is being shown daily at 12:30 p.m. by the Museum of the Moving Image, which is also offering a daily Claymation Creatures Workshop for ages 5 through 12. In the 2:30 p.m. hourlong workshop, which is inspired by the film, children will mold a clay animal of their own devising, and then create a stop-motion animation in which it stars. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us. Advance online registration is encouraged for the workshop.‘The Three Bears Holiday Bash’ (Saturday through Wednesday) There’s no word on whether Goldilocks is invited to this seasonal celebration, but Santa Claus definitely is. An annual production from the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, this puppet musical, which closes this week, centers on a variety show put on by the Bears, in which Baby Bear asks Santa to star. The fun draws on Hanukkah and Kwanzaa, as well as on Christmas. At 11 a.m. and 1 and 3 p.m.; Swedish Cottage, 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org. Reservations required; all shows are currently sold out.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’ (Continuing) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. This week is also Art Week, when children can do projects that include silk-screening, taking selfies and making bookmarks, as well as take part in a Jewish-theme pretend game show. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Winter Recess Wonderland (Monday through Thursday) Visitors to the Children’s Museum of Manhattan are a little too young to create a wardrobe for the Rockettes or to stand in Times Square to watch the ball drop on New Year’s Eve, but this museum celebration will allow them to capture the feel of those activities and take part in a lot of other projects, too. The schedule offers lots of workshops, including designing Rockettes costumes (Monday), holiday ornaments for the museum’s Wishing Tree (Monday, Tuesday and Thursday) and New Year’s noisemakers (Thursday); interactive science sessions about the sun in winter (Wednesday); and a dance party, ball drop and parade to ring in 2016 (Thursday). Full schedule is on the website. (Through Jan. 3.) The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Young Charles Dickens’ (Saturday through Wednesday) Audiences won’t have to have read the Dickens canon to enjoy this earnest and often evocative family musical, from New York City Children’s Theater. An adaptation of Deborah Hopkinson’s book “A Boy Called Dickens,” it seeks to illuminate how its subject became the conscience of the Victorian age. With a book and lyrics by Barbara Zinn Krieger and a score by Charlie Greenberg, it focuses on the wretched experience the 12-year-old Charles had working in a polish factory, and how he helped save himself — and eventually others — with stories. (Through Jan. 3.) Saturday and Sunday at 4 p.m.; Monday through Wednesday at 2 p.m.; Theater 3, 311 West 43rd Street, Clinton, 646-250-1178, nycchildrenstheater.org.Advertisement