AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Roberta SmithWASHINGTON — Over the past year, Hellenistic sculpture of ancient Greece has received a major boost in status and visibility. The instrument of change is “Power and Pathos: Bronze Sculpture of the Hellenistic World,” a beguiling landmark exhibition that features more than 40 life-size bronze figures and heads. After stops at the Palazzo Strozzi in Florence and the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles, it is making its farewell appearance at the National Gallery of Art here.Because they were so often melted down for their metal, bronze sculptures have had a very low survival rate. Of the thousands of bronzes made during the Hellenistic age, no more than about 200 are known to exist. This exhibition is rare for bringing together so many high-quality examples. Many have never been exhibited in the United States; several are recent discoveries.The show sets out to revise the view that the sculpture of the Hellenistic period represented a decline from the idealized Greek sculptures of gods, heroes and athletes from the Classical age (the fifth and fourth centuries B.C.). This is the view I remember from college art history courses, where the proto-Baroque Laocoön, with its writhing figures, anguished expressions and murderous serpents, was cited as a sign of decadence.The Hellenistic age was very different from the Classical era. It was shaped foremost by Alexander the Great, whose conquests shattered the geographical concentration of the Classical age, which had centered on Athens. At his death in 323 B.C. in Babylon, Alexander left behind the largest empire the world had ever known, and it spread Greek culture across half the globe. This exhibition includes works unearthed in Yemen, Eastern Georgia and in the sea off Tunisia. The year of Alexander’s death is considered the beginning of the Hellenistic age. Its conclusion is usually put at 31 B.C., when Octavian defeated Mark Antony and Cleopatra at Actium, or the next year, when the Romans conquered Egypt.This show reminds us that Hellenistic sculpture flowed from the Classical and made good on its long-running obsession with the human face and form. But it did this primarily by moderating Classical idealization with an unprecedented realism, and most of all by figuring out how to make the exteriors of sculptures and heads convey a sense of lived experience, that is, pathos. In contrast to the stylization of Classical sculptures — as well as Egyptian art — Hellenistic sculptors laid foundations of portraiture that remain pertinent.Bronze, which could be worked in greater detail than marble, was the preferred material for Hellenistic innovation. As the show’s catalog points out, the medium also created a different, more visceral engagement. We sense the hollowness of life-size bronze sculpture as similar to our own bodies and comprehend their thin metal as a kind of skin. Bronze figures could be made to suggest the lightness of actual bodies and movement in a way silent, solid marble could not.Another factor that pulled Hellenistic sculpture toward portraiture was the need to depict rulers, a convention lavishly reinforced if not instigated by Alexander, who erected monuments to himself everywhere he went. His court sculptor, Lysippos, is credited with a portrayal of the emperor as strong, lithe and clean-shaven with flowing locks. None of his statues survive, but they were widely copied, setting the standard for portraits of great men for centuries to come. A limestone base for sculpture signed by Lysippos is in the show’s first gallery. A half-size copy of his depiction of the charismatic Alexander on a rearing horse greets you in the second gallery.It is the emergence of realism that makes this show so breathtaking. Much of what we see here had not been depicted in sculpture before. This is as true of the finely woven band beneath the brim of a beretlike hat on a portrait head of a man, as it is of the furrowed brow, parted lips, incised eyebrows and curly beard that contribute to his expression of anxious concentration. It is also true of the “Sleeping Eros,” which radically reimagined Eros as a dozing toddler instead of a roving youth, setting the stage for squadrons of Renaissance winged putti and cupids to come.The determined realism of Hellenistic sculptures is really established in the third gallery by a larger-than-life portrait statue of Aule Meteli, an Etruscan diplomat and military leader with a world-weary face. His arm is raised in the “friends, Romans, countrymen” mode of a seasoned orator.He is flanked by the equally dignified, detailed heads of two other leaders and overseen by a stunning little statuette of an artisan, although it has been argued that he may be a god. Whoever he is, he has lost a leg and an arm and there is the suggestion in the position of his truncated shoulder that he had a crutch. The exquisite book tucked into his knotted belt suggests that his work was not manual, but what really holds us is his expression. Old and bald, he tilts his head down and left and stares intently into the middle distance, looking morose.There is a similar gaze on the face of a portrait statue of a boy in the next gallery who wraps himself so tightly in his cloak that he seems to tilt backward defensively. It is thought that he was made as a funerary monument.The show has been slightly different at each stop, with important pieces coming and going. Missing from the Washington version is the heart-wrenching “Statue of a Seated Boxer,” also known as the Terme Boxer, which was unexpectedly called back to Rome for the Papal Jubilee. An early Hellenistic life-size bronze (third century B.C.) unearthed in Rome in 1885, it depicts a muscular, visibly battered man, elbows resting on his knees, looking wearily over his shoulder. The work’s fusion of physical and psychic realities is so profound, it can shock even today.Jens M. Daehner and Kenneth Lapatin, the Getty’s curators of antiquities and the show’s organizers, have found significant if not quite equivalent replacements. These include a life-size boy runner shown midstride and a slightly smaller-than-life figure of Minerva notable especially for the indication of wind billowing and flattening her garments. The stylization of the Minerva figure brings to mind that of the 20th-century American sculptor Paul Manship, establishing that Hellenistic is a somewhat fluid category.Another addition is the “Dancing Faun (Pan),” a light-footed figure with raised arms, a curling tail, horns, luxuriant hair and a crown of outsize acorns. The label’s description that he is snapping his fingers gives a thrilling clarity to the delicate position of his hands. Like the Boxer, the Faun is amazing for being completely intact. Unlike the Boxer, it can revive thoughts of Hellenistic sculpture’s reputation for impressive displays of overwrought skill like the “Laocoön.”The Terme Boxer makes startlingly clear how little realist sculpture has achieved since this profound, holistic level of truth. The takeaway from this show, even without the Boxer, is that Hellenistic artists didn’t leave the realist sculptors of the future much to do, and that virtually no one after them used bronze’s ability to conjure skin — and the emotional states contained within — to better effect. All told, this is one of the best exhibitions of sculpture you may ever see.“Power and Pathos: Bronze Sculpture in the Hellenistic World” is on view through March 20 at the National Gallery of Art, Washington; 202-737-4215, nga­.gov.Advertisement