AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Amore Opera (Tuesday through Thursday) This energetic small company, an offshoot of the now defunct Amato Opera, offers daytime holiday performances of “Hansel and Gretel,” performed in English and directed by Sarah Moulton Faux. The company also continues its run of “La Bohème” in a production directed by Nathan Hull and conducted by Jason Tramm. “Hansel and Gretel” is at 2:30 p.m. on Tuesday and Wednesday (through Jan. 2); “La Bohème” is at 7:30 p.m. on Wednesday and 8:30 p.m. on Thursday (through Jan. 3), Loreto Theater, Sheen Center, 18 Bleecker Street, near Elizabeth Street, East Village, amoreopera.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)‘The Barber of Seville’ (Saturday, Tuesday and Wednesday) The Tony Award-winning director Bartlett Sher’s popular 2006 production of Rossini’s “The Barber of Seville” conveys the opera’s comic confusions through fluid staging and a playful set (all movable doors, staircases and potted orange trees). It has returned this season as a family offering, trimmed to two hours and performed in English translation. There is an enticing cast and extra afternoon performances. Antony Walker conducts. Saturday at 1 p.m., Tuesday at 7 p.m. and Wednesday at 12:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)‘Die Fledermaus’ (Monday and Wednesday) Though it’s hard to believe, James Levine is conducting his first complete performances of Strauss’s “Die Fledermaus” with this revival of Jeremy Sams’s 2013 production at the Metropolitan Opera. On opening night, he drew a lithe and stylish performance from the orchestra, chorus and an appealing cast, headed by Paulo Szot, Susanna Phillips, Toby Spence and Susan Graham. This operetta is performed in Mr. Sams’s playful English translation of the lyrics. But Douglas Carter Beane’s new spoken dialogue trades in lame, topical jokes. At 7:30 p.m., Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)★ ‘La Donna del Lago’ (Saturday) Rossini’s bel canto adaptation of a Sir Walter Scott poem about a Scottish beauty and her three suitors returns with most of the same stellar cast that first brought it to the Met earlier this year. The one outstanding newcomer is the tenor Lawrence Brownlee as King James; Joyce DiDonato remains incandescent in the title role, with additional strong performances by the tenor John Osborn and the mezzo Daniela Barcellona. The unobtrusive production is by Paul Curran; Michele Mariotti conducts. Saturday at 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)‘The Pearl Fishers’ (Thursday) Bizet’s “other” major opera returns to the Met stage for the first time in a century. The wonderful soprano Diana Damrau stars as Leïla, whose allure threatens the friendship of two fishermen, played by the tenor Matthew Polenzani and the baritone Mariusz Kwiecien. Together, they sing the duet that is the only part of this work that’s often heard, “Au fond du temple saint.” The director is Penny Woolcock; the conductor is Gianandrea Noseda. (Also through Feb. 4.) At 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Allen)‘The Pirates of Penzance’ (Saturday, Sunday, Wednesday and Thursday) This popular screwball operetta about a band of bumbling pirates on the coast of Cornwall returns in a colorful production by the indefatigable New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players. (Through Jan. 2.) Saturday at 2 and 7:30 p.m.; Sunday and Wednesday at 3 p.m.; Thursday and next Friday at 7:30 p.m., Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, 566 La Guardia Place, at Washington Square South, Greenwich Village, 212-769-1000, nyuskirball.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Early Music New York (Friday) For this special Christmas concert, the Early Music New York vocal ensemble performs Iberian-flavored sacred works from Spain and Mexico, along with festive instrumental pieces and dances. The singers are accompanied by guitars, bagpipes, recorders and other early instruments. There are two performances on Christmas Day of an annual program that has become very popular. Friday at 2 and 6 p.m., Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-280-0330, stjohndivine.org. (Tommasini)New York Philharmonic (Tuesday to Thursday) Joshua Bell reappears at the Philharmonic this week, incongruously playing Mendelssohn’s Violin Concerto in an otherwise all-Sibelius program on Tuesday and Wednesday, in which music director Alan Gilbert conducts “The Swan of Tuonela,” “Finlandia,” and the Symphony No. 4. Thursday’s New Year’s Eve bash is a Gallic affair, with Offenbach, Ravel and Saint-Saëns on the bill, and stars including Susan Graham and Inon Barnatan on the stage. At 7:30 p.m., David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (David Allen)New York String Orchestra (Monday) This youthful ensemble (which, contrary to its title, also includes winds and brass) offers an end of year celebration featuring Jaime Laredo conducting Tchaikovsky’s Violin Concerto with Jinjoo Cho as soloist. The lineup also includes Barber’s Adagio for Strings and an arrangement of Schubert’s “Death and the Maiden.” At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)★ P.D.Q. Bach (Monday and Tuesday) He won’t be swinging on ropes for the Golden Anniversary of his P.D.Q. Bach concerts, but Peter Schickele will surely still delight fans with his irreverent blend of classical musical slapstick. With the New York Pick-Up Ensemble, his partners-in-crime, Mr. Schickele will offer favorites like “New Horizons in Music Appreciation,” which presents the first movement of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony like a sportscast, and “Swing Sweet, Low Chariot,” billed as “a folk song derangement for tenor profondo and orchestra.” At 8 p.m., Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, the-townhall-nyc.org. (Schweitzer)★ Trinity Messiah (Saturday) New Yorkers are spoiled for choice when it comes to performances of this ceaselessly inventive oratorio by Handel. But the “Messiah” that Trinity Wall Street presents remains special for a number of reasons: the small choir made up of stellar singers, the dozen or so soloists drawn from the chorus who bring a variety of voices and styles to the arias, and the magnificent playing by the period-instrument Trinity Baroque Orchestra, conducted by Julian Wachner. At 5 p.m., Trinity Church, Broadway at Wall Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-602-0800, trinitywallstreet.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Twelfth Night Festival (Sunday through Jan. 6) Trinity Church’s annual festival gets underway after Christmas. This week’s highlights include a pairing of Benjamin Britten’s “Ceremony of Carols” and “St. Nicolas,” with the Downtown Voices, Trinity Youth Choir and Orchestra, and Novus NY (Sunday at 5 p.m., Trinity Church, Broadway at Wall Street); a performance of the violinist and composer Jessie Montgomery’s “Source Code,” “Strum” and “Banner,” with the soprano Julia Bullock and the Amphion String Quartet (Tuesday at 5 p.m., St. Paul’s Chapel, at Broadway and Fulton); and a program titled “Mass Reimaginings,” which hosts the premiere of Daniel Felsenfeld’s “Astrophysical Mass” (Wednesday at 5 p.m., Trinity Church). All performances are free, and more information can be found at trinitywallstreet.org. (Allen)Advertisement