By KATHRYN SHATTUCKDEC. 24, 2015
A crown of gleaming gold dripping with almost 450 emeralds — including a 24-carat stunner said to have belonged once to an Incan emperor — made its debut this month at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. You can see it in Gallery 357, its new home.And what better time than this season of shiny, pretty things to seek out the kind of blinding superbling you might have thought you had to cross the Atlantic to see? It’s true that the Tower of London holds a concentration of baubles perhaps unmatched anywhere. For flocks of tourists, the Tower’s macabre history is merely a prelude to what awaits at the end: the rainbow of sapphires, tourmalines, amethysts, topazes and citrines in St. Edward’s Crown, used at coronations; the Second Star of Africa diamond, the Black Prince’s ruby, the Stuart and St. Edward’s sapphires and Queen Elizabeth’s pearls, all in the Imperial State Crown; the 105.6-carat Koh-i-Nur diamond, front and center in Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother’s Crown, and said to bring bad luck to any man who wears it; and the First Star of Africa — at 530 carats, the largest flawless cut diamond in the world — in the Sovereign’s Sceptre. The sighs and gasps from crowds kept moving by conveyor belt are audible.“Why can’t we have that?” envious New Yorkers might secretly wail.In a way, we can — spread out among the city’s museums, on display or in storage, and periodically in its jewelry stores and auction houses.“You have to be a treasure hunter,” said Marion Fasel, a jewelry historian and the founder of TheAdventurine.com, when asked where to find New York’s crowning glories. “There’s a piece here, a piece there, but you really have to go looking for it.”AdvertisementI had a head start with my own treasure hunting. Over the years, I had taken my young son to the American Museum of Natural History’s gem galleries in search of a little family history: Shattuckite was discovered in the Arizona copper mines owned by my great-great-uncle Lemuel Shattuck, who had herded cattle along the Mexican border with my great-grandfather and, briefly, Butch Cassidy. A vivid blue, the gem nonetheless paled next to the diamonds, sapphires, emeralds and rubies in a collection that is “pretty much all bling,” said George E. Harlow, a curator there for almost 40 years. But there is so much more. Here is a sampling, beginning with the largest of New York’s treasure houses.THE METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART Just spend a day at the Met or its sister in Washington Heights, the Cloisters, and you can sleuth out enough bling to outfit a multicultural royal family and its army. Crowns from Asia, Africa, Europe and South America. Medieval scepters and chalices. Gold armor for King Henry II of France and King Henry VIII of England. (There is also blackened armor, like that favored by Philip IV of Spain, Louis XIII of France and Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden, part of what Pierre Terjanian, the chief curator in the arms and armor department, described as “the counterblinging movement,” which he defines as “episodes where restraint and sobriety become the quintessential manifestation of taste.” This armor was kind of like a tuxedo — the better to show off, say, your diamond-encrusted gold saber, whose scabbard has a trap door beneath an emerald in which a coin of Suleiman the Magnificent is hidden. That flash of brilliance is on view in Gallery 379.)The Crown of the Andes, as the Met’s new acquisition is known, might easily have graced any of those regal heads. Instead, it was created for a statue of the Virgin Mary — with emeralds seized from the Inca ruler Atahualpa, lore has it, and instructions that it go above and beyond earthly splendor. Made in what is now Colombia, in a region rich from gold and emerald mining, the crown sat in the cathedral at Popayán. Its diadem was created around 1660; its arches were added around 1770. One theory is that the crown was an offering of gratitude because Popayán had been spared during a 1590s smallpox epidemic.Officially named the Crown of the Virgin of the Immaculate Conception, the piece was originally used during Holy Week celebrations. The Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception safeguarded it until 1914, when Pope Pius X granted permission for its sale. American investors bought it, and it entered the United States in 1936. It was taken out of storage only for momentous occasions like the introduction of new Chevrolets in 1937 and the New York World’s Fair in 1939.Advertisement“It really is extraordinary for its rarity and its richness,” said Ronda Kasl, a curator of colonial Latin American art at the Met. “It’s the kind of object that expresses the spiritual values of the culture.”THE MUSEUM OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK Spiritual values are all well and good, but not always associated with ostentatious jewels. There was a time when wealthy New Yorkers wanted crowns of their own, the better to emulate the aristocracy in Paris, London and Rome.Consider George Kemp, an Irish immigrant ascended to pharmaceutical magnate, who commissioned a Tiffany tiara for the 1894 marriage of his daughter, Julia, into an established New England family.“It’s a great and amazing and rare thing that it has survived,” said Jeannine Falino, a curator of the “Gilded New York” exhibition at the museum, where the object is on view through early January. “And it comes with a rags-to-riches story that was what New York was about.” A confection of diamonds, platinum and gold, it’s thought to be one of the few Tiffany tiaras from the era still in existence, since the stones in most of these headpieces were often popped out and sold as this sort of adornment declined in popularity. (That didn’t stop Leona Helmsley, known as New York’s Queen of Mean, from standing guard in her tiara in 1980s ads for the Helmsley Palace.)TIFFANY & COMPANY The so-called Tiffany Diamond is said to have been worn, publicly at least, by only two women: Mary Whitehouse, one of the Met’s first female board members, wore it to the 1957 Tiffany Ball in Newport, R.I., and Audrey Hepburn posed with it in publicity photographs for the 1961 movie “Breakfast at Tiffany’s.”AdvertisementIt is now prominently displayed on the main floor of the flagship store at 727 Fifth Avenue. A 128.54-carat fancy yellow diamond, it was cut from a hulking stone discovered in 1877 in what is now South Africa and bought the next year by Charles Lewis Tiffany, who showed it off at the World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893 and the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo in 1901. When the renowned window designer Gene Moore placed the diamond in the hands of a gold wire angel during the 1955 holiday season, passers-by swore you could see it across the street.It was offered for sale — once — to whoever could come up with $5 million on Nov. 17, 1972. There were no takers.THE AUCTION HOUSES Can’t afford to buy? You can still touch — and are encouraged to do so, and maybe capture the moment for Instagram posterity — at Christie’s and Sotheby’s, where jewelry is displayed to the public before it is auctioned.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In early December, Ms. Fasel, the jewelry historian, photographed herself at Christie’s, wearing the 31.34-carat emerald-cut Victory Diamond. It was then sold to an anonymous bidder for more than $4 million. Sold alongside jewels owned by the socialite and philanthropist Carroll Petrie, who died in January, the diamond was named in honor of the Allied victory in World War II a few months after the discovery of the 770-carat rough stone, in Sierra Leone, that produced it. It was ultimately given to the perpetually bejeweled art patron Florence J. Gould — she was reportedly “full of diamonds” when she took a pedicab into a Cambodian jungle in 1976 — by her second husband, a son of the railroad magnate Jay Gould.“It’s a glorious stone and a glorious story and belonged to a glorious woman,” Ms. Fasel said of Ms. Gould.“Gems are gifts of the earth,” Ms. Fasel added. “Just having that Victory Diamond on, all I could think was, Wow, Mother Nature.”THE AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY Nowhere is Mother Nature on more glorious display than here, in the Morgan Memorial Hall of Gems.Wander past the dinosaur bones and dioramas and into the Memorial Hall and you will find the Star of India — at 563.35 carats, the largest blue star sapphire in a museum — and the 100.32-carat DeLong Star Ruby, which were both stolen in 1964 and recovered in Florida, the sapphire in a bus locker, and the ruby in a phone booth. There’s the 87.64-carat Schettler Emerald, carved during the Mogul Empire in India, with a flower on the front and holes for sewing it onto a garment. And the 100-carat orange-hued padparadscha sapphire, “a sleeper,” except for those in the know, Mr. Harlow said. “I can tell if somebody in particular has a knowledge about it because of the slobber marks on the vitrine,” he added.AdvertisementMr. Harlow is the author, with Anna S. Sofianides, of “Gems & Crystals From One of the World’s Great Collections,” recently redesigned for its 25th anniversary.Like one of Mr. Harlow’s favorite stones, an 89-carat cat’s-eye chrysoberyl, the gems are “best appreciated if you bring your own strong LED light to the museum” and viewed using a bob-and-weave motion, he said. “Gems are adornment. Either the gem moves, the light moves, or you move,” he explained. “The idea is that you get the play of color across your face.”And talk about color. The reddish-pink 58.79-carat heart-shaped Morganite — named by a Tiffany gemologist for J. P. Morgan, who commissioned what became the museum’s collection — “is really incredible for what it is, and rare as can be now,” Mr. Harlow said.Was the Shattuckite still there? I wondered. Within minutes, Mr. Harlow had emailed me images of a rough specimen tucked among the inosilicates and a polished cabochon, housed in the Unusual and Rare Gems case.Compared with the marquee gems, it’s small and unassuming, and no amount of LED light or bobbing will force the color to dance across my face. But when I wear my own Shattuckite piece, like a talisman, I feel unusual and rare. And that’s priceless.—American Museum of Natural History Central Park West and 79th Street; 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Christie’s 20 Rockefeller Plaza, at 49th Street; 212-636-2000, christies.com.The Cloisters 99 Margaret Corbin Drive, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights; 212-923-3700, metmuseum.org.Metropolitan Museum of Art Fifth Avenue and 82nd Street; 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org.Museum of the City of New York 1220 Fifth Avenue, at 103rd Street; 212-534-1672, mcny.org.Tiffany & Company 727 Fifth Avenue, at 57th Street; 212-755-8000, tiffany.com.Sotheby’s York Avenue and 72nd Street, Manhattan; 212-606-7010, sothebys.com.An article on Dec. 25 about expensive jewels and jeweled objects on display in Manhattan misidentified the owner of the Victory Diamond, which was sold at Christie’s in early December. The owner was a private collector — not the socialite and philanthropist Carroll Petrie, who died last year, and whose jewels were sold at the same time.A version of this article appears in print on December 25, 2015, on Page C25 of the New York edition with the headline: All That Glitters, Here to Behold.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.