AdvertisementSupported byFor full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Mykki Blanco (Thursday) The rapping female alter-ego of the artist Michael David Quattlebaum Jr. proved a provocative force on the EP “Betty Rubble: The Initiation.” A leader of the local Afropunk scene, Mykki Blanco’s confidence has a self-fulfilling momentum; she last released the album “Gay Dog Food,” which featured an exuberant cameo from Kathleen Hanna. With Cakes Da Killa and MikeQ. At 9 p.m., Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street, at Ludlow Street, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, mercuryloungenyc.com. (Stacey Anderson)Jimmy Buffett and the Coral Reefer Band (Thursday) Earlier this year Mr. Buffett made a brief but memorable cameo in “Jurassic World” — he was the tourist running away from airborne dino destruction, two margaritas firmly in hand. For this appearance, Parrotheads can prepare for a more buoyant sort of island escapism as the happy-go-lucky singer-songwriter marks his first New Year’s Eve show in New York. With Huey Lewis and the News. At 9 p.m., Barclays Center, 620 Atlantic Avenue, at Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, barclayscenter.com. (Anderson)‘A Darlene Love Christmas’ (Saturday) Her lovelorn “Christmas (Baby Please Come Home)” is a holiday showstopper for the ages; her annual yuletide festivities are a New York institution. Truly, Phil Spector’s former protégée has been an indelible voice in pop since the 1960s — the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame agreed when she was made one of its 2011 inductees. (Also on Jan. 1 and 16.) At 8 p.m., B.B. King Blues Club & Grill, 237 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 800-745-3000, bbkingblues.com. (Anderson)Dan Deacon (Tuesday) This hyperactive electropop figure from Baltimore can take a haughty attitude during his live shows or be a beaming, inspired conduit of live noise loops. His 2012 album, “America,” is an ambitious and anarchic study of these fruited plains; the follow-up, “Gliss Riffer,” was released in February. At 8 p.m., Brooklyn Bowl, 61 Wythe Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-963-3369, brooklynbowl.com. (Anderson)★ Deer Tick (Wednesday and Thursday) This group’s Nirvana cover-band endeavor, Deervana, roared back to life this year with a tribute set to “In Utero,” and that same guitar-smashing ethos pours from Deer Tick’s original material as well. The band’s fifth album, “Negativity,” released in 2013, was a ramshackle collection of thoroughly adult break-up reflections. Wednesday at 8:30 p.m., Thursday at 9 p.m., Brooklyn Bowl, 61 Wythe Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-963-3369, brooklynbowl.com. (Anderson)Disco Biscuits (Wednesday through Jan. 2) “Camp Bisco,” the band’s annual summer festival in upstate New York, is in temporary session in Manhattan. The eccentric funk-dance group from Philadelphia has recently leaned more heavily to trance and electronic dance music elements onstage, but it still factors in scores of noodling, open-ended instrumental solos and flurries of psychedelic visuals. With Horizon Wireless. Wednesday, next Friday and Jan. 2 at 11 p.m.; Thursday at 9 p.m., PlayStation Theater, 1515 Broadway, at 44th Street, 888-929-7849, playstationtheater.com. (Anderson)Fetty Wap (Saturday) Nocturnal sorts will recognize Fetty Wap, singer of the chipperly melodic banger “Trap Queen,” as an obligatory setlist component of all clubs worth their salt. The rapper has an especially ardent fan in Taylor Swift, who welcomed him onstage at a recent tour stop for a rousing rendition of his hit. With the dutch D.J. trio Yellowclaw. At 9 p.m., Pier 36, 299 South Street, Lower East Side, flavorus.com. (Anderson)Dillon Francis (Wednesday) One of the leading pioneers of moombahton — that onomatopoeic hybrid of house, reggae and drummy techno — Mr. Francis is a mainstay of the festival circuit and a popular party D.J. in his native Los Angeles. His debut studio album, “Money Sucks, Friends Rule,” bordered on self-parody with constant rallying cries and walloping beat drops. With Jauz and Aryay. At 8 p.m., Pier 36, 299 South Street, Lower Manhattan, flavorus.com. (Anderson)★ Future (Thursday) The rapper and singer Future continues to set a high bar for innovative wordplay and slick, self-possessed showmanship. Fresh off a breakthrough year of headlining shows and two releases — the stellar studio album “DS2” and the collaborative mixtape “What a Time To Be Alive” with Drake — he headlines a blowout New Year’s Eve set. With Rudimental. At 8 p.m., Pier 36, 299 South Street, Lower Manhattan, flavorus.com. (Anderson)Gogol Bordello (Wednesday and Thursday) Downtown’s waning punk hedonism endures in this gypsy-punk troupe, whose unrestrained live carnivals mix Eastern European musicality with righteous, sweat-soaked theatrics. Its frantic, hardcore-meets-Brechtian cabaret vivacity is only partially captured on its records; the remaining X factor resides in the unending stage dives. “Pura Vida Conspiracy,” the group’s rough-hewn sixth album, was released in 2013; it included “Lost Innocent World,” their most propulsive track in years and the soundtrack of a hypnagogic video the band created in collaboration with the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles. With Chicano Batman. Wednesday at 8 p.m., Thursday at 10 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)Gov’t Mule (Wednesday and Thursday) This splinter project from the Allman Brothers Band continues to prosper via respectable, extremely lengthy Southern rock jam sessions. Unlike the Allmans, however, funk influences have steadily encroached Gov’t Mule’s live shows; the plucky “Countdown Jam” will surely make a midnight cameo. Wednesday at 8 p.m., Thursday at 9 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)Hot Chip (D.J. Set) (Saturday) With its spiky bass and terse, detached vocals, this group of British dance punks were perfectly poised for the electronic dance music explosion that hit during its rise. “Why Make Sense?” the band’s sixth album, is sinuous electro with robotic effects and playful textures. With Nathan Harrington, Billy Caldwell and Tom of England. At 10 p.m., Good Room, 98 Meserole Avenue, at Mannhattan Avenue, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, ticketfly.com. (Anderson)★ Nicole Moudaber (Monday) A techno and deep-house tastemaker in Europe, Ms. Moudaber is widely credited with bringing raves to Beirut, where she once lived. This Nigerian-born artist is a stalwart advocate for women in the still-macho electronic scene, and an innovative D.J.-producer with a lively stage presence. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Anderson)Phish (Wednesday through Jan. 2) These hippie-dip poster children are surely doing something right commercially: they are returning to the world’s most famous arena for a four-night run. The group’s ethos of sprawling live improvisation instead of studio-culled hooks is as reliable as anything in the loose world of jazz-tinged jam bands.Wednesday, next Friday and Jan. 2 at 11 p.m.; Thursday at 8 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)They Might Be Giants (Thursday through Jan. 2) These Brooklyn-rooted eccentrics of the highest order represented Keep Williamsburg Weird decades ago with the 1990s singles “Istanbul (Not Constantinople)” and “Snail Shell.” The band recently released a 17th studio album, “Glean,” and staged a half-year residency at the Music Hall of Williamsburg. Clearly, the group can’t stay away from the club. Thursday at 11 p.m., next Friday and Jan.2 at 8 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)This Month in Cabaret Michael Feinstein, the suave singer, pianist and all-around entertainer, plays his first engagement at Feinstein’s/54 Below, the midtown club that now bears his name, through Wednesday. In earlier years, Mr. Feinstein’s annual holiday shows at his former club in the Regency Hotel were the closest New York nightclub equivalents to the kind of family-friendly holiday television specials that flourished in the 1960s, with their emphasis on yuletide cheer.Instead of a jolly swing band, Mr. Feinstein is accompanied by a pop-jazz trio led by Tedd Firth, the genius nightclub accompanist of the moment, with Mark McLean on drums and Sean Smith on bass. There are holiday songs, but the emphasis is on hard-core swing and expansive ballads. A suite of Broadway songs celebrates his 30th year performing in New York. Friday at 7:30 p.m., Saturday and Monday through Wednesday at 7 and 9:30 p.m., 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 646-476-3551, 54below.com.Another highlight of December is the annual end-of-the-year engagement of Steve Tyrell (singing Frank Sinatra) at Café Carlyle, 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan. Saturday at 8:45 and 10:45 p.m., Monday through Wednesday, next Friday and Jan. 2 at 8:45 p.m.; 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. (Stephen Holden)Advertisement