

      By ROBIN POGREBIN

OCT. 9, 2015

More than a dozen New York cultural institutions are planning major projects, and fundraisers are racing to tap into the deepest pockets.
This is a moment of critical mass for culture in New York, and  it looks both energizing and daunting. Sixteen arts institutions in Manhattan alone are in the process of raising more than $3 billion for projects from the ambitious (the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s new wing for modern and contemporary works) to the more modest but long awaited (the Irish Arts Center’s new Hell’s Kitchen home). It’s the kind of boom that can be stirring for art fans but that raises questions about how all this money can be raised simultaneously, particularly when foreign markets have created some financial uncertainty. It’s also not clear the city will continue to be as generous toward cultural capital projects as it was under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. So development directors will have to count on private dollars for the bulk of their fund-raising. Planned building and endowment projects, in millions $3.47 billion Total Moreover, the cultural world knows well the potential perils of expansion. If it’s hard to raise money for new buildings, it’s even harder raising money to sustain them. Arts groups learned this lesson the hard way, with some having to pull back on their aspirations — or in a few cases, like the American Folk Art Museum,  abandon them entirely — after previous economic downturns. But still strong is the seduction of the Bilbao Effect — when an architecturally exciting project makes an institution more of a destination, like Frank Gehry’s Guggenheim in Spain. And with the success of the new Whitney Museum of American Art, which is drawing droves downtown, everyone seems to be grabbing for hammers, from the American Museum of Natural History to the New York Philharmonic, where David Geffen has replaced Avery Fisher as the building’s name but where there is much money still to be raised. (Barry Diller’s cultural peninsula on the Hudson is exempt from such pressure because he is donating $113 million, nearly the entire budget, toward the project, as well as covering overages.) Veteran “tappers” — those charged with collecting all these capital dollars — seem unfazed by the task at this point. Their confidence is probably buoyed by the knowledge that it’s always been easier to raise money for bricks and mortar than for operating expenses. “Each of these institutions have loyal supporters who are engaged,” said Daniel Brodsky, a real estate developer who is the chairman of the Metropolitan Museum. “There are many prosperous people in New York City.” So how do they do it? How do all of these arts groups go hat in hand and get results? Here, The New York Times explores some of these questions now that the cultural — and gala — season is in full swing. The idea that there are too many projects that can possibly be financed is a myth, said Reynold Levy, the former president of Lincoln Center. “Tourism has doubled; the amount of wealth in the city has gone sky high,” he said. “Just look up, and you see it in all of our new buildings. A lot is dependent on how well people ask.” Illustrations by Jennifer Daniel/The New York Times Cultural institutions will tell you that every little bit counts. But it is the big gifts that go the furthest in jump-starting projects and prompting others to pony up. Here is a look at some of the heavyweights who can get arts organizations to their fund-raising goals.It’s hard to keep track of how much money and art Leonard A. Lauder has given away.The 82-year-old former chairman of the Whitney Museum of American Art gave that museum $131 million in 2008 to shore up its endowment. It was the largest gift in the Whitney’s history, though it came with conditions, namely that the landmark Marcel Breuer building, which Mr. Lauder considers the Whitney’s spiritual home, could not be sold for the foreseeable future. In 2013, he gave the Metropolitan Museum of Art 79 Cubist paintings, drawings and sculptures — a collection of Picassos, Braques and Légers valued at more than $1 billion that will one day be housed in the museum’s planned new wing for contemporary art.“He’s definitely one of the top two donors of art in the history of the Whitney,” said Adam D. Weinberg, the Whitney’s director.Mr. Lauder embodies an old money model of cultural largess, the kind of donor who concentrates his ample resources on one or two institutions, gaining considerable influence and making a significant impact.His gifts made him a prime candidate to have the Met’s new wing or the Whitney’s new building named after him. But Mr. Lauder demurred.“I want both the Met and the Whitney to have a major piece of New York real estate that is unnamed,” Mr. Lauder said in an interview, so if a “donor comes along and says, ‘I would like to have it named after me,’ and writes a check, both museums will be better in the long run.”—By Robin PogrebinThe diva Renée Fleming treads the boards at leading opera houses and concert halls — and treads some of their boardrooms as well. She serves on the boards of Lyric Opera of Chicago, Carnegie Hall and Sing for Hope, among others. “For me, it was the fascination of something new, and a chance to view and participate in what happens on the business side of arts presentation,” Ms. Fleming said in an email. She is not alone: Many cultural institutions have invited artists onto their boards in recent years. They are not generally expected to pony up as much money as the financiers and industrialists they sit with, but rather to help with fund-raising, offer perspectives on their fields and to act as star-powered draws to help lure others onto their boards. The pianist Yefim Bronfman joined the board of the New York Philharmonic last year — where the violinists Joshua Bell and Itzhak Perlman serve. The actors Anne Hathaway, Kevin Kline, Liev Schreiber and Sam Waterston are on the board of trustees at the Public Theater. And the Signature Theater has an actor as chairman of the board: Edward Norton. Carnegie’s board made headlines recently for discord. But it has more harmonious pockets, too: The hall’s star-studded 125th-anniversary gala on May 5 will feature performances by Martina Arroyo, Emanuel Ax, Ms. Fleming, Marilyn Horne, Lang Lang, Yo-Yo Ma, Jessye Norman and James Taylor, who are all members of its board. —By Michael Cooper When Reynold Levy, then the president of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, called David M. Rubenstein to persuade him to join the center’s board, Mr. Levy thought his chances were slim. Mr. Rubenstein, the billionaire co-founder of the Carlyle Group, a private equity concern, lived in Bethesda, Md., and was already a trustee of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. Yet Mr. Rubenstein became the first chairman of the capital campaign for Lincoln Center’s $1.2 billion physical redevelopment,  giving millions of his own money. “Lincoln Center is a unique institution, a terrific asset in the country,” Mr. Rubenstein, 66, said. There is so much going on in New York that out-of-town philanthropists play a much-needed role, too. They recognize the city’s cultural importance and perhaps the sense that no respectable billionaire has really made it until he’s had an impact on New York. David Geffen, the West Coast entertainment mogul, gave $100 million to Lincoln Center this year. Mr. Rubenstein has directed about 20 percent of the half-billion dollars he has given away to the city. “New York has a number of institutions that are world class that deserve support,” he said. Why does he support the arts? “That is what makes humans so impressive,” he said. “When we think about the brain that created Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony or ‘Hamilton’ in New York now. Celebrating these kinds of things is a good thing to do.” —By Graham BowleyWant to honor Bruce Kovner at a black-tie gala? Fat chance. Want to put his name on a building? Dream on. While Mr. Kovner, a 70-year-old hedge fund billionaire, contributes generously to the cultural causes close to his heart – namely classical music – he’s not comfortable with the publicity that often comes with philanthropy. “He operates below the radar screen,” said Jerry Speyer, the chairman of the Museum of Modern Art. “You don’t see Bruce’s name on anything.” That kind of low profile can be frustrating to fund-raisers, since giving publicly tends to generate other giving. If Mr. Kovner agreed to be the honoree at a fund-raiser, for example, his name would sell a lot of tables. But Mr. Kovner does try to make donations that prompt others to step up, like the $20 million he gave to Juilliard (he’s chairman) in 2012 for its early music program, which he helped start in 2009. Mr. Kovner — along with his wife, Suzie — has staunchly supported music organizations, including the Metropolitan Opera (he’s on the board) and the New York Philharmonic (he’s the vice chairman of Lincoln Center). While Mr. Kovner also gives to other causes, like education and health care, he views culture as essential.“The arts, broadly speaking, are a critical part of what makes life worth living,” he said in a rare interview, “and what makes humans what we are.”—By Robin PogrebinSource of net worths: ForbesIt used to be that the price of a subway ride and the price of a slice of pizza rose in tandem, as if bound by some law of economics. Then came the $1 slice, and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, alas, did not respond in kind. Similarly fickle has been the rule that governs getting your name on a cultural building. Some people have provided nearly the full cost, others less. But when adjusted for inflation, no one can deny the generosity of modern donors. ­Upper left, Carnegie Hall in a photograph from 1891, the year the building opened. The $1.1 million that Andrew Carnegie, upper right, spent at the time, which covered nearly all of construction and land, would be $29 million today when adjusted for inflation. Lower left, a performance of “Measure for Measure” at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, at the New York Shakespeare Festival, in 1985. The publisher George T. Delacorte provided just over a third of the cost of the theater when it opened in 1962. Lower right, from left, the pianist Emanuel Ax; Katherine Farley, the chairwoman of Lincoln Center; Oscar Schafer, the chairman of the New York Philharmonic; David Geffen; and Jed Bernstein, the president of Lincoln Center. Mr. Geffen’s $100 million donation covers about 20 percent of renovating the Philharmonic’s home, a hall now named for him. —By Colin Moynihan New York may fall short in some areas, but supporting the arts is not one of them. When it comes to opening their wallets to help cultural institutions, donors in the city are very generous. Of course, such largess is not devoid of self-interest; giving gets you social status, prominence, even — in some cases — your name on a building.In the age of the selfie, and large, very public donations to cultural institutions, who are these strange people who give anonymously? “Some people just have a joy in helping people,” said Buff Kavelman, the president of Kavelman Group Philanthropic Advisors. They have no need for recognition in the small print of a program or in embossed lettering on a museum wing. Many of them may be channeling Maimonides, the 12th-century Jewish philosopher and scholar who ranked anonymous giving as one of the higher levels of charity. Such spiritual concerns do not motivate many people though. So far in 2015, according to The Chronicle of Philanthropy’s calculations, nine of the top 100 gifts from donors in America have been anonymous, a ratio that has remained relatively unchanged over the past decade. And sometimes a more mundane motive is at work: a desire to be left alone. “There are just people out there who are very private about their giving,” said Julia C. Levy, executive director of the Roundabout Theater. “They’re just adverse to the notoriety that goes with giving publicly.” Once word of a donation gets out within the cloistered and clubby nonprofit cultural world, a gold rush of sorts can ensue, as organizations try to mine the same source. “Because we all troll everybody else’s list,” Ms. Levy said with a laugh. That feeling of being a charitable target, pursued by friends, or by people pretending to be friends, can be off-putting for some donors. “Making an anonymous gift helps to prevent that, to a certain extent,” Ms. Kavelman said.—By Lorne ManlyAnn Ziff donated $30 million to the Metropolitan Opera in 2010, the largest single gift from an individual in its history. But she — like many philanthropic women — isn’t much for public acknowledgment. “I have never wanted my name on anything,” said Ms. Ziff, the Met Opera’s chairwoman. “I don’t see a real reason for it.” Women’s names are not often seen on things, unless they are in the company of their husbands (Judy and Arthur Zankel Hall at Carnegie Hall) or husbands are honoring their wives (the Claire Tow Theater at Lincoln Center). This may be because wealthy women don’t want to take credit for donations that technically come from their families or husbands. But even top female executives seem to steer clear of naming opportunities. While there are a few examples — like the Mercedes T. Bass Grand Tier at the Metropolitan Opera — they are rare. Adrienne Arsht is a notable exception. She put her name on Miami’s performing arts center in 2008 after rescuing it with $30 million — it is now the Adrienne Arsht Center for the Performing Arts of Miami-Dade County. The stage at Alice Tully Hall bears Ms. Arsht’s name, too, thanks to a $10 million contribution in 2012. These and other gifts were made with the money Ms. Arsht herself earned in turning around a small community bank she and her husband owned in Miami, which she sold for $350 million to Banco Popular Español after his death in 2007. Giving publicly, as men do, Ms. Arsht said, sets an important example. “It shows men that women have the money to give, and will if asked, and it shows women that when they do something noteworthy, it helps to be able to share it,” she said. “Very few people can dream beyond what they can see.” —By Robin PogrebinCompanies routinely sponsor events like Shakespeare in the Park (Bank of America) or an emerging writers program (Time Warner) or a dance center in East Harlem (the Ford Foundation). Still, if you run an arts organization, the message is clear: You can’t rely too much on corporations.Robert L. Lynch, the president and chief executive of Americans for the Arts, said grants from businesses account for only about 3 percent of the total money raised for the arts each year. Larger chunks come from individuals, the government and the revenue generated by the organizations themselves through merchandising and ticket sales.The group’s previous study looked at the years 2009 to 2012 and found that the value of business grants was up 18 percent over the prior three-year period, when the recession put a big dent in bottom lines. Even with that growth, though, corporate giving returned only to where it had been previously, he said. And it has not kept pace, he said, with a surge in the number of arts groups, some 100,000 of which are nonprofit organizations.“Forty percent of the nonprofit organizations were in deficit last year,” he said.A second, more recent survey of companies by CECP, a coalition of chief executives who encourage societal engagement, showed giving to the arts by those businesses fell by 20 percent between 2010 and 2014, to $161 million from $202 million. One possible explanation: Companies increasingly link their philanthropic strategies to their core businesses — for example, health companies favor health causes, said Carmen Perez, the director of evaluation and data insights for the group. “You can imagine that there is a strain on culture and the arts,” she said.Lisa Quiroz, who oversees Time Warner’s charitable foundation, agreed that it seemed tougher for arts institutions to collect from the corporate sector, although Time Warner has stayed steady at $5 million a year.“We began to see that with the downturn of the economy in 2008,” she said. “I don’t know if it’s ever fully come back.”—By Graham BowleyShould you do “the ask” in writing or in person? When is the right time to tap a potential donor? What if you are turned down? How do you make the case for your institution when so many others are competing for contributions? Here are some of the strategies employed in getting gifts.For the Whitney Museum of American Art, leaving its Breuer building on the Upper East Side for a new home downtown was an expensive proposition. Part of the $422 million for the new Renzo Piano-designed building, located at one end of the High Line, was raised by selling naming rights to just about everything: plazas, a conservation center, a stairwell and gallery spaces.The restrooms at the New Museum — with their pixelated cherry blossom patterns superimposed on cyan or tangerine-hued tiles — are the most colorful part of the building. They also provided an offbeat naming opportunity when the museum set its $50 million capital campaign for a new building more than a decade ago. In fact, the four bathrooms on the lower level were the first places to find a donor willing to affix his family’s name. The price tag for the Jerome L. and Ellen Stern Restrooms: in the six figures. “I’m 83,” Jerome Stern, a retired venture capitalist, told The New York Times in 2007, “and I thought it would be nice to see my name in a place where I’m going to spend a lot of time.” But it’s not often that easy. Selling the naming rights to things like stairwells and conference rooms can be tricky. Efforts fizzled by the Roundabout Theater to auction off naming rights for its bathrooms in what became the American Airlines Theater. But executives there said that the request in 1999 — $75,000 for each of the four bathrooms – was more of a marketing gimmick than realistic goal. The Museum of Modern Art asks prospective donors what they might like to sponsor. “The thing that is striking when you’re on my side of the ask,” said Glenn Lowry, the museum’s executive director, “is how unexpected some people’s interests can be.” —By Lorne ManlyThere is no official rule book for how to raise money for cultural organizations, but veteran fund-raisers know the common mistakes. Reynold Levy, a former president of Lincoln Center, has developed his own list of tips to help meet those daunting campaign goals.Fishing is easier in a well-stocked pond. So is fishing for donations. With that in mind, many cultural institutions have expanded their boards, whose members are a key source of the contributions they rely on. (While board members serve many functions, their fund-raising duties are sometimes described, frankly if a tad ungallantly, as “give, get or get off” — meaning they should stick around only as long as they can donate or raise a certain amount each year.) The New York Philharmonic now  has 51 people on its board of directors, up from 44 a decade ago. Lincoln Center’s board of trustees nearly doubled in size during the tenure of its last president, Reynold Levy, growing to 80 members in 2014 from the 43 he inherited in 2002. The Metropolitan Opera now has 44 managing directors on its board, up from 37 a decade ago. “Every organization I know is looking at building the size, and particularly building the potency, of their boards — and that makes sense, particularly as we see the need for fund-raising growing,” said Michael M. Kaiser, who directs the DeVos Institute of Arts Management at the University of Maryland. Many institutions are now explicit about how much money they want board members to contribute. Lincoln Center board members gave an average of $80,000 a year when Mr. Levy arrived, he wrote in his book, “They Told Me Not to Take That Job.” As the board grew, he wrote, newcomers were asked to contribute $250,000 a year and to make pledges of $3 million to $5 million to a capital campaign within a year of joining, which were typically redeemed over three to five years. But there can be a point of diminishing returns, Mr. Kaiser noted. “When boards get very, very large,” he said, “board members can feel disengaged, and that can make them give less or raise less.” —By Michael CooperIn the ecosystem of New York City cultural institutions, there are 4,906 nonprofits, according to a Cultural Data Project analysis of I.R.S. filings. Just 1 percent have annual revenue of more than $25 million; 61 percent have less than $50,000 in revenue. As smaller organizations, from neighborhood groups to cultural mainstays, jockey for attention and money, they have challenges: Their development staffs are often tiny, and their information technology is out of date. They face greater scrutiny from potential donors and diminished interest from corporations. Yet they offer supporters a chance to see their money at work. “For donors who just want to go to dinner in Damrosch Park once a year, it won’t matter, but our most generous donors love being part of the kind of growth it’s easier to achieve at a small organization,” said Aidan Connolly, the executive director of the Irish Arts Center, which presents a variety of cultural programming. The center is growing — its budget has tripled, to $2.4 million, over the last eight years — and it has raised $46 million toward a $60 million project to build a modern performance space. The center uses some of the same tools as larger organizations — like galas and the sale of naming rights. For $50,000, a donor can name a seat in a new theater; for $5 million, the theater itself. This year the center attracted its first $1 million gift, from Robert M. Devlin, a businessman brought by friends to see the Irish songwriter Declan O’Rourke. Mr. Devlin is now on the board. —By Michael Paulson The newly minted millionaires and billionaires of the tech world are tempting targets for executives at New York’s nonprofit cultural institutions. But so far, little of that largess has come their way. That doesn’t mean the executives have given up hope. And one element in particular may play in their favor: Time. “People have to grow into philanthropy,” said Michael Margitich, the chief fund-raiser for the Museum of Modern Art for 17 years, until his retirement in 2012. (He still consults for the museum.) Fund-raisers for a number of New York institutions have made their way west to gauge desire. Often, those doors were opened by the connections held by current trustees, who hail from the worlds of Wall Street and corporate America. But many of these tech entrepreneurs are still relatively young. Though they may be worth billions of dollars, much of that fortune may be virtual (in terms of stock options) and not quite real in their minds. “If you’re building a business, investing in companies, trying to stay on top of the game, you’re starting a family, it’s hard,” said Vin Cipolla, the executive director of the David Geffen Hall Campaign at Lincoln Center, who’s founded several digital firms in his career. “And to support [arts institutions], you generally have to experience it. And finding four, five hours to do something, to go to something on any kind of regular basis is really, really hard for people.” The techies who have delved into philanthropy so far have for the most part concentrated on big-picture public policy matters like health and education, including Mark Zuckerberg’s $100 million grant to Newark. Bringing clean water to millions in Africa can seem a lot more important than helping an already-flush opera house build its endowment. That kind of charitable giving can also mesh more smoothly with the problem-solving, start-up mentality that spawned their professional success. But as the tech world matures, cultural fund-raisers expect interests to shift or expand to their areas. In the contemporary art world, where video and other technologically infused works appeal to these entrepreneurs, we’re seeing such a move. Since 2010, many of the new trustees at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art have come from the tech industry, including Marissa Mayer of Yahoo. New York cultural institutions aren’t giving up hope. “I always thought there was genuine interest,” Mr. Margitich said. “But it was just too soon.” —By Lorne ManlyAdvertisement