By MARTHA SCHWENDENERDEC. 24, 2015
Good fiction, Ernest Hemingway once wrote, is like an iceberg: Only a small portion is visible, but it’s the submerged mass that creates momentum. John Russell’s current show, “Sqrrl,” functions this way, too, sitting on a colossus of ideas that inform the work. The metaphor is also apt because icebergs are a bellwether of climate change, and Mr. Russell’s show touches on everything from ecological crises to the uncertain future of humanity.The first thing visitors see in the pink glow of the gallery is a shiny black sea turtle sculpture suspended — or perhaps impaled — by a pole stretching from floor to ceiling. A long sheet of vinyl printed on one side with futuristic figures divides the gallery lengthwise. A 45-minute video — sort of a cross between William Kentridge’s animations and the politically minded Paul Chan’s early videos — tells the story of CarLEee, a 195-year-old posthuman who has undergone 45 “body allocations” involving the bio-fusion of various species. The video’s whispered soundtrack appears in a modified form as an essay-artwork on the gallery’s website, and the gallery’s office includes a mini-library of texts, some edited or written by Mr. Russell, that both supplement the show and function as part of his art practice.The video and essay include references to feminist and techno-feminist thinkers, including Luce Irigaray, Elizabeth Grosz and Donna Haraway, as well as to recent theories like accelerationism and speculative realism. While these later philosophies have been challenged by mainstream thinkers, Mr. Russell uses art to his advantage. Following in the tradition of artists like Robert Smithson and Juan Downey, he has created work here that is open-ended and visionary. It functions more as science fiction-philosophy than as an argument for airtight specific conclusions or outcomes.John Russell‘Sqrrl’Bridget Donahue99 Bowery, near Hester Street ­Lower East SideThrough Jan. 10A version of this review appears in print on December 25, 2015, on Page C29 of the New York edition with the headline: John Russell’s ‘Sqrrl’ Embodies a Science Fiction Journey.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.