AdvertisementSupported byAntiquesBy Eve M. KahnIt was a year of breakups and near misses. Archives and other bulk holdings of designers, performers, wartime heroes and victims of injustice were taken out of storage and sold piecemeal, or rescued from the brink of dispersal. In the end, some intriguing antiques ended up at institutions, destined for public display.One of the year’s more controversial auctions, which was scheduled for April but canceled, involved a collection of artifacts from World War II internment camps for Japanese-Americans. Assembled by Allen Hendershott Eaton, a historian and advocate for American craft traditions, it was valued around $28,000 and consigned to the Rago auction house in Lambertville, N.J.Among the objects were watercolors depicting interned children lugging suitcases, and carved family nameplates for the tar-paper shacks in which many internees lived. Opponents of the sale, including the actor George Takei, who was interned during the war with his family, argued that no one should profit from the sale of objects that were linked to a shameful government policy and that had been given to Mr. Eaton for potential exhibition. (A descendant of an Eaton family friend had consigned the items for sale.)After the sale was canceled, the Japanese American National Museum in Los Angeles acquired the lots, and conservators and curators are trying to determine how best to restore and display them. Possibilities include loans to museums at the camps, including the Heart Mountain Interpretive Center in Powell, Wyo. Greg Kimura, president and chief executive of the Japanese American National Museum, said that the objects were fragile partly because the interned artisans had little access to durable raw materials. “People made beautiful things out of anything they could find,” he said.A few weeks ago, the Museum of World War II in Natick, Mass., spent about $15,000 for a fully equipped American military mobile surgical unit from the 1940s. Facing no competitors, Kenneth W. Rendell, the museum’s founder, bid by phone for thousands of pieces including tents, gleaming scalpels, medicine bottles, stretchers and bandages in the sale, by Centurion Auctions in Tallahassee, Fla. Peter T. Kirsch, a retired orthopedic surgeon in Louisville, Ky., spent years assembling the battlefront hospital unit and had occasionally displayed it at public events. The Museum of World War II hopes to complete an expansion in 2017 that will allow visitors to walk through the mobile tent clinic. Mr. Rendell said that he had long owned medical tools used by the Nazis and had sought American counterparts.Dabney Minor Scales, a Confederate naval officer from a remote Mississippi plantation, ranged as far as Australia aboard vessels assigned to seize Union ships and disrupt maritime trade. He found time on his journeys to collect signed photographs of other officers as well as portraits of prominent Europeans, including the French artist Rosa Bonheur. In January, the Tennessee State Museum paid $19,470 for his album at the Case Antiques auction house in Knoxville, Tenn. It had belonged to Mr. Scales’s descendants. Museum staff members are researching the images, some of which will be displayed in new galleries scheduled to open in 2018. Dan Pomeroy, the museum’s chief curator, said that the album documents the Civil War as “a worldwide seaborne conflict.” At the Case auction, a book dealer from Melbourne, Australia, Douglas Stewart, bought Mr. Scales’s journal of his sea voyages for the same price, $19,470, and the State Library of Victoria is trying to raise money to acquire it from him.In February, an auction house in Fairfield, Me., offered posters, photos and sheet music related to an autistic piano prodigy known as Blind Tom (he went by various last names including Wiggins), who grew up enslaved on a plantation near Columbus, Ga. His keyboard skills and talents for memorizing and composing music astonished audiences for five decades. The James D. Julia auction house sold the material for $29,625 to the Columbus Museum, which has displayed it since August in a show devoted to two Southern collectors that runs through Jan. 10. Rebecca Bush, the museum’s curator of history, said that the memorabilia had prompted conversations about race, slavery, music and autism, as well as how Blind Tom might have felt about constantly being taken on tour. In all of the documentation of his life and music-making, she said, “nothing comes from his perspective — it’s all a swirl around him.” The museum is setting up a permanent gallery space for the Blind Tom pieces.In July, costumes, dolls and other souvenirs that Shirley Temple Black retained from her career as a child star in Hollywood were auctioned in a Theriault’s sale in Kansas City, Mo. Institutions acquired a variety of the lots. The collector Steve Soboroff bought her creamy enamel childhood typewriter for $4,500 and donated it to the Smithsonian Institution. Next spring the Santa Monica History Museum will display some of her outfits, including a red plaid dress ($21,000) and a red-and-gold polka-dot dress ($75,000). The Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, is developing exhibition plans for recent gifts of a smocked dress in red silk ($2,250) and a coral-trimmed blue dress ($8,250). Michelle Tolini Finamore, the museum’s curator of fashion arts, said she was eager to research the star’s largely forgotten dressmaker, known as Elise of Hollywood.In a few months, the Museum of Fine Arts also plans to exhibit an elaborate silver urn known as the Progress Vase, made in the 1870s at the Reed & Barton factory in Taunton, Mass., and recently acquired at auction. Reed & Barton once described it as representing the transition “from savage to civilized life,” as settlers of European descent fanned out across North America. On one side, statuettes portray white people reading books and enjoying agricultural products. On the other, American Indians are depicted reining in a rearing horse over rocky terrain. Reed & Barton, which filed for bankruptcy this year, sold dozens of items from its corporate collection at Freeman’s auction house in Philadelphia, including the vase ($125,000) and a group of vintage baseball uniforms bearing the silver maker’s initials that brought just $188. The bulk of the company’s papers will be turned over to Harvard Business School and the Rhode Island School of Design.Advertisement