By JASON FARAGODEC. 24, 2015
Visitors to Martin Puryear’s 2007 retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art will remember the singular appeals of his mostly wooden sculpture: its enigmatic forms, its astounding craftsmanship, its humanistic spirit. When contemporary art is often said to exist in a “post-medium condition” — the art historian Rosalind Krauss’s phrase for the dissolution of boundaries between painting, photography and other once neatly defined disciplines — Mr. Puryear has remained faithful to sculpture, and keeps probing the medium’s capacity for revelation and beauty.His commitment to three dimensions endures even when he’s working in only two. Mr. Puryear’s less familiar drawings and prints, now on view in an intriguing show at the Morgan Library & Museum, are mostly studies for subsequent sculptures. Unlike his precise works in wood, his output on paper can feel provisional and uncertain. Which, actually, gives its own sort of visual satisfaction to “Martin Puryear: Multiple Dimensions.” In the drawings here, you can see Mr. Puryear exploring motifs, trying out forms and contours, and not worrying unduly about finish. The bulk of the drawings here have never been shown, and most come from Mr. Puryear’s own collection. They are autonomous and contingent at once, and this show sits in a pleasant limbo zone: It’s a stand-alone exhibition of prints and drawings, but at the same time a glimpse into his sculptural process. (The exhibition, which also contains a few impressive sculptures, was organized by the Art Institute of Chicago and will travel there next year.)Mr. Puryear was born in Washington in 1941, and after undergraduate study at the Catholic University of America, he joined the Peace Corps, which sent him to newly independent Sierra Leone between 1964 and 1966. In West Africa he drew proficient sketches of local architecture, palm trees and cactuses, and a few Sierra Leoneans he met while teaching English, French and biology. One scraggy contour drawing of a night watchman includes a floppy hat — a form that will recur throughout his career. If the appeal of his African juvenilia is now mostly biographical, one sheet of drawings of a rhinoceros beetle, its carapace rendered through tight crosshatching, suggests Mr. Puryear could have had a fine career as an entomologist.After his stint in the Peace Corps, Mr. Puryear studied printmaking in Sweden and then attended Yale, where he turned definitively to sculpture. It was 1969, and Post-Minimalism was then at its height; while Mr. Puryear worked on his M.F.A. at Yale, Richard Serra and Robert Morris were visiting artists there. His sculptures’ rationality and restraint reflect that Post-Minimal influence. But Mr. Puryear upheld the virtue of craft when the art world was abandoning it, and the abstract forms of his wooden sculpture were subtly inflected with cultural concerns. Mr. Puryear, who is African-American, returns again and again to a number of motifs, devoid of personal expression yet resonantly political. One recurring figure is the gate, a sign of welcome or of exclusion. Another is the soft Phrygian cap, worn by 18th-century revolutionaries in France and Haiti. In one spiraling drawing here, from 2003, two dozen lines go on a semicircular jog before narrowing and curving in on themselves, rearticulating a symbol of both egalitarian citizenship and black liberation.AdvertisementVessels and jugs, with their capacity for an interior secret, also make frequent appearances, and this show suggests how Mr. Puryear uses drawing to investigate those forms’ sculptural potential. A 1990 drawing, done with black Conté crayon and smudged around its edges, consists of an irregular oval that is extended at its bottom into a rectangle, looking a bit like the business end of a golf club. Two years later the form recurs, this time in a large preparatory drawing for a sculpture: the shape has been tilted 90 degrees, and translated from a solid mass of black into a lattice structure. The sculpture itself (“Vessel,” 1997–2002) is here too, and the lattice creates a cage of white pine, containing in its cavity a tar-covered ampersand. What was once solid has become hollow, and what was once abstract now feels almost anthropoid. That feeling is heightened by a smaller white bronze sculpture with the same shape, titled “Face Down.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While many prominent sculptors embrace drawing and printmaking as stand-alone efforts — consider Rachel Whiteread’s spare domestic impressions, or Thomas Schütte’s fraught and bulbous heads — Mr. Puryear evidently considers his works on paper as facilitators of something more substantial. But the germination process can take years. In a print here from 2001, a net of lines describes a conical form that bends at its apex and points back down, like a swan nuzzling its beak into its plumage. (Mr. Puryear calls it his “9/11 Print,” as he was at work on the image on Sept. 11.) The form recurred in three dimensions last year, in an elegant sculpture of hardwood saplings and cordage at Mr. Puryear’s outstanding exhibition at Matthew Marks Gallery in Manhattan. Look closer at the 2001 print and you’ll see a second, smaller network of lines in the corner, echoing the swan-cone, but abbreviated and more rectilinear. That one, too, became a sculpture. As the work on paper is not a drawing but an etching, a medium permitting no revisions, the second form could hardly have been an idle sketch.Neither of those new sculptures is here. Despite a few three-dimensional inclusions, this is a show of works on paper, and much of its argument about media is implicit. It may, by the way, look better in Chicago next year; at the Morgan, the show is divided between the museum’s low-ceilinged, crepuscular upstairs gallery and its taller, one-room downstairs exhibition space. The split is unwieldy, and makes the smaller second half, which contains models of Mr. Puryear’s public works, feel thrown together. (The show confirms the insufficiency of Renzo Piano’s Morgan Library renovation; the success of his Whitney Museum of American Art design and of his Art Institute expansion should not obscure the deficiencies of this one.)AdvertisementBut the Morgan is at its core a repository for drawing. If a sculptor of Mr. Puryear’s stature fits into its halls with some difficulty, that may affirm that his works on paper, while estimable, are still only a reflection of his greatest achievements.“Martin Puryear: Multiple Dimensions” continues through Jan. 10 at the Morgan Library & Museum, 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street; 212-685-0008; themorgan­.org.A version of this review appears in print on December 25, 2015, on Page C28 of the New York edition with the headline: Committed to Sculpture, Even in Two Dimensions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.