AdvertisementSupported byFriday FileBy Mary Jo MurphyToday, Friday File visits the ghosts of Christmases past.“A War Christmas” was the headline of an editorial in The New York Times on Christmas Day 1915. The United States was still at peace, but acutely aware of the events overseas.“The old irony of the festival of Peace on Earth to Men of Good Will in a world at war is only apparent, the Peace bestowed being of the soul,” the editorial began. After enumerating the wars, it continued: “It is a mark of the humane temperament of modern men that ‘atrocities’ and massacres shock civilized mankind. Until comparatively recent times war was a continual atrocity, rich in permitted and customary cruelties. It is one of the benefits of science that the art of destruction is so destructive that the process can’t be kept up indefinitely. By Christmas, 1916, or ’17, or ’18, somebody will have to cry, ‘Hold, enough.’”Somebody didn’t, of course. Or not for long anyway.The editorial ended with a blessing:“And so, may the turkey melt in the mouth, the cranberries be worthy of Cape Cod, the mince pie deserve the praise of the Fat Boy, the plums that of the Hon. John Horner. Merry Christmas to all and to all a good day! Which the weather collector promises.”Twenty-five years later, another Christmas, another war, with the United States on the brink. A front-page article on Dec. 25 described it this way, under the headline “Nation Will See Gayest Christmas Since the Slump”:“Reports on the pre-holiday trade indicated sales volume greater than any year in the past decade, with gift buying in department stores and some shops assuming the proportions of an orgy of spending, as if customers were determined to show there was at least one country that enjoyed peace and good-will.”An army of Santas was deployed to distribute some of those gifts around New York City, the article reported.They ranged from this: “A tugboat took the place of a sleigh and a sea-going Santa Claus carried gifts and greetings to sailors on nine British, one Belgian, two Dutch, one Polish and four Greek freighters in the harbor.”To this: “Boy Scouts of the nature study troop of the Kips Bay Boys’ Club distributed a ton and a half of cracked corn, peanuts and bread crumbs to birds and fowl on ponds in the city’s parks and playgrounds.”This time, the headline on the editorial was “Where Is Peace?” It was Dec. 25, 1965.“The bitter question in this title was asked by Pope Paul VI, speaking to pilgrims and visitors from the window of his apartment on St. Peter’s Square. Where, indeed?” the editorial began. “Yet the magic of Christmas is potent. Even in Vietnam, where there is no peace, the guns were stilled as the holy day began and the bombers stayed in their hangars.”Christmas, the editorial said, “is a day of peace in the midst of war, and of life renewed, whatever the bombs say and whatever they try to do.”Advertisement