Amid the city’s restaurants, nightclubs, theaters and art galleries, there are also over 5,000 churches.By WILLIAM GRIMESDEC. 24, 2015
New York has an image. In the American imagination it stands for money, culture and entertainment. It is a city of restaurants, nightclubs, theaters and art galleries. It is not, in the popular mind, a spiritual city. Mammon is its god, worshiped daily at the New York Stock Exchange. Thus it has always been, and shall be.But wait. There is another New York. “In some respects, New York may be called the city of churches,” the minister-turned-journalist James D. McCabe Jr. wrote in 1872, at the dawn of the Gilded Age. He counted nearly 500 of them, including a lone Greek Orthodox congregation.That number would nearly triple over the next quarter-century, and today, at the height of the second Gilded Age, the total is well over 5,000. The Council of Churches of the City of New York estimates that there are more than 4,000 denominational Christian churches in the five boroughs, a figure that does not include independent Christian churches, whose numbers have surged in recent decades, or the many hundreds of non-Christian places of worship. In a study conducted last year, the Pew Research Center found that more than two-thirds of New Yorkers identified as having a religious affiliation, a figure that might startle the rest of the country — or indeed, the world. In many cases, “affiliation” no doubt means a faint, lingering loyalty to the church of one’s childhood. But like a pilot light that ignites a larger flame from time to time, it can burst into life — at Christmas, for example, when midnight Masses and choral music by Bach and Schütz lift the heart.Churches anchor the city. The imaginary map of Manhattan imprinted on every New Yorker’s brain is not simply a catalog of skyscrapers, parks and subway routes. It also includes Trinity Church in the financial district; the Eldridge Street Synagogue on the Lower East Side; Grace Church and St. Mark’s Church-in-the-Bowery in the East Village; the Church of the Transfiguration and the Serbian Orthodox Cathedral of St. Sava near Madison Square Park; St. Patrick’s Cathedral, St. Bartholomew’s Episcopal Church and Temple Emanu-El in Midtown; the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem and the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine in nearby Morningside Heights.AdvertisementOutside Manhattan, the city’s streets, with their warp and woof, weave tightly around neighborhood-defining churches like St. Anthony-St. Alphonsus in Greenpoint, Brooklyn; St. Teresa of Avila in Crown Heights, Brooklyn; and the Friends Meeting House in Flushing, Queens.Newer additions reflect the changing demographics and patterns of immigration in the city. The traditional Roman Catholic and Protestant denominations struggle with declining membership, but the influx of new residents from South America, Mexico and the Caribbean finds expression in storefront Pentecostal churches, which pop up on every other block in parts of Queens, Brooklyn and the Bronx. Muslims seek Islamic mosques, some of them humble counterparts to the imposing Islamic Cultural Center on the Upper East Side. Sikhs support the Gurdwara Sikh Temple in South Richmond Hill, Queens. Hindus worship at the eye-popping Ganesh Temple in Flushing, Queens, its towering gateways embellished with stone peacocks, monkeys, eagles and representations of Ganesh, the elephant-headed god of wisdom and new beginnings. Sri Lankans gather at the Buddhist Vihara on Staten Island.“If this is a naughty old town, it isn’t for lack of gospel,” Rupert Hughes wrote in his 1904 guidebook, “The Real New York.” Where Americans in the heartland saw the bright lights of Broadway and a devil’s catalog of temptations, Hughes saw a faith-filled metropolis. His survey of the sacred could, with adjustments, apply today: “You can see the ritual of the Joss House, the Christian Science, the Theosophical, the Swedenborgian, the gorgeous Roman Catholic with sometimes a visiting Mexican cardinal, Episcopal, Presbyterian, Methodist, Baptist, Congregationalist, Unitarian, Lutheran, Universalist and Hebrew. There are two Quaker meeting houses and a Moravian society.”The Swedenborgian Church still stands, on East 35th Street in Manhattan, and if the Moravian Society is gone, its place has been taken by a hundred other places of worship, from the Reviving Revelation Pentecostal Church in East Flatbush, Brooklyn, to the Wat Buddha Thai Thavorn Vanaram, a Buddhist temple in Elmhurst, Queens. The Stock Exchange will resume business on Monday. And the soul of the city will express itself, throughout the year, in thousands of ways, in thousands of places, where mammon has no sway.AdvertisementHere are the 50 places of worship pictured:St. Luke and St. Matthew Episcopal Church, Brooklyn; St. Anthony of Padua Church, Manhattan; Co-Cathedral of St. Joseph, Brooklyn; Jesus Christ Family Church, Brooklyn; St. Mary & St. Antonios Coptic Orthodox Church, Queens; Pillars of Faith Full Gospel Tabernacle, Queens; Masjid Hazrati Abu Bakr Siddique mosque, Queens; Vineyard Christian Church of Flushing, Queens; Congregation Yetev Lev D’Satmar, Brooklyn; Free Synagogue of Flushing, Queens; Serbian Orthodox Cathedral of St. Sava, Manhattan; Holy Spirit C.O.G.I. Jesus Holy Cross, Brooklyn; St. Demetrios Cathedral, Queens; Holy Cross Ukrainian Catholic Church, Queens; Revelation Church of Jesus Christ of the Apostolic Faith, left, and True Light Universal Bible Church of God, Brooklyn; Original Church of God in Christ, Brooklyn; St. John’s Lutheran Church, Brooklyn; Gurdwara Sikh Temple, Queens; St. Anthony-St. Alphonsus, Brooklyn; Greenpoint Reformed Church, Brooklyn; Holy Rosary Church, the Bronx; Bronx Baptist Church; Iglesia Evangélica Presbiteriana, Queens; Chua Thap Phuong Buddhist temple, the Bronx; Freedom Hall Church of God, Brooklyn; Russian Orthodox Cathedral of the Transfiguration of Our Lord, Brooklyn; New Life Tabernacle Church, Queens; University Heights Presbyterian Church, Manhattan; Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints temple, Manhattan; First Baptist Church in the City of New York, Manhattan; Kehila Kedosha Janina Synagogue and Museum, Manhattan; Holy Trinity Ukrainian Orthodox Cathedral, Manhattan; Lincoln Square Synagogue, Manhattan; St. Nicholas of Tolentine Church, the Bronx; Madina Masjid mosque, Manhattan; St. George’s Church, Manhattan; Staten Island Buddhist Vihara; Congregation Temple Emanu-El, Staten Island; Albanian Islamic Cultural Center, Staten Island; Our Lady of Mount Carmel Grotto, Staten Island. Roman Catholic Church of St. Patrick, Brooklyn; Our Lady of Angels Church, Brooklyn; Sri Maha Vallabha Ganapati Devasthanam Hindu Temple, Queens; Our Lady of Perpetual Help, Brooklyn; Boon Church, Queens; St. Michael’s Roman Catholic Church, Brooklyn; First Baptist Church of Crown Heights, Brooklyn; Congregation Beth Elohim, Brooklyn; Han Ma Um Zen Center, Queens; Congregation Lubavitch, Brooklyn.A version of this article appears in print on December 25, 2015, on Page C25 of the New York edition with the headline: Spiritual Solace Amid the Urban Bustle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.