By JOSHUA BARONEOCT. 9, 2015
 Museums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (continuing) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and others? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out infection. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Center for Jewish History: ‘Allied in the Fight: Jews, Blacks and the Struggle for Civil Rights’ (Friday) Told through photos, letters, archival materials and film, this exhibition looks at the complicated role that Jewish people played in the American civil rights movement, with a focus on the shared projects and joint organizational efforts of black and Jewish people in the fight against injustice. 15 West 16th Street, Flatiron district, 212-294-8301, cjh.org.‘Global Citizen: The Architecture of Moshe Safdie’ (through Jan. 10) This touring exhibition, a retrospective of Mr. Safdie’s career of more than 50 years, makes its way to New York with new material based on the architect’s recent work related to dense urbanism in Asia. Donald Albrecht from the Museum of the City of New York organized the material in this show, which also explores Mr. Safdie’s design philosophy that buildings should be extensions of their physical, historical and cultural contexts. National Academy Museum, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-369-4880, nationalacademy.org.Morgan Library and Museum: ‘Alice: 150 Years of Wonderland’ (closes on Monday) The centerpiece of this exhibition is the original manuscript of Lewis Carroll’s “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland,” traveling from the British Library in London. Joining the book are letters, drawings, photographs and more that shed light on how the beloved book came to be, and why it still holds our attention after 150 years. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.AdvertisementMuseum of Chinese in America: ‘Sub Urbanisms: Casino Urbanization, Chinatowns and the Contested American Landscape’ (through January) Stephen Fan, an architecture professor and curator, examines the trend of Chinese casino workers in Connecticut converting suburban homes into multifamily communities. This exhibition is both creative and historical; it takes the present to imagine the future of housing design while looking back on the events that created the trend of suburban migration. 215 Centre Street, between Howard and Grand Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-619-4785, mocanyc.org.AdvertisementMuseum of the Moving Image: ‘How Cats Took Over the Internet’ (through January) Even people who hate cats can’t easily get through an hour of browsing online without coming across some kind of feline clickbait. This exhibition takes a critical look at and tells the story of how we, as a society, got to this point. Yes, there are cat GIFs. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.National Museum of the American Indian: ‘Meryl McMaster: Second Self’ (through Dec. 11) Meryl McMaster, an artist from Canada and a Plains Cree member of the Siksika Nation, shows her “Second Self” photography series, which uses portraiture to explore the complex ways in which identity is constructed. 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.New-York Historical Society: ‘Superheroes in Gotham’ (through Feb. 21) New York is safe as long as its long roster of comic-book heroes stick around. It’s been this way for nearly a century as these characters have defended the city in books, TV shows, movies, video games — even the Broadway stage. New-York Historical Society’s latest exhibition tells the story of how super heroes became a cultural staple for all ages and media. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Transit Museum: ‘Bringing Back the City’ (ongoing) This new exhibition comes three years after Hurricane Sandy took a swipe at the city’s infrastructure. But what of the people who put the pieces back together? “Bringing Back the City” tells the stories of everyday services — like electricity and mass transit — that become extraordinary in times of crisis. Boerum Place, at Schermerhorn Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-694-1600, bringingbackthecity.com.New York Transit Museum Grand Central Terminal Gallery Annex: ‘New York’s Transportation Landmarks’ (through Nov. 1) It’s been 50 years since New York passed its Landmarks Law, which covers over 30,000 buildings and structures around the city. To celebrate the anniversary, the New York Transit Museum has created an exhibition that explores the history of development, use and even rescue of these landmarks. More information: 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum.New York Transit Museum: ‘Spanning the Narrows: The Verrazano Bridge at 50’ (through Oct. 18) Photographs, maps, drawings, models and other archival materials related to the construction of the bridge (including correspondence from Robert Moses, who oversaw the project) are part of this exhibition commemorating its 50th anniversary. Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-694-1600, mta.info/mta/museum.New-York Historical Society: ‘The Hirschfeld Century: The Art of Al Hirschfeld’ (closes on Monday) This exhibition includes over 100 original drawings by the illustrator Al Hirschfeld (1903-2003), who was known in particular for his drawings of celebrities. The show has a special emphasis on his work for The New York Times, where he was a contributor for more than 70 years. Tickets are available at the museum or in advance online. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.AdvertisementOld Stone House: ‘In Search of One City: Sensing (in)equality’ (Friday and Saturday) This exhibition, with a variety of works gathered by the artist Katherine Gressel, explores the role of artists in investigating, making sense of and possibly even reconciling problems of income inequality in New York. Art from the show includes, for example, posters that advise poor people on how to suffer politely, as well a jukebox that plays interviews with low-wage workers. On view Friday from 3 to 6 p.m. and by appointment, 336 Third Street, between Fourth and Fifth Avenues, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-768-3195, theoldstonehouse.org.‘Sea Level: Five Boroughs at Water’s Edge’ (through Dec. 31) In its first pop-up exhibition for the Seaport Culture District, the American Institute of Architects presents a water’s eye view of the city through photos by Elizabeth Felicella and accompanying essays by Robert Sullivan. The panoramic view of New York starts at New York Harbor and makes its way along the East River, showing the shore of each borough along the way. Center @ the Seaport, 181 Front Street, South Street Seaport, Lower Manhattan, 212-683-0023, cfa.aiany.org.‘Webtoon’ (through Oct. 29) This exhibition highlights the culture of Korean webtoons — comics specifically made for the Internet. In addition to displaying the comics, this show will also take a look at the media and commercial products that have been inspired by popular webtoons. Korean Cultural Service New York, Gallery Korea, 460 Park Avenue, at 57th Street, Manhattan, 212-759-9550, koreanculture.org.Gardens‘Beyond the Scenic Hudson: Plein Air Painting’ (Sunday) Wave Hill’s Glyndor Gallery is currently showing a Hudson River-inspired installation by the artist Matthew Friday. For this workshop, visitors will meet the artist Matthew Friday to see his work and join him outdoors to paint the Hudson’s autumn landscape. Registration is required. From 1 to 4 p.m., West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx, 718-549-3200, wavehill.org.EventsArchitecture and Design Film Festival (Tuesday through Oct. 18) The lineup for this festival may seem niche, but the subject matter affects out daily lives: housing, preservation, the environment. Highlights include a virtual reality lounge, a Rizzoli pop-up bookstore and the screening of “The Infinite Happiness” (Tuesday at 8 p.m.), about the “8 House” building in Copenhagen by the Danish architect Bjarke Ingels. At various times, Bow Tie Chelsea Cinemas 9, 260 West 23rd Street, Chelsea; more information is at adfilmfest.com.Autumn Crafts Festival (Saturday and Sunday) Handcrafted treasures from makers around the country — about 250 of them — are on display in this event that takes over Lincoln Center for two weekends. There will be craft demonstrations, as well as live entertainment. From 11 a.m. to 8:30 p.m. on Saturdays; from 10 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. on Sundays, West 64th Street, at Columbus Avenue, Upper West Side, 973-746-0091, craftsatlincoln.org.‘Back to the Future’ in Concert (Thursday and next Friday) In celebration of the 30th anniversary of “Back to the Future,” Doc himself, Christopher Lloyd, will be in attendance of this screening with live musical accompaniment by the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra. At 8 p.m., Radio City Music Hall, 866-858-0008, radiocity.com.Chelsea Film Festival (Thursday through Oct. 18) Risk-takers and emerging storytellers are given a chance to screen their documentaries and fiction films at this little festival, back for its third year, with a theme of “global issues.” The screenings, talks and parties will be held at multiple venues and times of day; more information is at chelseafilm.org.AdvertisementHalloween Harvest (Saturday and Sunday, through Nov. 1) For the next six weekends, Halloween is taking over Luna Park’s activities, games and rides. For example, Jack’s Pumpkin Shack will give visitors a chance to guess the weight of a giant pumpkin, and Camp Luna will be a s’mores-making station. More information is at lunaparknyc.com. 1000 Surf Avenue, Coney Island, Brooklyn, 718-373-5862.New York Comic Con (through Sunday) You may have noticed the parade of costumed superfans making their way to the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center. No, Halloween didn’t come early; it’s time for New York’s annual take on this massive pop culture convention, complete with panel discussions, exhibitions and screenings. The full lineup is at newyorkcomiccon.com. Tickets are sold out, but New York has no shortage of super hero festivities this weekend. For example, New York Super Week has programming around the city lined up for Friday and Saturday. Multiple venues have become a playground for super heroes, vampires and zombies, offering a broad range of events, like comedy shows, concerts and food tastings. More information is at newyorksuperweek.com. And on Friday, the exhibition “Superheroes in Gotham” opens at New-York Historical Society. The museum tells the story of New York’s long relationship with comic book heroes and how they became a cultural staple across all ages and media — even worthy of an event like Comic Con. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.New York Super Week (Friday and Saturday) This festival is a sort of partner for New York Comic Con, which began on Thursday. For a week, various places around the city become a playground for fans of super heroes, vampires, zombies — typical Comic Con fare. There are dozens of events, from comedy shows and concerts to food tastings and lectures, planned covering a broad range of locations and topics. The lineup is at newyorksuperweek.com.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesday) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotations (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videologybarandcinema.com.Zum Schneider (Friday through Sunday) Oktoberfest officially ended on Sunday, but that isn’t stopping the bierhaus Zum Schneider from extending the party for an extra weekend. It has set up a sort of Munich on the East River, complete with Lederhosen-clad staff, strongman competitions, live music and liter steins. The beer tent opens Friday at 4 p.m. and Saturday and Sunday at noon, 24-20 F.D.R. Drive Service Road East, near 23rd Street, Stuyvesant Town, 212-598-1098, nyc.zumschneider.com.Spoken WordSasha Abramsky (Wednesday) Samuel G. Freedman, The New York Times’s On Religion columnist, joins Mr. Abramsky in discussing “The House of Twenty Thousand Books,” the story of his grandfather, Chimen Abramsky, whose home in London was a hot spot for some of his generation’s greatest thinkers and a vast library of socialist literature and Jewish history. At 7 p.m., Book Culture Columbus, 450 Columbus Avenue, near West 82nd Streets, Upper West Side, 212-595-1962, bookculture.com.‘By the Water’ (Friday) As the anniversary of Hurricane Sandy approaches, the New York Society for Ethical Culture presents a reading of Sharyn Rothstein’s 2014 play “By the Water.” The story follows Marty and Mary Murphy as they and their neighbors return to their Staten Island homes and attempt to rebuild their lives. A discussion about the plot’s ethical issues will follow. At 7 p.m., 2 West 64th Street, Manhattan, 212-307-7171, nysec.org.Richard Dawkins (Wednesday) The New York Public Library’s Books at Noon series brings in Mr. Dawkins to discuss his latest work, “A Brief Candle in the Dark,” a sequel to his 2013 memoir “An Appetite for Wonder.” In his new books, the science-minded author takes an “intellectual victory lap,” wrote Dwight Garner in a review for The New York Times. At noon, Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, New York Public Library, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman; free.Intelligence Squared Debates: ‘China and the U.S. Are Long-Term Enemies’ (Wednesday) John Donvan, the author and journalist, moderates this debate in which Peter Brookes from the Heritage Foundation and John Mearsheimer, a political-science professor from the University of Chicago, argue that China’s growing economic and military powers are in some ways a threat to the United States. Kevin Rudd, the former Australian prime minister, and Robert Daly, director of the Kissinger Institute on China and the U.S., provide a counterpoint. At 6:45 p.m. (reception at 5:45 p.m.), Kaufman Music Center, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-303-4322, intelligencesquaredus.org.AdvertisementColum McCann (Thursday) Before Joseph Gordon-Levitt was making his way across the World Trade Center towers on a wire in the new movie “The Walk,” Mr. McCann was fictionalizing Philippe Petit’s crossing in the National Book Award-winning novel “Let the Great World Spin.” Now, he’s back with a collection of short stories, “Thirteen Ways of Looking,” which he’ll discuss with the writer Lila Azam Zanganeh. At 7:30 p.m., Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.Muldoon’s Picnic (Monday) Paul Muldoon, The New Yorker’s poetry editor, assembles his latest collection of writers and musicians for a night of Irish entertainment. Guests include the novelist Column McCann, the poet Michael Dickman, the musical duo Damsel (Beth Meyers and Monica Mugan), the singer Iarla Ó Lionáird and the fiddler Caoimhín Ó Raghallaigh. At 7:30 p.m., Irish Arts Center, 553 West 51st Street, Clinton, 212-757-3318, irishartscenter.org.Out by 10 (Friday) This salon-style evening is back for a new season, starting with music and performances by three winners of the Moth’s StorySlam. The lineup includes: Ophira Eisenberg, host of NPR’s “Ask Me Another”; the 20-time StorySlam champion Adam Wade; and Wendy Suzuki, a neural science professor at New York University. At 8 p.m., John Strasberg Studios, 555 Eighth Avenue, a West 38th Street, Manhattan, outbyten.com.Artist Talk: Arlene Shechet (Thursday) The Brooklyn Museum’s Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art hosts this talk with the sculptor Arlene Shechet, who will speak with the curator Catherine Morris. Ms. Shechet’s art works in contradictions, like elegance and ugliness, to subvert traditions in arts and crafts. At 7 p.m., 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org.Walking ToursAmerica’s Museum: Art and History of the Metropolitan (Saturday) Art history doctoral candidates lead this tour of one of the country’s most popular, prestigious museums. Highlights include classic artworks, as well as anecdotes from New York’s cultural history — and the story of the museum’s only benefactor to have been eaten by cannibals. At 11 a.m., meeting in front of the Duke Semans Mansion, 1009 Fifth Avenue, at East 82nd Street, Upper East Side, 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.Bryant Park Public Tours (Wednesday) Bryant Park hasn’t always been the clean, open space it is today. This tour provides some insights on its history, including its darker days as a “needle park” in the 1970s, as well as its award-winning design and maintenance efforts. The tour meets at the fountain at 41st Street at Avenue of the Americas. Registration is required. At 11 a.m., Bryant Park, 212-768-4242, bryantpark.org.Central Park (Sunday) Central Park’s green-leafed days are numbered. This walking tour — which stops at places like the Bethesda Terrace, Belvedere Castle and the Ramble — could be a good chance to explore the park before its welcoming lawns like Sheep Meadow say goodbye until the spring. History will also figure heavily into discussions; the park is more than 150 years old, after all. The tour meets at 11 a.m. at Central Park West between 66th and 67th Streets, Upper West Side, 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.Flatiron District Walking Tour (Sunday) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.AdvertisementHistory of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.‘Revolutionary New York: Celebrating American History’ (Monday) This tour is a close look New York’s Revolutionary War-era history hidden amid Manhattan’s cityscape. Highlights include the graves of the war’s key players, the site of George Washington’s inaugural address and Fraunces Tavern. At 1 p.m.; beginning at Broadway and Murray Street (at the gate of City Hall Park), Financial District, 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.Save the Village (Saturday, Sunday and Tuesday) Last year the Steven Kasher Gallery in Chelsea put on an exhibition with the photography of Fred W. McDarrah, who documented the changing scene of Greenwich Village since the 1960s. Now, the spirit of that show has taken the form of this walking tour, which includes stops at the places McDarrah captured on film: locales like Washington Square Park and the Stonewall Inn. At 10 a.m.; the tour meets at Christopher Park, Stonewall Place, at Seventh Avenue, West Village, savethevillagetours.com.Shuls of Grandeur (Monday) This three-hour walk on the Lower East Side stops at two of the neighborhood’s grand synagogues: Bialystoker and Beth Hamedrash Hagodol. Along the way, participants learn about the historic importance of places like the Henry Street Settlement and Seward Park. The last stop is the Museum at Eldridge Street, a landmark and tribute to immigrant faith. The tour meets at 10:45 a.m. in front of Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, 212-374-4100, nycjewishtours.org.A Taste of Jewish New York: Borough Park Tour (Sunday) Participants in this tour will get an insider’s look at the customs of the Hasidic residents of Borough Park, Brooklyn. Highlights include a stop at a lively shopping area and the chance to try a variety of traditional foods. Modest attire is requested — no shorts, low necklines or sleeveless clothing. The tour meets at 9:45 a.m. at Fort Hamilton Parkway and 44th Street; 718-339-2302, timelinetouring.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturday) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Friday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. A version of this schedule appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page C20 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.