AdvertisementSupported byWeekend MiserBy Jonathan WolfeLast spring New York City’s bird-watchers were atwitter after a pair of nesting bald eagles installed themselves on the South Shore of Staten Island — the first active bald eagle nest reported in the city in 100 years.The couple moved on (the eggs didn’t hatch), and the visit has been overshadowed by a more recent — and rare — spotting in Prospect Park in Brooklyn, said Tod Winston, communications manager and research assistant at New York City Audubon.“This year’s biggest bird celebrity is the painted bunting hanging around near the LeFrak skating rink,” Mr. Winston said. “Dozens of people have been hanging out watching this brightly colored bird from the Southern U.S.”For beginning bird-watchers, December is a great time to start; leafless trees make it easier to spot and observe birds. New York is also one of the best places to bird watch, Mr. Winston said, because it sits in the migration path of many species.On Saturday, the Brooklyn Bird Club is offering novice bird-watchers a free guided walk through Prospect Park from noon to 1 p.m. Participants may see small flycatchers or a black-and-white or orange-crowned warbler.Farther south at Jamaica Bay, a group led by the city’s Parks and Recreation Department could glimpse the two American white pelicans recently spotted in the area, along with snow geese and wintering ducks. (Saturday from 1 to 2:30 p.m.)Those searching for a snowy owl on an owl hike in Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx may be disappointed (it’s too warm), but there’s a chance of spotting a great horned owl or a screech owl. (Sunday from 1 to 2:30 p.m.)For serious birders, the national Christmas Bird Count, in which volunteers document bird species across the Americas, continues this weekend. The first count took place on Christmas Day in 1900 after the founder, Frank M. Chapman, an ornithologist and New Yorker, proposed counting area birds instead of the holiday tradition of hunting them.To participate in the free Christmas Bird Count in the Bronx, contact an organizer at hras.org/count/92ndbw.html.(Prospect Park: Audubon Center, near the Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue entrance, Brooklyn, 718-287-3400; Jamaica Bay: Bayswater Park, Bay 32nd Street and Beach Channel Drive, Queens, 718-352-1769; Pelham Bay Park: Orchard Beach Nature Center, Park Drive, Section 2 of the beach, the Bronx, 718-885-3466. All locations: nycgovparks.org.)From Thanksgiving to New Year’s Day, a deluge of visitors descends on New York City (humans, not birds). For peaceful holiday ice-skating, these out-of-the-way rinks should help you avoid the flocks.Trump Lasker Rink is surrounded by trees and overlooks the Harlem Meer. Unlike Wollman Rink, run by the Trump Organization, this other Central Park rink is not only cheaper and less crowded but it also has extended hours this weekend and late-night ice skating.(Friday from 11 a.m. to 11 p.m., Saturday from 10 a.m. to 11 p.m., Sunday from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Central Park, enter at 110th Street and Lenox Avenue, 917-492-3856, centralparknyc.org; adults, $7.50; children, $4; rentals, $6.50.)Riverbank State Park, overlooking the Hudson River, is a 28-acres in Upper Manhattan with one of the most Miser-friendly rinks in the city, as well as one of the least crowded.(Friday through Sunday from 6 to 9 p.m.; additional hours on Saturday and Sunday from 2 to 5 p.m.; 679 Riverside Drive, Manhattan; 212-694-3600, nysparks.com/parks/93; adults, $5; children, $3; rentals, $6.)LeFrak Center at Lakeside in Prospect Park is nestled in painted bunting territory on the southeast corner of the park. The two connected outdoor rinks here (covered and uncovered) have scenic views of Prospect Park Lake. The site is also home to hockey, curling and broom ball matches, but this weekend they are giving way to extended skating hours.(Friday from 10 a.m. to 8:30 p.m., Saturday from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m., Sunday from 10 a.m. to 6:30 p.m.; 171 East Drive, near Ocean Avenue, Brooklyn, 718-462-0010, lakesidebrooklyn.com; $9; rentals, $6.)Advertisement