By ALEC M. PRIESTERDEC. 26, 2015
On this Boxing Day, you may still be at the house of friends or family. You may not be able to figure out how to use their remote control. So stream new additions to Netflix and use the last days of the year to watch “Almost Famous” and “Zoolander” before they are taken down on New Year’s Day.BLACK MIRROR WHITE CHRISTMAS on Netflix. The technological dystopia depicted in “Black Mirror” gets a punchup from Jon Hamm in this 90-minute Christmas special. A device called the Z-Eye allows people to edit others out of their lives. Could that seemingly useful device have negative consequences? You bet! Expect twists. (Netflix)BROADCHURCH SEASON 2 on Netflix. The second season of this British series starring David Tennant and Olivia Colman as detectives in a sleepy seaside town in England is so much more than the first season. In particular, it’s more maudlin, more melodramatic, more salacious and more misdirecting. Is that brooding, shirtless man guilty of anything except loving his ex-girlfriend? The case from the previous season remains in trial, and Jocelyn Knight, portrayed by Charlotte Rampling, comes out of retirement for one last round of litigation. But who should the barrister be but one of Knight’s former students, with an ax to grind.PHOENIX (2015) on Netflix. In Christian Petzold’s German-language film, Nelly Lenz, portrayed by Nina Hoss, is a Jewish singer who emerges from a concentration camp after World War II with a reconstructed face, which gives her the freedom to take on a new identity. She searches Berlin for her husband to find out if he betrayed her to the Nazis. Writing in The New York Times, A. O. Scott described the film as “never less than intriguing, coolly intelligent and flawlessly paced.”ALMOST FAMOUS (2000) on Netflix. Cameron Crowe’s rock ’n’ roll road trip film won the Oscar for its screenplay. Patrick Fugit portrays William, a high school student possessed by the energetic spirit of the music critic Lester Bangs. Frances McDormand plays his mother, a frayed and overbearing woman who opposes even the milquetoast Simon & Garfunkel. William conveniently omits his age when speaking to Rolling Stone, and the publication sends him on tour to cover a band called Stillwater. On that tour, various dramas play out and William comes of age. Philip Seymour Hoffman, Jason Lee, Billy Crudup and Kate Hudson star, and the musician Mark Kozelek is the first to break into a rendition of Elton John’s song “Tiny Dancer” that turns a morose tour van jubilant.ZOOLANDER (2001) on Netflix. Ben Stiller stars in this comedy about a male supermodel named Derek Zoolander. Owen Wilson is Zoolander’s rival, Hansel, who usurps Zoolander as the world’s best male model. Will Ferrell is Mugatu, a villain typically given to paroxysms who hopes to use Zoolander to kill the prime minister of Malaysia and ensure the continued proliferation of child labor. Mr. Stiller directed the film and was one of its writers. Its impending removal from Netflix coincides with the appearance of trailers and increasing promotion for its sequel, “Zoolander 2,” due on Feb. 12. Writing in The Times, Elvis Mitchell called the movie “often unspeakably funny.”A version of this schedule appears in print on December 26, 2015, on Page C8 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Watch Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.