By NEIL GENZLINGERDEC. 25, 2015
The age of television abundance is also increasingly an age without geographic boundaries. Whereas TV viewers in the United States once were at the mercy of the importation whims of PBS, BBC America and a few other outlets, streaming services now make all sorts of worthy shows available.So here’s one enjoyable tour you can take this holiday season that samples shows made available recently from three countries, no passport required:England This month the streaming service Acorn began offering weekly installments of a three-part British mini-series called “The Trials of Jimmy Rose” that is well worth a look for the gruff, touching performance by Ray Winstone in the title role. He plays a 61-year-old man who as the series opens is being released from prison after a 12-year stay.Jimmy is a stranger in a strange land. The world has moved along rather rapidly while he has been cooling his heels. His grandson has to show him how to view photos on a cellphone. A bus driver stops him at the door when he tries to pay with coins; he has to have a swipe card.But those are only minor adjustments compared with the ones Jimmy needs to make with his family and his approach to life. He has been home only a short while when his wife (Amanda Redman) tells him flat-out that she doesn’t love him anymore, and other relatives are divided over whether to welcome him back into their lives.AdvertisementHe also finds that the blunt bluster that he used to get his way in the old days doesn’t work so well now that he’s an aging ex-con. By the finale, which Acorn will make available on Monday, the old Jimmy and the new reality collide as he tries to pry a granddaughter away from her drug-using lifestyle.AdvertisementNew Zealand Acorn has also recently begun offering Series 2 of “The Brokenwood Mysteries,” a droll New Zealand crime show with a catchy soundtrack and a perfect pairing at the top of the bill. Neill Rea plays Detective Inspector Mike Shepherd, a lover of country music whose investigative technique is grounded in following his instincts, and Fern Sutherland is his partner, Detective Kristen Sims, a nonlover of country music and by-the-book cop.In Series 1 (which Acorn added to its lineup in May), Mike was newly assigned to the small town of Brokenwood, and the two partners gradually learned to accommodate each other’s personalities. Now, in Series 2, they’re the perfect team, and so are the two actors playing them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Brokenwood” is an old-school show reminiscent of the “NBC Mystery Movie” series of the 1970s, which consisted of free-standing movie-length episodes of “Columbo,” “McCloud” and other detective franchises. Any given episode can be consumed on its own; the regular characters have some depth, but there’s not an over-reliance on complex back stories.For a small town, Brokenwood, like Jessica Fletcher’s Cabot Cove in Maine, has rather a lot of murders, and they can be somewhat odd. In the Series 2 premiere (Acorn has been providing a new episode each Monday in December), the coach of perhaps the worst rugby team in New Zealand is found dead, tied to a goal-post in an undignified manner. It’s Mr. Rea who gets to utter the memorable line, “If the underwear did belong to her, we need to find out the reason it ended up down Arnie’s throat.”Australia If you’re tired of watching reruns of “The Office” to get your fix of workplace idiocy, there is plenty of it hilariously served in “Dreamland,” which made its debut in 2014 in Australia under the title “Utopia” and joined Netflix this year.It chronicles the work, or lack of it, of the Nation Building Authority, which has something to do with infrastructure for major construction projects. What specifically this agency does is always a little unclear, because its employees excel at procrastinating, becoming distracted and putting carts before horses.In one episode, designing a new logo consumes a lot of staff attention. In another, considerable energy and every conceivable buzzword of the digital era are applied to the task of creating a zippier, more interactive website for the agency to highlight the great things it intends to do but has never gotten around to. Rob Sitch is terrific as Tony, the head of the operation, who actually wants to move ahead on important projects but is constantly foiled by his staff and assorted outsiders. But, like “The Office,” this is an ensemble comedy that works because of the interplay among well-defined characters. A favorite: Katie (Emma-Louise Wilson), Tony’s personal assistant, who makes ineptitude endearing.A version of this article appears in print on December 26, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Global TV Tour, via Streaming.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.