By GIA KOURLASDEC. 25, 2015
Jeroboam Bozeman, whose broad shoulders and velvety fluidness give him a singular, rugged grace, has been having a breakout season with Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater. So far, he has triumphed in lead roles in works by Robert Battle and Rennie Harris. His “Sinner Man” variation in the company’s signature “Revelations” was reckless, desperate, taut. Many Ailey dancers know how to sell a dance with sizzle, and that’s fine, but Mr. Bozeman’s steely performances are more of a slow burn, and that’s even better.Apparently, he needed time to grow into himself. Now it’s hard to fathom that Mr. Bozeman auditioned for the Ailey company five times before landing a spot. And that as a teenager, he was turned down for a summer program at the Ailey school.“Didn’t get in,” he said with a grin during an interview at City Center, where the company is in residence through Jan. 3.When Mr. Bozeman was finally offered a place in Ailey II, the group’s second company, he didn’t hesitate. Others in his position might have. He had already been a member of Philadanco, or the Philadelphia Dance Company, led by Joan Myers Brown, for about three years; from there, he moved to Seattle to join Donald Byrd’s Spectrum Dance Theater. In terms of pay and, to a degree, clout, Ailey II was a step down. At 22, Mr. Bozeman was older than most of the other dancers — in both age and in life experience.Advertisement“I remember telling Donald Byrd, and he was like, ‘What?’” Mr. Bozeman recalled. “ ‘You’re going to dance for Ailey II?’”AdvertisementBut for Mr. Bozeman, now 25, it was entry into an organization that he had always dreamed of being a part of. After just a year, in 2013, he joined the main company. His life to that point, though, had not been a dance fairy tale. He grew up in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, with his parents and six siblings, including a fraternal twin, whom he regarded as a protector. Mr. Bozeman described himself as a shy, timid boy who, by choice, was mute; he learned American Sign Language as a way to communicate.“Being in dance helped me feel comfortable with expressing myself,” he said. “I felt very odd growing up. I was always very isolated from everyone, and I enjoyed playing double Dutch and doing all the stuff that the girls liked to do.”Now loquacious and animated, Mr. Bozeman recounted his story. He began dancing around 10 with Ruth Sistaire at the Ronald Edmonds Learning Center and went on to train with Jamel Gaines, a choreographer who directs Creative Outlet Dance Theater of Brooklyn. At 14, he quit, but not out of choice. His family left Brooklyn for a homeless shelter in the Bronx, and he could no longer continue his dance classes. He was devastated. “My parents had a big van, and I decided to sleep in it,” Mr. Bozeman said. “I remember lying in the van with my dad, crying my eyes out.”When he was 16, his parents moved back to Brooklyn, where Mr. Bozeman joined Mr. Gaines’s group as an apprentice and, a year later, Philadanco, where, he said, Ms. Brown helped turn him into a man. “I was always complaining,” he said, laughing. At one point, he said, she sat him down and told him: “It’s not going to be easy. You’re going to be lifting girls for the rest of your life. You’re tall.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At 6-foot-2, Mr. Bozeman has a grounded stage presence that radiates both heat and inner calm. For Robert Battle, Ailey’s artistic director, Mr. Bozeman, the second-cast lead in his new “Awakening,” is refined but a little rough. “That can be tricky, because it doesn’t fit every choreographer’s aesthetic in terms of being correct,” he said. “There’s always just a little grit, and I tend to gravitate toward that. Everything is to the bone with him, without having to draw it out. It’s not forced.”Mr. Bozeman doesn’t project outward as much as draw you in. In Mr. Harris’s “Exodus,” Mr. Bozeman portrays a savior of sorts or, as the dancer put it, “a positive light.” He has known Mr. Harris, a hip-hop choreographer, since his Philadelphia days, but Mr. Bozeman’s natural affinity for that dance form — with its silky melding of weight and sharpness — dates to when he first started studying hip-hop and African dance in Brooklyn.“For me, that character is me finally embracing who I am,” he said. “I feel like I’m my own savior. I saved myself.”As a boy, Mr. Bozeman was tormented for liking dance and was once so brutally attacked by a group of boys that people jumped out of their car to help. “A lot of things that I have experienced and endured, I’ve kept to myself,” he said. “I don’t want people to see me and have pity: Oh, Brooklyn boy with such troubles; oh, living in a shelter, being attacked.”What compels a young boy to dance? In the case of Mr. Bozeman, it was an uncontrollable longing. “Dance has always been so healing for me, no matter how many hours I was putting in, no matter how many cuts and bruises, the rejections, you’re not as good as so and so,” he said. “To me, dance made sense. Dance is a language that I am trying to understand. But because it has given me so much insight, I feel as though when I dance, I’m sharing who I am. It’s not a facade. It’s me.”A version of this article appears in print on December 26, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Dance Gave Him the Voice He Lacked   .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.