By MATT WOLFDEC. 25, 2015
LONDON — “Cruelty,” purrs Janet McTeer, the scintillating epicenter of an unbalanced revival of “Les Liaisons Dangereuses” that opened last week at the Donmar Warehouse here. And with a single word, the ever-vibrant actress makes an aphrodisiac out of malevolence.So long as Ms. McTeer is center stage as the Marquise de Merteuil, one of a pair of sexually devious power players in  18th-century France, all is right with this portrait of the haut monde heedlessly gliding its way toward the guillotine.Imposing of stature and sinuous of speech, Ms. McTeer lends a flickering allure to Josie Rourke’s production of Christopher Hampton’s 1985 play that stormed Broadway two years later. A 1988 film won Mr. Hampton an Oscar for his screenplay, which like the play was adapted from the 1782 epistolary novel by Pierre Choderlos de Laclos.Conjoined with her onetime lover, the Vicomte de Valmont (Dominic West), in an erotic roundelay that leaves no one unscarred, Ms. McTeer’s sumptuously attired Merteuil banters in double entendres as she captures the neo-feminist street smarts of a woman for whom erotic command is a kind of power. When she brings proceedings to a head with the word “war,” there can be no doubt that this Merteuil knows a thing or two about potency in all its manifestations.AdvertisementThe play demands equal sparring partners, and there has yet to be a stage “Liaisons” whose leads have been as beautifully matched as Alan Rickman and Lindsay Duncan were in that first Royal Shakespeare Company outing. An ideal foil for Ms. McTeer might have been Ben Daniels, who received a Tony Award nomination for a performance of cutthroat animalism in the 2008 Broadway revival that the period costumes could barely contain.AdvertisementMr. West, a fine actor returning to the London stage for the first time since his star turn in Jez Butterworth’s “The River” three years ago, is here outclassed by Ms. McTeer, and not only because she communicates an inner voraciousness that seems capable of eating all comers for breakfast. As Valmont, Mr. West speaks after the intermission of acquiring a newfound mercilessness that has to be taken on faith, and some unsteadiness with his lines on opening night amplified a sense that he is still feeling his way into the role. The unforced physicality of his splendid work on TV in “The Affair” or “The Wire” would not go amiss here.The supporting cast is a comparably mixed bag. Replacing Michelle Dockery (Lady Mary from “Downton Abbey”) as Madame de Tourvel, Elaine Cassidy cuts so brittle an object of Valmont’s depredations — staged as a near-rape — that she does not seem to justify the wager surrounding her bodily surrender on which the plot depends. (Michelle Pfeiffer was nominated for an Oscar for the same role in the film.)And while there is nice work from Adjoa Andoh and Morfydd Clark as a mother and daughter who are awakened to the amoral reality of their milieu, Edward Holcroft reduces the young chevalier Danceny to a buffoonish pawn in his elders’ gamesmanship. An especially ungainly wig does not help in taking the character seriously.Still, Ms. McTeer exerts such a force field that a long evening (the better part of three hours) acquires its own fevered pulse, and Tom Scutt’s ravishing design shows a quasi-dilapidated manse gradually stripped of its possessions, leaving nothing but a bare stage on which even the numerous candles have been symbolically snuffed out.The production will be broadcast in cinemas by National Theater Live on Jan. 28, allowing an opportunity to savor Ms. McTeer’s casually feral cunning at close range. And when Merteuil speaks the mantra of the play’s final section that events are “beyond my control,” it is certain things are anything but.Another venture propelled forward by a woman can be found on the main stage of the Royal Court Theater, where Penelope Skinner’s fascinating if ungainly play “Linda” has given a last-minute replacement a chance to seize one of the meatiest assignments for an actress in years.The performer in question is Noma Dumezweni, a 2006 Olivier Award-winner for a London revival of the American classic “A Raisin in the Sun.” Born in Swaziland but a long time resident of Britain, Ms. Dumezweni is in the news at the moment for having been cast very cheeringly against expectation as Hermione in the coming double bill of Harry Potter-themed plays that are opening in London next summer: A black performer in a part that few had anticipated would go to an actress of color.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Dumezweni’s presence in the title role of “Linda,” was announced within mere weeks of opening night, when she stepped in to replace Kim Cattrall, of “Sex and the City,” who withdrew from the play for unspecified medical reasons.AdvertisementGiven her late appointment, Ms. Dumezweni on press night had parts of the script tucked away around the set to call on if necessary. The few times she did so — “bear with me,” she said without missing a beat before barreling forward — scarcely mattered, testifying to her commitment to the part of a careerist whose life unravels in a scenario of suggestively Shakespearean heft. Not for nothing is “King Lear” specifically and extensively referenced.In context, the least of the demands of Michael Longhurst’s savvy production is that Linda is required to cook a risotto in real time, a task that recalls David Hare’s “Skylight,” in which the heroine, Kyra, makes spaghetti for her onetime lover, Tom. The greater challenge is the free-fall toward which Ms. Skinner’s thematically far-reaching play takes Linda, a cosmetics industry executive, wife and mother who is forced into a reckoning on virtually every front that leaves her storm-tossed — think Lear on the heath — and poised on the abyss. What the character decides to do from there is deliberately left open ended in a conclusion that instead takes us back in time.Ms. Skinner is writing about the condition of women across the generations, as Linda is displaced at work by a younger female colleague — Amy Beth Hayes coos her way through the part — just as her daughter Alice (the excellent Karla Crome) has taken to wearing a onesie as a reaction to a onetime   sexting misstep that haunts her still.The men in her orbit are a feckless husband (Dominic Mafham), his face forever buried in his laptop, and a heavy-handed boss (Ian Redford) whose dismissive attitude adds to the growing feeling that Ms. Skinner is loading the dice against her heroine. Won’t anyone give Linda a break?The action unfolds on a sleek, multi-tiered playing space designed by Es Devlin that is at once chicly antiseptic as well as a refuge of sorts for Linda against a marauding world. Ms. Dumezweni navigates its levels with the same mighty aplomb she brings to the part: suddenly Harry Potter onstage looks a whole lot more interesting.Les Liaisons Dangereuses. Directed by Josie Rourke.Donmar Warehouse.Through   Feb. 13.Linda.  Directed by Michael Longhurst. Royal Court Jerwood Theater Downstairs. Through Jan. 9.A version of this review appears in print on December 26, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.