By NATE CHINENDEC. 18, 2015
A bright blue sky stretched over Fort Adams State Park in Rhode Island on the afternoon this summer that I spoke with Jon Batiste. He and his band, Stay Human, had just performed at the Newport Jazz Festival, leaving several thousand people in a state of fizzy elation. Mr. Batiste, an irrepressible force on piano, melodica and vocals, was five weeks away from his new gig as bandleader for “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert,” where his brand of ecstatic stagecraft now reaches an average of 3.1 million people a night.Walking to our backstage interview, he happened to cross paths with another pianist, Joey Alexander, a tousle-headed 12-year-old several months into the ascendant phase of his celebrity turn as a jazz prodigy; for much of the festival he had been closely trailed by a camera crew from “60 Minutes.”Here were two of the breakout jazz stars of this year, each effectively in the process of becoming an ambassador for the music. Had I looked up Billboard’s Jazz Albums chart for that week, I would have found two other examples lurking among the singers and smoothies in the Top 10: the tenor saxophonist Kamasi Washington and the pianist Robert Glasper, each with a stylish, vibrant and self-defining release.All of these artists contributed to a great year for jazz, and a great year for jazz in the popular conversation, though those aren’t the same things. Jazz fans — a marginalized, long-suffering constituency — tend to regard any runaway success story with a hopeful heart and a critical eye. And in surveying the overachieving crossover class of 2015, a congratulatory cheer from the outside can be hard to disentangle from a larger insecurity on the inside, a nagging feeling in the jazz world that each of these artists is being hailed as an exception that proves the rule.AdvertisementWhat’s your problem with jazz, anyway? Maybe you’re among those who complain that it has become too effete or inward-seeking. Take heart, then, in the stentorian cry of Mr. Washington’s debut album, “The Epic” (Brainfeeder), a volcanic burst of astral soul-jazz that sprawls heroically across three discs.AdvertisementMaybe you think most jazz today is too cerebral and abstruse. Mr. Batiste, frolicking across the “Late Show” stage and high-kicking with Mr. Colbert, is your bolt of reassurance.Or maybe you decry the academicization of jazz, the tyranny of institutional training. Well, Joey Alexander developed his gifts in Indonesia, far from any jazz conservatory. (And again, he only recently reached the age of a middle schooler.)The notion that any of these musicians might embody a corrective for jazz has little to do with their intentions. Mr. Batiste eschews most genre talk in favor of his own term, “social music,” but he tactfully disarmed my suggestion that he meant it as a form of critique. Mr. Washington, whose rumbling emergence out of a energetic but localized Los Angeles scene was one of the year’s best music stories, has been diplomatic about the mantle bestowed on him (again and again) in the press, as a chosen one who might restore jazz to relevance.Mr. Glasper, who like Mr. Washington had an active hand in this year’s most admired album, at least by critical consensus — “To Pimp a Butterfly,” an astonishing display of diligence and conscience by the rapper Kendrick Lamar — goes farther than most in his criticism of jazz culture. On a recent episode of the podcast “The New Yorker Radio Hour,” Mr. Glasper talked about how jazz had grown complacent and stilted, instantly agreeing with a suggestion by David Remnick, The New Yorker’s editor in chief, that it had become “a museum of itself.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On one level, in a year that brought us centennial tributes to Billie Holiday, Billy Strayhorn and Frank Sinatra, that’s a fair point. Some of the more popular jazz releases of 2015 featured reclaimed historical material by Erroll Garner or Miles Davis. And then there was “Miles Ahead,” a long-anticipated Davis biopic starring its director, Don Cheadle; it was the closing night selection of the New York Film Festival, and will open in theaters next spring.Mr. Glasper is aware of “Miles Ahead”; he was its musical director. Beyond that, his gripe about a suffocatingly nostalgic jazz culture feels a bit off-key this year. Mr. Washington and his band, the Next Step, proved a runaway phenomenon — especially on tour, ablaze in the present despite the music’s echoes of jazzdom past.Elsewhere there was engaging new music by artists as varied as Maria Schneider, Makaya McCraven, Vijay Iyer, Christian Scott and Tomeka Reid. And even the jazz repertory often raced with a modern pulse: “Bird Calls” (Act), a stoutly acclaimed album by the alto saxophonist Rudresh Mahanthappa, paid tribute to Charlie Parker without a hint of bebop retrenchment.Youthful jazz historicism will always be an irresistible media hook: look no further than a recent spread in Vanity Fair — “These Millennials Are Shaking Up the Jazz World,” shouted the headline, as if through a vintage bullhorn — featuring a spruce array of talent. But while some of those musicians are unabashed throwbacks, others, like the tenor saxophonist Melissa Aldana and the pianist Gerald Clayton, defy any retro agenda. (Mr. Glasper would have been among them, not so long ago.)The robustness of the field is one reason that it’s fine to harbor some reservations about “The Epic,” or Mr. Batiste’s buoyant brand of slick or even young Joey’s indomitable stardom — even if that critical ambivalence can make a person feel like the ungrateful recipient of a gift. That’s what I tell myself, anyway. One happy outcome of this music’s moment in the spotlight would be that we stop instinctively asking whether something is good for jazz, and instead pose the simple question: “Is it good?”A version of this article appears in print on December 26, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Jazz 2015: Blending Old Sounds and New.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.