By LAUREL GRAEBEROCT. 9, 2015
Onassis Cultural Center NY Festival Family DayThis weekend the Onassis Cultural Center NY will show a lot of love to someone who’s famous for loving only himself: Narcissus.According to Greek mythology, this gorgeous youth was so enamored of his reflection in a pond that he wasted away while gazing at it. The original narcissist, he may seem an unlikely inspiration for a festival — Narcissus Now: The Myth Reimagined, which began on Thursday — but the newly renovated center in Midtown Manhattan is embracing his story as it celebrates its own new look.“Our lives today focus on social media and the selfie,” said Tamar MacKay, co-curator of the Festival Family Day on Sunday. The festival is “using the myth as a metaphor.” At the same time, the Onassis center, devoted to Hellenic culture, is doing what Narcissus didn’t care to: examining the relationship between the self and the wider world.“What was very exciting about looking at the myth for the Family Day is that there’s so much that can relate to kids,” Ms. MacKay said. Tiny visitors can join Maria Hanley for “Mirror Dance,” a movement workshop for ages 3 through 5 in which they’ll frolic to their reflections. Children 5 and over can enjoy “Tell It Again,” an interactive exploration of the myth led by Efi Latifi, and “Narcissus and Echo,” a workshop in which they’ll collaborate with the musician Benjamin Weiner to give the story a digital soundscape. (Echo, a nymph, futilely loved Narcissus.)AdvertisementThe day even connects Narcissus to science. In “Narcissus & Space,” the filmmakers Sharon Shattuck and Ian Cheney will show their animated short “Moon Mirrors,” above, which investigates a project that began with the Apollo moon landings: the placement of special mirror arrays, called retroreflectors, on the moon’s surface. When scientists aim lasers at the mirrors, they reflect the light precisely, providing invaluable data on the moon’s position. Jeffrey Hoffman, an M.I.T. professor and former NASA astronaut, will answer children’s questions.Advertisement“We’ll have a demonstration with a retroreflector, and kids will act as the assistants,” Ms. MacKay said.Sunday will feature drop-in activities, too, including creating a Greek mythology comic; using recycled materials to build a “Reflectopolis,” or shining city; and making a paper flower (the narcissus, of course).The free festival is also a chance to reflect on the myth’s positive side. As Ms. MacKay put it, “Narcissus is able to blossom into this beautiful flower that represents spring and a new beginning.”(From 9 a.m. to 3 p.m., Olympic Tower, 645 Fifth Avenue, at 51st Street. Schedule: onassisfestivalny.org.)For Children‘Alice in Wonderland’ (Saturday and Sunday) Literally Alive Theater, which adapts books into children’s productions, has followed the White Rabbit to Greenwich Village, where it has revived this musical — using video projections and over 30 instruments — based on Alice’s adventures. Written by Michael Sgouros and Brenda Bell, the show is preceded by a workshop in which young theatergoers learn about Lewis Carroll’s work and make a story-related craft to take home. (Through Nov. 8.) Saturday at 11 a.m. and 3 p.m.; Sunday at 11 a.m.; workshop one hour before the performance. Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, 212-352-3101, literallyalive.com.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Continuing) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing Middle Eastern artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (around 1900) where young archaeologists can dress in costume and portray early-20th-century immigrants to Palestine. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Brooklyn Sewers: What’s Up Down There?’ (Through May 29) When it comes to subterranean infrastructure projects, New York City’s subway system seems to get all the attention. But a group of teenage curators at the Brooklyn Historical Society would like to introduce you to another underground marvel: Brooklyn’s sewer system, one of the city’s oldest and most extensive infrastructure projects. This exhibition explores engineering conundrums and courtroom battles and tells the story of the sewer system through photographs, drawings and maps. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Advertisement‘Connected Worlds’ (continuing) Human choices and actions have an impact on the world’s ecosystems, but people usually can’t see the effects as they happen. That isn’t true in this new permanent exhibition in the renovated Great Hall of the New York Hall of Science. Consisting of huge screens (one is 38 feet tall), the show depicts six interconnected environments with a shared water supply. With the help of technology that responds to gestures, “Connected Worlds” allows children to use simple motions to plant, harvest, cut trees, create clouds and make other changes in the projected landscapes — and see how the native flora and fauna fare. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.Family Programs at the Museum of the City of New York (Saturday through Monday) Workshops at the museum, for ages 6 through 12, usually combine looking, learning and making. On Saturday “Print Power” will encourage young participants to make a statement. After drawing inspiration from the museum shows “Activist New York” and “Everything Is Design: The Work of Paul Rand,” they’ll create graphic posters to express their own ideas. On Sunday “Finger Knitting Fun” will include instruction in this craft and exposure to the ways New Yorkers have used it. (Yarn will be provided.) And Columbus Day will be all about collage, as young visitors learn about the crops the Lenape Indians harvested here centuries ago and then make their own mosaics, using materials like corn. From 11 a.m. to 2 p.m., 1220 Fifth Avenue, at 103rd Street, 212-534-1972, mcny.org.‘Fashion Academy, the Musical’ (Saturday through Monday) Vital Theater Company’s latest show for children 7 and older focuses on a middle-schooler, MacKenzie Williams, known as Mickey. When her colorful and completely original style doesn’t go over well at her new school, Fashion Academy of Brooklyn, she decides to make over not only her wardrobe, but also herself. Based on the book “Fashion Academy,” by the mother-daughter team of Sheryl Berk and Carrie Berk, this adaptation, by the elder Ms. Berk and Sabrina Chap, asks whether Mickey’s new persona, Kenzie, is really worth the sacrifice. (Through Oct. 31.) At 3:30 p.m., Marjorie S. Deane Little Theater, 10 West 64th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Flight School, the Musical’ (Saturday through Monday) If you want to fly, and you’re a bird, you should be all set, right? Well, not if you happen to be a penguin. That’s the challenge confronting the little hero of this new musical from Vital Theater Company, adapted from “Flight School,” a picture book by Lita Judge. With a script by Cara Lustik, lyrics by Joshua H. Cohen and a score by David Mallamud, the show, recommended for ages 2 through 7, chronicles Penguin’s determination to remove the technical obstacles between him and the sky. (Through Oct. 31.) At 1 p.m., Marjorie S. Deane Little Theater, 10 West 64th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Cooking With Frida’ (Through Nov. 1) The New York Botanical Garden is honoring the Mexican artist Frida Kahlo (1907-1954) in its exhibition “Frida Kahlo: Art, Garden, Life,” and it offers programs to introduce its youngest visitors to this famous Latina. In this one, at the Ruth Rea Howell Family Garden, children can explore the raw ingredients of Mexican cuisine and enjoy cooking demonstrations inspired by Kahlo’s entertaining. This holiday weekend, Saturday through Monday, the Howell garden will also offer “Dig! Plant! Grow!,” a program from 1:30 to 5:30 p.m. that will focus on the crops known as “the three sisters”: corn, beans and squash. Children will learn about them and make corn husk dolls to take home. “Cooking With Frida” workshops are on Wednesdays, Saturdays and Sundays at 2 and 4 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.‘Frolic!’ at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan (Through Dec. 31) You’re never too young to rock — and this space proves it. A new pop-up installation at the museum, “Frolic!” uses rock music and a themed décor to stimulate sensory play and learning in visitors ages 5 and under. In addition to a stage, a pretend ticket booth and ’70s-style props — including a Volkswagen mini-van to climb into — the 1,500-square-foot area has programs of workshops and live performances to help little ones get into the groove. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Fridays at 7 p.m.; Saturdays at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sundays at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.General Mischief Dance Theater: ‘Up and Away — Dances for All Hours’ (Sunday) What child could resist a company with a name like this? General Mischief aims to lure all generations with dance that incorporates games, playfulness and humor. This weekend it presents the world premiere of ‘Up and Away,’ which includes a collaboration with the actor and artist Kevin Reese, who has designed a mobile that the company will assemble and raise overhead during the performance. Among the program’s other pieces is “Suite Shel,” a series of dances inspired by Shel Silverstein’s poetry. At 1 and 6 p.m., Goldman-Sonnenfeldt Family Auditorium, JCC in Manhattan, 334 Amsterdam Avenue, at 76th Street, 212-714-4694, brownpapertickets.com.Advertisement‘Gone Batty!’ Live Bat Encounter (Saturday through Monday) Bats may be malevolent symbols in fiction, but they’re strictly benevolent in real-world ecosystems, something the New York Botanical Garden will demonstrate in this program. Children can see a variety of species close-up, including the endangered Rodrigues bat and the magnificent Malayan flying fox, and learn about the key role these creatures play in pollination, particularly in Mexico. At 1 and 3 p.m., Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Hansel and Gretel’s Halloween Adventure’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) This pair already know how to deal with a witch, and they have encounters with many more fantastical creatures in this puppet musical at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater. Geared to ages 3 through 9 (and appropriately tame), the show is a sequel to the theater’s original “Hansel and Gretel,” introduces characters like mermaids, cute monsters, charming vampires and valiant pirates. (Through Oct. 31.) Weekdays, except Mondays, at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an extra performance on Wednesdays (and on Halloween) at 2:30 p.m.; weekends at 1 p.m. (This Sunday’s show is sold out.) At 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts. Reservations required.‘The Hunger Games: The Exhibition’ (Through Jan. 3) What enterprising 12- or 13-year-old wouldn’t like to foment a little rebellion? Such a visitor can do so vicariously at this attraction at Discovery Times Square, stepping into the role of Katniss Everdeen, the teenage heroine of “The Hunger Games” and the ultimate leader of the resistance against her nation’s totalitarian government. Based on the Lionsgate film adaptations of Suzanne Collins’s novels, the show includes costumes and artifacts from the movies, as well as re-creations of Katniss’s journey and interactive, role-playing elements like a gamesmaker’s table and a chance to learn and practice stunt choreography. 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com, thehungergamesexhibition.com.‘If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home’ (Through Jan. 17) Maps present facts, but they can also engage the imagination. This new exhibition at the Children’s Museum of the Arts explores the intersection of cartography and art, showing work that expands upon, redefines or simply refers to maps. Among the eight artists represented are Matthew Cusik, who makes collages from map fragments; Joyce Kosloff, who layers images and textured paint onto maps; Loren Munk, who adds plaques of color and information to street maps; and Nikki Rosato, who subtracts from maps, cutting away all but roads and rivers. In the museum’s Cynthia C. Wainwright Gallery, 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.‘Jean-Michel Cousteau’s Secret Ocean’ (Friday through Thursday) Ever encounter a goby or a blenny? How about a Christmas tree worm? These small marine species, often unnoticed and uncelebrated, are among the stars of this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History. Filmed by Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau, and Holly Lohuis, a marine biologist, the film captures 30 species that are among the tiniest to inhabit the seas. (Through Jan. 10.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘LARD: Life’s a Real Dream’ (Saturday) This show about LARD, the concept, has nothing to do with lard, the substance. An acronym for “Life’s a Real Dream,” “LARD” is the title of a rollicking musical production starring Lard Dog, who also happens not to be a dog. The alter ego of the multimedia artist Steven Erdman, Lard is a gregarious out-of-this-world character who has flown in from the planet Belopio on a giant pretzel. He and his Band of Shy perform this hourlong entertainment, which includes cartoon graphics and a pretzel toss. (Through Jan. 2.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, houseoflard.com.Alison Faith Levy and Her Big Time Tot Rock Band (Sunday) This San Francisco singer has gone from children’s music to adult music and back again. A former member of the kids’ pop group the Sippy Cups, she detoured into the grown-up duo McCabe & Mrs. Miller before returning to her young fans with the albums “World of Wonder” and “The Start of Things.” This concert, for ages 3 through 8, is her New York City debut with her new band. At 11:30 a.m., the Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton, who recently stepped into the roles, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.Music in Motion (Saturday) That motion is the gentle rocking of a boat for this series of family neighborhood concerts presented by Bargemusic, the floating barge at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge. As always, the material — announced just before the performance — is chamber music, but these programs differ in important ways from the regular Bargemusic fare: With unreserved seating, they last only an hour, include a post-show question-and-answer session with the musicians and are free. (Through Nov. 28.) At 4 p.m. (doors open at 3:45), Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org.Advertisement‘NYC & Me: A Little Bite of the Big Apple’ (Through Jan. 18) There’s one place where little citizens can safely run loose on the streets of New York: the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. This new interactive 3,000-square-foot gallery is a city microcosm for small visitors, allowing them to pretend to be taxi drivers, bus drivers, construction workers, street performers and, most impressively, the mayor. Activities include directing traffic, erecting a skyscraper, “ice skating” in their socks and investigating urban tales on the steps of the New York Public Library. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘One Wild Ride’ This would seem to be an apt title, since one of the stories in this hourlong show is about a subway car with extraordinary powers. But an even wilder ride may be provided by the young audience members themselves, who will be involved, along with the adult cast, in an adventure of their own choosing. The presenting company, BKBXKids!, is a division of Broken Box Mime Theater, and will do this production with a talking M.C. After each performance, the cast will also give a children’s workshop in mime after each show. (Through Oct. 24.) Saturdays at 2 p.m., Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas, at Dominick Street, South Village, 866-811-4111, brokenboxmime.com.¡Pueblo Harlem! Hispanic Heritage Celebration (Saturday) The heritage honored here is one that can be heard loud and clear: jazz. A free daylong festival devoted to family, community and the arts, this event will feature performances by young people helping to get other young people into the groove — the Fat Afro Latin Jazz Cats — as well as a workshop in Brazilian rhythms led by the Griot Youth Ensemble. Classes in Afro-Cuban folkloric dance are on the menu, too. From 11 a.m. to 6:30 p.m., Harlem School of the Arts, 645 St. Nicholas Avenue, near 141st Street, Hamilton Heights, afrolatinjazz.org.‘Robin Hood’ (Saturday and Sunday) Merry Men will make for merry children in this production, which has opened the season at the New Victory Theater. Written by Greg Banks and performed by Seattle Children’s Theater, this staging incorporates a lot of swordplay and fast costume changes, as four actors portray all the roles in the Robin Hood legend. Running about an hour and 40 minutes (with one intermission) and geared to theatergoers 7 and older, the show, closing this weekend, focuses on the many ways Robin and his fellows — and Maid Marian — consistently outsmart the evil prince and the Sheriff of Nottingham, all in the name of helping the poor. Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 5 p.m.; 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.‘Skeletons ... A Day of the Dead Bedtime Story’ (Saturday) According to Mexican tradition, the spirits of deceased loved ones are revived on the Day of the Dead, a holiday that is joyous rather than ghoulish. In this production from Teatro Sea, the Latino children’s theater, Jimmy is in mourning for his grandfather, who actually comes back to life for one night. Written by Richard Marino, the company’s managing director, “Skeletons” portrays the comical adventures that result when Grandpa and other departed relatives try to help Jimmy get on with his life. (Through Nov. 1.) At 3 p.m., Los Kabayitos Puppet and Children’s Theater, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org.‘Sleepy Hollow’ (Friday through Sunday) Ichabod Crane and the Headless Horseman are off and riding again in this musical revival from Be Bold! Productions. Inspired by Washington Irving’s “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow” and recommended for theatergoers older than 9, this show, by Michael Sgouros and Brenda Bell, focuses on the love triangle and the mystery inherent in Irving’s tale. It also explores a darkness beyond the story’s fearsome woods: that of the human heart. Fridays and Saturdays at 7 p.m. (no show on Oct. 31); Sundays at 2 p.m.; Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111, hollowthemusical.com.Sunday Story Time in Mr. Morgan’s Library (Sunday) That Mr. Morgan is none other than Pierpont (1837-1913), whose library is now a cozy museum. Children ages 3 through 6 are invited there on Sundays to hear about Alice’s amazing trip to Wonderland and what she found there. The program relates to the museum’s show “Alice: 150 Years of Wonderland,” which includes the book’s original manuscript, along with illustrations and other vintage objects that young visitors can see in a brief visit after the story. (Through Oct. 11.) From 3 to 4 p.m., 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.‘A Taste of Magic’ (Friday and Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various Manhattan restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind-reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. (Through Nov. 24.) Friday at 8 p.m., Ben & Jack’s Steakhouse, 225 Fifth Avenue, between 28th and 29th Streets. Saturday at 6:30 p.m., Docks Oyster Bar & Seafood Grill, 633 Third Avenue, at 40th Street. Information and registration: atasteofmagicnyc.com.Advertisement‘The Velveteen Rabbit’ (Saturday and Sunday) There’s a long fictional tradition of toys wanting, or trying, to become real, but few such tales are more poignant than Margery Williams Bianco’s story “The Velveteen Rabbit,” in which a beloved stuffed animal undergoes a magical transformation. Atlantic for Kids, the children’s theater division of the Atlantic Theater Company, is the latest troupe to adapt the book for the stage. This musical version, by Cormac Bluestone and Anya Saffir, is directed toward children 3 to 9 and features many young alumni of the Atlantic Acting School. (Through Nov. 1.) Saturdays and Sundays at 10:30 a.m., Linda Gross Theater, 336 West 20th Street, Chelsea, 866-811-4111, atlantictheater.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Continuing) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Wings Over Wave Hill Weekend (Saturday through Monday) Wave Hill, the Bronx garden, is inviting families to spend the Columbus Day Weekend with some proud residents who inhabited these shores long before Christopher Columbus set foot on them. They are raptors, or birds of prey, which visitors will be able to see up-close at 1 p.m. on Monday, when Brian Bradley, of the organization Skyhunters in Flight, will do a falconry demonstration. Recommended for children 8 and older, the program will show off the prowess of hawks, owls and falcons. On both Saturday and Sunday, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., children can also take part in the garden’s drop-in family art project, “Sailing the Sky,” first watching for migratory hawks as the birds journey above the Hudson River and then making either a hawk glider or a feathery windsock. In addition, the garden will offer two bird-watching walks: At 8 a.m. on Saturday and at 9:30 a.m. on Sunday, children 10 and older are invited to accompany adults on tours through the garden and woodlands led by the naturalist and bird expert Gabriel Willow. (Registration is required for the Saturday walk and recommended for the Sunday one.) Also on Sunday, at 1 p.m., the naturalist Gabriel Willow will lead a family nature walk for ages 6 and older, starting at the Perkins Visitor Center. West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx, 718-549-3200, wavehill.org.A version of this schedule appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page C20 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.