LOS ANGELES – Seven major movies braved wide or limited releases against “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” over the Christmas weekend, and all but one – “Point Break” – found initial success, even if several prestige films still have a lot to prove.As expected, “The Force Awakens” (Walt Disney Studios) was a massive No. 1 at North American theaters, taking in about $153.5 million in its second weekend, for a new domestic total of $544.6 million and a global tally of more than $1 billion.But other studios also had reason to celebrate, albeit on a more modest scale. After an uneven year, Paramount successfully introduced the middle-brow comedy “Daddy’s Home” to $38.8 million in domestic ticket sales, or roughly 50 percent more than some box office analysts had expected. Paramount and a partner, Red Granite, spent $50 million to make the film, which paired Will Ferrell and Mark Wahlberg.Third place went to David O. Russell’s “Joy” (20th Century Fox), which collected $17.5 million, according to Rentrak, a box office data service. “Joy,” starring Jennifer Lawrence as a down-on-her-luck mother turned home shopping titan, slightly over-performed expectations; analysts had expected opening-weekend sales of about $15 million. “Joy” cost $60 million to make after accounting for tax incentives.A holdover, the raunchy comedy “Sisters” (Universal Pictures), had a sturdier-than-expected second weekend, taking in $13.9 million, for a new total of $37.1 million. “Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Road Chip” (Fox) rounded out the top five, with $12.7 million in ticket sales, for a two-week total of $39.4 million.Arriving in sixth place was “Concussion” (Sony Pictures). Starring Will Smith as a Nigerian doctor who battles the National Football League, “Concussion” managed about $11 million in ticket sales, an O.K. debut for a serious drama that cost Sony, Village Roadshow and other partners just $35 million to make. Still, “Concussion” fell far behind other serious efforts by Mr. Smith, whose star power has been fading; “Ali” arrived to $19.7 million in December 2001, after accounting for inflation.Eating into “Concussion,” particularly among male moviegoers, was likely “The Big Short” (Paramount), which came up with $10.5 million in ticket sales, for a new total of $16 million since arriving in narrow release on Dec. 11. Focused on a complicated subject – the American housing bubble of the mid 2000s – “The Big Short” cost a modest $28 million to make.And then there was “Point Break,” a $105 million remake that faced a savage public response from the moment its first trailer arrived in May. Financed by Alcon Entertainment and distributed by a down-on-its-luck Warner Bros., “Point Break” took in only $10.2 million. Dismal reviews will likely limit its draw in the coming weeks.Two films hoping for attention from Oscar voters — both Westerns, albeit sharply different in tone and budget — arrived in limited release. “The Hateful Eight,” directed by Quentin Tarantino and distributed by the Weinstein Company, collected $4.5 million from 100 theaters, where it played in a 70 mm format, with some exhibitors reporting sellouts. “The Hateful Eight” cost at least $44 million to make.Alejandro G. Inarritu’s wildly over-budget “The Revenant,” distributed by Fox and financed by New Regency — for at least $135 million — arrived in four theaters, where it took in $471,000, making it one of the best limited openings of the year. But it’s still anyone’s guess how Mr. Inarritu’s violent and gory period film will ultimately be received; “Steve Jobs” flopped in wide release.