By ALEC M. PRIESTERDEC. 27, 2015
Should old television be forgot and never brought to mind? Not in what our critic James Poniewozik calls, if not the best, “the most TV year ever.” Enjoy the lull before New Year’s Eve by watching a few of our critics’ year-end top television picks. MASTER OF NONE on Netflix. A hit this year, Aziz Ansari’s series features Mr. Ansari as Dev, an aspiring actor in the liminal space between his fun 20s and the impending responsibilities of his 30s and beyond. The show deals with the dearth of diversity in film and television and the immigrant experience in America. Scenes are frequently and conspicuously set in of-the-moment New York City restaurants. Writing in The New York Times, James Poniewozik said the show has “a frankness about identity and a curiosity about other walks of life — all packaged in a hilarious, fresh millennial rom-com.” (Image: Mr. Ansari, center.)THE LEFTOVERS on HBO Go. Two percent of the Earth’s population vanishes, and those remaining have to deal with the psychological and behavioral fallout. The recently concluded second season takes place in a small Texas town from which nobody vanished. “That this lovely, melancholy exploration of loss was able to find a place on secular TV, hone its technique and return stronger, is, itself, a minor miracle,” James Poniewozik wrote in The Times. (Image: Regina King and Kevin Carroll.)THE JINX on HBO Go. This true-crime documentary mini-series concerns the real estate heir Robert A. Durst, who was connected to three deaths but never convicted of one. “The twists were gobsmacking,” James Poniewozik wrote in The Times, and the “storytelling was haunting, dogged yet empathetic.” “A documentary mini-series gave us the best central character,” Mike Hale wrote in The Times, “and the most gripping ending of the year.” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times, “It’s one thing to take an outsider’s view of a high-profile criminal case; it’s quite another to get inside the head of the suspect.” (Image: a poster of Mr. Durst’s first wife.)LOUIE on iTunes. The fifth season of the comedian Louis C.K.’s FX sitcom. “In a sense, the series, and particularly the new season, is about a well-meaning (if gloomy and slightly misogynistic) Everyman’s journeys among the aliens — the crazy cop, the angry lesbian at the school potluck, the young Asian woman who pre-emptively shames him for being a creepy old man, the girlfriend who won’t love him as much as he loves her,” Mike Hale wrote in The Times. “His moments of victory, and redemption, come when he’s alone, onstage, working a funny voice and a dumb joke. The whole room laughs, and Pam, sitting in the audience, looks around in surprise.”TRANSPARENT on Amazon Prime. The Pfefferman family continues to evolve in the second season of Jill Soloway’s comedic drama, which James Poniewozik described in The Times as more expansive than the first season, “but every bit as gorgeous, gloriously messy and full of fractious, argumentative love.” (Image: Judith Light and Jeffrey Tambor.)A version of this schedule appears in print on December 27, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Watch Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.