By BRUCE WEBERDEC. 26, 2015
Lewis M. Dabney, a literary scholar whose doctoral dissertation at Columbia steered his path to becoming perhaps the pre-eminent expert on the life and work of Edmund Wilson, died on Tuesday at his home in Easton, Md. He was 83.The cause was a brain tumor, said his daughter, Elizabeth Dabney Hochman.Professor Dabney, who taught for more than three decades at the University of Wyoming, completed his exhaustively researched biography, “Edmund Wilson: A Life in Literature,” in 2005. By then he had been immersed in Wilsoniana for more than 40 years.For half a century Wilson was, in the minds of many, the most serious and penetrating cultural commentator in America, and he was indisputably one of the 20th century’s most prolific and versatile men of letters.In his 20s, Wilson was among the first critics to recognize the importance of Joyce’s “Ulysses,” Eliot’s “The Waste Land” and what he called Hemingway’s “distinctively American development in prose.” At his death at 77 in 1972, his prodigious output included books of essays and reported pieces — many of which originally appeared in Vanity Fair, The Dial, The New Republic and The New Yorker — on literature, political philosophy, cultural history and travel, as well as fiction, poetry, plays and, perhaps most notably, voluminous letters and journals containing social observations, self-analyses, forceful literary judgments, descriptions of cultural movements and trends, and revealing biographical portraits.AdvertisementWilson was known for his appetites. Married four times, most turbulently to the writer Mary McCarthy, he had numerous affairs (and wrote about them), including one with the poet Edna St. Vincent Millay, to whom he surrendered his virginity.And he was a world-class tippler: As Professor Dabney wrote in the introduction to his biography, though alcohol helped ruin his marriages, “Wilson was the only well-known literary alcoholic of his generation whose work was not compromised by his drinking.”In 1983 Professor Dabney edited “The Portable Edmund Wilson,” a more than 600-page selection of Wilson’s writing that, in a later edition, became “The Edmund Wilson Reader.” It included an introduction by Professor Dabney that the eminent critic and biographer R. W. B. Lewis called “the most cogent overview of Wilson’s career yet written.”AdvertisementIn the early 1990s, Professor Dabney succeeded Leon Edel as the editor of Wilson’s journals. He produced the final volume, “The Sixties,” which, perhaps more than its predecessors, impressed its readers with Wilson’s omnivorous curiosity. Indeed, as the critic Frank Kermode wrote of the volume, “It is hard to avoid epithets like ‘voracious.’ ”In his biography, Professor Dabney offered a succinct assessment of his lifelong subject.“His writing reveals a figure full of contradictions,” he wrote: “A rationalist and classicist who was also a restless romantic, questing for more books and writers to investigate, ever more scenes in which to re-create himself; an empiricist who kept coming back to questions of belief and faith; a man of ideas for whom abstractions lacked the validity of individual figures and particular scenes; someone self-absorbed in relation to his family, vulnerable to romantic entanglements, endlessly generous with literary friends.”He concluded: “Restless and tireless, doggedly thinking through subjects, expanding and recycling his work in some 32 volumes that still entertain, instruct and inspire, this determined man gave to books and writing their full weight in the human struggle.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lewis Meriwether Dabney III was born in Dallas on Feb. 28, 1932. At a young age, he moved first to Washington and then to Manhattan with his parents, Lewis Dabney Jr., a lawyer, and the former Crystal Ray Ross.His mother was reared in a small Texas town but moved to New York after graduating from the University of Texas, earned an M.A. in English and comparative literature from Columbia in 1921 and then went to Europe, where she kept company with Gertrude Stein, F. Scott Fitzgerald and Hemingway and earned a Ph.D. from the University of Strasbourg.Not long before his death, Professor Dabney completed a book about his mother and her lifelong friendship with the novelist John Dos Passos, to whom she was briefly engaged.Professor Dabney graduated from Swarthmore College in Pennsylvania, did postgraduate work at Emory University in Atlanta and earned his Ph.D. in English from Columbia. Two mentors there, Lionel Trilling and F. W. Dupee, suggested to him that someone should write a book about Edmund Wilson’s life and work.Professor Dabney’s doctoral dissertation was called “Edmund Wilson: The Early Years.” Before landing at the University of Wyoming, he taught at Smith and Vassar. He wrote an early academic study about William Faulkner’s treatment of Native Americans, “The Indians of Yoknapatawpha.”Professor Dabney married Sarah Pettibone in 1958. She survives him. Besides his daughter, he is also survived by a son, Lewis IV, and three grandchildren.In 1962, while at Columbia, he wrote a review of Wilson’s recently published book about the literature of the Civil War, “Patriotic Gore.” Wilson liked it, and subsequently invited the young man to spend a few days at his home in Talcottville, N.Y.Advertisement“We discussed the Civil War and its literature as well as Dos Passos and Hemingway, my mother’s friends in France during the ’20s, whom I had met as a boy,” Professor Dabney recalled in a preface to the biography. “Wilson was intensely curious, and would slap his thigh in laughter, but his standards were stern. He lacked respect for politicians who lied about major issues, and when I spoke as though from knowledge of some aspect of his life I knew little about, the old-fashioned reporter said, ‘You must train yourself never to make an assertion that is not based on positive evidence.’ ”A version of this article appears in print on December 27, 2015, on Page A24 of the New York edition with the headline: Lewis M. Dabney, 83, Scholar Who Made Edmund Wilson the Focus of His Life’s Work.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.