AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeWhen she appears as Leïla, the fought-over Hindu priestess in Bizet’s “Les Pêcheurs de Perles” (“The Pearl Fishers”), opening at the Metropolitan Opera on New Year’s Eve, the soprano Diana Damrau wears a pearl. Naturally. A necklace, to be exact, with a single orb hanging from a leather strap, garishly shiny enough to be visible even to those watching from the last row of the Met’s highest tier.But the company’s insurers needn’t worry: The jewel is fake. The financial stakes were rather different after a recent rehearsal, when Ms. Damrau, 44, agreed to browse with a reporter at Mikimoto, the venerable pearl vendor on Fifth Avenue, where the cost of the offerings swiftly soars to six figures and beyond.“It all depends on your skin tone,” one of several solicitous attendants advised as Ms. Damrau navigated the choices: necklaces, earrings and bracelets in various shades of white, gold and black. (The color of a pearl is dependent on that of the shell of the oyster that produced it.)Ms. Damrau’s skin tone looked particularly radiant as she wore a long string of large, perfectly matched pearls, assembled over the course of 10 years, with a retail price of $1.1 million. That, as it happens, is not so far from the cost of the Met’s new production of “Les Pêcheurs de Perles,” which the director Penny Woolcock has moved from the libretto’s ancient Ceylon to modern-day Asia, adding projections and aerialists in the process.With a perfumed score by Bizet — far better known for “Carmen,” his later masterpiece — this Orientalist melodrama, a success with the public if not the critics at its 1863 premiere in Paris, is not completely unknown. It boasts a lyrical tenor aria and a soaring tenor-baritone duet, “Au fond du temple saint,” that is a concert favorite. But it is rarely enough staged that the coming run, conducted by Gianandrea Noseda, arrives 99 years after the opera was last seen at the Met.The stars then were Enrico Caruso, Giuseppe De Luca and Frieda Hempel, stalwarts of the company in the early 20th century. While their distinguished 2015 counterparts include the tenor Matthew Polenzani and the baritone Mariusz Kwiecien (as two pearl divers whose friendship is threatened by their competing passions for Leïla), it is Ms. Damrau whose stock at the Met has risen to the point that a little-heard work can be mounted because she wishes it.“Peter Gelb asked me what we can do,” she said, a little bashfully, referring to the Met’s general manager in an interview after the shopping excursion. “They’ve done quite a lot of titles for my voice. And I said, ‘Pearl Fishers.’ Yes, the story is a little trivial, and the surprises at the end are almost too much. But I choose this opera because I love it.”It is the clearest sign yet of the formidable power of a singer whose Met career has advanced in a slow, steady burn rather than a sudden explosion. Though she has appeared in New York every season since her house debut in 2005, she has never starred on an opening night, the traditional platform for the company’s leading prima donnas. (Renée Fleming, by comparison, has opened five seasons; Anna Netrebko, three.)Ms. Damrau’s personal life — she has two young children with her husband, the bass-baritone Nicolas Testé, who is also in the cast of “Pêcheurs” — is exasperatingly stable for an operatic world that thrives on offstage drama. Whether in character or in an interview, she radiates girl-next-door pluck rather than the glamour of a star. She is, all in all, unassuming.But little by little, almost without anyone noticing, she has become perhaps the Met’s most daring diva. Many singers bring to New York roles they’ve tested elsewhere — often at smaller theaters or insular, comfortable summer festivals. But Ms. Damrau has taken on a remarkable number of opera’s toughest challenges for the first time here, without any out-of-town tryouts.“I’m not scared,” she said. “These roles, I know they’re matching my voice. I know what I want to do with them and how I want to sing them.”The results have been thrilling. As Rosina, in the premiere of a new production of Rossini’s “Il Barbiere di Siviglia” in 2006, she strode spunkily across a stage that was extended around the orchestra pit, while singing with her characteristic smooth, rounded polish. As Aithra in the Strauss rarity “Die Ägyptische Helena” in 2007, she didn’t fade next to Deborah Voigt’s Helena, and, singing Countess Adèle in Rossini’s “Le Comte Ory” in 2011, she located a core of tenderness in the opera’s erotic games.Ms. Damrau was a gentle Pamina in Mozart’s “Die Zauberflöte,” during a 2007 run in which she also sang two performances of the stratospheric Queen of the Night, a trademark role as her international career took off. She was a dreamier, softer-grained Lucia, in a 2008 revival of Donizetti’s “Lucia di Lammermoor,” than Natalie Dessay, acting neurotic, had been in the production’s premiere. All these new parts were in addition to memorable Met forays into the coloratura roles that were once Ms. Damrau’s stock in trade: Strauss’s Zerbinetta, Mozart’s Konstanze, Verdi’s Gilda, Donizetti’s Marie.But it is in the past few seasons that she has truly come into her own here, showing more of the steel at the core of the warmth she always emits. In 2013, when she sang her first Violetta, in Verdi’s “La Traviata,” her voice seemed to grow through the performance. The defeats Violetta endures as the opera goes on were all the more poignant because Ms. Damrau was so pugnacious at the start, all teenage high spirits. Her very tone seemed to have been wounded into ethereality in “Dite alla giovane,” and she swung, like a pendulum, from thin threads of sound to full-bodied cries in a resigned “Addio del passato.”It was astonishingly assured work for a soprano singing that touchstone role for the very first time. Her first Amina, in Bellini’s “La Sonnambula,” last year was similarly confident. Here, as in “Lucia,” she inherited a production designed for Ms. Dessay, and once again she breathed naturalness into a staging that had previously exuded clenched-teeth tension. Matched in sweet sincerity and long-phrased richness by the tenor Javier Camarena, Ms. Damrau made the show-within-a-show conceit more plausible than it had seemed before.Another tenor, the thrilling loose cannon Vittorio Grigolo, spurred her to even greater heights — an almost discomfiting level of commitment — in Massenet’s “Manon” this March. That opera’s title role, which Ms. Damrau first sang in a brief run in Vienna in 2010, ideally demands more fullness in the middle and lower registers than she, despite her ever-growing, ever-deepening voice, can now comfortably provide. But she never forced her tone. As with Violetta, Ms. Damrau’s sound seemed to expand over the course of the performance, growing to hysterical — but never ugly — intensity in the final act.It is surprising, given the triumph she enjoyed in the part, to learn that she sang the entire “Manon” run while suffering from bronchitis, which lingered for months, continuing through some scattered opera performances and a concert tour. Her physical condition then worsened.“I really needed a break,” she said. “I had acid reflux, I was very tired. I hadn’t had a holiday for five and a half years, and meanwhile I produced two babies. Traveling, the hormonal changes: I got through all this. Making CDs, concerts. I have a right to be tired. And my body said, ‘Stop.’”In September, she exited a new production of “Lucia di Lamermoor” at the San Francisco Opera, issuing a statement that was, by opera’s doublespeak standards, unusually frank about her exhaustion.“You must listen to your body,” she said in the interview. “We have only two vocal cords, and you can’t replace them. The moment you start operating and touching them, it’s the death sentence. Sure, the opera world is really cruel, and when you cancel one thing, it’s like a tsunami of ‘Oh, she has lost her voice,’ ‘Over,’ ‘Finished.’ It’s terrible.”But it was obvious at a rehearsal for “Les Pêcheurs de Perles” on the Met stage that Ms. Damrau is not even close to finished or over. She sang Leïla’s heartfelt cavatina, “Comme autrefois dans la nuit sombre,” with a melting tone that was still always focused and clean.Having sung the opera in concert for the first time during her salad days at the opera house of Mannheim, Germany, Ms. Damrau finally did it onstage last year. It was, she said, “a wild production” at the Theater an der Wien in Vienna, with the plot transmuted to a jungle-camp reality TV show, a “Survivor” knockoff called “Perlenfischer: The Challenge.”“I was scared when I knew what they wanted to do,” she said. “I thought, ‘Should I cancel now or later?’ But then I spoke to the director and I knew it would work.” It didn’t just work: It was an unexpected hit.The Met’s production, despite the updating, will be more conventional — “for a more classical audience,” as Ms. Damrau put it. The projections, designed by 59 Productions, which also worked on “Satyagraha,” “The Enchanted Island” and “Two Boys” at the Met, seek to evoke the pearl fishers’ experiences, with aerialists conjuring the slow undersea movements of the divers.Next season, Ms. Damrau will expand her French repertory further, with her debut as Juliette in Gounod’s adaptation of Shakespeare — another first for her at the Met, as well as a reunion with Mr. Grigolo. She has major contracts in New York through 2019, including, in the 2018-19 season, a new production of “La Traviata,” to be conducted by Yannick Nézet-Séguin and directed by Michael Mayer (of the Met’s Rat-Pack “Rigoletto”), with Juan Diego Flórez as Alfredo and Quinn Kelsey as Germont.Things end worse for both Juliette and Violetta than for Leïla, who is saved just before her planned execution. For the benefit of the workers at Mikimoto, Ms. Damrau gave a quick plot spoiler about her fate: “She almost gets killed, and then they run away at the end.” (The tenor, of course, gets the girl.)“She grows into a strong woman,” Ms. Damrau later said. “She is very determined. It’s not a princess in pink who’s spoiled from beginning to end.”But even a lovesick priestess’s resolve to leave the pearling life forever might have been sorely tested by the store’s holdings: exquisite combinations of diamonds and pearls, whole fortunes of jewels. Walking past the cases toward a rainy Fifth Avenue, Ms. Damrau looked from side to side, gave a loud mock sigh, and moaned, as if chastising herself, “Leïla, see what you lost!”Advertisement