AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan SaltzsteinAcross the street from the New York Stock Exchange in Lower Manhattan, the British artist Simon Birch sat in a cavernous room with fireproofed girders, a rickety table and three wobbly office chairs for company. For most of the 20th century, 23 Wall Street was a temple of profit, the sumptuous headquarters of J. P. Morgan & Company. For the last decade or so, save for the occasional fund-raising event, it has been a neglected hulk. But Mr. Birch, 41, a tall man dressed in black, with neon-green sneakers and a sweep of dark-blond hair, hopes to restore some of its luster with a huge art installation opening here April 14.He is the driving force behind “The 14th Factory,” a $3 million exhibition that will feature his work and that of about 30 other artists and creative types, including architects and filmmakers, who will fill almost 150,000 square feet, over seven floors, with paintings, sculptures, videos and interior landscapes.The project revolves around vague, sprawling themes like the expansion and collapse of empires. That includes America, whose endless pursuit of growth, Mr. Birch seems to believe, has led to the brink of major change — making the show’s location, right in the heart of the capitalist machine, perhaps all the more dramatic.“We’re going to splash down in New York,” he said, resting his rangy frame on the table.The scope is dizzyingly ambitious, with other challenges, as well. “There’s a huge art system here going on already, which we’re not really part of, to be honest,” Mr. Birch said. “We’re kind of nobodies.”That might be true in the United States. In Hong Kong, however, where he has been based since 1997, Mr. Birch is a well-known maker of spectacles.In 2010, his show “Hope & Glory: A Conceptual Circus” drew over 60,000 visitors in Hong Kong, where at 20,000 square feet it was one of the biggest multimedia shows the city had seen. It included a 3-D film of a white horse and a mirrored ramp that children could skate on, and mixed Mr. Birch’s creations with works from other artists.Like “Hope & Glory,” the new installation, which will be up for four to six weeks, will be free to the public. Mr. Birch has set up a nonprofit foundation to support it, and he has sold his paintings to raise initial funds. After its run, much of the art will be auctioned off, with most of the proceeds, he says, going to New York-based youth charities like the Robin Hood Foundation and the Madison Square Boys and Girls Club. An area that includes the bank vault will house a temporary education center, where Mr. Birch hopes to bring students and other visitors to discuss and dissect the artworks.The intersection of theme and location is striking, but it is just one of a series of serendipities that convinced Mr. Birch that the project was fated to happen: A Chinese urban planner he approached to design a poppy-dappled interior landscape learned the same day that her grandfather had been involved in the opium trade. The lead architect on the project, Paul Kember, could fulfill Mr. Birch’s desire to replicate a set from “2001: A Space Odyssey” because his uncle and great-uncle had worked on the sets for the original film.Perhaps most striking, “The 14th Factory” had originally been planned for the James A. Farley Post Office Building, on Eighth Avenue at 33rd Street, but found a home earlier this year at 23 Wall Street — right next door to where Mr. Birch had been living for two years while conceptualizing it.For the artist, though, that sense of inevitability extends throughout his artistic and personal life.Mr. Birch was born in Brighton, south of London, and grew up in the English Midlands. He moved out at 16, to a rough neighborhood in Leicester, where he started working in bars and clubs as a bouncer and D.J. just as rave culture was exploding. By 18, he was hosting his own raves. As his events became more ambitious, he found he couldn’t handle the financial side and ended up in debt. Violent events surrounded his collapse: His older brother was stabbed and nearly died in front of Mr. Birch. A friend was shot and killed outside a club.“I’m not a gangster, you know? I’m an artist,” he said. “I left, with nothing in my pockets. Literally, I had 50 quid to my name.”He soon found himself in Hong Kong, working in construction. Throughout, even though he had no professional training, he was painting and drawing.His early work was generally figurative: bodies or large heads floating in space — perhaps falling, perhaps rising — rendered in slash-like brush strokes that conveyed both energy and violence. Friends started asking for portraits, and word spread.That timing was lucky: The Hong Kong contemporary art scene was still in its infancy, said Valerie C. Doran, a curator who later worked with Mr. Birch on “Hope & Glory” and describes him as “kind of like a pinball — he bumps up against something and reacts to it.”Things began to happen fast — ”more projects, more work,” Mr. Birch said. He won an Asian art award and considered doing a show in New York or London.“Unfortunately,” he said, “that’s when I got put in my place.”In 2008, doctors told him he had a rare, aggressive form of non-Hodgkin lymphoma and gave him a slim chance of survival. He began a six-month run of chemotherapy and radiation, as well as every form of alternative therapy he could find. He also gathered his friends and told them they were going to be his team.“It was an incredibly beautiful experience to be surrounded by people that didn’t want me to die,” he said. “It changed me forever.”Five years after his diagnosis, he was told the cancer was in full remission. He began to do charity events, hoping to give back some of the good will he had received. And his paintings changed. “They just became so much looser, and more fluid, and more abstract,” he said. “It was like I had nothing to hold back anymore.”Johnson Chang, a prominent Hong Kong curator and dealer, said he wasn’t impressed with Mr. Birch’s art in itself. “He was doing, frankly, very boring paintings,” he recalled, but “Hope & Glory” captured his attention. “Not entirely because it was a spectacle,” Mr. Chang said, “but I was impressed to see that he had exceeded himself.”In 2010, Mr. Birch exploded from his figurative work with that show. With its $1 million cost, brash visuals and obscure historical references — one piece spelled out “Tigranes,” the name of an Armenian king (Mr. Birch is partly Armenian by ancestry), in giant, carnival-like letters — it excited the local art scene. Ms. Doran, the curator, who is on the advisory board for “The 14th Factory,” said its interactive elements in particular resonated with a broad audience. “It was really like a living space,” she said.For years, Mr. Birch tried to figure out a sequel of sorts in New York and on a bigger scale. When the post office space fell through, one of his patrons lent him an apartment overlooking 23 Wall Street, and he found himself gazing at the empty building. “The thing was under our feet the whole time,” he said.The show’s title is a reference to the 13 factories, or warehouses, of Canton (now Guangzhou), which in the 18th and 19th centuries were the centers of foreign trade — the Chinese called them “barbarian houses.” But its structure also alludes to the sequence of actions Joseph Campbell described as the “hero’s journey,” or monomyth. At “The 14th Factory,” the visitor is the hero, moving from the everyday into the supernatural, through trials and battles, to emerge victorious and transcendent.Viewers will enter into a gallery of portraits of punk rockers from the late 1970s (the “original disrupters,” Mr. Birch said), past videos of bodies in motion (subway dancers filmed so they appear suspended in midair), into a large room of deconstructed airplane parts, culled from a large commercial graveyard in the Mojave Desert. Elsewhere will be a huge laser-cut wood sculpture of an object in mid-explosion, the poppy-topped undulating hills (the grass will be artificial, the poppies real), and more video screens showing real-life Chinese factory workers fighting and a car crash involving Mr. Birch’s Ferrari.Once through that violent imagery, visitors will find well over 100 crowns designed by Mr. Birch — empty symbols of victory — and then projections of buildings falling past them, from which they will exit onto the street.It’s easy to find references to the Sept. 11 attacks, given the show’s proximity to ground zero, but Mr. Birch said that was unintentional. “I’m not qualified to talk about that event as an artist or as a man,” he said, though Ms. Doran acknowledged that they had discussed it early on.“He’d be easy to criticize if he wasn’t putting a lot of stuff on the line,” said Gary Gunn, a composer who is designing sound for the installationMr. Birch is aware that the enterprise, which he hopes to reinvent in Los Angeles and perhaps elsewhere, is risky, both financially and critically.“The truth is, it could be the end of my career,” he said. “I used to work in construction. I’d be happy to go back to that.” He paused. “In theory.”Advertisement