Through music, film and an animated series, artists are changing the narrative about what separates Mexico and the United States.By JOSH KUNDEC. 23, 2015
Bud Buckwald and Ernesto González are neighbors. They live side by side in a small Southern California city perched along the border with Mexico: Mexifornia. Bud is a disgruntled midlevel Border Patrol agent (think Archie Bunker on desert foot patrol), and Ernesto is a plucky Mexican immigrant who runs a successful landscaping business. Bud looks at the changing demographics of America and doesn’t see a place for himself. His American dream is slipping away as Ernesto’s is coming true.“It’s like the Mexican’s become the Man,” he likes to say. “And I’ve become the Mexican.”The two families provide the comedic backbone of “Bordertown,” a new animated series executive produced by Seth MacFarlane (“Family Guy”) that debuts on Fox on Jan. 3. With often brutal satire that mines racism, xenophobia, drug cartels, mega churches, corrupt mayors, the pope and the occasional U.F.O., it offers up the border town as a prototype of the new American city, a key laboratory for thinking through the national future.“The border demands attention,” said Lalo Alcaraz, one of the show’s lead writers and a consulting producer, who thinks of Mexifornia as a new version of Springfield from “The Simpsons.” Mr. Alcaraz grew up in San Diego as the son of immigrants, just north of Tijuana and American border communities like San Ysidro and Chula Vista. “There are so many important stories here, which is why it makes for good television. You get all of the culture clashes: Americans and immigrants, Mexico and the U.S., and all of the mixtures that come with border life in general.”“Bordertown” arrives at an opportune, and extremely sensitive, political moment, with immigration a flash point in the presidential race. If elected, Donald J. Trump has promised to build a towering new border wall, has branded Mexican immigrants as criminals and rapists, and in August, famously deported the Univision anchor Jorge Ramos from a news conference. In the most recent Republican debate, immigration reform and border security fueled a heated battle between Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio over who had been the toughest — or the most lax — on policing the country against undocumented populations.AdvertisementBorder talk is rarely just about the border itself. In both politics and popular culture, the border is a proxy for thinking about the role of Mexico in American life and for grappling with the ways Mexican immigrant culture and the American mainstream influence each other. It is both a scapegoat and a mirror: a place to project fears and anxieties about a changing nation, and a reflection of the identity-straddling, language-juggling multicultural nation that is already here.AdvertisementBeneath all the media bluster, undocumented Mexican and Central American immigrants continue to take enormous risks as they navigate the United States Border Patrol, Mexican drug cartels and deportation policies at both the federal and state levels. It’s a reality of morgue statistics and family separations that was lost on a particularly shameless Carl’s Jr. burger ad that appeared in September: a bikini-versus-bikini volleyball game that used the militarized border wall as a sexy Tex-Mex net.No wonder the border has played a starring role in so much culture this past year. Novels like John Vaillant’s “The Jaguar’s Children” and Don Winslow’s “The Cartel” unfolded through the voice memos of migrants trapped in truck trailers and the bloody global business of cartel bosses. Songs from Alan Jackson (“Mexico, Tequila, and Me”), The Game (“El Chapo”) and Juan Gabriel (“La Frontera,” a choppy remake of his ’80s pop classic) were additions to the border jukebox. The Houston rapper and comedian Chingo Bling (Pedro Herrera III) even did a spoof of “Antidote,” by fellow Texan rhymer Travis Scott. Mr. Herrera’s neighborhood gigolo doesn’t pop bottles, he sips “purple Fabuloso” (the popular Mexican floor cleaner), eats menudo on Sundays and is on constant Border Patrol alert: “I hear the migra at the front door.”Like so many Mexican and Mexican-American artists, Mr. Herrera flips traditional border narratives. A far cry from the “South of the Border” romance of Gene Autry or the jaundiced view of northern Mexico in Steven Soderbergh’s “Traffic,” these are border stories that typically push back against anti-immigrant sentiment and remind audiences that the border is also a vibrant, thriving region that millions of people call home.“The border should be redrawn as a circle,” said Mr. Herrera, who was part of the earlier viral YouTube hits “They Can’t Deport Us All” and “Started From the Border,” the latter a 2013 Drake parody that continues to have a second life as a Twitter hashtag. “Its influence is everywhere.”The border as both a circle of looping, mobile culture and a fortified line — a network of fences, walls, and surveillance — was also the subject of work this year by the visual artists Yoshua Okón, Postcommodity, and Ana Teresa Fernández. They all used the border’s physicality, contrasted with the ideas and traditions that cross through it everyday, to explore the politics of land and belonging in the contemporary Southwest. Or in Ms. Fernández’s case, she foregrounded it by making it vanish — painting portions of the Mexican side of the wall in Tijuana and Nogales the same blue as the sky.“I wanted people to imagine what it would be like if the border wasn’t there,” the Mexican-born artist said by phone from her studio in San Francisco. “What if I could just paint it away? It’s as absurd of a gesture as building the border wall itself.”Others have met the border on its own terms, tapping its power as both a ruthless market for people and drugs and a ruthless battlefield for racism and fear. These drama-friendly themes propelled both the film “Sicario,” which followed an F.B.I. agent on a cartel hunt through moral mazes and underground tunnels in the El Paso-Juarez region, and “Desierto” (a recent festival favorite bound for theaters this spring), which never leaves the rocky crevasses and dry washes of an unnamed Southwestern desert.AdvertisementDirected by Jonás Cuarón, who was born in Mexico and raised in the United States, “Desierto” rewrites the migrant journey north as a terrifying horror film. An American vigilante goes hunting for Mexican migrants, picking them off one by one with a shotgun and a vicious German shepherd.“The more you learn about borders the more you learn that they are the wrong way to see the world,” said Mr. Cuarón, who compares the film’s stark, minimalist portrayal of solitary characters against an extreme environment to the last film he helped write, “Gravity.” “When I scouted for ‘Desierto,’ deserts would spread to both sides, north and south of a line that you couldn’t always see. There is an arbitrary notion where one place ends and another begins.”While the film’s vigilante may remind some of the self-designated border guardians of the Minutemen and Arizona Border Recon (seen this year in the documentary “Cartel Land”), Mr. Cuarón insists that his film is meant to conjure archetypes, not individuals. It certainly wears its allegory on its sleeve: The killer played by Jeffrey Dean Morgan is named Sam, and Gael García Bernal’s migrant who lives long enough to be hunted is Moises (Moses). Mr. Cuarón said he wanted to represent “the rhetoric of hatred and fear of the foreign, of the other,” a rhetoric that he is quick to point out is not only at a fever pitch in the United States toward Mexicans and Muslims, but also in Mexico toward Central Americans and against migrants throughout Europe.Mr. Cuarón and Ms. Fernández are Mexican artists working in the United States, and as such, their work is as much about how America views Mexicans as how Mexicans view the United States. Nowhere is this shift in position more regularly at work than in the regional Mexican music industry, where predominately Mexican-born artists fill the Billboard charts with songs that depict, and comment on, the transformations and struggles of immigrant life.In November, at the annual Premios de la Radio award show in Los Angeles, a group of the biggest stars in banda and norteño music responded to Mr. Trump’s statements about immigrant Mexicans by teaming up for a glossy, Spanish-language music video parody of Taylor Swift’s “Bad Blood.” Yet instead of Ms. Swift’s girl squad getting revenge on an ex-BFF, the Los Angeles radio personality and rapper Don Cheto and the Tucson heartthrob Luis Coronel lead their own squad of immigrant Mexican musical insurrectionists (including the duranguense queen Diana Reyes and the corrido veteran Lupillo Rivera) to take on Mr. Trump.“I left my home, my customs, my country,” Mr. Cheto raps, before comparing Mr. Trump to a member of the Ku Klux Klan. “We are the people who sustain this nation.” Mr. Cheto immigrated from the Mexican state of Michoacán, and Mr. Coronel is the son of undocumented immigrants from Sonora and Durango.“The border is ground zero for these artists,” said Lenard Liberman, the media executive behind Premios de la Radio who wrote the lyrics to the “Bad Blood” parody. “That’s what resonated with the artists in the video. These are young kids who came here, or whose parents came here, with a dream, and then they learn that if you have a dark face and a Spanish accent you are seen as a criminal. How is that not going to affect you?”There aren’t any references to Mr. Trump in “Bordertown” (the first season wrapped last year). But Bud Buckwald seems to share some of his views.Advertisement“Bud is the white guy who feels things are changing too fast for him,” said Mark Hentemann, the “Family Guy” veteran who created “Bordertown,” and who is white. The new demographics of a country where whites will soon be a minority are already a reality in Mexifornia, and they hit Bud, and his anti-Mexican prejudices, in often personal ways: His left-wing, activist daughter gets engaged to the college-educated nephew of Ernesto.In one midseason episode, the decision to build a border wall, or “Freedom Wall,” using drug money discovered in the wreckage of a crashed cartel plane, wreaks havoc on just about every layer of life in Mexifornia. It threatens Bud’s job as an agent (he no longer has anyone to chase) and Ernesto’s landscaping business (he no longer has a steady stream of workers). Bud ends up getting fired and takes work wherever he can get it: first as one of Ernesto’s gardeners and then running an immigrant smuggling tunnel from his own basement.They all soon agree they were all better off without the wall. We watch it come crashing down.For all of the comedic punches that “Bordertown” lands, perhaps its greatest success is in determining who gets to tell the jokes. Mr. Hentemann assembled a staff that includes five Latino writers personally familiar with life in the borderlands, many of whom had never previously written for a scripted show. (Mr. Alcaraz, for example, is best known for his daily comic strip La Cucaracha, Gustavo Arellano is the editor of the OC Weekly newspaper, and the San Antonio-born Vanessa Ramos is a veteran of Comedy Central roasts.)For Mr. Alcaraz, this makes “Bordertown” something of a turning point in the way the border gets seen in the American media. It is a rare prime-time network representation of border life — albeit a cartoon bound to offend just about everyone — told, in large part, through Latino eyes.“Some people have their head in the sand as to how influential Mexico and Latin America are in the U.S.,” he said. “Not just people and demographics but culture. Americans live in this ideological bubble. ‘Rah-rah, we’re No. 1, and we’re all alone over here,’ and that’s just not true. We’re all interconnected, and we have to accept that interconnectedness. What better place to do that than at the border?”An article last Sunday about the ways that artists are changing the narrative about what differences truly separate Mexico and the United States referred incorrectly to the comic strip La Cucaracha by Lalo Alcaraz, who is also a lead writer on the new Fox animated series “Bordertown.” The nationally syndicated strip, which focuses on Latino and political themes, appears daily, not weekly. The article also referred incorrectly to the college-educated man whom Bud’s activist daughter gets engaged to on the show. He is the nephew of the landscaper Ernesto, not his son.A version of this article appears in print on December 27, 2015, on Page AR1 of the New York edition with the headline: Humor Without Borders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.