By JOE COSCARELLIDEC. 23, 2015
LOS ANGELES — On a recent morning, Scooter Braun, the talent manager and aspiring media mogul, arrived at the converted West Hollywood home that contains his company, SB Projects, in jeans and worn-in Vans. Cruising by his young staff, past walls of toy figures and a Ping-Pong table in the courtyard, he cracked jokes and grabbed a basketball from his office before being presented with paperwork. “I just invested in an app!” he announced after a few pen strokes.It’s here, where a sign on the front door reads “Believe,” that Mr. Braun and his team are working to diversify the business that began with Justin Bieber — then a Canadian tween prodigy Mr. Braun discovered on YouTube — from pop stars (Ariana Grande, Carly Rae Jepsen) to everything else in entertainment, across film, television and technology.In 2015, in addition to engineering a repentant Bieber revival, in which music trumped TMZ headlines, SB Projects found success with a hit network TV show (“Scorpion” on CBS); earned a best new artist Grammy nomination for the long-gestating singer Tori Kelly; and signed the model Karlie Kloss (“She’s a great brand”). “Purpose,” the new album from Mr. Bieber, has sold a million copies since November, according to Nielsen, a capstone achievement in a put-up-or-shut-up year for the company.Mr. Braun, the grandchild of Holocaust survivors and once a teenage party promoter in Atlanta, is now on a first-name basis with his oft-mentioned industry heroes like David Geffen and Jimmy Iovine. By shepherding Mr. Bieber, 21, down the rocky path to grown-up fame — and guiding other viral infernos like Psy’s “Gangnam Style” (2.5 billion YouTube views) and Ms. Jepsen’s “Call Me Maybe” (759 million) — he has become the defining music executive of the social media era, known for aggressive online cross-promotion between clients.AdvertisementThrough those same channels, Mr. Braun has had unprecedented visibility, especially for a manager in teen pop; he has more Twitter followers than some of his acts. “We’re building a brand that can help our business,” he said of his own fame. And despite his multiplatform ambitions, Mr. Braun has also reinforced his commitment to music, alluding cryptically to his sizable investment fund, Ithaca, an open secret in industry circles since 2013. (“We have an alliance with other managers,” he said, “that allows me to scale without having to manage.”)AdvertisementSB Projects is run like a start-up — with constant talk of scaling, content and disruption — and has an average employee age that “definitely starts with a two,” according to Scott Manson, the company’s chief operating officer. Added Mr. Braun, who was born Scott and also invested early in Uber and Spotify: “I’m a 34-year-old man who calls himself Scooter. That describes the vibe.”From the couch in his casual corner office, Mr. Braun — part smooth-talking operator, part motivational speaker and newly a humbled family man — discussed his company’s marquee 2015, including its commercial flops (Ms. Jepsen’s “Emotion”) and biggest wins (bringing Mr. Bieber back) while fiddling with his wedding ring (his first child was born in February). These are edited excerpts from the conversation.Q. When did the Bieber comeback campaign start in earnest?A.As I started to see it going in the wrong direction, I started to prepare. I put deals in place where he was protected for the long run. And I started to prepare my company to scale, because I was not going to let him work. [After “Journals,” Mr. Bieber’s 2013 digital compilation,] he wanted to tour, and I honestly at that time felt, if he toured, he could die.I know people have seen the marketing and the A&R and everything we put together, and they’re like, “Wow, great job!” But I want to be really clear: I was trying to do that job for a year and a half, and I failed every single day. It wasn’t until something happened that it clicked for him. He made the conscious decision as a young man: “I need to make a change in my own life.”I decided I needed six months of that. I looked at Robert Downey Jr. and all these people — when you ask for redemption, people will give it to you. But if you’re the boy who cried wolf, they’ll destroy you. Once I saw there was consistency I said, O.K., now it’s time to go back in the professional life. The click happened about 20 months ago. Six months after that, you start seeing me planning a [Comedy Central] roast. And then the Calvin Klein ads come, and the roast comes …How did the roast come about?I had a meeting in the office, and I said: “O.K., guys, these are some of my ideas. What person do you think Justin should do the intense sit-down interview with? Is it Katie Couric? Do we call Oprah and see if we can do a special?” And Ava [Coleman] — 21 years old, at the time an intern — she said: “I just think my generation doesn’t care about that. I think if you want people to see that he’s for real, he should do a Comedy Central roast.” And I went: “That is genius. Get it done.” Twenty-four hours later, I was on the phone with Comedy Central.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Did you play up Justin’s real-life lows to make the redemption narrative that much more powerful?Absolutely not.Because to an outsider, it looks like what he was doing wasn’t that different from ——The outsiders don’t really know what was happening. It was far worse than people realize. And when he is ready, he will tell what he was going through. But it’s a hard thing to watch someone you care and genuinely love go through that. I’m really, really happy that’s over.Let’s talk about the Carly Rae Jepsen album. It’s popular with critics, and yet it only sold 16,000 copies the first week [36,000 to date]. Why didn’t anyone buy it?AdvertisementWe had the biggest single in the entire world last time [“Call Me Maybe”], and we sold 30,000 copies in the U.S. This is the music business — it’s a worldwide business. Carly’s album is gigantic in Japan, which is the second-biggest music market in the world. In other markets, this album is a humongous success. I think that I tried everything, and it falls on me. I didn’t get it done for her.Did you make mistakes?The answer is simply: I must have. Because I didn’t get the success I wanted. Maybe I didn’t push hard enough when I thought I was. Maybe I didn’t get her the right TV look at the right time. Maybe I picked the wrong single. The bottom line is, I don’t think this album is done, by any means. There are a lot of great albums that take a year to connect. And I am going to continue being incredibly proud of this album and pushing it every which way I can. Trust me, it’s been a huge fight. If it didn’t do what it was supposed to do, it’s on me.How did you handle Ariana Grande’s first real mini-scandal, the doughnut-licking video?I tell her, you have to address the mistakes that you made and own them. Some of the words she used in that shop were things she needed to address, and she did. But I also think — not about her, but just in general — we’re getting a little ridiculous when it comes to doughnuts and eggs. The rock stars of ’70s were really [expletive]. Let’s talk about some real stuff. Why are we discussing that when we have real significant issues in the world? Like, gun control. And the fact that a presidential candidate is saying things that I find to be anti-American. These are the things we should be angry and frustrated about.Do you think you can bring Psy back in the United States, or was it just a moment?It’s such a ridiculous question, and I’ll tell you why. When I signed “Gangnam Style,” it had 60,000 views. And I told Psy I wanted to keep it in Korean, and he thought I was crazy. It went No. 1 [on the sales chart] for 11 weeks. You do that, and then people ask you that question: Can you do it again? I think that we achieved what we wanted to achieve and so much more. If Psy wants to go give it another run, that’s my dude.Were there other stories in pop music that you followed with interest this year?Adele.What did you learn from Adele?That “21” was an incredible album.“25”?“21” [from 2011]. I love “25,” but when you sell that many records in the pre-order when no one’s even heard “25” — you’re talking 900,000 pre-orders on iTunes. That is a testament to a body of work that is beyond special. It’s so good for the music business. I think it shows that people still care — and if they care, they’ll consume.What are your priorities for 2016?Being able to self-finance our own stuff and create content in-house. I never like to talk about things until we’re already successful. The moment you announce what you’re thinking about doing, you’ve already created a ticking time bomb. Where I’ve been able to be successful in our company’s path is the fact that people think that we kill it, because they don’t see our failures. Because we don’t talk about them.A version of this article appears in print on December 27, 2015, on Page AR23 of the New York edition with the headline: Here’s a Brand Name: Scooter Braun.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.