By BEN RATLIFFDEC. 23, 2015
EARLY LIFEThe Oakland, Calif., band Mansion plays highly rhythmic, ringing, eerie, pitch-black, rough and telegraphed noisiness. What it does, with drums and two guitars and the singer Candace Lazarou enunciating sternly and carefully, feels like sturdy, skeptical commentary about song-making, something we can always use as a corrective. It’s brash enough to make you feel it has no parents, but it doesn’t come out of nowhere; it relates to a post-No Wave tradition that’s more than 30 years old. Imagine the 1980s group Live Skull but less melodic, or the new Montreal group Big Brave but more claustrophobic, without the pensive silences, and you’re almost there. On “Early Life,” Mansion’s first full-length album — available on vinyl as issue No. 17 of the fanzine Degenerate Ephemera, or via stream or download at Mansion’s Bandcamp page — Ms. Lazarou sings a weird poetry about forgetting, futility, valuelessness, and has a gift for the mysterious detail: “Sell off the clothes of the soon deposed/Leave them in a field.” (Deposed?) Or “I’m not doing this because it is fun/It’s just that the vibrating is getting to us.” (The vibrating?) The songs are gnashing or pinpointed, or switch between the two positions; I prefer them when they’re holding something back and keeping you in suspense, as in “California Priest” and “100 Pound Crown.”LISTEN TO FORMATION, LOOK FOR THE SIGNSNadia Reid, from Port Chalmers, New Zealand, is a folkish, slightly country, roots-oriented singer-songwriter. In the words of her songs, love is dangerous, good things are missed or longed for, and habits last a long time; in the music, guitars twang spaciously and the drumming, when present, moves with slow stealth. There’s lots of music out there roughly like her first album, “Listen to Formation, Look For the Signs” (Scissortail) — Angel Olsen, Gillian Welch, any number of musicians who play at, say, the Hardly Strictly Bluegrass festival in San Francisco. But excellence clears its own space and tells its own story, no matter the context. Ms. Reid is a fabulous singer. Her voice is full of sorrow and body, and it’s right for her subject matter, whatever that really is. Sometimes these songs are written in the third person, presenting characters doing one ill-advised thing or another, and sometimes the characters are given names; but one of the best is a first-person song, “Track of the Time,” which has no story at all, just an idea about love as a supernatural and totally disorienting experience. It’s hard to tell whether it’s good love or bad love; that seems beside the point. In an early performance from a few years ago, filmed by the Auckland station 95bFM, she introduces it by saying, “I don’t know really what it’s about yet.” Which is exactly what it sounds like.I ABUSED ANIMALIn improvised music, there’s an old tradition of avoiding clichés by playing your chosen instrument as if it’s a completely different instrument, or as if it’s something hitherto unknown. Heather Leigh, who sings and plays pedal-steel guitar, has some of that quality. She’s been putting out music on CD-Rs and cassettes for more than a decade, and performing with various kinds of free improvisers including the drummer Chris Corsano and the saxophonist Peter Brötzmann, but on her intense and minimal new record, “I Abused Animal” (Ideologic Organ), she seems to be inventing new song forms, or perhaps it’s just that she’s unconcerned about loyalty to any song form. Some tracks are for vocals alone, and sound like hymns or prayers, careful and confidential but given errant details that sound improvised. In “The Return,” she uses a volume pedal to beam out edgeless steel-guitar strafe-notes under her high-voiced singing. In “Quicksand,” she slowly repeats four single notes, making them ropy and spindly and echoed, and in general subverting her instrument’s identity as a harmony and glissando machine.A version of this article appears in print on December 27, 2015, on Page AR19 of the New York edition with the headline: Here’s to Holding Back: Suspense Can Be the Best Part of a Song.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.