The New York Art, Antique & Jewelry Show will not be returning to the Park Avenue Armory next year as the Armory continues to transform itself into a setting  for live cultural programming.Scott Diament, chief executive of Palm Beach Show Group, which owns the fair, said he had been told to find a new home for the annual event.He bought the fair three years ago and has held two editions at the Park Avenue Armory. In its latest edition, last November, it ran five days, hosting 85 dealers and attracting 12,000 visitors, according to Mr. Diament.While confirming that the fair would not be coming back, Rebecca Robertson, the Armory’s president, denied that the move represented any new shift in direction. Instead, she said, it was part of the general transformation into a cultural performance space begun since the new leadership took over at the Armory in 2006. The 2016 season includes an eclectic mix of artists and musicians. In the spring a performance of Heiner Goebbels’s “De Materie”  will play to the Armory’s strengths as a location, Ms. Robertson said, and will feature 100 sheep. “You can’t do that in Carnegie Hall,” she added.“We are about culture, about doing these programs that audiences in New York can’t see otherwise,” she added. “We are cautiously moving in the direction of more and more programming.” News of the change was first reported by The New York Post.She said fairs would continue to be an important revenue stream and that no other fairs that take place at the Armory had been told they had to find a new home. “We have no plans for any changes right now,” Ms. Robertson said.Among other fairs held at the Armory are the Winter Antiques Show, in January; the New York Antiquarian Book Fair, scheduled for April; and the International Fine Art and Antiques Show, usually held in the fall. Representatives for these fairs did not respond to requests for comment.“They are going to happen as planned,” Ms. Robertson said.As for years beyond that,  she added, “We are evolving and are cautious about our revenue streams. We are a work in progress.”Mr. Diament said he hadn’t found a new location for his fair and hoped the organizers of the Park Avenue Armory would change their mind.He said he had even been prepared to raise the rent he paid to the Armory – which he put at somewhere around $320,000 for the five days. “This thing just floors me. It was such a shock,” he said.The fair has been running  in some form or other for more than 30 years, he said, and he believed there was “an unwritten presumption when I purchased this three years ago that I would be able to continue to run a great event.”“We think it is an important part of the fabric of New York.”A version of this article appears in print on 12/30/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Antique & Jewelry Show Loses Armory Home.