AdvertisementSupported byBy Alec M. PriesterThe networks are showing classics to distract you from the interminable holiday season. There is escapism (“The Matrix”) and there are escapees (“The Shawshank Redemption”). On Netflix, the comedian Demetri Martin cracks wise.DEMETRI MARTIN: LIVE (AT THE TIME)  on Netflix. The comedian Demetri Martin riffs on the word “nope,” hot dogs, elevator etiquette and a bunch of other stuff at the Lincoln Theater in Washington. (Image: Mr. Martin)THE DARK KNIGHT RISES (2012)  5:15 p.m. on TNT. In this final installment of Christopher Nolan’s Batman trilogy, starring Christian Bale, Bruce Wayne has retreated to his mansion after taking the blame for the death of Harvey Dent, the district attorney, in the preceding film. He returns to fighting crime as Batman — aided by John Blake (Joseph Gordon-Levitt) and Selina Kyle (Anne Hathaway) — after the police commissioner is kidnapped by the superhuge and supervillainous Bane (Tom Hardy), who means to destroy Gotham City. (Image: Mr. Bale)THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION (1994) 8 p.m. on Lifetime. This adaptation of a Stephen King novella was written and directed by Frank Darabont. Tim Robbins plays a banker who is sentenced to prison for murdering his wife and her lover. He maintains his innocence, and after befriending an older prisoner (Morgan Freeman) they plot an escape. “There are times when ‘The Shawshank Redemption’ comes dangerously close to sounding one of those ‘triumph of the human spirit’ notes,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times. “But most of it is eloquently restrained.” (Image: Mr. Freeman, left, and Mr. Robbins)20/20 ON ID PRESENTS: CRIME 9 p.m. on Investigative Discovery. The first episode of this series investigates the case of a mother and son who disappeared. She was found dead with a note saying her son would never be found.LEGENDS 11 p.m. on TNT. It’s the season finale of this spy drama starring Sean Bean, with flashbacks to the ’70s, unsavory bargaining, questions of identity and no small amount of intrigue.THE MATRIX (1999) 11 p.m. on IFC. In the Wachowskis’ sci-fi thriller, Neo is a hacker who learns from a man named Morpheus that life is really a computer-generated fiction called the Matrix, imposed on humans by robotic overlords who harvest their energy. They must protect the last real human city while battling the machines and the evil Agent Smith. (Image: Keanu Reeves)Advertisement