AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenThe claws have been retracted, but the attitude remains the same: a complicated mixture of sarcasm, curdled sweetness and contempt. That describes the comedian and singer Sandra Bernhard, now 60 (but looking two decades younger), who opened her annual end-of-the-year engagement on Saturday evening at Joe’s Pub with a new show, “Feel the Bernhard.”Time was when Ms. Bernhard, brandishing a flashlight, prowled the darkened stage like an avenging police officer, peering into the audience and flushing out suspects as they cringed in their seats. You attended one of those early, groundbreaking shows with a certain foreboding.A residual sense of danger still lurks in her performances. But on Saturday there was no flashlight and her inner attack dog remained muzzled, although her glare is as ferocious as ever. Ms. Bernhard, who has a college-age daughter, has mellowed. I would like to think she discovered how much her ambushes hurt some innocent people and decided to pull back and let others do the dirty work.Accompanied by a rock trio (Mitch Kaplan, her longtime musical director and pianist; Kevin Andreas on guitar and John Badamo on drums), Ms. Bernhard delivered a loose-jointed improvisatory monologue interspersed with occasional songs. Instead of jokes, she made remarks. There was a surprising lack of political humor in a show advertised as addressing inequality.Even toned down, Ms. Bernhard remains a fascinating, charismatic entertainer who shares with her devotees a love-hate relationship with popular culture, fashion, gossip, glamour, Hollywood fantasy and expensive name brands.In one monologue, she dropped the names of her imaginary female “squad,” which includes Taylor Swift, Lena Dunham, Emma Stone, Katy Perry and Selena Gomez, among many other celebrities, to suggest the fictional grown-up equivalent of a high-school clique. Another anecdote described a visit to Liza Minnelli’s Los Angeles house with Michele Lee for a lunch date that didn’t take place.The deepest and most lyrical monologue was a fantasized reflection on a lonely Hollywood woman at Christmas spun around an image of a tearful Caitlyn Jenner gazing out to sea in Malibu. It prefaced a tough, soulful rendition of Carol Hall’s tear-jerker, “Hard Candy Christmas” from “The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas.” A monologue about celebrities named Jones (focusing on Tom and Grace) introduced the Billy Paul hit “Me and Mrs. Jones.”If “Feel the Bernhard” was as sloppy and unfocused a show as I’ve seen Ms. Bernhard give, at its heart was a theme that she was one of the first to introduce into comedy long before Kathy Griffin, Wendy Williams and others brought it into the mainstream: a voyeuristic worship and envy of celebrity that extends to the core of American culture. Ms. Bernhard embodies the guilty, self-aware narcissist who knows better than to wallow in trash but just can’t help herself.Sandra Bernhard continues through Thursday at Joe’s Pub, 425 Lafayette Street, Manhattan; 212-539-8778, publictheater­.org.Advertisement