By JON CARAMANICASEPT. 30, 2015
On its 2013 debut album, “The Bones of What You Believe,” the Scottish band Chvrches knelt at the altar of new wave romanticism. The singer Lauren Mayberry has an almost metallic voice, plaintive but precise, and she used it primarily to convey ache. Her band mates, Iain Cook and Martin Doherty, are adept multi-instrumentalists, fluent in the whole range of 1980s sparkle. The album was something of a revelation, a revisiting of a distant time that didn’t feel studied.Chvrches has just released its second album, “Every Open Eye” (Glassnote), a slicker and more knowing record than its debut, but not one that alters the group’s fundamental approach. Everything is amplified — the hollow thwacks of percussion, the glimmering walls of synthesizers, Ms. Mayberry’s sweet pleas and deceptive darts.At SummerStage in Central Park on Tuesday night, the band headlined one of the season’s annual benefit shows. The trio performed in a setup worthy of 1985: Ms. Mayberry out front, her band mates cloistered behind banks of electronic instruments on either side of her, huge screens behind them flashing neon beams. But the songs, which on record can feel grand, began to evaporate in the open air, their structure and polish shouting down their substance.Chvrches have happened upon a successful template, and over the course of the night, it began to feel like just that — a set of gestures mixed and matched for differing effect, but never altering the overall tone. That is, apart from when Mr. Doherty came out to sing on “Under the Tide,” a largely inessential move.AdvertisementHe and Mr. Cook have mastered the density required of their music, and Ms. Mayberry is still an urgent, compelling vocalist, dolloping out her voice in slowly decaying peals.Midway through the night, a guy in the audience shouted, “Marry me!” at Ms. Mayberry. She didn’t take kindly to it, taking the opportunity to stop the show for a moment and berate him for his presumptuousness and bad manners, to say nothing of his gender politics.AdvertisementMs. Mayberry, who was a journalist before she was a full-time musician, still writes occasionally. In 2013, she detailed in The Guardian the online misogyny faced by female musicians: “Is the casual objectification of women so commonplace that we should all just suck it up, roll over and accept defeat? I hope not.” That fire is in her lyrics, but can be tough to discern in music so reliant on structure and heritage. In truth, a polished, streamlined, burr-less package might not be her best pulpit.A version of this review appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Hymns From the Altar of ’80s New Wave.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.