Malcolm-Jamal Warner is lamenting the effect that sexual assault allegations against Bill Cosby have had on the legacy of “The Cosby Show,” which he described as a corrective against harmful stereotypes. When it came to negative depictions of minorities on TV and in film, “we’ve always had ‘The Cosby Show’ to hold up against that,” Mr. Warner, who starred on the NBC sitcom as Mr. Cosby’s son, Theo Huxtable, told The Associated Press on Thursday. “And the fact that we no longer have that, that’s the thing that saddens me the most because in a few generations the Huxtables will have been just a fairy tale.” Mr. Cosby has been accused by more than 50 women of misconduct ranging from drugging to raping them, according to news reports.“It’s just a bad situation all around — for him, for his family, the women, their families, the legacy of the show,” Mr. Warner said. He said he had spoken with Mr. Cosby but declined to say what was discussed.“The Cosby Show” ran from 1984 to 1992. Mr. Warner, a Grammy-winning musician as well as an actor, discussed the show as part of an interview to promote his new album, “Selfless.”His comments clash somewhat with those another former Huxtable made earlier this week. Keshia Knight Pulliam, who played the daughter Rudy, told the Grio website on Tuesday that “you can’t take back” the positive impact “The Cosby Show” had and continues to have on its fans. Other core cast members have mostly refrained from commenting on Mr. Cosby in recent months, though Phylicia Rashad previously expressed general support for him. On Wednesday Mr. Cosby lost a bid in Los Angeles County Superior Court to block the latest lawsuit against him, from a woman who said he assaulted her at the Playboy Mansion in 1974, when she was 15. He is scheduled to be questioned under oath on Friday, though the deposition will be kept secret until a judge rules in December which portions, if any, will be made public.Also on Friday, NBC will air a “Dateline” special that brings together 29 of Mr. Cosby’s accusers for a group interview about their experiences with him.A version of this article appears in print on 10/10/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: u2018Cosby Showu2019 Legacy Is Hurt, Former Star Says.