AdvertisementSupported byBy Alec M. PriesterCelebrate the slow postholiday return of regular television programming with “Almost Genius,” “Booze Traveler” and “What Would You Do?” FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH (1982) Noon on IFC. Cameron Crowe wrote the screenplay for this movie and the book it is based on after posing as a high school student for a year. The film, directed by Amy Heckerling, follows teenagers (Sean Penn, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Phoebe Cates, Judge Reinhold and others) as they concern themselves with the mall, fast-food jobs, sex and surfing. Jackson Browne wrote the song “Somebody’s Baby” for the film. (Image: From left, Hallie Eckstein, Ms. Cates and Ms. Leigh)X-MEN: DAYS OF FUTURE PAST (2014) 3:45 p.m. on HBO. In the present, the mutants have been hunted nearly to extinction by robots called the Sentinels. In the 1970s, a mutant-hating arms manufacturer played by Peter Dinklage is developing the robots and selling them to the government. Wolverine returns to the ’70s to prevent the Sentinel program from getting out of control while the other mutants stay behind to battle robots. (Image: Jennifer Lawrence)BOOZE TRAVELER 10 p.m. on Travel Channel. Jack Maxwell travels the world doing a kind of field research on alcoholic beverages and drinking customs. In this episode he goes to Hong Kong, where he visits a wine shop that ferments reptiles and small mammals to make snake wine and baby mice wine, for instance. He drinks a variety of beverages at a horse racing track, on a boat and at a dive bar.ALMOST GENIUS  10 p.m. on TruTV. The premiere of another clip show, which laughs at the taped failures of others, with commentary by comedians.THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS (1991) 10 p.m. on Showtime. A serial killer named Buffalo Bill is at large. Jodie Foster plays the F.B.I. agent Clarice Starling, who must interview a mysteriously seductive incarcerated cannibal named Hannibal Lecter (Anthony Hopkins) for insight into Buffalo Bill’s psychology to help apprehend him. Clarice and Hannibal have a psychological war of their own. “Through the bulletproof glass, in dizzy succession, Hannibal and Clarice become analyst and analysand, teacher and pupil, father and daughter, lover and beloved, while always remaining cat and mouse,” Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times. “‘The Silence of the Lambs’ is pop film making of a high order.” (Image: Mr. Hopkins)BOOGIE NIGHTS (1997) on Netflix. Mark Wahlberg is an unassuming young man who is cast by the director Jack Horner, portrayed by Burt Reynolds, as Dirk Diggler, the lead in a pornographic film with artistic aspirations. This bawdy story, set in Los Angeles in the 1970s and ’80s, was written and directed by Paul Thomas Anderson. “Everything about ‘Boogie Nights’ is interestingly unexpected,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times. (Image: Heather Graham)Advertisement