AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayHow do you make your debut in roles as exalted as the Sugarplum Fairy and her cavalier in “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker”? And how much does a debut performance count for? The questions recurred this Christmas season at New York City Ballet when the company — investing in its future — gave these parts as opportunities to a series of young dancers from the corps.Certainly City Ballet revealed its new wealth of star potential among its youngest women and their remarkable variety. As events proved, there is no single solution to the famous role. Since 1954, when Maria Tallchief and Tanaquil LeClercq alternated in it, the Sugarplum has become a different character according to each important ballerina’s interpretation. And success is elusive. Some of the greatest dancers of Balanchine’s day — Suzanne Farrell, Patricia McBride — were at their least legendary in it. And in this era, it took Sara Mearns years before she, magnificently, conquered it.So this season, it was startling to find that two young dancers making their debuts — scarcely known even to aficionados in the audience — seemed immediately right for this role, Unity Phelan and Ashley Hod. They joined the company in 2013; both are absorbingly handsome in face and figure, with gorgeously elegant line. You have only to look at them to feel the distinction they bring to the Kingdom of Sweets. Ms. Phelan, who danced the matinee Dec. 16, was the more regal and warm of the two: an exquisite performance, with moments of sweeping grandeur.Through much of the pas de deux, Ms. Hod, who danced Sunday, seemed more guarded in revealing herself. Then came the role’s greatest moment — a sequence of supported pirouettes with rising arms that suddenly end in a backbend toward the audience. Those arms have risen in a spiraling cone, when suddenly the dancer opens herself up in a sudden cascade, with face and shoulders stretching back toward us. Most of these new performers were handsome here, but the secret — ending the backbend with a photograph-like stillness before the phrase rushes on — sometimes seemed to be lost. Yet Ms. Hod, assisted by the expert Adrian Danchig-Waring and arching back with ravishing fullness, was breathtaking: motionless and spectacular for a perfect instant.Both Indiana Woodward and Claire Kretzschmar are better known; high excitement accompanied their debuts. They were marvelously unalike. Ms. Woodward, a smallish brunette who joined the company in 2012, was all sparkling energy and springing brio, with wonderfully pliant, strong feet. She danced the evening performance on Saturday, followed the next afternoon by Ms. Kretzschmar, a tall, long-limbed, platinum blonde, who moved with sunny, daring confidence, as if charged with an electric current.These are both evidently important dancers, who rose admirably to the occasion. Each leaves me thinking she’ll be better suited to other ballerina roles; but who knows? Ms. Woodward is already right for the sugarplum side, Ms. Kretzschmar for the fairy side. Earlier in the season, one retired ballerina remarked that a dancer in this part needs two performances in quick succession to get the choreography’s complex landscape into her nervous system; certainly, it seems a shame that these talented women must wait another year before proving themselves further in this part.Last year, two other young corps women, Sara Adams and Emilie Gerrity, made their debuts in the role; having missed them then, I was impatient to see them this December. They did not disappoint. Ms. Adams, who performed the matinee on Thursday,  is known for a number of junior roles. In this one, she brought brightness, attack, twinkle: You felt safe in the company of her happy assurance.But why have we seen so little of Ms. Gerrity, who joined the company in 2010? She’s another of the elegant film-worthy beauties: As with Ms. Phelan, your eye hangs on the distinction with which she carries her head, the marvelous legibility of her facial features, the flowing line of her perfectly proportioned limbs. Her calm boldness takes you by surprise. In her performance on Wednesday evening, the attack with which she stepped into the climactic arabesque in the Sugarplum adagio and the accelerating speed of her traveling turns in the coda were just two of the many thrills of this performance.Who’s the Sugarplum Cavalier? He can seem a knight in shining armor, a monarch who shares the fairy’s glory, or a discreetly self-effacing gentleman whose purpose is to be near invisible beside this ideal vision. The different choices were apparent as four young men made their debuts in this role.Three male newcomers were chivalrous in both manners and achievement. Silas Farley, who, since joining the corps in 2013, has often seemed the tallest and happiest dancer in New York. As the partner to Ms. Kretzschmar, Mr. Farley also proved himself a stylish solo dancer; the leg-beating jumps with which he opened the coda were elegant grace notes that stay in the memory, while the big circuit of full-stretched jumps found him admirably focused. Ms. Kretzschmar and he, well matched in height, made a striking team.Cameron Dieck, a company member since 2008, is a dancer of manly presence, who made his debut in Saturday’s matinee. His line in jumps should be more elegant, but they were a source of strength. Peter Walker, who partnered Ms. Gerrity, was the quietest and most self-effacing of cavaliers, and that’s part of his skill: He knows when to let his ballerina take risks in daringly last-moment plunges, how to carry her to glory.Joseph Gordon, who danced Thursday’s matinee, is a marvel, always a riveting presence, but as a partner he was a little immature. In two of Ms. Adams’s pirouette sequences, he could not give her all the support she needed. He soon solved the problems; not everyone in the audience was likely to spot any trouble.There were other debuts this month; I single out these dancers as those who may do most to shape the company. I have begun to glean schedules for 2016 in hopes that repertory may show us more of them.­“George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” continues through Sunday at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, nycballet.com.Advertisement