By ZACHARY WOOLFEDEC. 28, 2015
Audience participation takes an ecclesiastical turn in Britten’s sumptuous cantata “Saint Nicolas,” featured at Trinity Church on Sunday during the first weekend of Trinity Wall Street’s annual Twelfth Night Festival. At two key points in the work listeners are asked to become singers and join in traditional hymns inserted into the text, which was written by Eric Crozier, a longtime Britten collaborator.Swelling both the music’s volume and its sense of communal ritual, these moments were among the most moving in a generally strong performance by the Trinity Youth Chorus (which also performed Britten’s charming “A Ceremony of Carols”), Downtown Voices and the instrumental forces of Novus NY and the symphony of the InterSchool Orchestras of New York.Written in 1948 to commemorate the centennial of Lancing College in Sussex, England, “Saint Nicolas” had its premiere that summer at the first Aldeburgh Festival, founded by Britten, Crozier and Britten’s partner, the tenor Peter Pears. It begins with a steady, foreboding beat, over which a violinist (here the excellent Katie Hyun) weaves a sinuous melody that guides the chorus into the introduction of the saint. Poetically retelling Nicolas’s life story, the cantata continues through an alternation of solo recitatives, arialike passages, instrumental outcries, organ surges and choruses that build to a raucous energy reminiscent of Handel’s oratorios.The part of Nicolas was sung with steadiness and sensitivity by the tenor Steven Caldicott Wilson, who was impassioned without ever straining, and calm in his death scene. In the sequences in which the adult choir sang at the front of the church, with the children’s choir in the organ loft, the conductor Stephen Sands beautifully balanced the sound and maintained order. The singers and instrumentalists had incisive, agile strength.In “A Ceremony of Carols,” conducted by Melissa Attebury, the harpist Caroline Cole was breathtaking in a solo interlude that included both weighty grandeur and an uncanny softness.The Twelfth Night Festival continues with a rich array of works (Baroque, contemporary and much in between), as well as a short run of Gotham Early Music Scene’s well-loved staging of the medieval “Play of Daniel” and, on Wednesday, the premiere of Daniel Felsenfeld and Rick Moody’s “Astrophysical Mass.” This is the first in a series of what Trinity is calling “Mass Reimaginings”: new versions of the traditional Mass, commissioned by the church. Coming every year just after Christmas, Twelfth Night is more than ever a gift.­The Twelfth Night Festival continues through Jan. 6 at various locations; trinitywall­street.org.A version of this review appears in print on December 29, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Communal Ritual Suited to the Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.