AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperIt could almost be a high-powered personals ad: World-famous concert hall seeking new chairman of the board, someone with “a passion for the arts and a love of music” who can “generate substantial annual revenue” and “work effectively with a diverse set of stakeholders.”The wish list comes from a draft memorandum circulating among Carnegie Hall board members that lays out the “attributes, duties and responsibilities” sought in its next chairman. The memo, obtained by The New York Times, offers insight into the institution’s thinking as it works to recover from the turmoil that burst into the public eye this fall when Ronald O. Perelman, the billionaire businessman, abruptly stepped down after eight months as its chairman.Beyond offering a titillating peek behind the scenes at a clash of personalities at an august institution, the blowup at Carnegie Hall raised serious questions about how boards, donors and professional staffs should balance their responsibilities at a time when nonprofit cultural institutions depend more than ever on large gifts from the very rich.The upheaval has already proved costly. Before the relationship soured, Mr. Perelman, who had given generously to Carnegie Hall, had been expected to donate another $30 million or more, according to two people familiar with conversations about the possible gift who were granted anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the matter publicly. That would have made a large dent in the hall’s $125 million fund-raising campaign, which is pegged to the 125th anniversary being celebrated this season.Carnegie Hall is quietly taking steps to deal with the fallout from Mr. Perelman’s brief reign: It has established a committee on its board to evaluate its policies, created a search committee to find a permanent chairman, and decided to hire a general counsel — a new position that “advises the board of trustees on proper governance and provides senior management with effective legal advice,” in the words of a job listing posted. Many of the steps seem designed to clarify the responsibilities of board and staff.“It’s a very important question: What is the role of the board versus what is the role of the staff,” said Michael M. Kaiser, who has run several major arts institutions and now directs the DeVos Institute of Arts Management at the University of Maryland.Mr. Kaiser said that boards should be involved in several areas: developing and approving plans and seeing that they are implemented; understanding and approving budgets; hiring, firing and compensating the people who report to them; raising money; and serving as ambassadors for their organizations. But in modern nonprofit arts organizations, those who pay the players — the donors and board members — do not get to call the tunes.“They don’t determine artistic choices, they don’t select artists, they don’t operate the organization,” he said. “They approve plans, and the staff is responsible for implementing them and reporting back to the board.”That balance has been out of whack at some institutions. Some boards have been criticized for being lax or irresponsible, such as the one that allowed the cascade of missteps that eventually sent New York City Opera into bankruptcy. Others boards and donors have been accused of overstepping their roles, micromanaging staffs or improperly trying to interfere in artistic matters. (Mr. Kaiser said that when he ran American Ballet Theater, a donor once offered a million-dollar donation if Mr. Kaiser would promote a certain dancer — an offer he refused, though the company needed money.) The fear of both extremes seems to have played a role in the dispute at Carnegie Hall, as the relationship between Mr. Perelman and the hall’s staff grew strained.The choice of Mr. Perelman last February surprised some in the music world. He readily acknowledged that he was not a classical music aficionado, and his pugnacious reputation in the business world raised questions about how he would fit in at the helm of Carnegie’s somewhat clubby board. But Mr. Perelman was a billionaire who had the backing of Sanford I. Weill, the outgoing chairman, a generous philanthropist who had given about $30 million over the years to Carnegie Hall, where the main stage is named for him.Before long Mr. Perelman was clashing with Clive Gillinson, who has been the hall’s executive and artistic director for a decade. Mr. Perelman accused Mr. Gillinson of a lack of transparency, suggested that the hall was not adequately vetting potential conflicts of interests, and in August suspended Mr. Gillinson, accusing him of disregarding instructions to hold off on a planned music prize. A subsequent legal review found “no evidence to support allegations that Mr. Gillinson sought to undermine Mr. Perelman’s or the board’s oversight responsibilities, or that his staff’s actions impeded the proper governance of Carnegie Hall,” the hall said in a statement in November.Carnegie Hall, which is owned by New York City, has declined to offer more details on the findings of the review. “We publicly shared the review’s conclusions last month, and we do not have any further information to add, especially as we’re not able to discuss specifics tied to confidential business matters,” Synneve Carlino, a Carnegie spokeswoman, said in a statement.A brief suspension of Mr. Gillinson called into question the proper relationship between the chairman and the rest of the board. Mr. Perelman suspended him with input from two other board members but without telling the rest of the executive committee, an action that left many feeling blindsided, according to a board member. The executive committee reinstated Mr. Gillinson the next day.Mr. Perelman made his view of the proper relationship between the board and the staff clear in a letter shortly before he announced that he would not seek re-election as chairman: State law, he wrote, mandates that “an executive director serve the board through its chairman — not vice versa.”The draft memo about the duties of the next chairman casts the relationship differently. It calls for the chairman to “work in partnership with the executive and artistic director to achieve the mission of the organization and make sure board resolutions are carried out,” to communicate concerns between the board and the staff, and to be “a trusted adviser to the executive and artistic director” as he or she “develops and implements Carnegie Hall’s strategic plan.”Asked if Carnegie Hall was looking from within the board or from outside as it seeks a chairman to succeed Mercedes T. Bass, who was elected acting chairman in October, Ms. Carlino said only that it was early in the process, and the search committee was “focused on looking for the right person for the chairman position.”Advertisement