AdvertisementSupported byBy Ted LoosMILWAUKEE — The architect Santiago Calatrava’s addition to the Milwaukee Art Museum, completed in 2001, quickly became the symbol of this Midwestern city, plastered prominently on the official tourism website.The $130 million Quadracci Pavilion, the addition’s official name, has a cathedral-like reception hall topped by a soaring louvered sunscreen that opens like the wings of a giant bird. Locals refer to the structure — which holds a grand temporary exhibition space, a restaurant and other amenities — as simply “the Calatrava,” as if it were a stand-alone artwork.But the museum has some 30,000 objects in its permanent collection that are housed in two other buildings. And while attention was being lavished on the Quadracci Pavilion, including scrambling to pay off the debt its construction incurred, the two older buildings were falling apart: Water, the great enemy of museum collections, was dripping through the ceilings of the War Memorial Center — a 1957 structure designed by Eero Saarinen — and its larger 1975 addition by David Kahler.Gallery spaces, encroached upon for storage and offices over the years, were unnavigable. “The floor plan was a maze,” the museum’s chief curator, Brady Roberts, said. “Staff people who had been here for 10 years would get lost.”Something had to be done, and much eventually was. Last month the museum unveiled its understated reboot of the two older buildings, at a cost of $34 million, including a discreet, glass-and-steel addition of 16,000 square feet to the Kahler building right on the edge of Lake Michigan. The project is one of a handful of recent art museum renovations, including the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford and the Smithsonian’s Renwick Gallery in Washington, that have opted for a relatively modest approach over starchitecture.“People shouldn’t come to a museum just for the architecture, and this brings back the balance to the art,” said Dan Keegan, the Milwaukee museum’s director, who undertook the renovations. The project increases the number of objects on view to 2,500 from 1,500, in significant measure because of the way it reclaims original gallery space.The entire permanent collection was shuttered in September 2014 for the renovations. (By 2009, the wooden floor in one gallery had buckled so badly that it reminded some of Maya Lin’s “Wave Field.”) “You can imagine how I felt in my stomach when I learned that it was water damage,” Mr. Roberts said.Peter Kenny, a former longtime curator at the Metropolitan Museum of Art who ran its American Wing, said, “It’s brilliant that they could do as much as they did for $34 million.”Mr. Kenny recently visited the museum here as a trustee for the Chipstone Foundation in Milwaukee, which promotes American decorative arts. The foundation has lent some of its significant collection to the museum, including a Colonial-era tea bowl, and has curated five of the new American galleries.With the rehab, works from the museum’s most significant holding — the Bradley Collection, a 1975 gift of about 400 works by 20th-century masters like Picasso, Braque, Kandinsky and Giacometti — are no longer endangered.The formerly cramped and confusing Kahler building now features an airy sculpture gallery with large pieces by Martin Puryear, Richard Serra and Eva Hesse.“So many elements of the contemporary collection were never on view,” Mr. Roberts said. “Nobody has seen these all out at once.”Perhaps the most significant feature is the new Herzfeld Center for Photography and Media Arts, 10,000 square feet of dedicated space in the Kahler building that allows the museum to display works like Edward Weston’s 1938 image “Bad Water, Death Valley.”To achieve his goals, Mr. Keegan, the museum director, first had to untangle a complicated arrangement with the Milwaukee County War Memorial, which has always shared a small portion of the Saarinen building with the museum. The county owns the building, and for decades the War Memorial controlled all the mechanical systems, which badly needed updating.“We’re occupying 90 percent of the space, why don’t we take responsibility for the systems?” said Mr. Keegan, who will leave the director’s job in May having accomplished that switch-over. “That was the historic agreement we reached.”Some $24 million in funding came from private donors, with the remaining $10 million from Milwaukee County. The museum’s endowment is currently around $65 million.Local government participation was key, Mr. Keegan said: “We said we wouldn’t take on the project unless they put skin in the game.”According to the powerful fund-raisers behind the scenes, there are no regrets about the order of priorities, having started with brand-name new architecture first before getting around to renovating the older buildings.“There will always be naysayers who think there are better ways to do something,” said Bud Selig, the commissioner emeritus of Major League Baseball and a former owner of the Milwaukee Brewers, who was a key patron of the renovations and the Quadracci Pavilion. His wife, Suzanne L. Selig, is a longtime museum trustee, and they now have two family-named galleries at the institution.But Mr. Selig said he was still surprised at how much impact a renovation of existing buildings could have. “I didn’t fully realize how much it meant to the museum until the night of the opening in November,” he said. “It’s just stunning.”Connecting the Quadracci Pavilion to the Kahler addition has proved the trickiest task of all, because most people enter the museum through Mr. Calatrava’s building. (With the renovation there is now an additional entrance through the Kahler building, too.)To see the permanent galleries, visitors must go down a long hallway; in the past many people simply never made the trek.“One of the real challenges was getting a vista in the galleries to pull you down,” Mr. Kenny said after his visit. “I am not sure they solved that, but it’s better and brighter now.”Previously, Egyptian antiquities were dimly visible at the far end of the hallway. As a new enticement, the museum has now anchored the connecting point with Tom Wesselmann’s colorful 1964 Pop work “Still Life #51” — depicting an orange and a can of Milwaukee-born Pabst Blue Ribbon.Perhaps the beer will do the trick.Advertisement