

      By ELISHA COOPER

JAN. 1, 2016

Thousands experience the beauty of George Balanchine’s classic ballet at Lincoln Center each year. Far fewer see what happens behind the scenes — the makeup and mouse heads — or what life is like for the dancers and workers who put on 49 performances in 38 days. Here is a sketchbook, in pictures and words, of the world in the wings.
In a studio in the lower concourse of the David H. Koch Theater, 10-year old Dakota Blake is eating a salad and having her hair curled by her mother. In an hour she will perform in tonight’s “Nutcracker” as a party guest, a mouse and a Polichinelle — a little clown.Young dancers from the School of American Ballet put on makeup, have their “cheeks” (red doll-like circles) painted on by older students, play cards and do homework. The youngest dancers play hide-and-seek.Two levels above, in a dressing room behind the stage, the New York City Ballet principal dancer Teresa Reichlen eats a banana and puts on her makeup while listening to Indie Brunch on Spotify. She’s this evening’s Sugarplum Fairy.Onstage, Tim O’Dell, a member of the Local 1 stagehands union, sweeps the floor with a long broom, then rolls over it with a mini-Zamboni. As the music starts, young dancers flock to the children’s wardrobe room. Soldiers’ uniforms wait on chairs. Bags with slippers hang underneath. Ulrika Haag, a costumer, bobby-pins the bunny’s ears in place.The mice run up the stairs to the stage level and put on their heads. One mouse groans: “Hot, very hot. Hard to breathe. Hard to see!” As they waddle down the hallway toward the stage, they bump into one another and squeak: “Sorry! Sorry! Sorry!”In the lower concourse studio, parents watch the performance on a monitor (though a few take the opportunity to drink coffee and talk). When Marie, in the battle scene, hits the Mouse King with a particularly accurate throw of her slipper, some parents applaud.After the snowflake dance, Marie and the Prince walk down the halls leaving a paper trail of “Snowflakes.” F. Henry Berlin, the Prince, saves the shredded pieces of paper in a cup and has jars of it at home.Nine years ago, Harrison Coll was a student playing the Prince; now he’s in the corps de ballet and performing this evening as Mother Ginger. After stagehands attach his stilts, he lifts up a Polichinelle and does curls with her. As the second act starts, members of the corps de ballet watch from the wings, stretching and keeping loose. Sometimes, before going on, they wave across the stage at friends in the opposite wing.After nailing a difficult turn, the principal dancer Megan Fairchild comes offstage and high-fives another dancer. After her next turn, she downs a cup of water. After her final turns, she collapses in a chair and gasps, “Oh, my heart hurts.”As Sugarplum and Cavalier perform, Harrison Coll (still in a wig but no longer on stilts) dances in the wings with the Polichinelles. They take turns with him, imitating the pas de deux onstage. Mr. Coll lifts one “poli” in a grande jeté, and she soars into the air. The curtain is down. In the lower concourse, young dancers wipe off their “cheeks” and pull on coats and sweatpants. They sign out and leave quickly — they will be back at the theater soon enough — and head out to the dark of Columbus Avenue.Elisha Cooper is an author and illustrator of children’s books. His daughter Mia Cappella Cooper was a mouse and a Polichinelle this year in New York City Ballet’s “The Nutcracker.”Advertisement