AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioLiving up to its tradition as the premier forum for rock ’n’ roll reunions, the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival will host at least two of them in 2016: Guns N’ Roses — a gigantic get — and LCD Soundsystem.The music world has been buzzing for months about a possible reunion for Guns N’ Roses, after Slash, the band’s original lead guitarist, suggested in interviews that he had finally reconciled with Axl Rose, its singer, ending a two-decade feud. After the original band fell apart in the mid-1990s, Mr. Rose maintained the Guns N’ Roses name, releasing “Chinese Democracy,” one of rock’s  longest-gestating albums, in 2008 — after some 13 years of work and untold millions of dollars in production expenses — and he has toured with various new members over the years.Now, some version of the classic Guns N’ Roses will headline the next Coachella, which will return to Indio, Calif., on April 15-17 and April 22-24, according to a person with direct knowledge of the festival’s plans, who was not authorized to discuss it publicly. The festival is expected to announce the lineup early next week.Besides Slash and Mr. Rose, it is unclear who else will participate. Its classic lineup, which played on the band’s 1987 debut album, “Appetite for Destruction,” also included the guitarist Izzy Stradlin, the bassist Duff McKagan and the drummer Steven Adler, who was kicked out in 1990.News of Guns N’ Roses’ return was first reported by Billboard, which also said that the band was looking to book a major stadium tour next year — which, if it happens, could easily be one of the biggest rock tours in years, with top ticket prices likely. Mr. Rose is expected to make an announcement about the future of Guns N’ Roses on “Jimmy Kimmel Live!” next week.The next Coachella will also feature the return of LCD Soundsystem, the dance-rock band led by James Murphy, which last performed in a farewell show at Madison Square Garden in 2011. Rumors of an LCD comeback surfaced on Dec. 24, after the group released a new song, “Christmas Will Break Your Heart,” on its website.A spokesman for LCD Soundsystem declined to comment. Representatives of Guns N’ Roses and Coachella did not return numerous requests for comment.Coachella’s high-profile reunions over the years have included the Pixies in 2004, Rage Against the Machine in 2007 and Outkast in 2014. For its 2015 edition, which featured AC/DC, Drake, the Weeknd and Jack White, the festival collected $84 million in ticket sales, according to Billboard, making it by far the most lucrative festival in the country.Coachella is presented by Goldenvoice, a California concert promoter that is owned by the global concert giant AEG Live.Advertisement