The Divine Morales
Museo Nacional del Prado.
Through Jan. 10.The Spanish artist Luis de Morales, who was born in the early years of the 16th century, painted almost exclusively religious artwork over the course of his lifetime, offering his wares in cities and towns across Spain and Portugal. This show presents around 50 of his artworks, including the circa 1560 “La Piedad.” Like many of Morales’s works, it has a stylized look that anticipates the work of El Greco, who was several decades his junior.The Metabolic Age
MALBA.
Through Feb. 15.The video artist Takeshi Murata, the installation artist Wilfred Prieto, and William Wegman, whose artwork focuses on dogs, are on view in this contemporary art exhibition. The curator Chus Martínez chose a 1965 egg sculpture by Federico Manuel Peralta Ramos — which the artist displayed once and then smashed with a hammer — as the exhibition’s starting point (a recreation of the work is on display). The show focuses on the legacy that Peralta Ramos’s project continues to exert on art in the Internet age.The Magic Flute
Teatro la Fenice.
Oct. 20-31.This summer, audiences at the Royal Opera House in London jeered at a rape scene that the director Damiano Michieletto inserted into the opera “William Tell.” Now, Mr. Michieletto is taking the stage again with a new production of Mozart’s well-loved, fantastical opera. The bass baritones Alex Esposito and Thomas Tatzl will alternate in the role of the love-lorn birdcatcher Papageno.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Shunga
Eisei Bunko Museum.
Through Dec. 23.“Shunga” is an ancient Japanese erotic art form, whose best known expressions are racy woodblock prints created during the Edo Period, in the 17th to 19th centuries. Over 100 of those works are on view, by a mix of relatively unknown artists and major names, like Hokusai, who had a major retrospective at the Grand Palais in Paris last year, and at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston this year. The show is the first shunga exhibition of its scale ever held in Japan and is open to adults only.Macbeth
Wiener Staatsoper.
Through Oct. 21.The celebrated German director Christian Räth’s new production of Verdi’s opera — a straight adaptation of Shakespeare’s play — updates the action to a fictional future, and features a chorus dressed like characters from Star Trek. The Romanian baritone George Petean plays the role of the general-turned-king Macbeth, and the Russian soprano Tatiana Serjan plays Lady Macbeth.Titian to Canaletto
Ashmolean Museum.
Oct. 15-Jan. 10.Titian, Canaletto and a range of other artists who worked in 16th- to 18th-century Venice are on view in this show, which focuses on drawing that emerged from the city. Other artists include Tintoretto, Bellini and Vittore Carpaccio. The artist Jenny Saville created a number of works inspired by Venice’s artistic output for a small solo exhibition that runs alongside the main show.Picasso Mania
Grand Palais.
Oct. 7- Feb. 29This large-scale exhibition is a retrospective of the artist and an exegesis of his influence on the art movements that followed him. The exhibition includes works from Picasso’s career, from the early blue period to the late Cubist works. Around 75 other artists, whose works curators believe draw from his output, are on display. They include Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein and David Hockney.SCAPE 8: New Intimacies
Various venues.
Through Nov. 15.Big-name artists like Antony Gormley and local ones make up this exhibition of public artworks that are spread throughout the city. Some artists created new works for the show, including Mr. Gormley, who made two statues for the event. Other works on view include a billboard-size piece centered around a photo from an early 20th-century local newspaper (by Nathan Pohio), and “Call me Snake,” by Judy Millar, a giant sculpture in which several fine artworks by the artist twist around each other. Christchurch was hit by a major earthquake in 2011, which destroyed much of the city, and some artworks on view reflect on the city’s ongoing recovery.Mozart in Havana
Various Venues.
Oct. 16-24.Local musicians, a youth orchestra and several prominent classical music artists from Europe will perform in this festival, timed to coincide with the third anniversary of the Lyceum Mozartiano de la Habana, a musical training and performance center. The Lyceum’s youth orchestra opens the festival with a performance of Mozart’s Concerto for Flute in G major and his Mass in C minor, and closes it by playing two Mozart symphonies, under the direction of the conductor Walter Reiter. Guest musicians include Gérard Caussé, Clemens Hagen and Niurka González.