AdvertisementSupported byBy Joshua BaroneThe placards read like Twitter posts from the past. In large type, printed in bold against a plain backdrop, they deliver messages from women’s suffrage activists to politicians in the 1912 election: “The men of twelve States and Alaska have given women their ballot. Will you not be as fair as those men?”There are 22 posters in all, and they will soon be on view together for the first time as part of the exhibition “Women Take the Lead: From Elizabeth Cady Stanton to Eleanor Roosevelt, Suffrage to Human Rights,” opening on Jan. 14 at the Roosevelt House Public Policy Institute at Hunter College on the Upper East Side.Along with the posters are other documents from the decades-long women’s suffrage moment, like the prison records of the British activist Emmeline Pankhurst (played by Meryl Streep in the recent film “Suffragette”) and an early copy of Ms. Stanton’s “Declaration of Sentiments” at the 1848 Seneca Falls Convention on women’s rights.The propaganda pamphlets are by turns angry and playful. One of them, “Mother Goose as a Suffragette,” is a collection of altered nursery rhymes like:Jack and Jill Have equal will And equal strength of mind. But when it comes to Equal Rights Poor Jill trails far behind.Beyond suffrage, the show includes documents from women’s history. Among them is an original manuscript about family planning from Margaret Sanger, a pioneer in birth control and founder of the precursor to Planned Parenthood. A hand-edited script of the 1938 Nobel Prize acceptance speech of Pearl S. Buck, the first American woman to win that honor, will also be on view.The exhibition — curated by Deborah Gardner, Roosevelt House’s staff historian — combines materials from the philanthropist Barbara Dobkin’s private collection of feminist history with in-house resources related to Mrs. Roosevelt, who was a member of the League of Women Voters and was actively involved in New York politics.The show is the first at Roosevelt House — the New York City home base for the former president and his wife from 1905-1941 — since it reopened as a public policy institute six years ago.Harold Holzer, who became the director in August, said the exhibition began with a suggestion by Elbrun Kimmelman, a member of the Roosevelt House board of advisers, who had seen “No Gate, No Lock, No Bolt,” a show along the same lines, at Glenn Horowitz Bookseller, which manages Ms. Dobkin’s collection. Ms. Kimmelman and her husband, Peter, provided the money to bring the materials to Hunter College.At Roosevelt House, the show has been expanded to include documents from its own collection, a process that Ms. Gardner said had led her to discover treasures even she had not yet seen. Even when showing the exhibition’s materials to a reporter, she came across a bound archive of typescripts from Mrs. Roosevelt’s syndicated column, “My Day,” in which she chided the Republican National Committee for mistakenly reaching out to her in a fund-raising campaign and, absurdly, invoking the Gettysburg Address to gain support.The Roosevelt House, Mr. Holzer said, also figures in women’s history. It was at this house that Franklin D. Roosevelt asked Frances Perkins to become secretary of labor, and the first female cabinet member. This exhibition, Mr. Holzer said, “is being shown in a place where women’s history was embraced and advanced.”All the better that the Roosevelt House is also part of Hunter College, founded in 1870 as one of the first women’s colleges, said the university’s president, Jennifer Raab. While the exhibition is open to the public, she said she was hoping Hunter students especially would learn from and better understand that the rights they have were hard won.“On the one hand, women today are standing on the shoulders of so many before them,” Ms. Raab said. “But we’re still not there. We’re still talking about equal pay and protection against sexual abuse. Women still don’t have equal rights.”­“Women Take the Lead: From Elizabeth Cady Stanton to Eleanor Roosevelt, Suffrage to Human Rights” runs Jan. 14 to April 2 at Roosevelt House Public Policy Institute at Hunter College, 47-49 East 65th Street, Manhattan; roosevelthouse­.hunter­.cuny­.edu.Advertisement