AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon Pareles, Ben Ratliff, Jon Caramanica and Nate ChinenIn the full portfolio of what musicians can and must do, concerts now take their place alongside digital-only recordings, long-form videos, limited-edition vinyl, intricately timed rollouts, interviews, tweets, public disagreements and various other kinds of life-as-performance. But the stage show is still where it’s possible to take the full measure of a performer, whether at a D.I.Y. party or an arena. Here, from the jazz and pop critics at The New York Times, are hundreds of 2015 concert experiences boiled down to 40. BEN RATLIFF1. U2 AccorHotels Arena, Paris, Dec. 7: I wasn’t there; I watched it on HBO. But even without the scale or volume of a live performance, the Paris show that concluded U2’s Innocence and Experience tour — postponed after the massacre at the Bataclan — was concert as personal memoir, archetypal story, prayer, exorcism and vow of unity. Autobiographical songs about terrorism in Dublin and overcoming “days of fear” had a new context, and Eagles of Death Metal provided a benediction.2. D’Angelo and the Vanguard Apollo Theater, Feb. 7: D’Angelo had waited nearly 15 years between albums. At the soul shrine of the Apollo, singing his complex, hardheaded new songs, he was in full command. His band worked like an old-school soul revue, moving from leisurely tease to funky drive, from seduction to consciousness-raising, from visceral to thoughtful to soulful. It wasn’t like he had never left; it was why he never should have.3. Grateful Dead Soldier Field, Chicago, July 4: Reclaiming and retiring the band name after 50 years — though with ringers like Trey Anastasio in the lineup — the Grateful Dead drew an outpouring of gratitude, nostalgia and tie-dye at their Fare Thee Well shows. Yet they also pushed themselves to keep exploring together as they played, peaking with this Independence Day show of songs full of American place names. True to the Dead’s legacy, it spanned the down-home and the cosmic.4. Björk Carnegie Hall, March 7, Governors Ball, June 6: Indoors and outdoors in New York City, Björk performed the chronicles of heartache and healing from her album “Vulnicura.” In Carnegie Hall, the sorrow and vulnerability were palpable. Outdoors, such nuance seemed unlikely to survive, and it didn’t have to. Instead, she drew on the injured rage that also courses through those songs.5. FKA twigs Brooklyn Hangar, May 19: Slow-motion grooves, deep bass, banks of lasers and a dance troupe of contortionists and voguers accompanied “Congregata,” a dark, eerie, meticulously choreographed pageant of desire and suspense.6. A. R. Rahman Beacon Theater, May 28: A. R. Rahman’s Bollywood (and lately Hollywood) songs and scores aren’t just East meets West. Past also meets present, North meets South and Indian raga and ghazal meet disco, flamenco, reggae, Baroque music and hip-hop. In a concert full of Bollywood hits and the Oscar-winning “Jai Ho,” the musicians and singers demonstrated globe-spanning virtuosity and proved that hooks break language barriers.7. Chick Corea and Herbie Hancock Carnegie Hall, April 9: The duets by these two jazz-piano grandmasters (and Miles Davis alumni), touring together for the first time since 1978, were all chromaticism, comedy, pinpoint timing, close listening and can-you-top-this improvisation. They brought their synthesizers but quickly realized that their pianos spoke together much better.8. Arca Bowery Ballroom, April 8: Arca’s electronic music defied digital neatness and claimed the physicality behind synthetic sounds. As his music throbbed, swooped, whooshed and thundered, Jesse Kanda’s video images melted human figures into surreal shapes. Eventually, a near-nude Arca made his way into the audience to chant and shout in Spanish, emphatically a figure of flesh and blood.9. Courtney Barnett Red 7, Austin, Tex., March 16: The droll contrariness of Courtney Barnett’s lyrics keeps getting her tagged as a slacker — exactly the wrong term for the way she tore into her many South by Southwest shows. Her cranked-up rhythm guitar was a force of nature as she led her trio, with her words hoarsely tumbling out, carrying Velvet Underground basics into her own contentious present tense.10. Florence and the Machine Governors Ball, June 5: Doing her first concert “standing” after breaking her foot in April, Florence Welch rarely stood still. She strode, ran, jumped and danced all over the stage to her band’s joyous crescendos, throwing herself into her songs’ messages of love, affirmation and inner strength.1. Vexx Berserktown II festival, Santa Ana, Calif., Aug. 16: Vexx, from Olympia, Wash., plays sturdy and elegant songs with trebly and powerful riffs, a partial echo of early West Coast punk. Those songs have their own virtue, but the singer Maryjane Dunphe embodied them entirely — pacing, swaying, interacting with the stage monitors and the floor, acting out dozens of emotions, taking possession of a stage at a level I saw no one else quite reach this year.2.Wayne Shorter with the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra Rose Theater, Jazz at Lincoln Center, May 14: The saxophonist and composer Mr. Shorter, at 81, diverted from his usual role as expansive and mystical soloist in a quartet. Instead, he worked within small spaces afforded by big-band arrangements of his songs (written by members of the 15-piece orchestra). The arrangements felt original, and so did virtually every gesture Mr. Shorter played.3. “More Up a Tree,” Claudia de Serpa Soares and Jim White Fishman Space, BAM Fisher, Nov. 19: A set of structured improvisations full of loose and generative energy, between Jim White’s relaxed, low-slung drumming and Claudia de Serpa Soares’s dancing. It took place inside a rectangular enclosure with two-way mirror glass, designed by the artist Eve Sussman, which made it an event about spectatorship and participation, both from the point of the view of the performers and the audience.4. Gilberto Gil Town Hall, April 23: Performing with a new group, using quiet wiles and experimentation generously — as if the audience were co-conspirators — Mr. Gil, a master of Brazilian popular music, kept finding new ways to get to the center of old bossa-nova repertory.5. Grouper Big Ears festival, Knoxville, Tenn., March 28: Liz Harris, who performs as Grouper, sat cross-legged on the stage floor, playing electric guitar and singing through veils of echo and reverb, as 16-millimeter films of wood and water and stone played behind her; she turned simple songs into churchly environments.6. Kevin Drumm and Jason Lescalleet Amplify 2015 festival, Fridman Gallery, Nov. 1: Electro-acoustic music made with laptops, reel-to-reel tape machines and field recordings: loud, dense, physical and purposeful.7. Circuit des Yeux Saint Vitus, Sept. 13: Haley Fohr’s low and commanding voice, and her strong and gliding new songs arranged for a small, folkish band, feel like the hard-won result of a natural process.8. Steve Coleman/Milford Graves/John Zorn Village Vanguard, Feb. 13: A first-time meeting for a trio of inveterate big-picture thinkers, two saxophonists and a drummer, organizing themselves into various alert combinations, finding resonance in tone and rhythm.9. Vessel The Wick, Feb. 4: The English electronic-music producer Vessel, a.k.a. Sebastian Gainsborough, set up his gear on the floor of a Brooklyn club, bringing analog circuitry and a constantly shifting and cross-fading vocabulary of sound — fast-tempo dance beats and perverse silences, crackling washes and siren-like melodies.10. Downtown Boys house party, East Los Angeles, Aug 14: A band from Providence, R.I., that merges the singer Victoria Ruiz’s speeches with onrushing, clattering dance-punk, asking direct questions about social justice on local and theoretical levels. It gets to you, especially in this kind of setting: a word-of-mouth show at a packed and tiny backyard in an otherwise quiet neighborhood.1. Barack Obama College of Charleston, Charleston, S.C. (broadcast live on C-Span), June 26: At the memorial service for the Rev. Clementa Pinckney, slain in his own church nine days prior, President Barack Obama spoke for around a half-hour about, among other things, the historical and psychological import of the black church. “Our beating heart,” he called it. “The place where our dignity as a people is inviolate.” A killer had torn that safe space asunder. To help stanch the wound, the President had to offer an example of resilience — to make, in effect, the whole world his church. And so he sang: The first few syllables of “Amazing Grace” spilled out of him frictionlessly. Quickly, the clergy seated behind him rose to their feet, smiling as if hit by sudden sunshine. By the second line, the crowd was singing with him. By the fourth, the band had fallen into step.President Obama sings like a lecturer: contained, sonorous and lingering on certain words for emphasis, pulling “sound” and “found” out into three hard syllables. This singing wasn’t ecstatic, but empathetic and pained. Even as the room filled with palpable joy and release, President Obama remained grave. After finishing the opening quatrain, he declaimed the names of the victims of the Charleston shooting, the band replying each time with a relieved organ flourish.The President’s fluency with the impassioned rhetorical maneuvers of the black church is a gift he only sometimes shares. In the video of this moment, you can see the thrill on the faces of those on stage with him, as if they were being let in on a secret. One man hastily removed his sunglasses, his eyes revealing shock and pride. Beamed out to countless homes and offices around the country, this was a vivid demonstration of music as resistance, and music as balm. For a couple of minutes, bathed in the President’s song, everyone was safe.2. Drake Molson Canadian Amphitheatre, Toronto, Aug. 3: A superstar concert. A branding exercise. A tactical mission. A casual dissection. A savage grin. A flexed muscle. A commandeered throne.3. Keith Ape S.O.B.’s, April 7: It was unrestrained mayhem at the New York debut of the rising Korean hip-hop star Keith Ape, both a cross-cultural curiosity and also a clear inheritor of Southern rap rowdiness that requires no translation.4. BigBang Prudential Center, Newark, Oct. 11: This electric, sleek and dizzyingly busy concert by one of South Korea’s most vital K-pop acts made even its biggest American counterparts look like rank amateurs.5. Taylor Swift Soldier Field, Chicago, July 18: What appears on the surface to be a triumph of optimism is in fact a triumph of determination, of flamboyant talent, of sheer power. That Ms. Swift delivers it in a way that emphasizes and prioritizes relatability is the greatest bait-and-switch of all.6. Chance the Rapper Union Park, Chicago, July 19: The hometown hero’s polymorphic hip-hop extravaganza at Pitchfork Music festival peaked with his surprise guest: not Kanye West, as expected, but Kirk Franklin, who abetted Chance’s gusts of optimism and moral vision with literal preaching.7. Skepta Palisades, July 29: One of the biggest stars of London’s grime revival performed here in what can only be termed a sauna. Skepta had a healthy sheen throughout his set, while a couple hundred audience members raged hard and melted ungracefully.8. D’Angelo Apollo Theater, Feb. 7: Sweaty, virtuosic, vital. But it could have begun and ended with the outlandishly great 15-minute rendition of “Untitled (How Does It Feel)” and no one would have complained.9. The Haxan Cloak 23 Wall Street, May 15: In what was more or less a cave in the financial district, the Haxan Cloak played a set of elegant, thrashing rumble and groan — something like being trapped between an industrial leaf blower and a pneumatic drill — as part of the Tri Angle Records fifth-anniversary show.10. Shamir Music Hall of Williamsburg, June 1: Sometimes the young soul/folk/dance singer Shamir can sound fragile, but on this stage, with little musical assistance, he pulsed with real authority and vocal strength, seeming like he was shrugging all the while.Honorable-not-quite-a-concert mention:‘Hamilton’ The Public Theatre: Nothing else this year, or in any recent year, offered such hope for the written word, the spoken word, the sung word and the rapped word.1. D’Angelo and the Vanguard Best Buy Theater, March 11: A show of dominion from a singer and bandleader with absolute command of his resources: D’Angelo started out strong and only got stronger, luxuriating in the swirling current of the Vanguard’s rhythm section, and presiding over his earthy yet exalted version of a psychedelic funk-soul revue.2. Jack DeJohnette’s Made in Chicago Newport Jazz Festival, Aug. 1: During a year of 50th anniversary festivities for the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, this council of elders — Mr. DeJohnette on drums, Muhal Richard Abrams on piano, Roscoe Mitchell and Henry Threadgill on reeds and flutes, and Larry Gray on bass and cello — stretched space and time, making each passing moment feel pressurized and pivotal.3. Björk Carnegie Hall, March 7: In the first performance of songs from “Vulnicura,” her chronicle of heartbreak, Björk exuded a hard-fought composure, singing with clarion precision against chamber-electronic backing. Her pain was offered as something other than an abstraction — but so was her perseverance, girded by the drive to refine raw experience into art.4. Cécile McLorin Salvant Jazz Standard, Aug. 25: It’s not just deep mastery of a historical tradition that sets Ms. Salvant apart as a jazz singer. As she showed in this coolly intoxicating set, she’s also working with a rare set of critical tools, and the ability to make a roomful of listeners feel like sly accomplices.5. Ibrahim Maalouf’s Kalthoum Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola, May 25: Mr. Maalouf, a Lebanese trumpeter living in Paris, teamed up with elite partners like the saxophonist Mark Turner in this homage to Oum Kalthoum, the great Arabic singer. As on “Kalthoum,” due out digitally next week, it took the form of an hourlong suite played with sleek assurance and devotional fire.6. Brandi Carlile Ryman Auditorium, Nashville, Oct. 3: Burnished, yearning melody and a reverent sense of occasion gave Ms. Carlile plenty to work with in this concert, which also carried a subtext of the changing tide in country music. The voice was huge and the sentiment huger, staggeringly so.7. Charles Lloyd New Quartet Village Vanguard, March 15: Returning to the Vanguard stage after an absence of more than 40 years, the tenor saxophonist and flutist Charles Lloyd made this one-nighter feel both momentous and casual.8. Marquis Hill Blacktet TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, Jan. 31: The sharp young Chicago trumpeter Marquis Hill established a foothold in New York this year, starting here. His Blacktet, featuring aces like the drummer Makaya McCraven, blended post-bop and hip-hop in unforced and persuasive ways.9. Rhiannon Giddens The Towne Crier, Beacon, N.Y., Nov. 13: So much about Ms. Giddens could scan as oldfangled mannerism: the minstrel banjo, the mountain songs, that folk-operatic alto. But the rigor and charisma of her performance lifted her well beyond pastiche.10. ‘Real Enemies,’  Harvey Theater, Brooklyn Academy of Music, Nov. 18: This rumination on American conspiracy theories was a true collaboration, its visual dynamism inseparable from the whole. Still, the crux of the work was the music, composed by Darcy James Argue for his Secret Society big band, streamlining complex maneuvers with an on-rushing flair.Advertisement