By SCOTT ROTHKOPFDEC. 29, 2015
Words like joy, delight and wonder don’t have a lot of currency in serious contemporary art criticism, which tends to prize skepticism and anxiety over supposedly easier pleasures. But it was precisely those former feelings that overcame me when I first encountered Ellsworth Kelly’s work en masse as a college student at his staggering 1996 retrospective at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum. The artist filled Frank Lloyd Wright’s signature rotunda with a confetti explosion of jaunty yellow ovals, crisp blue rectangles and vivid red curves, delivering an effervescent jolt that changed the course of my life and my interest in art. His paintings were strict yet somehow sprightly, and they tended to arouse emotions that one would be hard-pressed to ascribe to Mr. Kelly’s equally rigorous contemporaries in the field of abstraction.Back at school, I sought out the courses taught by Mr. Kelly’s greatest critical champion, Yve-Alain Bois, and was soon fortunate to meet the artist himself. In the days since his death at 92, I’ve been thinking more about his playful spirit than the generally esteemed intellectual qualities of his mind and work. There was, in both Mr. Kelly and his art, the thrill of discovery and the joy it could provoke.The last time I visited his studio in Spencertown, N.Y., it was as a curator at the Whitney Museum of American Art, on New Year’s Day almost exactly one year ago. He was excited as ever to greet the new year, hurriedly ushering me from a model for an unfinished chapel in Texas he was designing, to a YouTube video of an adorable Oxford University a cappella group vamping it up to Mariah Carey’s “All I Want for Christmas Is You.” “What a great song!” he exclaimed, eyes flashing, fingers tapping along.Our next stop was a pristine sky-lit space hung with a clutch of new paintings. Often in art, as in most things, elegance can be the enemy of feeling or vigor, but not so in Mr. Kelly’s case. Here was a group of ineffably refined paintings that felt hard-won yet unstudied, perfectly poised yet bristling with life. A few harked back to collages he had made some 70 years before, while others looked to an unknown future. One particularly surprising canvas featured a sunny yellow field crowned by wobbly blue forms suggesting an infinity sign that seemed at once to vex and intrigue its maker. “Do you think I should show it?” he asked with an impish grin.AdvertisementHe did show it, in a group of astonishing exhibitions of all new work that opened in May, two weeks shy of his 92nd birthday, and filled the four Chelsea gallery spaces of Matthew Marks, his longtime dealer and unstinting supporter. Shortly thereafter came the exceptional first volume of a catalogue raisonné of his paintings by Mr. Bois.Mr. Kelly was one of the true pioneers in the development of Abstract art, a relatively short history nearly spanned by the arc of his own long life. Most notably, he challenged the subjective nature of composition and forever changed our understanding of how artworks are not just windows to other worlds but sit squarely in the ones that they (and we) inhabit. The lilting cut-out planes and perspectival geometries of his paintings and sculptures generate delicate spatial illusions but insist on their status as things in real space open to our perception.Mr. Kelly’s achievements were vast, and he was so admired and adored by the big New York museums that each of us might be tempted to call him our own. At the Whitney we are proud to have been the first institution to acquire his work, while the Guggenheim granted him his most recent New York survey. The Museum of Modern Art can claim incomparable holdings, and at the Metropolitan Museum of Art you can always see his magisterial 1969 painting, “Spectrum V,” unfurling across nearly 40 feet of wall.AdvertisementDespite his renown, Mr. Kelly was an inveterate charmer who could make you believe the twinkle in his eye was only for you. I was surprised to learn from his obituary that as a young man he was drawn to the silence of postwar Paris, because I knew him as a real talker. He lit up at parties, especially those increasingly given in his honor, where he would momentarily feign abashment before seizing the mike and wooing the crowd.Privately, he was especially generous to students, unspooling stories about his past like a Scheherazade for the art historian set. There was his early service as a camouflage designer during World War II, and the visit to the sculptor Constantin Brancusi’s studio in the company of young female friends (whom the master insisted sit on his lap). There was the pilgrimage to discover Monet’s last canvases in his pigeon-infested atelier in Giverny, France, and the quiet of a vanished New York where Mr. Kelly lived alongside the artists Robert Indiana, Agnes Martin and Jack Youngerman in airy old lofts along Coenties Slip.As he grew older he seemed intent on making known other, more difficult stories, whether about being a young gay man in the Army or fearing throughout long periods of his career that his work might be misunderstood. Always at his side was his beloved and devoted husband, the photographer Jack Shear, chiming in with a missing name or punctuating a tale he’d heard dozens of times with a tender eye roll.But Mr. Kelly was far more interested in the present than in the past.In the inaugural exhibition of the Whitney’s new downtown home last spring, he was represented not only by his early works but also by one he completed at the age of 80. This stirring collage published in The New York Times in 2003 consisted of nothing more than an aerial image of ground zero affixed with a trapezoid of, what else, Kelly green.Amid the roiling debates over towers and memorials, Mr. Kelly had imagined the site as a void of grassy parkland in the heart of Lower Manhattan. The forces of commercial real estate and politics destined his vision of a living memorial to be no more than a dream, but the point was that Mr. Kelly was still dreaming, late in his years, choosing to confront the shadow of death with new life. That spirit of affirmation remains among his greatest gifts.Scott Rothkopf is deputy director of programs and chief curator at the Whitney Museum of American Art.A version of this article appears in print on December 30, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Artist, Inspiration, Storyteller  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.