By JOE COSCARELLIDEC. 28, 2015
Ian Fraser Kilmister, the jagged-voiced heavy-metal singer and bassist known as Lemmy, who led the loud and fast British rock band Motörhead for decades, died on Monday at his home in Los Angeles. He was 70.Motörhead confirmed his death on its Facebook page. The band said in a statement that Mr. Kilmister, who had dealt with health issues for years, had “a short battle with an extremely aggressive cancer,” which he learned he had on Saturday.Motörhead had scheduled tour dates across Britain and much of Europe to start 2016. But in an interview with the Swedish newspaper Espressen, the band’s drummer, Mikkey Dee, said the group would not continue.“Motörhead is over, of course,” he was quoted as saying. “Lemmy was Motörhead. But the band will live on in the memories of many.”AdvertisementKnown for living hard and playing furiously on Motörhead albums like “Ace of Spades,” “Overkill” and “Iron Fist,” Mr. Kilmister became an avatar of rock ’n’ roll endurance and a godfather to genres like thrash and speed metal.Advertisement“Please,” the band said in its statement, “play Motörhead loud, play Hawkwind” — Mr. Kilmister’s earlier group — “loud, play Lemmy’s music LOUD. Have a drink or few.”Formed in 1975, Motörhead has released 22 studio albums, including this year’s “Bad Magic,” featuring typically aggressive songs like “Shoot Out All of Your Lights” and “Teach Them How to Bleed.” Mr. Kilmister was the group’s only constant member.The band had slowed down in recent years, canceling tour dates because of Mr. Kilmister’s ailments, which included heart problems and diabetes. This year, he said, he had switched from his usual drink, Jack Daniel’s and Coke, to a healthier alternative: orange juice and vodka. “Apparently I am still indestructible,” he said.Mr. Kilmister was born on Dec. 24, 1945, in Staffordshire, England. His father was a minister in the Royal Air Force; his mother was a librarian.Starting in his teens, he had the good fortune to be present for many of rock ’n’ roll’s pivotal moments. When he was 18, he went to see the Beatles at the Cavern Club in Liverpool. He spent six months as a roadie for Jimi Hendrix and attended the recording sessions for the album “Axis: Bold as Love” by his group, the Jimi Hendrix Experience.He joined the English psychedelic rock band Hawkwind in 1971, but was kicked out several years later for abusing amphetamines. In response, he formed Motörhead, naming the band after the final song he wrote for Hawkwind. (Motorhead was biker slang for a person with a penchant for amphetamines.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Kilmister never married, preferring a solitary life on the road. “This is how I live, you know?” he told Rolling Stone in 2009. “It’s what I’m supposed to do.”He is survived by a son, Paul Inder.Since its debut album in 1977, titled just “Motörhead,” the band favored consistency over innovation, writing breakneck music full of violent imagery. Early on, the band coexisted with the rise of punk in Britain, but followed its own rough path. (Mr. Kilmister preferred to call its music simply rock ’n’ roll, even as his band became synonymous with “metal.”)AdvertisementIn the song “Ace of Spades,” from 1980, the band’s breakout number and still its most recognizable, Mr. Kilmister growls: “You know I’m born to lose, and gambling’s for fools/But that’s the way I like it, baby/I don’t wanna live forever.”Motörhead won a Grammy Award for best metal performance in 2005 for its cover of Metallica’s “Whiplash.” The band was nominated but lost in the same category this year for the song “Heartbreaker.”Asked as an elder statesman about the future of rock, Mr. Kilmister was often pessimistic. “People don’t want to see the guy next door on the stage; they want to see a being from another planet,” he said.Mr. Kilmister moved to Los Angeles in 1990, selecting an apartment close to the Rainbow Bar & Grill in West Hollywood, a dank hangout for rock’s most notorious figures. In 2014, he told Rolling Stone that he was not ready to hang up his bass.“I’ve still got a few bugs in me,” he said. “Don’t look forward to my demise just yet.”On Monday night, Mr. Kilmister was remembered online by his rock peers. “He was a warrior and a legend,” the metal star Ozzy Osbourne wrote. “I will see you on the other side.”The band Anthrax, one of countless groups influenced by Motörhead, said, “You are Rock N Roll.”Mr. Kilmister’s death was the second suffered by Motörhead in recent weeks. The drummer Phil Taylor, who played alongside Lemmy in the band from 1975 to 1984 and again from 1987 to 1992, died on Nov. 11 after a long illness. He was 61.Recognizable by his untamable mutton chops, facial moles and usually all-black biker gear, Mr. Kilmister cut an imposing rebel figure and was known to collect Nazi memorabilia, although he denied being a Nazi sympathizer. As he told the British newspaper The Independent in 2010, it was simply a matter of fashion for him.“I’ve always liked a good uniform,” he said, “and throughout history it’s always been the bad guy who dressed the best.”A version of this article appears in print on December 29, 2015, on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: Ian Kilmister, 70, Bassist and Singer for Motörhead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.