AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn ShattuckFor armchair detectives, Netflix’s “Making a Murderer” is delicious fodder: 10 hours of a true-crime documentary, smartly released by the streaming service over the holidays, when free time is abundant. After watching the story of Steven Avery, it’s difficult not to immediately postulate theories and throw things at your screen as you rage against the imperfections of the American justice system.Like the HBO documentary “The Jinx” and the podcast “Serial” before it, “Making a Murderer,” which took 10 years to complete, has transfixed many. District attorneys and defense lawyers alike have received negative Yelp reviews and death threats. Mia Farrow is outraged, Ricky Gervais thinks the series deserves a Nobel Prize, and Alec Baldwin live-tweeted his thoughts while watching. In Wisconsin, the Manitowoc Police Department has distanced itself from the Manitowoc County Sheriff’s Department, which handled Mr. Avery’s case. And the hacktivist group Anonymous has apparently found its latest mission.Here’s a quick rehash of the case’s facts:In 2003, after spending 18 years in prison, Mr. Avery, as a result of DNA evidence, was found not guilty of a sexual assault he’d long maintained he didn’t commit.Two years later — after filing a $36 million lawsuit against Manitowoc County officials over his false conviction — he was arrested again and charged with a new crime: the murder of 25-year-old Teresa Halbach, who’d visited the Avery family’s car-salvage yard to photograph a minivan for an automobile magazine.Despite Mr. Avery’s having been one of the last people to see Ms. Halbach alive, there was not an overwhelming amount ofphysical evidence linking him to this crime. But what did packed a wallop: Ms. Halbach’s Toyota RAV4 was discovered in the Avery car-salvage yard. Some of Mr. Avery’s blood was inside the car. The key to the vehicle was found on the floor of Mr. Avery’s bedroom. A bullet casing with her DNA was found in his garage and the fragments of her bones and teeth in a fire pit next to Mr. Avery’s home.Brendan Dassey, Mr. Avery’s 16-year-old nephew, confessed to participating in the rape and murder of Ms. Halbach.Mr. Avery once again maintained his innocence, claiming that he was framed by officers angry at the public humiliation they’d endured after his exoneration and the potential financial repercussions they faced because of his lawsuit.Dean Strang and Jerry Buting, Mr. Avery’s defense lawyers, maintained that the physical evidence was planted; that Mr. Dassey’s confession was coerced; and that two officers, Sgt. Andrew Colborn and Lt. James Lenk, masterminded the setup.Mr. Avery’s lawyers built a case on what wasn’t there: no blood spatters inside Mr. Avery’s home or garage, no DNA evidence from Ms. Halbach was inside the home or garage beyond the single bullet casing, no scratches or rope fibers on the bed on which she was supposedly bound and murdered.But their case was not strong enough to sway jurors. Mr. Avery, who settled the lawsuit for $400,000 to pay legal fees, is serving a life sentence without the possibility of parole. Mr. Dassey is serving life with the possibility of early release in 2048.So what do we think really happened? Here are some starting points for what promises to be an animated discussion.• Is it feasible for an officer or officers in the Manitowoc County Sheriff’s Department to have concocted such a scheme and planted the evidence?• Ken Kratz, the former district attorney, chose not to be interviewed for the series, but has said in other interviews that he believes that the filmmakers have created a series favorable to the defense and have left out several pieces of evidence, both physical and otherwise. Is “Making a Murderer” too one-sided?• Did the prosecution effectively make its case or were jury members, who lived alongside the Avery family and had been steeped in Steven Avery’s story since 2003, already too biased?• Did some of Mr. Avery’s crimes — setting a family cat on fire, running a relative off the road — portend increasingly violent acts, as the judge suggested when sentencing him?• What of the interrogation of Mr. Dassey, who has a below average I.Q. and a seeming willingness to say what he thought detectives wanted to hear? And how about his first defense lawyer, Len Kachinsky, who appeared to be cooperating with investigators and allowed Mr. Dassey to be questioned without his mother present?• Both Mr. Avery’s money and his state appeals have been exhausted. Should the Wisconsin Innocence Project, instrumental in his 2003 exoneration — but which subsequently declined to help him overturn his murder conviction — get involved again?• And last, but certainly not least, is the right guy in jail — or is the killer still out there?Advertisement