By ALASTAIR MACAULAYDEC. 31, 2015
Allegra Kent’s ‘Ballerina Swan’ OnstageSome remember Allegra Kent as the most inspiring of all New York City Ballet’s many ballerinas. In the 1950s and 1960s, she created enduring roles for both George Balanchine (“Ivesiana,” “Episodes,” “Bugaku”) and Jerome Robbins (“Dances at a Gathering”). She subsequently wrote a memorable autobiography, “Once a Dancer” (1997). In a different key, she wrote a funny and touching children’s book “Ballerina Swan” (2012). Only recently did I discover that this has been turned into a theatrical production for children. A performance of “Ballerina Swan” occurs on Saturday at 1 p.m. at the New York City Children’s Theater. The choreography is by Michael McGowan, writing by Barbara Zinn Krieger.Dance in Die FledermausThe Metropolitan Opera’s English-language production of “Die Fledermaus,” new on New Year’s Eve 2014, has had a strong British element from the start: its director/translator/adapter is Jeremy Sams, its choreographer Stephen Mear. (There’s a short ballet, for a corps of 12, in Act II.)I enjoyed this year’s revival twice as much, thanks not only to the danciness of James Levine’s conducting. Other welcome new ingredients were the further British additions to the cast — Toby Spence as Eisenstein, Lucy Crowe as Adele, and Alan Opie as Frank. I don’t say this because I’m British, too; but these three, with long records of singing the English language, did so with flair. And Mr. Spence, whom I’ve only seen and heard before in serious roles, proved to contribute the best dancing of the evening; just the way he twirled his cloak in Act I while anticipating the frolics of the evening to come was delicious. Performances continue this week (Wednesday evening, Saturday afternoon) and next.AdvertisementCunningham in BostonBefore the 2016 season takes off, it’s worth drawing attention to some out-of-town rarities that may need advance planning. “Leap Before You Look,” the exhibition commemorating artistic experimentation at Black Mountain College (at the Institute of Contemporary Art in Boston through Jan. 24), has a number of live dance performances; those on Jan. 21 and Jan. 23-24 include extremely rare choreography by Merce Cunningham. I reviewed in October Silas Riener’s performance of “Changeling,” a solo hitherto performed solely by Cunningham, in the years 1957-64; in December I saw the no-less-rare performances by students (taught by Mr. Riener) from the Boston Conservatory.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Conservatory’s junior students include some exceptionally gifted dancers (they will be joined in these January performances by senior students). But the great draw are the dances, which include items that, though a Cunningham devotee since 1979, I have never seen in live performance. (Places, most of them standing or on the floor, are on a first-come, first-served basis; space is limited, and early arrival is recommended.)The special highlight is the duet from “Springweather and People” (1955), not complete but reconstructed from a film recently discovered by the filmmaker Alla Kovgan. (Excerpts from Ms. Kovgan’s “Cunningham 3D,” a film-in-progress of his choreography in 3-D can also be seen at the Institute for Contemporary Art.)AdvertisementOriginally made by Cunningham for himself and Carolyn Brown, “Springweather” has a sequence that has haunted me since those December performances; let’s hope memory has not played tricks. The woman, on flat foot, takes an arabesque (leg stretched behind her); the line of her neck, torso, and leg are like those of a swan swimming. Then the man joins her and protectively places his arm around her waist. The image seems romantically complete — and then comes the unexpected, as she hops forward, eluding his grasp.An earlier version of the picture caption with this article misidentified the work being performed. It is “Apollo,” not the “Sylvia Pas de Deux.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.