By ALEC M. PRIESTERDEC. 31, 2015
A dramatic evening of programming is set to welcome the New Year. One of America’s most ferocious rivalries plays out in Times Square between Ryan Seacrest and Carson Daly, the eminent presenters of seemingly anything televised. If you have reason to skip the festivities, you can instead laugh at “Shaun of the Dead” or become immersed in “No Country for Old Men.” SHAUN OF THE DEAD (2004) 1:30 p.m. on IFC. Shaun (Simon Pegg) and his girlfriend, Liz, are having problems because of Shaun’s insistence on always doing the same thing. He likes to hang out at the pub with his friend Ed (Nick Frost) and has yet to meet Liz’s mother. Shaun and Ed are so complacent that it takes them an astonishingly long time to realize that odd events around them are the result of a zombie outbreak. They fight for survival but in a very funny way. “There is something intrinsically ridiculous about zombie movies,” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times. “The British horror-comedy ‘Shaun of the Dead’ skillfully plays off that ridiculousness by implying that Britain may already be populated with the living dead, metaphorically speaking.” (Image: A zombie horde)TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY (1991) 8 p.m. on Encore. James Cameron directed this sequel, in which two Terminators have been sent back in time to battle over Sarah Connor and her son, John, who will lead the human resistance against the robots. “Mr. Cameron has made a swift, exciting special-effects epic that thoroughly justifies its vast expense and greatly improves upon the first film’s potent but rudimentary visual style,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times. (Image: Arnold Schwarzenegger)A TOAST TO 2015 8 p.m. on NBC. Kathie Lee Gifford and Hoda Kotb welcome a gaggle of celebrities to reflect on notable moments from the past year. Interview subjects include Bob Costas, Misty Copeland and Kelly Osbourne, among many others.AdvertisementDICK CLARK’S NEW YEAR’S ROCKIN’ EVE WITH RYAN SEACREST 8 p.m. on ABC.  Mr. Seacrest hosts this New Year countdown in Times Square for the 11th straight year. With live reporting from Jenny McCarthy and a performance by Carrie Underwood.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ALL-AMERICAN NEW YEAR 9 p.m. on Fox News Channel. Jesse Watters leads the special before Kimberly Guilfoyle and Eric Bolling take over from the Knickerbocker Hotel in Times Square. Correspondents will report on New York City security, the scene in Times Square and revelry in Miami.NBC’S NEW YEAR’S EVE WITH CARSON DALY 11:30 p.m. on NBC.  Mr. Daly rings in the New Year with a performance by Gwen Stefani.AdvertisementNO COUNTRY FOR OLD MEN (2007) on iTunes. This Coen brothers adaptation of a Cormac McCarthy novel won four Oscars. Llewelyn Moss (Josh Brolin) is pursued by a coolly diabolical villain (Javier Bardem) with inventive weapons after Moss takes $2 million in cash from the carnage of a bad drug deal in Texas. “‘No Country for Old Men’ leaves behind the jangled, stunned sensation of having witnessed a ruthless application of craft,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times, calling the film “bleak, scary and relentlessly violent,” and praising “the sheer brilliance of the Coens’ technique.” (Image: Mr. Brolin.)A version of this schedule appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page C8 of the New York edition with the headline: What to Watch Thursday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.