By ANTHONY TOMMASINIDEC. 30, 2015
Timid conductors wary of programming new or challenging works sometimes fall into a trap that Alan Gilbert has called “the ‘Bolero’ effect.” The idea is that the audience will come for a new piece, so long as the program ends with a crowd-pleaser like Ravel’s “Bolero.” The problem is that such a gambit suggests the conductor doesn’t really believe in the challenging work.Yet something close to this “Bolero” effect permeated Mr. Gilbert’s concert with the New York Philharmonic on Tuesday at David Geffen Hall. The program was mostly a tribute to Sibelius, a few weeks after the 150th anniversary of his birth. It began with a haunting Sibelius tone poem, “The Swan of Tuonela,” and ended with his well-known “Finlandia.” The main offering was the composer’s astounding Symphony No. 4 in A minor, the most radical of his seven symphonies and one not heard at the Philharmonic since 1987.But dropped into the middle was Mendelssohn’s popular Violin Concerto in E minor, featuring the superstar violinist Joshua Bell. From the posters outside the hall, which featured Mr. Bell’s photo prominently, and the labeling of the program as simply “Joshua Bell” on the Philharmonic’s website, it was clear that he was the big draw.Mr. Bell played the Mendelssohn beautifully. He always plays it beautifully. His performance got the audience on its feet for the only standing ovation of the night.AdvertisementBut the real news was Mr. Gilbert’s exciting accounts of the Sibelius works, especially the Fourth Symphony. By playing it safe with the Mendelssohn, Mr. Gilbert, who has over all been a force for innovation as music director of the Philharmonic, missed an opportunity to present a fully coherent tribute to Sibelius, with this audacious symphony at its core.AdvertisementThough “The Swan of Tuonela,” based on a mythical tale, is indebted to Liszt’s harmonically murky late tone poems, the tremulous stirrings and elusive episodes of this mysterious 10-minute score sounded utterly original in the glowing performance Mr. Gilbert drew from his players.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When Sibelius’s composed his Fourth Symphony in 1910 and 1911, he was aware of Schoenberg’s explorations in atonality, as well as adventures in Modernism like Stravinsky’s “Firebird,” as James M. Keller points out in his program notes. But to Sibelius such experiments were not radical enough. His Fourth is structured in four traditional movements and mostly hews to a tonal harmonic language. But Sibelius referred to the enigmatic piece as a “psychological symphony,” and it sounds like music exploring the unconscious.The first movement begins almost reluctantly, with a heaving eruption based in the lower strings. Soon, fragments of themes and a mournful solo cello line try to emerge into something definitive. But the music keeps breaking into baffling discontinuities. The second movement sounds like a fractured dance in which the broken parts have been reassembled, but in the wrong way. Hints of brass chorales break through the dejected slow movement. In the finale, fleeting bits of melody never complete themselves and keep breaking off into episodes of repetitive, oddly hymnal chords.The performance powerfully conveyed the astonishing strangeness of this inventive work; the Philharmonic sounded magnificent. It would have been sensible for Mr. Bell to play Sibelius’s Violin Concerto after intermission. But the Philharmonic is presenting Leonidas Kavakos in that work in March. Perhaps there could have been a piece by a living Finnish composer? Or at least by someone influenced by Sibelius? After Mr. Bell’s Mendelssohn, the performance of “Finlandia,” though stirring, seemed an afterthought.There was an unusual encore: Mr. Gilbert’s payment for losing a bet with Michael Stern, the conductor of the Kansas City Symphony, over the recent World Series, in which the Royals defeated the New York Mets. Wearing a Royals cap and shirt, Mr. Gilbert conducted “Kansas City,” from the musical “Oklahoma!,” with a special vocal soloist: Joyce DiDonato, who grew up in Kansas as a Royals fan.This program will be repeated on Saturday at David Geffen Hall, 212-875-5656, nyphil­.org.A version of this review appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: A Safe Mendelssohn, and Brave, Bold Sibelius.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.