AdvertisementSupported byCritic's NotebookBy Neil GenzlingerThis might sound like an insult, but really it’s a compliment: The Emmy Awards need a new category, Outstanding Deliberately Mindless Comedy Series, and for 2015 the statuette should have gone to ABC’s daffy “Galavant.” Also, judging from the first seven episodes of its second season, which begins Sunday, the show would have a good chance of being a repeat winner in 2016.“Galavant,” for the uninitiated, is a ridiculously likable musical comedy — yes, a musical comedy — about the title character, a heroic medieval fellow engagingly played by Joshua Sasse, who was relatively unknown until this show came along.As the series opened last January, Galavant saw his one true love, Madalena (Mallory Jansen), forcibly taken from him by the evil, inept King Richard (Timothy Omundson). Now, as Season 2 begins, Madalena has blossomed into an evil queen and formed a partnership with Richard’s former bodyguard, Gareth (Vinnie Jones). Richard and Galavant, meanwhile, are best buddies and Galavant has a new love interest, Princess Isabella (Karen David). A potential snag: She is betrothed to her 11-year-old cousin, because in “Galavant,” the improbable is commonplace.Several times an episode, characters burst into Broadway-style musical numbers. Usually these are frivolous ditties, but one of the show’s remarkable features is that every once in a while a song turns genuinely touching despite the absurdity of plot and performance. That’s because the men behind the music know something about combining whimsy with real emotion: They are the composer Alan Menken, whose varied résumé includes both “The Little Mermaid” and “Little Shop of Horrors,” and the lyricist Glenn Slater, currently represented on Broadway by “School of Rock: The Musical.”The laurels lately for television comedy have been going to shows that are defined by savvy archness (“Veep”) or that make a cultural statement through their plotting or casting (“Transparent” and, to a certain extent, “Modern Family”). But TV has a long and sometimes honorable history of comedies that care about little other than the gag.This is a deceptively difficult form to nail; often those who try end up with little more than a collection of flatulence jokes. Done right, though, as it is in “Galavant,” a mindless comedy is not the same as a dumb comedy. It’s smart, just in a carefree way. In a Season 2 episode, Galavant takes offense when he is erroneously credited with a flatulence joke as a result of a static-filled medieval version of a cellphone conversation. (These characters have higher aspirations.)It’s the viewers who get to turn off their brains and gut-laugh at the well-crafted silliness on screen.The mindless comedy has been somewhat out of fashion since “All in the Family,” but it’s making a bit of a comeback, enough that it could indeed be its own Emmy category. “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend,” an amusing CW series that also serves up occasional musical numbers, would be a deserving nominee. “Scream Queens,” Fox’s love-it-or-loathe-it horror comedy, also has nothing on its agenda other than laughs (and never mind the Emmys’ dumb rule that comedies must be a half-hour). CW’s “iZombie” is always good for gag-inducing gags. NBC’s lightweight “Superstore,” which was given a sneak-peek preview this month, hits the funny bone now and again.But “Galavant” is more appealing and intricate than any of these. Its characters grow on you, and the performances — especially those by Mr. Sasse, Mr. Omundson and Ms. David — are a delight.In Season 2, look for homages to “Les Misérables” and “West Side Story.” Expect a manipulative wedding planner, a beautiful female warrior and a recurring role for a unicorn. Pirates. Giants. Dwarves. Bewitched headwear. You never know where this story is going, which only adds to the fun.Advertisement