AdvertisementSupported bySpotlightBy Stephen HeymanThe landscape architect Peter Latz grew up amid the ruins of postwar Germany in Saarland, a coal- and steel-producing region whose bombed-out factories and mines would inspire his work. Long before sites like the High Line in New York became wildly popular, Mr. Latz, now 76, pioneered the repurposing of disused infrastructure into spaces for the public’s enjoyment.What is considered his masterpiece, Landschaftspark Duisburg-Nord, designed in 1991, turned an abandoned steelworks in the Ruhr region of Germany into a multiuse landscape park, in which wild gardens fill rusted storage bunkers and a former gas tank is now a practice pool for scuba divers.Mr. Latz is now at work on one of the world’s most ambitious reclamation projects: Ariel Sharon Park in Tel Aviv. The design involves excavating a huge retention basin for 7 million cubic meters of floodwater and transforming the Hiriya landfill, a giant trash heap that once contained 25 million tons of waste, into a verdant oasis. Mr. Latz’s plan calls for enveloping the landfill in a recycled plastic skin, which is then topped with three feet of gravel and soil, allowing vegetation to grow.The methane produced by the waste still trapped underneath will be siphoned off to power nearby factories. While parts of the park are now open, construction is scheduled to run at least until 2025, and the finished site will include an open-air theater, an ecologically sensitive farm, and a small wetland area filled with plant species that can treat sewage.In the following edited interview, Mr. Latz discusses why he is drawn to derelict spaces and how he tries to bring new life to them without erasing their complicated histories.Q. You often transform landscapes that are synonymous with pollution or decay: a landfill, a contaminated metalworks, a polluted river. Why are you attracted to these places?A. I grew up in a village destroyed by the war and learned early on about the value of materials. I used recycling as a method long before it has been reinvented as “sustainability.” I feel obliged to recondition disused landscapes for the next generation — to rehabilitate them as sources of life. Who should deal with these landscapes if not landscape architects and urban planners? Better us than casino developers.Q. One feature of your work seems to be making reference to a site’s history — even if that history is harsh or unpleasant. How have you done this in the Hiriya project in Tel Aviv? A. Landscape is basically history. There are only two possibilities: To obliterate that history or to make it your partner. For Hiriya we used traditional agricultural patterns on the foot terraces and planted the terraces sloping down to an oasis with olive groves. These traditional plantings recall the orange plantations which have existed in this place before any garbage was there. All the walls have been and will be built with recycled materials, with “garbage” in the broad sense. And even the so-called “garbage mountain” — which was how the eyesore of Hiriya was once called — keeps its impressive form but now it provides residents a panoramic view of Tel Aviv.Q. The success of the High Line in New York has turned it into a tourist attraction and made the technique of rehabilitating postindustrial landscapes especially fashionable, leading to many copycat projects. As one of the earliest practitioners of this sort of reinvention, do you ever worry that the technique will become overused? A. I don’t think that the technique will become overused — quite the contrary, it has not yet really arrived in the profession. This kind of landscape architecture is certainly becoming more and more important, but landscape architects must learn to concern themselves to a greater extent with new technologies and, first and foremost, to focus on “the normal,” the basic structures, and to deal with the existing more carefully. Stephen HeymanAdvertisement