By MICHAEL COOPERDEC. 30, 2015
On various Sundays this month, Anna Netrebko sang in Verdi’s “Giovanna d’Arco” at the Teatro alla Scala in Milan, Jonas Kaufmann appeared in Berlioz’s “La Damnation de Faust” at the Paris Opera and Plácido Domingo played the title role in Verdi’s “Macbeth” in Valencia, Spain.The Royal Opera in London, the Vienna State Opera and, closer to home, the Lyric Opera of Chicago and the San Francisco Opera all had at least one Sunday performance, too.But the Metropolitan Opera remained dark on Sundays, as usual — and will do so next season, as well. Peter Gelb, the company’s general manager, who has broached the idea of performing on some Sundays to attract bigger audiences, said in a recent interview that he had not yet been able to reach the necessary agreements with members of the Met’s work force to make it happen.“It’s too late to institute them for next season,” said Mr. Gelb, who noted that the Met required time to organize its various subscription series and schedules. “I am hopeful and optimistic that we will find a way of implementing them, perhaps the season after next.”AdvertisementMr. Gelb sees Sunday performances as an important tool in bringing more people to the opera at a time when attendance has been struggling. As audience habits have changed, he said, the Met has found that Friday and Saturday performances regularly outsell weeknights, when it can be tough to attract operagoers who may work late, wake up early or face long trips home.AdvertisementHe said that other arts institutions that perform on Sundays — including opera companies, Broadway shows and ballet companies — find them among their most popular days. “I believe that Sunday performances are inevitable, and must be considered to be inevitable by everyone who works in the performing arts,” Mr. Gelb said. “Because it’s clearly what audiences want.”But adding Sunday performances would require the agreement of the Met’s powerful labor unions, who often work punishing schedules and who agreed to pay cuts after bitter negotiations in 2014 that strained their relationship with Mr. Gelb. Sundays are considered days off in their current contracts, which last through 2018, and many workers are entitled to be paid double time if they work on Sundays.“Given the financial fragility of the Met, to have Sunday performances paid at double time would defeat the purpose of having them,” Mr. Gelb said.Members of several key unions at the opera house said that while there had been some talks this fall with management about Sunday performances, they had not received any formal proposals they could put to a vote of their members. But they suggested that they were still open to talks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.David Frye, the chairman of the chorus committee, said in an interview, “If it will help the Met, we’ll discuss changes in the contract.” And Jessica Phillips, the chairwoman of the orchestra committee, said in a statement, “We are active partners in promoting the Met and are always willing to consider any new ideas and initiatives.”The Met’s never-on-Sundays tradition, with a few exceptions for the occasional concert or special New Year’s Eve gala performance, dates back to the days of blue laws, when many kinds of performances (and even baseball games) were banned on Sundays. Concerts were allowed, though, and in its early days the Met regularly gave concert performances on Sundays.Even Sunday concerts were viewed askance by some, once upon a time. In 1910, when the New York Philharmonic announced plans to play several Sundays under the baton of Gustav Mahler at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, it drew a rebuke from the Sunday Observance Association of Kings County. Loudon Charlton, the manager of the orchestra, replied by letter, “in this day and generation, when breadth of view prevails even in churches and among sects, this Philistine attitude toward Sunday performances of a purely ethical, educational and uplifting character seems beyond belief.”The Philharmonic long gave regular Sunday afternoon concerts, and for decades it had a weekly radio broadcast every Sunday. But in 1964 it announced that it was moving its Sunday concerts to Monday, largely to make sure that the musicians had a regular day off.AdvertisementSundays were once dark on the Great White Way, too, but almost all Broadway shows now have Sunday performances, and quite a few have two. The musical “Finding Neverland” added a second Sunday performance in November, closing on Wednesday nights instead, and show officials said that they were pleased with the results.At the Met, Mr. Gelb said, the company would only be able to perform on a limited number of Sundays because of its complex schedule. The company — which this season is giving 227 performances of 25 operas, including six new productions — tends to hold rehearsals onstage every weekday. Adding a Sunday performance, and going dark on Mondays, would mean missing a day of stage rehearsals. So it could only be done occasionally.But Mr. Gelb said that he was optimistic that the company would eventually perform on some Sundays. “My feeling is it will get done,” he said. “It’s just a question of when.”A version of this article appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Sunday Performances  Still Elude the Met.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.