Regrets, Annie Proulx has had a few, starting with “Brokeback Mountain.” That 1997 story about two gay cowboys may have won wide acclaim and been turned into an Oscar-winning movie, but in a 2009 interview with The Paris Review, which drew renewed attention this week, Ms. Proulx said she wished she could take it back.“I wish I’d never written the story,” she said. “It’s just been the cause of hassle and problems and irritation since the film came out.”The problem is less homophobic critics, she told the interviewer, Christopher Cox, than fans who didn’t like the unhappy ending and regularly send her letters suggesting better ones.“I think it’s important to leave spaces in a story for readers to fill in from their own experience, but unfortunately the audience that ‘Brokeback’ reached most strongly have powerful fantasy lives,” she said. “And one of the reasons we keep the gates locked here is that a lot of men have decided that the story should have had a happy ending. They can’t bear the way it ends — they just can’t stand it. So they rewrite the story, including all kinds of boyfriends and new lovers and so forth after Jack is killed. And it just drives me wild. They can’t understand that the story isn’t about Jack and Ennis. It’s about homophobia; it’s about a social situation; it’s about a place and a particular mindset and morality. They just don’t get it.” Ms. Proulx wrote the libretto for an opera by Charles Wuorinen based on the story that had its premiere last year, a project she said she had considered declining. “But then I figured that one of these idiots who loves happy endings would come along and start messing with it,” she said. “I want to keep the story as it is. It’s a strong story and it shouldn’t be mangled into everybody lives happily ever after. Not that that could happen in an opera.”A version of this article appears in print on 01/02/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Proulx Regrets Writing u2018Brokeback Mountainu2019.