AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8:45 A.M. (HBO Signature) POLLOCK (2000) Ed Harris summons the spirit of the Abstract Expressionist giant Jackson Pollock, standing over an enormous canvas and dripping paint in graceful swooping gestures as the camera dances around him. He also seethes like the surly, violent alcoholic that Pollock was — upending dinner tables; raging at his wife, the painter Lee Krasner (Marcia Gay Harden); and ultimately crashing his car with two female companions in what might have been a deliberate suicide run. Yes, the movie, which Mr. Harris also directed, “has flaws and inaccuracies,” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times. “But ‘Pollock’ is for the most part admirable. It reminds us that great art isn’t about creating beauty out of misty-eyed Hallmark moments but about discovering and communicating messy truths that spill all over the place, just like the lives of the artists driven to uncover them.” (Image: Mr. Harris)8 A.M. (CUNY) TIMESTALKS Michael Caine discusses his six-decade career and a new film, “Youth,” in which he and Harvey Keitel play lifelong friends pondering retirement after finding success in classical music and film. The writer Logan Hill moderated this conversation, the first in a series with noted British actors.11:30 A.M. (Flix) STEP INTO LIQUID (2003) In the mid-1960s Bruce Brown tracked two California dudes searching for the perfect wave and created the seminal surf movie “The Endless Summer.” In this documentary Dana Brown follows in his father’s wake, mixing images of angry seascapes and beautiful youths poised atop big waves with good vibrations to make what Elvis Mitchell, writing in The Times, called “such a gorgeous recording of the spume-slathered sport that cinemas screening the picture would do well to sell boards at the concession stands.” There is more ocean action in Kathryn Bigelow’s “Point Break” (1991), at 12:15 p.m. on Sundance, starring Keanu Reeves as an F.B.I. agent who goes undercover as a surfer. (Image: Keala Kennelly in “Step Into Liquid”)8 P.M. (Disney) INVISIBLE SISTER (2015) Cleo (Rowan Blanchard), an introverted science prodigy, accidentally turns her popular older sister, Molly (Paris Berelc), who is their school’s star lacrosse player, invisible. Which means that Cleo, with a little coaching from Sis, must take Molly’s place on the field during an important game. Now if only they can find an antidote before Molly’s disappearing act becomes permanent.8 P.M. (CW) REIGN Season 3 finds Mary, Queen of Scots (Adelaide Kane), and Francis, King of France (Toby Regbo), determined to put their anger aside and find solace in their power. Then Elizabeth (Rachel Skarsten), the Virgin Queen of England, decides to go after Mary with the help of Catherine de’ Medici (Megan Follows).9 P.M. (NBC) DATELINE NBC They called it the “Gone Girl” case. Just two days after Denise Huskin’s boyfriend, Aaron Quinn, reported that she had been abducted from his home in Vallejo, Calif., she reappeared, prompting the police to accuse the couple of perpetrating a hoax. But then someone else reported an attempted abduction with similar details. In another segment, 27 women discuss Bill Cosby and what they say were their experiences of assault, betrayal and emotional distress.1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK Michael Riedel discusses his book “Razzle Dazzle: The Battle for Broadway,” about 20th-century theater and efforts by Bernard Jacobs and Gerald Schoenfeld of the Shubert Organization to revive the industry and clean up Times Square.What’s Streaming NowRED OAKS In the summer of 1985 an N.Y.U. student (Craig Roberts) from New Jersey gets a job as an assistant tennis pro at his local country club, where he falls under the spell of the resident big wheel (Paul Reiser), a Wall Street guy and weekend tennis warrior who acts as both mentor and nemesis. If on the surface this series calls to mind “Caddyshack” and “Dirty Dancing,” Mike Hale wrote in The Times, “it’s more warmhearted and low-key than those — the film from that period that it feels most like is probably ‘Fast Times at Ridgemont High.’ ” And while events and characters “are familiar from a half-century of stories of the Jewish suburban experience,” he added, “for the most part, they feel fresh, or at least lovingly recreated.” (amazon.com) (Image: Mr. Roberts and Gage Golightly)Advertisement