By KATHRYN SHATTUCKJAN. 1, 2015
11 A.M. (HGTV) ROSE PARADE 2015 The new year is once again coming up roses for HGTV, which heralds 2015 from its traditional perch at this 126th annual parade. Louis Zamperini, the Olympic runner turned World War II bombardier of “Unbroken” fame, who died in July, will be honored as the grand marshal as nearly 40 floats inch their way down Colorado Boulevard in Pasadena, Calif. The floats, adorned with more botanical elements than the average florist might go through in year, are based on inspirational stories. The “Property Brothers” — Drew and Jonathan Scott — and Nancy O’Dell will provide play-by-play. (The parade will also be broadcast on ABC, NBC and the Hallmark Channel. The University of Oregon will take on Florida State in the Rose Bowl game at 5 p.m. on ESPN.) The HGTV programming moves into prime time at 8 with a tour of the latest “Dream Home” giveaway: a 3,200-square-foot, three-bedroom Cape Cod-style vacation house on Martha’s Vineyard. The property includes soaring ceilings, patios off each sleeping area, a bike rack and a doggy dream home. The winner also gets furnishings from Ethan Allen, a GMC Acadia Denali and $250,000.9:15 A.M. (Starz Cinema) ANOTHER YEAR (2010) Jim Broadbent and Ruth Sheen star as Tom and Gerri, a contentedly married British couple moving toward retirement and reflecting on the vulnerability of their friends and family (played by, among others, Imelda Staunton, Lesley Manville and Peter Wight) across four seasons in this Mike Leigh drama about the unequal distribution of happiness. Writing in The New York Times, A. O. Scott called the film, with its notes of class consciousness, “splendidly rich and wise,” adding that Mr. Broadbent and Ms. Sheen play their parts with “uncanny subtlety and tremendous soul.”2:30 P.M. (13) FROM VIENNA: THE NEW YEAR’S CELEBRATION 2015 Zubin Mehta conducts the Vienna Philharmonic for the fifth time in its annual concert of festive works by the Strauss family. Julie Andrews hosts this “Great Performances” presentation for the sixth year, broadcast from the Musikverein in Vienna and featuring performances by the Vienna State Ballet in Johann Strauss’s “Students Polka” and “Wine, Women and Song Waltz.” Ms. Andrews will also take a streetcar tour of the historic buildings and palaces along the city’s Ringstrasse, visit the Baroque Great Hall of the Old University where Beethoven first presented his Seventh Symphony and travel up the Danube to Dürnstein in the Wachau Valley. The concert is repeated at 8.7:30 P.M. (Outdoor) THE RELUCTANT OUTDOORSMAN This new unscripted comedy series follows the exploits of an Outdoor Channel employee named Derek — a suburbanite who doesn’t hunt, doesn’t fish and is, he says, “totally unfit for the outdoors” — as he embarks on challenges like stalking feral hogs, catching catfish barehanded, bull riding and wrangling alligators. His professional mentors include the angler Jeff Kriet, the hunters Michael Waddell and Chris Brackett, and Master Sgt. Terry Schappert of the Army National Guard Special Forces.Advertisement8 P.M. (TCM) HORSE FEATHERS (1932) This Marx Brothers gaiety — in which a college president, intent on beefing up his school’s football team, mistakenly recruits two lunatics — stars Thelma Todd and Groucho Marx and kicks off a mini-festival that continues with “A Night at the Opera” (1935), at 9:15; “A Day at the Races” (1937), at 11; “Room Service” (1938), at 1 a.m.; “At the Circus” (1939), at 2:30; and “Go West” (1940), at 4.8 P.M. (E!) I LOVE YOU, MAN (2009) Paul Rudd and Jason Segel, who teamed up in “Forgetting Sarah Marshall,” play Peter Klaven, a girl’s guy without a male friend, and Sydney Fife, a guy’s guy so secure in his maleness that he wears Ugg boots and shorts to walk his teeny dog. The two meet at an open house and voilà!, Peter has a best man to stand by his side at his wedding to Zooey (Rashida Jones) — if the wedding ends up happening. Writing in The Times, Manohla Dargis called the film “a fitfully funny comedy that owes much to Judd Apatow, the king of such sublimated man-on-man affairs.”AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowFRIENDS All 10 seasons — that’s 236 episodes — of this NBC sitcom starring Jennifer Aniston, Courteney Cox, Lisa Kudrow, Matt LeBlanc, Matthew Perry and David Schwimmer are available for streaming on Thursday. (netflix.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on January 1, 2015, on Page C11 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Thursday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.