AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Jon ParelesMichael Daves brought a New York City edge to a rural tradition with his All-Star Bluegrass Throwdown on Tuesday night at the Bell House. Mr. Daves, who grew up in Atlanta, is a guitarist and singer with a tense, pinched, nasal voice that harks back to old Appalachia. He is also, like many musicians now stretching Southern traditions, not only scholarly and analytical about the material, but also drawn to the odder, more musically and psychologically twisted corners of the repertoire. That is, he’s the kind of musician who cheerfully announces, “It’s murder ballad time!” before playing an intricate and harrowing version of “Pretty Polly.”Mr. Daves had other announcements. “The last three days we’ve been making a record,” he said. “And we done made it.” He added that it took three 14-hour days, and that the album will be released in May. For the sessions and the show, Mr. Daves had assembled a group of fellow virtuosos — Sarah Jarosz on harmony vocals, mandolin and the guitar-size octave mandolin; Brittany Haas on fiddle; Noam Pikelny on banjo; and Mike Bub on bass — with whom he had been up late recording the night before. They played through the songs from the album: mostly old ones, from sources like Bill Monroe and the Stanley Brothers, but also a ringer, “Stargazer,” from the Seattle grunge band Mother Love Bone. They were tales of love gone wrong, trains, whiskey and death, with their unhappy tidings offset by flying fingers. Like bluegrass purists, Mr. Daves and his all-stars played into a lone microphone, stepping forward for solos and back when done — which became a kind of choreography when they were trading quick two-bar breaks. But individuality shines through their love of tradition. Mr. Pikelny, deadpan and sly, would start picking his way through solos at a steady clip, then suddenly sprint off on a harmonic tangent or push against the beat with a syncopated flourish; Ms. Jarosz was unfailingly melodic in her scampering mandolin solos. Ms. Haas would bear down on double stops that turned into sliding counterpoint. Mr. Daves’s guitar solos raced through forthright flatpicking or dropped into low, throaty hints of blues; he was also the group’s rhythmic engine, with carefully gauged choices to pick or strum, to voice chords high or low. His ear was also unmistakable in the repertoire, which included plenty of waltzes, Mr. Monroe’s strangely asymmetrical “Sally Jo,” some venerable fiddle tunes with modern-sounding twists and that Mother Love Bone song, in which the band traded the slow heave of grunge for breakneck bluegrass picking. Playing bluegrass in the 21st century is a labor of love, not a commercial prospect. But it’s not, apparently, a lonely one. Some songs featured guests: the fiddlers Alex Hargreaves and Mike Barnett, joining Ms. Haas in three-part arrangements, and Tony Trischka, plunking away on a big, round cello banjo. After the group played through the album, the stage filled up with more guests for a jam session that somehow had glistening ensemble passages. There were singers, guitarists and the return of the opening act: the Lonesome Trio, which writes old-timey songs with a droll contemporary perspective and titles like “Appalachia Apologia.” (It also features the actor and comedian Ed Helms on guitar.)Mr. Daves had the last encore to himself: a honky-tonk weeper recorded by George Jones, “The Window Up Above.” It’s sung by a voyeur having his heart broken, watching his wife with another man: classic and creepy. Advertisement