AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Zachary WoolfeThe gray bunting had already been hung onstage at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday, ready for the New York Philharmonic’s New Year’s Eve concert the next night. For Wednesday, the orchestra had scheduled a Gershwin celebration, featuring no less eminent a soloist than the jazz singer Dianne Reeves. But Ms. Reeves, for all her suavity and virtuosic spontaneity, was to be hard pressed to match the quantity of both qualities in Daniil Trifonov, who joined the Philharmonic on Tuesday for Rachmaninoff’s Piano Concerto No. 1.Mr. Trifonov, 23, has an unusually concentrated flurry of appearances in New York this season. In early December, he gave what has become his annual recital at Carnegie Hall, including the rare spectacle of Liszt’s complete “Transcendental Études” (S. 139). On Jan. 23, he returns to Carnegie for a recital with the violinist Gidon Kremer, a nod from a distinguished artist to a rising star.Between those two programs, he has returned to the Philharmonic for Rachmaninoff’s Concerto No. 1, an early work that is hardly a rarity but remains less played than this composer’s second and third piano concertos. For all of the piece’s melodic lushness, it can feel diffuse.Mr. Trifonov, his body bent at extreme angles, his neck jutting out just over the keys, doesn’t do diffuse. His sound bright and lean at the start, he brought out the work’s focus, even as he gave the impression of flexibility. In the first movement, confidently varying the pulse, he wove his lines around the orchestra’s. The great solo melody near the start of the slow second movement had a wandering if attentive feel, as if it were an impromptu, and Mr. Trifonov’s sound took on a calm lucidity but without a hint of chill.In the finale, he gave his tone silky diaphanousness, keeping a quality of roundedness even in Rachmaninoff’s most pounding runs. Handled by Mr. Trifonov with a kind of assured artlessness, his encore, Debussy’s “Reflets dans l’Eau” (“Reflections in the Water”), felt like an outgrowth of the concerto’s sound world and mood.Making his Philharmonic debut, the Spanish conductor Juanjo Mena led the program — one of this season’s hoariest immersions in the standardest of standard repertory, it must be said — with brisk efficiency and lightness of texture. But there seemed to be no strong interpretations being tested, not that Rimsky-Korsakov’s Technicolor “Capriccio Espagnol” is a trying ground for ideas.No, this bonbon is about vividness of colors and textures, and the orchestra obliged with bright playing and an energy that remained dignified rather than lurid, as in some spirited violin solos from Sheryl Staples, the orchestra’s acting concertmaster. Mr. Mena’s account of Tchaikovsky’s Symphony No. 6 (“Pathétique”) was crisp and clean, except for some slight lapses of polish in the final movement, when the orchestra’s great heaves and sighs weren’t always unified. It was a performance that satisfied the letter of the score without ever quite letting in the degree of intensity its composer intended.Daniil Trifonov’s program with the New York Philharmonic will be repeated Friday, Saturday and Tuesday at Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center; 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. Advertisement