AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events. A.O. Movement Collective  (through Saturday) For the past three years, Sarah A. O. Rosner has created a kind of gay feminist sci-fi utopia with the help of more than 60 collaborators. Together they have produced a graphic novel, a concept album, a fashion show and more. This week adds another dimension (the 10th) to their universe. In “Etle and the Anders,” a cast of 10 conjures a future based on Ms. Rosner’s “Infinite Theory of the Plural History of Everything,” which she recites. Don’t expect to be passive observers. Friday at 7:30 at 10 p.m., Saturday at 7:30 p.m., Loft 172, 172 Classon Avenue, between Park and Myrtle Avenues, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, 347-915-4790, etle.info. (Brian Schaefer)★ ‘A Ballerina’s Tale’ (in conversation Monday, in theaters Wednesday) In the past year, Misty Copeland has graced the cover of Time magazine, became a popular face of the athletic brand Under Armour and, most significantly, became the first African-American woman to be named a principal dancer at American Ballet Theater. The new documentary, “A Ballerina’s Tale,” recounts her remarkable journey. On Monday, Ms. Copeland and the film’s director, Nelson George, chat with Gayle King at the 92nd Street Y after a screening; on Wednesday, the film hits select theaters and video-on-demand. At 7:30 p.m., 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Schaefer)Monica Bill Barnes  (Wednesdays through Dec. 16) Karaoke night meets office party in “Happy Hour,” the latest concoction from Ms. Barnes and Anna Bass, best known these days as the dancers — alongside the radio personality Ira Glass — in the touring revue “Three Acts, Two Dancers, One Radio Host.” Their new weekly gig, in a Lower Manhattan dance studio, features the cheeky duo playing two guys playing their everyday selves, as Ms. Barnes continues her love affair with awkwardness, failure and physical comedy. The audience gets drinks, prizes and the chance to sing. At 6:30 p.m., Studio G, Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, 646-837-6809, monicabillbarnes.com. (Siobhan Burke)Bolshoi Ballet (Sunday) This company’s performance of the Romantic classic “Giselle” will be broadcast live from Moscow to more than 500 theaters, including several in Manhattan. The performance features the prima ballerina Svetlana Zakharova in the title role of the peasant girl deceived by the nobleman-in-disguise, Albrecht, danced here by Sergei Polunin (also known for his recent rendition of “Take Me to Church,” which went viral on YouTube). Ms. Zakharova’s tragic elegance and Mr. Polunin’ propulsive power will be all the more potent in close up. At 12:55 p.m., more information and participating theaters are at bolshoiballetincinema.com. (Schaefer)H.T. Chen and Dancers  (Thursday through Oct. 18) The wife-and-husband team of Dian Dong and H.T. Chen spent three years researching and interviewing Chinese immigrants and their descendants for “South of Gold Mountain.” Performed by a multigenerational cast, the work sheds light on the racism and discrimination faced by 19th- and early 20th-century Chinese immigrants who settled in the American South, and celebrates their contribution to building the country’s infrastructure. Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Schaefer)★ Company XIV  (through Nov. 15) This flirtatious company, which combines ballet and contemporary dance with elements of baroque and burlesque, specializes in sexy, spicy, opulent interpretations of fairy-tale classics. This fall, the director and choreographer Austin McCormick introduces his take on “Cinderella,” which comes with a dash of opera and vaudeville. Because of titillating costumes and scenarios, and free-flowing libations, performances are for adults only. Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., Sundays at 5 p.m., Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-745-3000, companyxiv.com. (Schaefer)Seán Curran Company and Ustatshakirt Plus  (through Saturday) As part of the cultural exchange program DanceMotion USA, led by the United States Department of State and the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Mr. Curran and his New York-based modern dance company recently toured Central Asia. While in Kyrgyzstan, they met the traditional Kyrgyz music ensemble Ustatshakirt Plus. “Dream’d in a Dream,” which has its premiere at BAM’s Harvey Theater, is a collaboration between that group (playing live) and nine dancers, inspired by Kyrgyz culture and the Walt Whitman poem of the title. At 7:30 p.m., Harvey Theater, BAM, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Burke)★ Dance Heginbotham  (Saturday and Sunday) After 14 years as a dancer with the Mark Morris Dance Group, John Heginbotham founded his own company in 2011 and quickly collected fans for his wit, refreshing physical strangeness and canny musical collaborations. The company’s Joyce debut, performed to live music, includes “Angels’ Share,” originally set on the Atlanta Ballet, the solo “Diamond” and “Easy Win,” in which Mr. Heginbotham and the jazz pianist Ethan Iverson honor and skewer the rituals of ballet class. Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)Moriah Evans  (Thursday through Oct. 17) In the previous iteration of her “Social Dance” project, Moriah Evans cleverly utilized a black-and-white checkered floor as a grid to dictate the structure of her work. She describes the sequel, “Social Dance 9-12: Encounter,” performed this weekend at Danspace, as its “obverse mirror.” In this version, she zeros in on the act of looking as a fundamental component both of social dance and the relationship between audience and performer. At 8 p.m., St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Schaefer)★ Fall for Dance  (through Sunday) This popular, packed-to-the-gills festival concludes this weekend, but not before introducing a new program. The remaining performance of Program 4 (Friday) features Stephen Petronio’s “Locomotor,” San Francisco Ballet, the classical Indian elegance of Nrityagram and the tap artists of Dorrance Dance. Program 5 (Saturday and Sunday) welcomes the ballet superstar Tiler Peck with an unlikely partner — the actor and clown Bill Irwin; the Boston Ballet with a Bellini-inspired work by Leonid Yakobson; a United States premiere by the young Flamenco dancer and choreographer Jesús Carmona; and a New York premiere by the enigmatic Israeli troupe L-E-V. Friday and Saturday 8 p.m., Sunday at 7 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org. (Schaefer)General Mischief Dance Theater  (Sunday) The modus operandi of General Mischief Dance Theater is dance as play — the company’s shows have been fondly compared to children’s birthday parties. The title of its new work, “Up and Away,” refers to a large mobile, designed by the actor and sculptor Kevin Reese, which the company’s performers assemble and launch by the dance’s end. At 1 and 6 p.m., JCC in Manhattan, Sonnenfeldt Family Auditorium, 334 Amsterdam Avenue, at 76th Street, 212-714-4694, generalmischief.com. (Schaefer)★ José Limón Dance Company  (Tuesday through Oct. 25) José Limón is a pillar of American modern dance, though perhaps the most unassuming of them. The work of the Mexican-born choreographer is celebrated for its proud nobility, palpable spirituality and high drama. Marking its 70th anniversary, the company that bears his name presents 15 works spanning three decades, from 1942 until Limón’s death in 1972. The works will be performed by companies and academies from around the United States, as well as South America, Europe and Asia. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday and Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)★ New York City Ballet  (through Oct. 18) Already this season, City Ballet has given the world five new ballets by five men, all with something to admire. They receive another encore on Friday, then the rest of the week is a Balanchine love-fest, featuring a collection of his famous “Black and White” ballets (Saturday matinee and evening), a taste of his Romantic side in “Tschaikovsky Suite No. 3” and “Liebeslieder Walzer” (Sunday) and a nod to commedia dell’arte in “Harlequinade,” which is paired with Jerome Robbins’s streetwise rumble, “N.Y. Export: Opus Jazz.” Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Tuesday through Thursday at 7:30 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Schaefer)Ponydance  (through Saturday) This boisterous Irish dance-theater troupe returns to New York as part of Travelogues, a series assembled by Laurie Uprichard, who brings the best of what she’s seen in her curatorial travels to Abrons Arts Center. The characters of “Anybody Waitin’?” find themselves at loose ends; as the news release puts it, “Leonie is waiting for Paula, Paula is waiting for a man and Bryan is waiting to be included.” Together they wrest humor from prolonged anticipation. Friday at 7:30 p.m., Saturday at 6 and 9 p.m., 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side, 866-811-4111, abronsartscenter.org. (Burke)★ Silas Riener  (Wednesday through next Friday, and through Oct. 28) The solo is a special strand of dance DNA, and Silas Riener, a celebrated former member of the Merce Cunningham Dance Company, knows how to command a big space. His new solo performance, though, takes pace in more intimate environs, offering a welcome opportunity to observe his calm intensity and physical precision up close. The show, called “Blue Name,” is a compilation of short works made over the course of a year and a half. At 8 p.m., Chocolate Factory Theater, 5-49 49th Avenue, Long Island City, 718-482-7069, chocolatefactorytheater.org. (Schaefer)‘Swango: The Theatrical Dance Experience’ (Thursday through Oct. 17) This production is a revival of an Off Broadway show from 2005 in which the playwright Rupert Holmes, the tango choreographer Mariela Franganillo and the swing dance champion Robert Royston collaborated on a story of star-crossed lovers who represent their respective dance styles — a meet-cute between swing and tango. At 7:30 p.m., Schimmel Center for the Arts, Pace University, 3 Spruce Street, Lower Manhattan, 866-811-4111, schimmel.pace.edu. (Schaefer)‘Where Sculpture and Dance Meet: Minimalism from 1961 to 1979’  (through Oct. 31) This exhibition at Loretta Howard Gallery examines the interchange of ideas among choreographers and sculptors in the 1960s and ’70s. Sculptures by Ronald Bladen, Donald Judd, Robert Morris, Andy Warhol and Sol LeWitt share the space with videos of performances by Trisha Brown, Lucinda Childs, Merce Cunningham, Simone Forti and Yvonne Rainer. Tuesdays through Fridays from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. and Saturdays from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., 525-531 West 26th Street, Chelsea, 212-695-0164, lorettahoward.com. (Burke)Advertisement