Festival Internacional Santiago a Mil
Several venues.
Jan. 3-18.The festival, one of the country’s major multidisciplinary arts events, plays host to around 90 acts  that include high-profile performances as well as fringe productions staged in venues around the  city. It features the Latvian director Alvis Hermanis’s interpretation of ‘‘Black Milk’’ by the contemporary Russian playwright  Vassily Sigarev. Other events include the open-air ‘‘Veles e vents’’  by the Spanish Xarxa Teatre,  which recreates a voyage at sea using pyrotechnics, live performance  and music. 
International Arts GuideA selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.El Greco Expressive
Pinakothek  der Moderne.
Through April 12.  While parts of Munich’s Alte  Pinakothek are closed for renovations through 2017, one of its exhibits  has been traveling forward in time:  El Greco’s ‘‘The Disrobing of  Christ’’ has been moved to the  Pinakothek der Moderne, where it is  joined by seven works by early 20th-century artists, including Robert  Delaunay, Adriaan Korteweg and  Franz Marc. The exhibition aims to  illustrate the Spanish Renaissance  master’s influence on Expressionist  painters. Klein Fontana Milan Paris 1957- 1962
Museo del Novecento.
Through March 15.More than 90 artworks, photographs, films and archive materials illustrate the bond between  Yves Klein, one of the pioneers of  the Nouveau réalisme movement,  and the painter and sculptor Lucio  Fontana, who was one of Klein’s  most important collectors in Italy.  The exhibition is a collaboration  between the Lucio Fontana Foundation in Milan and the Yves Klein  Archives in Paris, and includes a  1951 neon work by Fontana as well  as Klein’s 1961 ‘‘Ex-Voto dedicated  to Saint Rita of Cascia,’’ which was inspired by a pilgrimage  to the sanctuary of Cascia in Italy. From Hokusai to Hiroshige: Grand  Masters of Ukiyo-e Art from TFAM’s  Permanent Collection (Part One)
Fuji Art Museum.
Through Feb. 1.The first installment of the Fuji Art  Museum’s exhibition of Ukiyo-e,  translated as ‘‘Pictures of the  Floating World,’’ includes Katsushika Hokusai’s iconic ‘‘Thirty- six Views of Mount Fuji,’’ a series  on daily life around Mount Fuji  through the seasons. Other examples of this Japanese art form,  popular during the Edo period  (1603-1867), on display include  works depicting actors (Yakusha- e) and prints of great beauties  (Bijin-ga). Also on show are prints  by Utagawa Kuniyoshi from the  museum’s private collection.  Juliette et Roméo
Palais Garnier.
Jan. 6-10.For its 240th anniversary, the  Swedish Royal Ballet, one of the  oldest dance companies in Europe,  is revisiting Shakespeare’s tragedy  with a new interpretation by the  choreographer Mats Ek, who has  previously taken original spins on  classics like ‘‘Swan Lake’’ and  ‘‘Carmen.’’ Mr. Ek’s reworking of  the ballet starts with its title, inversing the names of the two lovers, to lend more prominence to the  role of Juliet. The production is set to a score by Tchaikovsky, arranged by Anders Högstedt, instead of the more commonly used  music by Prokofiev.  Sydney Festival
Several venues.
Jan. 8-26. Highlights of the festival program  this year include Roysten Abel’s  ‘‘The Kitchen,’’ a multisensory play  that explores cooking as a metaphor for life, with a couple silently  preparing a traditional Indian  dessert to the rhythm of twelve  drummers. Michel Hazanavicius’s  Oscar-winning film ‘‘The Artist’’  will be screened to its original  soundtrack performed by the  Sydney Symphony Orchestra with  the conductor Ernst Van Tiel,  above, and with the composer of  the score, Ludovic Bource, at the piano. Seu Jorge, the Brazilian musician known for his strumming of  Portuguese versions of David  Bowie hits in Wes Anderson’s ‘‘The  Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou,’’  will perform, bringing his mix of  samba, reggae and electro to Australia for the first time. Still Moving: A Triple Bill on the  Image 
SAM at 8Q, Singapore Art  Museum.
Through Feb. 8.The Singapore Art Museum, in a  partnership with Deutsche Bank,  the Yokohama Museum of Art and  the Singapore International Photography Festival, is offering a multitude of viewpoints around image  making, spanning different periods,  regions and media. The exhibition is  divided into three sections: ‘‘Afterimage: Contemporary Photography  from Southeast Asia,’’ which explores the influence geography has  on photographic narratives in the  region; ‘‘Time Present: Photography from the Deutsche Bank  Collection’’; and ‘‘Image and Illusion,’’ which focuses on video and  new media. On display are works by  artists like Liana Yang, Yaya Sung  and Gary-Ross Pastrana. Eurosonic Noorderslag 
Various  venues.
Jan. 14-17. This small Dutch town will transform, once again, into a vibrant  music village for the 29th edition of  this festival of live shows and conferences. Around 300 under-the- radar European acts are showcased to audiences and festival  scouts, who come to pick new acts  for the summer season. The lineup  promises an eclectic mix, including  soul music from Sweden (Seinabo  Sey), grunge rockers from Spain  (Mourn) and an all-female Ukrainian ‘‘freak cabaret’’ (Dakh Daughters). A series of workshops and  awards and panels will also take  place during the festival. La Rondine
Israeli Opera at the Tel  Aviv Performing Arts Center.
Jan. 9- 24.The French director Nicolas Joel’s  production of ‘‘La Rondine,’’  Puccini’s light opera, which was  first staged in Monte Carlo in 1917,  sets the romantic troubles of its  heroine, Magda, against the glamorous backdrop of Belle Époque  Paris, complete with Art Deco costumes. Angela Gheorghiu, the Romanian soprano who made her  breakthrough in the 1990s with her  performances in ‘‘La Traviata’’ and  ‘‘La Bohème,’’ stars in the role of  Magda for several performances.  