AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck9 P.M. (13) BILLY JOEL: THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS GERSHWIN PRIZE Mr. Joel adds this lifetime achievement prize — which honors living songwriters whose work, according to the library, exemplifies “the standard of excellence associated with George and Ira Gershwin” — to his 33 Top 40 hits and 23 Grammy nominations. Justice Sonia Sotomayor of the Supreme Court and Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California, were among those who bestowed the award on Mr. Joel on Nov. 19 at Constitution Hall in Washington. That celebration, presented here, features Tony Bennett performing “New York State of Mind,” LeAnn Rimes singing “Lullabye (Goodnight, My Angel),” Josh Groban rendering “Always a Woman” and John Mellencamp covering “Allentown.” Then it’s Mr. Joel’s turn with renditions of “Movin’ Out,” “Vienna,” “You May Be Right” and, with Kevin Spacey, “Piano Man.”4:05 P.M. (Starz Cinema) AMOUR (2012) A French couple, portrayed by Jean-Louis Trintignant and Emmanuelle Riva (above) find their love tested when she has a stroke and he becomes her caregiver in this Oscar winner for best foreign-language film, directed by Michael Haneke. Isabelle Huppert plays their self-centered daughter — like her parents, a musician — whose questions about what she can do to help as her mother becomes increasingly incapacitated ring hollow. Manohla Dargis, writing in The New York Times, called this film “a masterpiece about life, death and everything in between.” And while some viewers may find the movie cold and even cruel, she added, “there’s another point to be made here, namely that all the violence in ‘Amour’ is crucial to Mr. Haneke’s rigorous, liberatingly unsentimental worldview, one that gazes on death with the same benevolent equanimity as life. All of which is to say: Bring hankies. This is a film that will make you weep not only because life ends, but also because it blooms.”8 P.M. (Animal Planet) WHALE WARS The Sea Shepherds head back to Antarctica for a 10th mission to stop whaling but without their leader, Capt. Paul Watson, after a court ruling that limits how he can interact with Japanese vessels. This three-hour Season 7 special follows Capt. Peter Hammarstedt as he undertakes Operation Relentless by trying to intervene before the whaling season even begins — and lets the Japanese hunters know that the Sea Shepherds’ endeavor won’t ease up just because Captain Watson isn’t at the helm.10 P.M. (TLC) NEW BODY, NEW STYLE In this collaboration with People magazine, the style and beauty expert Mary Alice Stephenson shows two women who have each shed half their body weight how to best accentuate their new physiques.10:45 P.M. (Starz) CAPTAIN PHILLIPS (2013) Tom Hanks (above center with Barkhad Abdirahman) stars as Richard Phillips, the commander of the Maersk Alabama, an American container ship with a crew of 20 sailors and a cargo including supplies from the United Nations World Food Program that was seized in the Indian Ocean in April 2009 by four armed Somalis. Barkhad Abdi, a first-time actor who received an Oscar nomination, plays Muse, their leader, whose actions lead to the arrival of the American military and its warships. “The existential realities that inform contemporary Somali piracy turn out to be one of the unexpected themes of ‘Captain Phillips,’ which begins as something of a procedural about men at work and morphs into a jittery thriller even as it also deepens, brilliantly, unexpectedly, into an unsettling look at global capitalism and American privilege and power,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times about this best picture nominee, adapted by the director Paul Greengrass from Mr. Phillips’s book, “A Captain’s Duty: Somali Pirates, Navy SEALs, and Dangerous Days at Sea.” “Phillips is unambiguously a heroic figure, but he’s scarcely the sole point of interest in a movie that steadily and almost stealthily asserts the agonized humanity of his captors.”1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK Charles Isherwood of The New York Times, Jesse Green of New York magazine and Elisabeth Vincentelli of The New York Post recap the 2014 theater season and reveal the one show they’re all looking forward to this spring.What’s Streaming NowWHALE WARS Through Jan. 19, every episode from the previous six seasons of this Animal Planet series chronicling the efforts of Capt. Paul Watson and his Sea Shepherd Conservation Society to combat Japanese whaling is available for streaming. (animalplanet.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement