By LAUREL GRAEBERJAN. 1, 2015
First Saturdays for Families: ‘Group Choreography’Many established choreographers work with less experienced disciples, but Vanessa Justice’s collaborator on a program for the New Museum may be one of the youngest on record: Liv Rylander, 3.Liv, Ms. Justice’s daughter, brings genuine expertise to the project. Her mother has been developing a workshop for children, and who better to serve as creative consultant?“I plan to introduce kids to the way choreographers think — how they work with bodies, space and time to make a dance,” Ms. Justice said in a telephone interview.Her program, “Group Choreography,” will be part of the museum’s First Saturdays for Families, a free series. The museum has devoted its most recent Research and Development Season — a group of projects embracing different platforms — to the theme of choreography, and Ms. Justice has been participating in it through “AuntsforCamera,” an installation of nine filmed dance works.Advertisement“I was working with spinning, and kids love to spin,” she said. This led her to think of using Ring Around the Rosie as a nucleus for her workshop. She said she also planned to present “an exercise about space” called the Garden: One child will come into a defined area and choose a place to lie down, stand up or sit. A second will enter and do the same, and then a third. After all have selected their positions relative to one another, they will “basically have created a spatial composition,” Ms. Justice said.AdvertisementThis approach may help young participants understand how choreographers make pictures with bodies. By breaking down Ring Around the Rosie into its constituent elements and reordering or revising them, as Ms. Justice did with Liv — maybe falling down first instead of last — they may also grasp how choreographers can make a small piece of familiar material more layered, complex and unexpected.Ms. Justice’s workshop, which she will conduct three times on Saturday — the event is drop-in — is geared to children 3 to 9, but the museum will offer other activities, too. Young visitors can try figure drawing, using the dancers as models, or they can draw a movement-related word from a box — like “high” or “turn” — and illustrate it with their bodies.“I hope they come away with the feeling that dance is in continual evolution,” Ms. Justice said, “and that someday they might make a dance that is totally unique in its vision.”(10 a.m. to noon, 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org; tickets are limited, first come first served.) LAUREL GRAEBERFor ChildrenAiley Family Matinees (Saturday) Children can take their first steps as dancegoers by following the leaps and bounds of the members of Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater in this abbreviated afternoon program, which is followed by a question-and-answer session with the dancers. This family matinee, the last of the season, includes new works and repertory favorites. It concludes with Alvin Ailey’s own “Revelations,” the troupe’s signature work, inspired by spirituals. At 2 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org.‘All Aboard With Thomas and Friends’ (Saturday, Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) In winter, the New York Botanical Garden becomes as much a train station as a plant-filled paradise. In addition to the Holiday Train Show, which features model trains zooming among models of New York City landmarks, the garden is now offering “All Aboard With Thomas & Friends,” a mini-performance featuring Thomas the Tank Engine and Driver Sam, of storybook and television fame. Children can help the characters as they decorate the train station for a big surprise party and pose for photos with Thomas at the end of the singalong show. (Through Jan. 25.) Saturdays and Sundays at 11 a.m., and 1:30, 3:30 and 5:30 p.m.; this Tuesday through Thursday at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m.; members-only performances this Saturday and Sunday at 9 a.m.; Ross Hall, Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx, 718-817-8777, nybg.org. Advance purchase is recommended for “All Aboard” shows; those buying online must choose the tickets that specify mini-performances and reserve a time.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’  (Friday; Sunday through Tuesday; and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; until 4 p.m. on Fridays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.Advertisement‘Cirque Zíva’ (Friday through Sunday) The title may seem French, but the show is unmistakably Asian: This two-hour production, closing this weekend, represents the return of the Golden Dragon Acrobats, from Hebei Province, China, to the New Victory Theater, where they first wowed young audiences in 2005. And don’t expect ordinary handsprings and somersaults. This troupe’s members specialize in the extreme, like balancing on one hand on a stack of chairs or doing ballet moves while perched on another person’s shoulders. They’ll offer a lion dance, too. Friday and Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 5 p.m.; 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.Elska (Saturday) Children can take a trip to the Arctic, no snowsuits required, via this show by Elska (Shelley Wollert), a kind of Björk for young listeners who combines music, puppets and wild costumes and characters — the Goobler, the Arctic Fox — in a fanciful tale about her life on a volcanic island off the coast of Iceland. Part of Symphony Space’s Just Kidding series, the presentation will include electro-pop from her album, “Middle of Nowhere.” At 11 a.m., Leonard Nimoy Thalia Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.Family Country Dance (Saturday) You don’t usually get much of a rustic feeling in Manhattan, but the 92nd Street Y will provide it on Saturday with this old-fashioned country dance. Family members young and old can enjoy square dances, circle dances, line dances and reels, all done to live traditional music by the Hell’s Kitchen Cookers. Guests at the event — it’s free to anyone under 18 — are invited to prepare a vegetarian dish for a potluck supper before the swinging and do-si-doing begin. From 5 to 8 p.m., Buttenwieser Hall, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org.‘Fancy Nancy: Splendiferous Christmas’ (Friday through Sunday) Vital Theater Company, which gave eager young audiences “Fancy Nancy: The Musical,” has returned with a new show starring that inimitable little diva. Based on the book written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, “Fancy Nancy: Splendiferous Christmas,” which closes this weekend, deals with Nancy’s fancy expectations for the holiday season. With a book by Cara Lustik, music by Randy Klein and lyrics by Matthew Hardy, the production revolves around Nancy’s purchase of a grand decoration for the top of the Christmas tree, and what ensues when her dreams don’t turn out quite as planned. At 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., McGinn/Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.'s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m. 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘Great White Shark’ (Friday through Sunday) Seeing this Imax film, closing this weekend at the American Museum of Natural History, may inspire fear — not for the safety of humans, but for that of sharks. Shown in both 2-D and 3-D, this documentary explores the fate of great white sharks, which have been driven to the brink of extinction by the market for shark fin soup. Filmed in waters off Mexico, New Zealand, South Africa and California, the work captures sharks in their habitats, including a sequence in which great whites are shown breaching in 3-D. Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. At Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org. Included in Museum Plus One admission (general admission and one Imax film or special exhibition): $27; $22 for students and 60+; $16 for ages 2 to 12. Member tickets: $13.50; $8.50 for children.‘The Greatest Pirate Holiday Spectacularrr!’ (Friday and Saturday) My, that Scrooge was a scurvy knave: repossessing houseboats, stealing ugly sweaters, hiding his ill-gotten gains in a litter box. You’re probably thinking that Charles Dickens must be rolling in his grave over this, and he probably is — with laughter. Presented by Off Sides Entertainment, which produced last year’s “The Greatest Pirate Story (N)ever Told,” this show combines a parody of piracy and “A Christmas Carol” with audience-assisted improvisation and a variation on the children’s fill-in-the-blank game Mad Libs. Dickens himself plays a role in the production, which you shouldn’t miss: It closes this weekend. Friday at 11 a.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 5 p.m.; Snapple Theater Center, 210 West 50th Street, Manhattan, 212-921-7862, greatestpiratestory.com.Hands-On Nano Demos (Saturday) Forget about thinking big; this free event is all about thinking small, as Sony Wonder Technology Lab offers experiments and workshops exploring the properties, structures and materials involved in nanotechnology. Recommended for ages 7 and older, these demonstrations are enhanced by the lab’s permanent exhibit on nanotechnology’s applications in fields like medicine, transportation and fashion. From 1 to 3 p.m., 550 Madison Avenue, at 56th Street, 212-833-8100, sonywondertechlab.com; reservations are required.‘Hansel and Gretel’ (Saturday and Thursday) Children may not think that Hansel and Gretel have much to sing about in their dark adventure, but young audiences will find out otherwise at this family-friendly production from the Metropolitan Opera, which ends its holiday run on Thursday. Presented in Richard Jones’s English adaptation, with Engelbert Humperdinck’s score, the opera, for ages 5 and older, runs about 2 hours 10 minutes and stars Robert Brubaker as the gluttonous witch. Saturday at 1 p.m.; Thursday at 7:30 p.m.; Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metoperafamily.org.Advertisement‘Into the Third Dimension: 3-D Printing for Young Artists’ (Friday through Monday, and Wednesday and Thursday) Imagine that a robot or a fairy or a lion came out of a child’s drawing and acquired three dimensions. It sounds like an animated fantasy, but the Children’s Museum of the Arts is making something very similar happen in this exhibition. A collaboration with 3DP4E (3-D Printing for Everyone), this show features works from the museum’s permanent collection of children’s art. Each drawing is shown alongside one of its elements or details that’s been made three-dimensional through the printing process. On selected Saturdays the museum will hold drawing workshops in which children can create art to enter into a raffle to be selected for 3-D printing. (Through Jan. 11.) 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org. Hours: Fridays and Thursdays from noon to 6 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Mondays and Wednesdays from noon to 5 p.m.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.Museum of the Moving Image Workshop and Screening (Friday through Sunday) Movies can often seem magical, but this museum is increasing that appeal with a hands-on workshop that delves into cinematic wizardry. “Stop-Motion Shapes,” its winter holiday family workshop, for ages 8 and older, daily at 2:30 p.m., will allow children to make their own videos emulating Chuck Jones’s short film “The Dot and the Line,” in which he animates the simplest shapes. They’ll turn cutouts and blocks into characters. On Saturday only, at noon, the museum is also screening “The Wind Rises” (2013), which the Japanese master Hayao Miyazaki has said is his final film. An animated adventure and romance, it offers a fictionalized version of the life of Jiro Horikoshi, an aeronautical engineer who designed warplanes used in World War II. On Sunday only, at 1 p.m., it is showing “Baton Bunny” and other cartoons, part of its Chuck Jones matinee series. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-777-6800, movingimage.us. Workshop requires a small materials fee; screenings are free with museum admission.‘Somebody Come and Play: 45 Years of “Sesame Street” Helping Kids Grow Smarter, Stronger, and Kinder’ (Friday, Saturday, and Monday through Thursday) Sesame Street now has an additional address: the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts. This free show showcases more than 250 artifacts related to the beloved preschool public television series “Sesame Street,” including set designs, original sketches for characters, scripts, storyboards, animation cels, Claymation models, videos and, of course, over 20 Muppets, among them Elmo, Zoe and Bert and Ernie. A children’s area includes “Sesame Street” books and activities. (Through Jan. 31.) Daily, except Sundays, from noon to 6 p.m.; to 8 p.m. on Mondays and Thursdays; 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, Lincoln Center, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/lpa.Sugarcube: ‘Enchanted’ (Thursday) An inflatable, heated pop-up space at the South Street Seaport, the white rectangular Sugarcube looks a lot like its name. And what’s inside seems pretty sweet, too: a weekly series of free arts events, from Thursday through Sunday, that include workshops, performances, D.J. parties, screenings and family programs. The family offerings kick off on Thursday with a free showing of “Enchanted,” the 2007 Disney film about Giselle, an animated princess who falls under a spell and suddenly finds herself emerging in Times Square as a flesh-and-blood human being. Played by Amy Adams, Giselle has to contend with both the challenges of New York and the potential for a love that isn’t just a cartoon. At 7 p.m., Fulton and Front Streets, Lower Manhattan, sugarcube.nyc.‘Swamp Juice’ (Friday through Sunday) You can sometimes find junk in a swamp, but in the one conjured by this shadow puppet show, closing this weekend, the creatures are rubbish, too. Jeff Achtem, of Melbourne, Australia, uses ordinary household stuff to create his characters, which include a snail, a crocodile, a mouse, a snake, birds and a grumpy old man who interacts with them all. (In the finale, audience members are given 3-D glasses to complete their swamp immersion.) Friday and Sunday at 5 p.m.; Saturday at 2:30 and 7:30 p.m.; Barrow Street Theater, 27 Barrow Street, at Seventh Avenue South, West Village, 212-868-4444, barrowstreettheatre.com.Three Kings Day Celebration/El Día de los Reyes Magos (Tuesday) In the Bible, the three kings traveled to Bethlehem to bestow gifts on the baby Jesus. In present-day Manhattan, they will journey to the Lower East Side to bestow gifts on local children. This is part of the free celebration at Teatro SEA, the Latino theater for young people, which will honor the holiday with traditional music by Los Pleneros de la 21 and Mariachi Academy of New York; an appearance by the three kings; and presents for the first 1,000 little visitors to arrive. From 3 to 5 p.m., Los Kabayitos Puppet and Children’s Theater, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 10:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. At Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Advertisement‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Hours: Mondays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; until 5:30 p.m. on Sundays. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.  LAUREL GRAEBERA version of this schedule appears in print on January 2, 2015, on Page C30 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.