AdvertisementSupported by Museums and galleries are in Manhattan unless otherwise noted. Full reviews of recent art shows: nytimes.com/art. A searchable guide to these and many other art shows is at nytimes.com/events.Museums★ Bronx Museum of the Arts: ‘Beyond the Supersquare’  (through Jan. 11) In the mid-20th century, certain Latin American cities looked like the most modern cities on earth. Not only was their architecture imaginative, so were the ideas behind it: that design could shape civic life; that art and architecture were inseparable; that while Europe and the United States were the cultural powers of the day, South America had a shot at tomorrow. The momentum broke down when a rash of right-wing military coups swept the continent. But the link between art and architecture remained firm and continues to. That’s the subject of this subtle, buoyant think-piece of a show of contemporary work, which extends to an open-air pavilion designed by Terence Gower, set in the lush garden of the Andrew Freedman home across from the museum. 1040 Grand Concourse, at 165th Street, Morrisania, the Bronx, 718-681-6000, bronxmuseum.org. (Holland Cotter)★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Killer Heels: The Art of the High-Heeled Shoe’ (through Feb. 15) Whether you view extra-high heels with lust or horror, as objects of empowerment or objectification, this in-depth survey of elevating footwear from past and present, East and West, is a model of the curatorial craft. It examines its subject from several fruitful angles, including unflattering ones, interspersed with excellent labels, relevant objects of art and especially design, clips from famous films and videos both didactic and artistic. Its main flaw: dim lighting dictated by fragile materials means that some shoes are most visible in the catalog. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Roberta Smith)★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Judith Scott — Bound and Unbound’  (through March 29) Judith Scott’s mesmerizing sculptures sit like large, unopened bundles, contents mysterious, in the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art at the Brooklyn Museum. In a few, solid forms can be made out under wrappings of yarn, string and fabric strips; others suggest gift-wrapped boulders. You can call them abstract and stop there, or go further and connect them to art history, specifically the history of fiber art, or go further and consider them in the light of Ms. Scott’s history: She was born in 1943 with Down syndrome, started making art only in her early 40s and kept making it until her death at 61. However approached, the work is complex and brilliant. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum (continuing) The stately doors of the 1902 Andrew Carnegie mansion, home to the Cooper Hewitt, are open again after an overhaul and expansion of the premises. Historic house and modern museum have always made an awkward fit, a standoff between preservation and innovation, and the problem remains, but the renovation has brought a wide-open new gallery space, a cafe and a raft of be-your-own-designer digital enhancements. Best of all, more of the museum’s vast permanent collection is now on view, including an Op Art weaving, miniature spiral staircases, ballistic face masks and a dainty enameled 18th-century version of a Swiss knife. Like design itself, this institution is built on tumult and friction, and you feel it. 2 East 91st Street, at Fifth Avenue, 212-849-8400, cooperhewitt.org. (Cotter)★ Frick Collection: ‘Masterpieces From the Scottish National Gallery’ (through Feb. 1) As it did last year with masterworks from the Mauritshuis, the Frick has welcomed 10 paintings from the Scottish National Gallery, in Edinburgh, home to a renowned collection of fine art from the Renaissance to the end of the 19th century. It’s a quieter sort of exhibition, exemplified by the under-the-radar entrance of Sargent’s “Lady Agnew of Lochnaw.” It’s also a rangier show, one that isn’t as identifiably Scottish as the Mauritshuis works were Dutch — even considering the commanding Sir Henry Raeburn portrait of a kilted Macdonell clan chief. 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, 212-288-0700, frick.org. (Karen Rosenberg)★ Jewish Museum: ‘From the Margins: Lee Krasner and Norman Lewis, 1945-1952’ (through Feb. 1) Inspired by a pairing in the museum’s 2008 show “Action/Abstraction: Pollock, de Kooning and American Art, 1940-1976,” this exhibition orchestrates a profound and sensitive conversation between Krasner and Lewis — one that takes into account their shared visual language as well as different cultural backgrounds (as a Jewish woman and an African-American man). It also suggests that both artists have long been hidden in plain sight: Krasner as the spouse of an art celebrity, Lewis as a black artist whose paintings were more formal than political. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)★ Jewish Museum: ‘Helena Rubinstein: Beauty Is Power’ (through March 22) The first museum show devoted to the life and art collection of the cosmetics magnate Helena Rubinstein is a master class in modernism-as-marketing — one that comes with a strong female perspective on 20th-century visual culture. It shows us how Rubinstein adapted Cubism, Surrealism and other avant-garde art and design movements for her personal brand, highlighting new and different standards of beauty and exhorting women to control their own images through makeup and grooming. Mixing biography, business, art, fashion and décor, it recreates rooms from Rubinstein’s salons and reassembles parts of her diverse collection, which included African, pre-Columbian and Oceanic artworks. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Bartholomeus Spranger: Splendor and Eroticism in Imperial Prague’  (through Feb. 1) This show is intriguing as much for the story it tells of an eventful and extraordinarily fortunate career as for the works on view, which range from pictures of standard Christian subjects to extravagantly theatrical images of pagan sex and revelry. Working in Prague for the Holy Roman emperor Rudolf II, Bartholomeus Spranger (1546-1611) painted and drew Mannerist-style allegories involving nude and nearly nude gods and goddesses athletically entwined in anatomically improbable positions. His images were copied by expert engravers and disseminated in immense quantities throughout Europe. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Ken Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Cubism: The Leonard A. Lauder Collection’  (through Feb. 16) This no-strings-attached gift of 81 Cubist works more than lives up to expectations. Concentrating on the four horsemen of the Cubist apocalypse (Braque, Gris, Léger and Picasso), it outlines the style’s heady transformation of art while giving the museum a foundation in modernism commensurate with its holdings in other eras. It’s a stunning show and thrilling event. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Grand Design: Pieter Coecke van Aelst and Renaissance Tapestry’  (through Jan. 11) The Met presents its third spectacular show of European tapestries in a dozen years and its first to concentrate on a single artist, the polymath Pieter Coecke van Aelst. It may repeatedly make you gasp, whether at the size or realness of the images, their human dramas and sumptuous surfaces, or simply the immense open space that forms the exhibition’s spine. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Making Pottery Art: The Robert A. Ellison Jr. Collection of French Ceramics (ca. 1880-1910)’  (through March 15) Nearly all the 40 works in this show — from a collection recently donated to the museum — are in a traditional form of vases, bowls and platters. They represent a marvelous variety of styles and influences, including Art Nouveau, Arts and Crafts, classic Chinese traditions and European folk art. What they share is a love for processes and materials and a candid way with the human touch. Most intriguing of all is a curiously clunky small vase by Paul Gauguin, who might have been the George Ohr of European ceramics if he’d stuck with it. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Thomas Hart Benton’s “America Today” Mural Rediscovered’ (through April 19) The prickly American Regionalist Thomas Hart Benton had his share of detractors. But even they would probably acknowledge that his early mural “America Today” is the best of its kind, a raucous, cartwheeling, wide-angle look at 1920s America that set the standard for the Works Progress Administration’s mural program and has remained a New York City treasure. Now installed at the Met in a reconstruction of its original setting (a boardroom at the New School for Social Research), it captivates with period details (from the cut of a flapper gown to the mechanics of a blast furnace) and timely signs of socioeconomic and environmental distress (exhausted coal miners and hands reaching for coffee and bread). 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)MoMA PS 1: ‘Bob and Roberta Smith: Art Amnesty’ (through March 8) Bob and Roberta Smith is the cognomen of a British artist who specializes in humorously mocking art institutions and the conventional attitudes they tend to promulgate. The ostensible idea of this show is to give people an opportunity to officially retire from making art and to ceremonially discard works of art they own but no longer want. Unloaded works are displayed along with jazzy signs painted by Mr. Smith on all kinds of surfaces. One proclaims, “Joseph Beuys conclusive proof not everyone is an artist.” 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Johnson)MoMA PS1: ‘Samara Golden: The Flat Side of the Knife’ (through Aug. 30) Standing at a railing where you look into the museum’s two-story-tall Duplex Gallery, you behold a confoundingly complicated interior architecture with furniture, stairways, musical instruments, wheelchairs and many other domestic items rendered in silvery, foil-clad foam board. The gallery’s floor is covered by a grid of large mirrors so that everything is doubled. What you think is up may really be down and what you take to be real might be a virtual reflection of the real. 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Johnson)Morgan Library & Museum: ‘The Untamed Landscape: Théodore Rousseau and the Path to Barbizon’ (through Jan. 18) Nearly 150 years after his death in 1867, this 19th-century French landscape painter receives his first retrospective in the United States. The show features only drawings and oil studies, but it provides a lucid and revelatory summary of his sensibility and achievement. Rousseau loved nature and drawing with equal passion, and this exhibition is suffused with a determination to explore all that is both ardent and brilliant. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org. (Smith)★ El Museo del Barrio: ‘Marisol: Sculptures and Works on Paper’ (through Jan. 10) This 30-piece survey, organized by the Memphis Brooks Museum of Art, makes virtues of the artist’s restlessness and eclecticism. It includes her underappreciated works on paper alongside sculptural tableaus that combine woodcarving and assemblage (for instance, “The Family,” a funky Nativity scene from 1969 that is dominated by a neon-haloed, heavily bedazzled Virgin). It could have done more, however, to explore her Latin American folk-art influences and Venezuelan roots, which deserve at least as much scrutiny as her ties to American Pop art. 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street, East Harlem, 212-831-7272, elmuseo.org. (Rosenberg)Museum of Arts and Design: ‘What Would Mrs. Webb Do? A Founder’s Vision’  (through Feb. 8) Paying tribute to museum founder Aileen Osborn Webb (1892-1979), a well-connected philanthropist, patron of the arts and, in the museum’s new parlance, a “maker,” this collection show rich in midcentury objects also brings to life Mrs. Webb’s craft-related activities and organizations beyond the museum. (She had founded the American Craft Council in 1939 and, before that, organized cooperatives of craftspeople up the Hudson in Putnam County during the Depression.) With her vision of a museum connected to various networks and marketplaces, Mrs. Webb affirmed craft — or “making,” or whatever you call it — as a deeply social activity and a source of economic self-empowerment. 2 Columbus Circle, Manhattan, 212-299-7777, madmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘The Forever Now: Contemporary Painting in an Atemporal World’ (through April 5) Despite being predictable and market-oriented in its choice of 17 artists, this museum’s first painting survey in decades is well worth seeing. About half the artists are exceptional and the rest are represented by their best work. Based on the premise that all historical painting styles are equally available today, the exhibition has been smartly installed to juxtapose different approaches: figurative and abstract, digital and handmade, spare and opulent. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Henri Matisse: The Cut-Outs’ (through Feb. 10) A popular image of the elderly Matisse is of a serene, bespectacled pasha propped up in bed and surrounded by doves and flowers. But in the years around 1940, he must have felt he was living a nightmare. He and his wife of more than four decades separated. He underwent debilitating surgery for cancer. During World War II, he fled south to Nice, only to have that city threatened with bombardment. Through everything, he worked on. It is this Matisse — the invalid, insomniac, night-worker and waking dreamer — we meet in the marvelous, victory-lap show that has arrived in New York from London, trailing light, praise and lines around the block. 212-708-9400, moma.org; admission is by timed tickets. (Cotter)Museum of Modern Art: ‘The Paris of Toulouse-Lautrec: Prints and Posters’ (through March 22) In his printed works, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec chronicled and publicized the music halls, theaters, circuses, operas and cafes of Paris with terrific verve, sly wit and surprising subtlety. This enthralling show presents approximately 100 examples drawn from the museum’s permanent collection. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Johnson)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Robert Gober: The Heart Is Not a Metaphor’ (through Jan. 18) This 35-year retrospective, haunting 13 beautifully-installed galleries at the museum, presents tenderly handmade sculptures and installations more real than surreal that are as American as apple pie — with the sugar left out. Their familiar yet startlingly altered forms — including playpens, sinks and easy chairs — and truncated human limbs and bodies, have a sharpness that continually bring us up short, conjuring memories both private and shared, including the attacks of Sept. 11. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Sturtevant: Double Trouble’  (through Feb. 22) Among the first things you see in MoMA’s taut, feisty retrospective of the American artist Elaine Sturtevant is work by far better known figures: Joseph Beuys, Jasper Johns, Marcel Duchamp. In each case, however, the pieces are by Ms. Sturtevant herself, who spent much of a long career adopting and adapting the art and styles of others to create a body of work entirely her own, one which raises questions about the value of art, about the hows and whys of producing it, and about the degrees to which quasi-replication can be an exercise in flattery, parody, objectivity, originality and love. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Cotter)Museum of the Moving Image: ‘What’s Up, Doc? The Animation Art of Chuck Jones’ (through Jan. 19) One of the great producers of animated cartoons in the predigital era, Mr. Jones created Road Runner and Wile E. Coyote and made movies starring previously existing characters like Bugs Bunny and Daffy Duck. This entertaining show includes 136 original drawings and paintings and has 23 video versions of films directed by Mr. Jones showing in whole or in parts in a screening room and on monitors throughout. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us. (Johnson)★ Neue Galerie: ‘Egon Schiele: Portraits’ (through Jan. 19) Of the approximately 125 items in this terrific show, there are only 11 oil paintings, which is a good thing. Except for a large picture of his wife, Edith, in a colorful striped dress, Schiele’s works on canvas are dark and turgid. But his drawings are nimble and nuanced. Working on paper with pencil, charcoal, ink, gouache, watercolor and crayons, he portrayed himself and others with infectious avidity. There’s hardly a single sheet here that doesn’t warrant close looking for its virtuoso draftsmanship and psychological acuity. 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street, 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org. (Johnson)★ New Museum: ‘Chris Ofili: Night and Day’ (through Jan. 25) This intoxicating midcareer survey presents six distinct bodies of paintings and drawings, as well as a few sculptures, tracing a remarkable development. It reveals an artist restlessly pushing his art to new extremes of decorativeness and harshness, darkness and threat, funky extravagance and suavity. Painting itself undergoes several transmutations. Race, religion, pop culture and nature are touched on. Color triumphs in several forms. The art is never shortchanged. 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Smith)New-York Historical Society: Annie Leibovitz: ‘Pilgrimage’  (through Feb. 22) No living celebrities are portrayed in “Pilgrimage,” but lots of celebrated figures from the past are indirectly represented, from Thomas Jefferson and Emily Dickinson to Eleanor Roosevelt and Robert Smithson. In the spring of 2009, Ms. Leibovitz set out on a two-year journey that took her to about two dozen historic sites in the United States and Britain. Most of these were house museums dedicated to famous individuals, where she photographed the rooms they inhabited and objects they owned and used. Though often poetically atmospheric, these pictures are disappointingly less lively than her portraits of famous entertainers. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org. (Johnson)★ Rubin Museum of Art: ‘The All-Knowing Buddha: A Secret Guide’ (through April 13) This show presents 54 paintings that illustrate step-by-step instructions for followers of Tibetan Buddhism. Delicately painted on 10-by-10-inch paper sheets, most of the pages depict a monk having fabulous visions in a verdant landscape. Thought to have been commissioned by a Mongolian patron and executed by unidentified artists in a Chinese workshop sometime in the 18th century, it is a fascinating and remarkably thorough manual for seekers of higher consciousness. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org. (Johnson)Rubin Museum of Art: ‘Francesco Clemente: Inspired by India’ (through Feb. 2) The first Clemente retrospective in New York in more than a decade ties the peripatetic Italian-born painter to a single country. At just 20 works or so, it’s not exactly comprehensive. It is, however, thoroughly immersive. The installation, in the Rubin’s skylit top-floor galleries, evokes the structure of an Indian temple with a combination of large and small spaces; it has an open central area of paintings, intimate nooks for sculpture and a “sanctum” of watercolors. This finely articulated sense of place is the most novel aspect of an exhibition that otherwise, like many previous Clemente exhibitions, seems to coast on his cosmopolitan charms. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)Skyscraper Museum: ‘Times Square, 1984: The Postmodern Moment’ (through Jan. 18) In this smart, pithy show, 20 architectural panels capture the essence of another show, the “Times Tower Site Competition” held by New York’s Municipal Art Society 30 years ago, when over 500 architects made proposals for the famous triangular site in Times Square. Philip Johnson and John Burgee were proposing a suave 4.2 million-square-foot ensemble of four skyscrapers that would help “clean up” the surrounding urban squalor, and they favored an open square at the center of their project. The Municipal Art Society protested the proposal by asking for alternatives to replace the Times Tower. The dispute proved a turning point in New York’s urban history and, more broadly, in American architectural history, as the postmodernism of the Johnson towers gave way to a highly eclectic, free-for-all postmodernism devoid of his mansards or triumphal arches. 39 Battery Place, Lower Manhattan, 212-968-1961, skyscraper.org. (Joseph Giovannini)Galleries: Uptown★ ‘Local History: Castellani, Judd, Stella’ (through Jan. 17) Despite a flimsy premise that proposes a shared, and Minimalist, history, this exceptionally beautiful exhibition is a must-see. Its numerous early works by the American artists Frank Stella and Donald Judd and the Italian Enrico Castellani, revisit a point in the early 1960s when the artwork’s three-dimensional nature was redefined. Dominique Lévy Gallery, 909 Madison Avenue, at 73rd Street, 212-772-2004, dominique-levy.com. (Smith)Galleries: 57th Street★ Pablo Picasso: ‘Picasso and Jacqueline: The Evolution of Style’ (through Jan. 10) This exhibition is fairly candid about the fact that its raven-haired, green-eyed subject (Picasso’s last companion and second wife, Jacqueline Roque) is not so much a muse as she is an art-historical Zelig. In paintings from the mid-1950s, she is a odalisque in Turkish costume, in tribute to Picasso’s great rival Matisse (who died in 1954) and to Delacroix, whose harem fantasy “Women of Algiers in Their Apartment” inspired a substantial and varied group of Picasso paintings and etchings. At other times, she appears to us as a prim Goya Madrileña in a black head scarf or as a calmly exhibitionist member of Manet’s luncheon party. Pace galleries, 32 East 57th Street, Manhattan, 212-421-3292, and 534 West 25th Street, Chelsea, 212-929-7000, pacegallery.com. (Rosenberg)Galleries: Chelsea‘Disturbing Innocence’ (through Jan. 31) At the start of this entertaining and provocative exhibition organized by the painter Eric Fischl, you encounter ominous images of suburban homes in photographs by James Casebere and Gregory Crewdson, paintings by Peter Drake and a sculpture by Roy Lichtenstein. Moving into the main part of the exhibition you discover what goes on behind closed doors: a riot of polymorphous perversity in the form of paintings, photographs and sculptures, by more than 50 artists, representing children, dolls, mannequins, robots and toys. Flag Art Foundation, 545 West 25th Street, 212-206-0220, flagartfoundation.org. (Johnson)★ Martin Puryear (through Jan. 10) Late in long careers, some artists settle for delivering signatures rather than fresh work, but not Martin Puryear. His first solo show was in 1972, and for his latest, which is also his debut at Matthew Marks Gallery, he has come up with an exploratory group of sculptures and etchings. They are all ingenious variations on a single historical image, the so-called Phrygian cap, the soft, red conical hat that became an emblem of anti-loyalist resistance and antislavery sentiment during the French Revolution. The result is work that’s political, playful, sweet to the eye and deep. 502 and 522 West 22nd Street, 212-243-0200, matthewmarks.com. (Cotter)Galleries: Other★ ‘The Memphis Group’ (through Jan. 31) Postmodernism may mean different things to different people, but certainly one of its most memorable manifestations was that of the Memphis Group, the Milan-based designer collective started by Ettore Sottsass in 1981. Featuring playfully eccentric bookcases, tables, chairs, vases, lamps and other domestic items mostly by Mr. Sottsass and including works by six other group members, this exhilarating pair of exhibitions is a must for students of 20th-century design. Through Jan. 31 at Koenig & Clinton, 459 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-334-9255, koenigandclinton.com. Through Jan. 11 at Joe Sheftel Gallery, 24A Orchard Street, Lower East Side, 212-226-4900, joesheftelgallery.com. (Johnson)★ Chris Verene: ‘Home Movies’ (through Jan. 17) Mr. Verene has been photographing members of his extended family and circle of friends in his hometown, Galesburg, Ill., regularly for the past 30 years. Along with eight photographs resembling enlarged snapshots from a personal photo album, this show presents something new and different: a 30-minute video titled “Home Movies.” Made with low-budget cameras, it’s a riveting, sad and sometimes comical series of short, documentary portraits of poor, white, working-class people getting by in a time of pervasive economic hardship. Postmasters, 54 Franklin Street, TriBeCa, 212-727-3323, postmastersart.com. (Johnson)Public Art‘Archeo’ (through March) Shortening the word archaeology, this exhibition focuses on technology and obsolescence. Marianne Vitale’s sculptures made from steel components of railroad switches known as frogs are one highlight; Jessica Jackson Hutchins’s neo-hippie assemblages with found ceramics and a hand-woven hammock another. Across the bar from the Standard Hotel, Josh Kline takes the most activist stance, with smoothies made from prescription drugs and consumer products, while a mural by the veteran artist Ed Ruscha — a new commission separate from “Archeo” — announces “Honey, I Twisted Through More Damn Traffic Today,” perhaps capturing the ethos of the tourist-clogged High Line. At the High Line, enter at Washington and Gansevoort Streets, art.thehighline.org. (Martha Schwendener)Out of Town★ Dia:Beacon: ‘Carl Andre: Sculpture as Place, 1958-2010’ (through March 9) Minimalism was the late 20th century’s great hope for a heroic American art on the Abstract Expressionism model. Carl Andre was one of Minimalism’s founders. This career survey of his low-to-the-ground modular sculptures looks terrific in Dia’s sonorous, sunlight-washed spaces. It also poses the question of how such monument-minded art can feel so modest, intimate — even delicate. The real treat here is the chance to see dozens of manuscript pages of Mr. Andre’s 1960s poems, which he referred to as “typewriter drawings.” Carefully shaped on the page in lines and blocks, they are evidence of a sculptor-to-be at work. 3 Beekman Street, Beacon, N.Y., 845-440-0100, diaart.org. (Cotter)★ Museum of Fine Arts, Boston: ‘Goya: Order and Disorder’  (through Jan. 19) The snapshots of savagery that the news media withholds — of torture and rape in progress — Francisco Goya placed front and center in his art. In “The Disasters of War,” he is a virtuoso of violence, shading it, savoring it, prodding it toward us with blunt intent. If these prints and even more harrowing images from his private albums of drawings were the entire contents of “Goya: Order and Disorder” it would make for a punishing visit. Instead, this terrific exhibition adds portraiture and religious painting to form the broadest view of the artist’s career in America in more than two decades. 465 Huntington Avenue, Boston, 617-267-9300, mfa.org. (Cotter)★ National Museum of African Art: ‘Conversations: African and African American Artists in Dialogue’  (through early 2016) For its 50th anniversary, this museum has brilliantly thread together work from two sources: its own holdings in African material and the Camille O. and William H. Cosby Jr. collection of African-American art. The Cosby collection, weighted toward canonical figures like Romare Bearden and Charles White, will bring in the crowds, but it is the curators and museum itself, which is in a period of renaissance, that have made the show rise well above predictability. Smithsonian Institution, 950 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, 202-633-4600, africa.si.edu. (Cotter)★ Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts: ‘David Lynch: The Unified Field’ (through Jan. 11) The director of “Eraserhead,” “Blue Velvet,” “Mulholland Drive” and other great movies, Mr. Lynch started out with aspirations to be a fine artist. After three semesters studying painting at Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts in 1966 and ’67, he quit to pursue film, but he never gave up on painting, and since completing “Inland Empire” in 2006, he’s been especially busy making nonmoving art. A must for Lynch completists, this show presents about 90 paintings and drawings dating from 1965 to the present. 118 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, 215-972-7600, pafa.org. (Johnson)Last ChanceAsia Society and Museum: ‘Nam June Paik: Becoming Robot’ (closes on Sunday) Close on the heels of a large Nam June Paik survey in Washington last year comes this show, which seems to have two aims in mind: to situate Paik, who was born in Korea in 1932 but spent most of his career in New York, as a prescient imaginer of various forms of digital technology and social media, and to consider his identity as an Asian artist, or at least as a kind of Zen floater who made some of his most interesting work from pixels and sound waves circling through space. 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org/new-york. (Cotter)Brooklyn Museum: ‘Crossing Brooklyn: Art From Bushwick, Bed-Stuy and Beyond’ (closes on Sunday) Billed as a “major survey” of Brooklyn artists, this 35-person show favors artists who venture outside their studios to do various activities social and otherwise. Much is tepid and didactic, but some things are amusing. Nobutaka Aozaki makes portraits of people using a black marker to add their distinctive features to the yellow smiley face on plastic shopping bags. In a triptych of video self-portraits that she made in an airplane lavatory, Nina Katchadourian lip syncs to a Bee Gees song. A video by William Lamson, in which at certain points he appears to be standing on the calm surface of the Delaware River, has a transcendentalist vibe. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Guggenheim Museum: ‘Zero: Countdown to Tomorrow, 1950s-60s’ (closes on Wednesday) One of the most experimental of all postwar European art tendencies finally receives a full-dress survey in an American museum, one that was built and opened during its first flowering. While the work’s pursuit of newness — moving parts, mirrored surfaces and glowing lights — wears thin, the seamless pairing of exhibition and architecture is perfect. Both seem alternately radical and quaint. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. (Smith)★ ‘Luminós/C/ity.Ordinary Joy: From the Pigozzi Contemporary African Art Collection’  (closes on Thursday) For this new Harvard art gallery, the architect David Adjaye has transformed two awkwardly configured ground-floor offices into a small but viable exhibition space, and, doubling as curator for the inaugural show, packed the space with sterling work culled from a problematic private collection. The Cooper Gallery fills an important globalist gap at Harvard, where African art has otherwise no consistent presence. Ethelbert Cooper Gallery of African &amp; African American Art, 102 Mount Auburn Street, Cambridge, Mass., coopergalleryhc.org. (Cotter)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Assyria to Iberia at the Dawn of the Classical Age’ (closes on Sunday) Is art from the past pertinent to the present? Absolutely. The evidence is there in this magnificently complex show of art from parts of the Middle East, or as the Met prefers to call it, the Near East, that now include Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Syria and Turkey. The exchange of materials, ideas and beliefs traced in shipwreck-salvaged objects here speak of a world as globally networked as our own. The wars depicted in Assyrian relief panels are as horrific as those being fought on the same turf today. Look at any precious thing in the show — a Babylonian gold pendant, a Phoenician ivory carving — and know that their equivalents are being looted and sent to destinations unknown today. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)Metropolitan Museum of Art: Amie Siegel: ‘Provenance’ (closes on Sunday) Stylish aesthetics and fashionable conceptualism trump documentary realism in “Provenance,” an extremely suave film by Amie Siegel. The 40-minute movie is an instance of institutional critique, an art genre that tries to expose and subvert the workings of the capitalist art market. Specifically, it’s about the scandalous trade in furniture produced for Chandigarh, the utopian city in northern India designed by Le Corbusier and his team and built from 1951 to 1965. Although visually and emotionally captivating, it leaves obscure details that a more conventional documentary would bring to light. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Philadelphia Museum of Art: ‘Paul Strand: Master of Modern Photography’ (closes on Sunday) This museum, which mounted the last major Strand retrospective in 1971, has given us an elegant and convincing reappraisal. It depicts Strand as a modernist turned humanist, and a photographer who was just as much a cinephile. Drawing from the Philadelphia museum’s sizable Paul Strand Collection (most of it acquired since 2010), this show of some 250 prints takes in the full sweep of his career and some three-quarters of the 20th century. It includes film excerpts and a generous sampling of his photo books, projects that feed back into the early photographs and reveal longstanding interests in duration and narrative. Benjamin Franklin Parkway at 26th Street, 215-763-8100, philamuseum.org. (Rosenberg)★ Pablo Picasso: ‘Picasso and the Camera’ (closes on Saturday) This gallery’s fifth Picasso show organized by the artist’s biographer John Richardson is supposed to be a sweeping assessment of Picasso’s relationship to photography. But it’s a messy, fragmented affair, with a cluttered installation by the Broadway set designer David Korins. Viewers who can see past the slanted columns covered in blown-up photographs will, however, find some fantastic paintings, including the colorful Synthetic-Cubist canvas “Instruments de Musique sur un Guéridon,” the 1932 acrobatic nude “Le Repos,” and a marvelous series of 1939 portraits of Dora Maar in a strangely shaped red hat. Gagosian Gallery, 522 West 21st Street, Chelsea, 212-741-1717, gagosian.com. (Rosenberg)★ Rhode Island School of Design Museum: ‘What Nerve! Alternative Figures in American Art, 1960 to the Present’  (closes on Sunday) This revelatory exhibition focuses on four groups of artists who rejected New York-style abstraction and conceptualism in favor of offbeat sorts of figurative representation: the six-artist group the “Hairy Who,” which exhibited in Chicago from 1966 to ’69; nine artists associated with the San Francisco-born trend known as Funk; the four art- and zine-producing members of the noise band Destroy All Monsters (1973 to ’77) of Ann Arbor, Mich.; and the Providence, R.I., four-man collective Forcefield. 20 North Main Street, Providence, R.I., 401-454-6500, risdmuseum.org. (Johnson)Sculpture Center: ‘Puddle, pothole, portal’ (closes on Monday) Inspired by the cartoon art of Saul Steinberg and the movie “Who Framed Roger Rabbit?,” this 23-artist show invites viewers to consider the ways and wherefores of comical art. It’s generally more droll than laugh-out-loud funny. Consisting mostly of three-dimensional objects, it focuses on comedic art’s formal properties like absurdist contradiction, exaggerated scale and dysfunctional mechanics. Sculpture Center, 44-19 Purves Street, Long Island City, Queens, 718-361-1750, sculpture-center.org. (Johnson)Advertisement