AdvertisementSupported byMuseums and galleries are in Manhattan unless otherwise noted. Full reviews of recent art shows: nytimes.com/art. A searchable guide to these and many other art shows is at nytimes.com/events. Museums★ Asia Society and Museum: ‘Philippine Gold: Treasures of Forgotten Kingdoms’ (through Jan. 3) More than half a millennium before Ferdinand Magellan reached the archipelago now called the Philippines in 1521, a number of related societies thrived there. One of the few things known about them today is that they were astoundingly skillful goldsmiths. This gorgeous and historically intriguing exhibition presents nearly 120 pieces dating from the 10th through the 13th centuries, including bracelets, necklaces, pendants, collars, finger rings, bowls and a balance scale made entirely of gold. The star of the show is a gleaming, nine-pound sash made of gold beads that could be mistaken for a futuristic ammunition belt. 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org. (Ken Johnson)★ Bronx Museum of the Arts, El Museo del Barrio and Loisaida Inc.: ’¡Presente! The Young Lords in New York’ (through Dec. 12) On July 26, 1969, a group of young Latinos stood on stage of the band shell in Tompkins Square Park, in the East Village, and declared the founding of the New York branch of a revolution-minded political party called the Young Lords. Its purpose was to gain social justice for New York’s working-class Latino population, then largely Puerto Rican and treated with contempt by the city. Most of the people on stage that day were recent college graduates well-versed in leftist political theory. To gain the trust and cooperation of the grass-roots communities — concentrated in the East Village, East Harlem and the South Bronx — they knew they needed to get their feet on the street, and they wasted no time. They cleaned up neighborhoods; battled for health care; and created spaces for art and music. Spread over three institutions, "¡Presente!” rescues a crucial episode in the city’s history and treats a vibrant political organization as both a cultural and an ideological phenomenon. Through Dec. 1 at Loisaida Inc., 710 East Ninth Street, Lower East Side, 646-757-0522, loisaida.org; through Dec. 12 at El Museo, 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street, East Harlem, 212-831-7272, elmuseo.org; through Oct. 18 at Bronx Museum, 1040 Grand Concourse, at 165th Street, Morrisania, 718-681-6000, bronxmuseum.org (Holland Cotter)Brooklyn Botanic Garden: Isamu Noguchi (through Dec. 13) The Noguchi Museum and the Brooklyn Botanic Garden are to be commended for installing such a show, in which sculpture is exposed to the elements (and the wandering visitors). But this exhibition of 18 of the Japanese-American artist’s sculptures parceled throughout the garden can be frustrating, as you attempt to locate his works on a specially provided map. The showcase of the exhibition is an installation of several Noguchi sculptures inside the Japanese Hill-and-Pond Garden, a marriage of modern and traditional forms, and there are works just below the Native Flora Garden that offer moments of successful communion with art and curated nature. 990 Washington Avenue, at Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights, 718-623-7200, bbg.org. (Martha Schwendener)★ Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Personal Correspondence: Photography and Letter Writing in Civil War Brooklyn’ (through spring 2016) Symbolically, the Civil War ended when Robert E. Lee surrendered to Ulysses S. Grant in the spring of 1865. For many people who lived through it, though, the war never ended at all, and it lives on in letters sent to and from the battlefield. Thousands of these ended up half-forgotten in attics and bureau drawers; a small stash comes to light in this exhibition that consists of just one little room with a lot in it — including letters, Civil War souvenirs and explanatory texts — with everything as readily accessible as if in a well-packed suitcase. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org. (Cotter)Brooklyn Museum: ‘Impressionism and the Caribbean: Francisco Oller and His Transatlantic World’ (through Jan. 3) Francisco Oller (1833-1917) was the most celebrated Puerto Rican artist of the 19th century. For most of his career he was a facile imitator sojourning in Madrid and in Paris, where he hung out with Impressionist painters like Pissarro, Monet and Cézanne. But it wasn’t until after settling down in San Juan around age 60 that he came into his own, producing haunting landscapes and some mysteriously powerful still-life paintings that can plausibly be called great. This show presents 40 paintings by Oller and 45 works by other artists, including his European and American contemporaries and his Puerto Rican predecessors. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Johnson)Brooklyn Museum: ‘Zanele Muholi: Isibonelo/Evidence’ (through Nov. 1) Describing herself as a “visual activist,” the South African photographer Zanele Muholi is dedicated to increasing the visibility of black lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people with notable international success. Her stark black-and-white photographs often respond to the violence inflicted on those groups. But the exhibition also includes colorful photographs of same-sex weddings that are radiant, both with African sunshine and irrepressible joy. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Schwendener)The Cloisters: ‘Treasures and Talismans: Rings From the Griffin Collection’ (through Oct. 18) In its most basic form as a small hoop made of anything that can be turned into a circle, the finger ring is the simplest, least encumbering kind of jewelry. Yet, as shown by this absorbing exhibition, a ring can be a miniature sculpture of marvelous complexity, skill and imagination. The show features more than 60 rings made in Europe from late Ancient Roman times to the Renaissance, and it’s amplified by two dozen paintings and sculptural objects related to ring making and customs. 99 Margaret Corbin Drive, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights, 212-923-3700, metmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum (continuing) The stately doors of the 1902 Andrew Carnegie mansion, home to the Cooper Hewitt, are open again after an overhaul and expansion of the premises. Historic house and modern museum have always made an awkward fit, a standoff between preservation and innovation, and the problem remains, but the renovation has brought a wide-open new gallery space, a cafe and a raft of be-your-own-designer digital enhancements. Best of all, more of the museum’s vast permanent collection is now on view, including an Op Art weaving, miniature spiral staircases, ballistic face masks and a dainty enameled 18th-century version of a Swiss knife. Like design itself, this institution is built on tumult and friction, and you feel it. 2 East 91st Street, at Fifth Avenue, 212-849-8400, cooperhewitt.org. (Cotter)★ Jewish Museum: ‘The Power of Pictures: Early Soviet Photography, Early Soviet Film’ (through Feb. 7) Revolutions sell utopias; that’s their job. Art, if it behaves itself and sticks to the right script, can be an important part of the promotional package. That’s the basic tale told by this exhibition of photographs and vintage films of the 1920s and ’30s, but with a question added: What happens to art when the script is drastically revised? Russia was an experiment in progress in the heady years following the 1917 revolution, and avant-garde art, free-spirited by definition, was officially embraced. When Joseph Stalin came to power art became government-dictated propaganda and its makers, often under threat, towed the line. Remarkably, the show presents a dozen films — some familiar, some not — full-length, on a rotating schedule of four a day, in a small viewing theater built into one of the Jewish Museum’s galleries. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Cotter)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘The Roof Garden Commission: Pierre Huyghe’ (through Nov. 1) This outdoor rooftop exhibition is about time. The main attraction is a massive fish tank containing a curious assortment of objects, animate and inanimate. As if by magic, a boulder of lava floats in the water, its top rising a bit above the surface. A couple of inches below is a mound of sand around which are swimming little brown eel-like lampreys and bright orange Triops cancriformis, or tadpole shrimp, two species thought not to have evolved in millions of years. Elsewhere on the roof, a boulder of Manhattan schist, the material that forms the bedrock for many New York City skyscrapers, represents geological duration. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Johnson)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Grand Illusions: Staged Photography from the Met Collection’ (through Jan. 18) With 40 works, this small, choice exhibition forms a freewheeling survey of the ways and means of staged photography — the arranging objects or people for the camera — and the many needs and sensibilities it has served. Its smart installation jumps between past and present, commercial and fine, pre- and postmodern, and is peppered with surprises by artists well-known and not. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Roberta Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Kongo: Power and Majesty’ (through Jan. 3) For centuries the West assumed that African art had no history, because none had been found written down. But this tight, intense show, beautifully designed, with a stirring catalog, demonstrates otherwise. It begins in the 15th century when the rulers of Kongo peoples in Central Africa were sending luxury textiles to European courts and receiving gifts in return. It continues through the devastations of the slave trade, shifting from art made for pleasure and profit to art made to save lives and souls. It concludes with 15 sensational, just under life-size sculptures that were last-ditch responses to the slow-motion emergency of colonialism. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Paintings by George Stubbs from the Yale Center for British Art’ (through Nov. 8) A rare sighting in New York: eight paintings by the inimitable English painter George Stubbs (1724-1806). They include two of his best racehorse pictures, with their stunning precision of anatomy, portraiture, landscape space and interspecies psychology. Four other paintings follow two men through a day of shooting small game and the fifth shows the gentle killing of a wounded doe at a hunt’s end. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Reimagining Modernism: 1900-1950’ (continuing) One of the greatest encyclopedic museums in the world fulfills its mission a little more with an ambitious reinstallation of works of early European modernism with their American counterparts for the first time in nearly 30 years. Objects of design and paintings by a few self-taught artists further the integration. It is quite a sight, with interesting rotations and fine-tunings to come. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)Morbid Anatomy Museum: ‘Opus Hypnagogia: Sacred Spaces of the Visionary and Vernacular’ (through Oct. 18) Coined in the 19th century, the word hypnagogia refers to the transition period between wakefulness and sleep, when, while still conscious, you may find yourself seeing images, having thoughts or hearing things that make little logical sense. This disorganized but fascinating show presents a wildly eclectic selection of more than 50 paintings, drawings and sculptures, including voodoo ritual objects, antique illustrated mystical books and recent works of offbeat fantasy by contemporary artists, all or some of which might have been inspired by hypnagogic experiences. 424 Third Avenue, at Seventh Street, Gowanus, Brooklyn, morbidanatomymuseum.org, 347-799-1017. (Johnson)★ Morgan Library & Museum: ‘Ernest Hemingway: Between Two Wars’  (through Jan. 31) Mounted on walls that have been painted tropical blue to suggest Hemingway’s years in Key West and in Cuba, this show takes him all the way from high school to roughly 1950 with photographs, handwritten first-drafts and personal correspondence. But the largest and most interesting section focuses on the ’20s, Hemingway’s Paris years, and reveals a writer we might have been in danger of forgetting: Hemingway before he became Hemingway. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org. (Charles McGrath)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Scenes for a New Heritage: Contemporary Art from the Collection’ (through April 10) MoMA’s latest installation of works from its permanent collection fills the second-floor contemporary galleries with videos, installations, sculptures, drawings, prints and photographs produced by more than 30 artists during the past three decades. It’s an uneven, haphazard selection, but leaving artistic quality aside, its unusually optimistic-sounding title inadvertently raises a large and intriguing question: At a time when contemporary art seems to be spinning its wheels, what could a new heritage be? 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Johnson)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Design and Violence’ (continuing) Described on the museum’s website as a “curatorial experiment,” “Design and Violence” was and is an exhibition that exists almost entirely on the Internet. The show includes pictures, descriptions, essays and discussions about design objects used for violent purposes, including the AK-47 rifle, animal slaughter systems, bullets, plastic handcuffs and graphics depicting everything from refugee migration to incarceration demographics to violent video games. It’s a heavy and heady gathering of information that leans at times toward a symposium rather than an exhibition, but remains grounded in innovative objects that have made — or could make — a cultural impact. Online at designandviolence.moma.org; 212-708-9400. (Schwendener)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Endless House: Intersections of Art and Architecture’ (through March 6) This scattered but enjoyable exhibition, drawn from the museum’s art collection as much as its design holdings, focuses on the single-family home as a place of experimentation and regeneration; of conflict as well as dreams. Its highlight is a series of drawings and photographs by Frederick Kiesler, the Austrian-American polymath whose Endless House — never completed — fused fine art, architecture, furniture and lighting design into a bulbous, unstable whole. Several artists here echo Kiesler’s theme of the house as a reflection of the psychology of its inhabitants. None is more powerful than Rachel Whiteread’s sober image, made with white correction fluid, of a dwelling in East London: a preparatory drawing for a now lost sculpture crafted by filling the house with liquid concrete. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Jason Farago)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Picasso Sculpture’ (through Feb. 7) Nearly a work of art in its own right, this magnificent show redefines Picasso’s achievement with the first full view here in 50 years of his astoundingly varied forays into sculpture. His materials, not his female loves, become the muses, and are different each time out. The basic plotline: After introducing sculptural abstraction and space, he spent about 50 years counting the ways that the figure was far from finished. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Transmissions: Art in Eastern Europe and Latin America, 1960-1980’ (through Jan. 3) Visiting this big, spirited group show is like walking into a party of intriguing strangers. For every person you recognize, there are 10 you don’t know. One topic everyone’s talking about, at different intensities, is the anti-institutional politics that swept Europe and the Americas in the 1960s, and almost everyone speaks the language of Conceptualism. A product of an in-house research initiative called Contemporary and Modern Art Perspectives, or C-MAP, intended to expand MoMA’s narrow Paris-New York view of modernism, the show is very much the beginning rather than the end of a learning curve. But with curators exploring material new to them — just steps ahead of their audience — the show has a refreshing buzz of surprise as it takes the museum in a realistic new directions. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Cotter)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Activist New York’  (continuing) With a focus on activist tactics from the 17th century to the present, this exhibition — designed by the firm Pentagram — is a room-size onslaught of sensory stimulation, complete with videos, graphics and text. Told through 14 “moments” in New York activism, it includes a facsimile of the Flushing Remonstrance (1657), a petition for religious tolerance given to Peter Stuyvesant, director-general of the settlement, as well as contemporaneous objects, like a Dutch tobacco box, a Bible and “Meet the Activists” kiosks adjacent to each display, which identify activist groups working in the present. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Schwendener)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Folk City: New York and the Folk Music Revival’ (through Jan. 10) Handwritten Bob Dylan lyrics, well-strummed guitars from Lead Belly, Judy Collins and Odetta, concert posters, Sing Out! magazines, video from a raucous protest over banning folk singers from Washington Square, the street sign from Gerdes Folk City and plenty of songs on headphones evoke idealism and ambition in “Folk City.” The exhibition explores how New York City became a magnet for and a champion of rural styles and then the center of a pop-folk movement, from leftist “people’s music” efforts in the 1930s and ’40s, and the Red Scare reaction, to the civil rights rallies, coffeehouses and hootenannies of the folk revival at its peak. The tangle of tradition and change, earnestness and pop machinations are on view, along with the makings of a legacy that roots matter and a song can change the world. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Jon Pareles)★ Neue Galerie: ‘Berlin Metropolis: 1918-1933’ (through Jan. 4) Another outstanding museum exhibition joins New York’s autumn roster with this ambitious, expertly designed and organized account of the rich cultural ferment of the fragile Weimar Republic. With many loans from Germany, it musters an egalitarian array of mediums into a poignant, detailed view of the tragic cost — less in human life than in immeasurable human potential land achievement — of Hitler’s devastating rise and rule and the shattering of a great city. 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street, 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org. (Smith)★ New-York Historical Society: ‘Freedom Journey 1965: Photographs of the Selma to Montgomery March by Stephen Somerstein’ (through Oct. 25) Almost 50 years ago, the picture editor of a campus newspaper at City College of New York assigned himself a breaking story: covering what promised to be a massive march in Alabama, led by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., to demand free and clear voting rights for African-Americans. On short notice the editor, Stephen Somerstein, grabbed his cameras, climbed on a bus and headed south. The 55 pictures of black leaders and everyday people in this show, installed in a hallway and small gallery, are some that he shot that day. The image of Dr. King’s head seen in monumental silhouette that has become a virtual logo of the film “Selma” is based on a Somerstein original. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org. (Cotter)★ Studio Museum in Harlem: ‘Everything, Everyday: Artists in Residence 2014-15’ (through Oct. 25) During their residency year, these three artists have worked in assemblage mode, using both physical and psychological matter as their raw materials. Eric Mack has worked out a hybrid of painting and sculpture from distressed clothing, rope, pegboards, packing blankets and pigment to create a threatening-to-fall- apart dance of heavy and light. Lauren Halsey’s “Kingdom Splurge,” a mirrored grotto lined with pastel-tinted boulders and beauty shop ads, is a Afro-futuristic Emerald City. Sadie Barnette, in a series of meticulous graphite drawings, spins out a complex, first-names-only family tree and pieces together her own past from memorabilia related to her father. 144 West 125th Street, Harlem, 212-864-4500, studiomuseum.org. (Cotter)★ Studio Museum in Harlem: ‘Stanley Whitney: Dance the Orange’ (through Oct. 25) This well-chosen show of works from the past decade surveys the maturation of a late-blooming abstract painter who has revived the modernist grid with a distinctive combination of freehand geometry and bold color (the full spectrum) and altogether an unprecedented sense of improvisation and, complexity. The work sustains multiple readings both in terms of the history of modernism and Mr. Whitney’s African-American heritage. 144 West 125th Street, Harlem, 212-864-4500, studiomuseum.org. (Smith)Galleries: Uptown‘Portraiture Now: Staging the Self’ (through Oct. 17) This exhibition, organized by the National Portrait Gallery in Washington in collaboration with the Smithsonian Latino Center, reimagines portraiture in creative ways through the works of six contemporary Latino artists from the United States. Carlee Fernandez’s delightfully weird self-portraits from 2006 show her communing with her (old, white, male) influences. Rachelle Mozman’s subtly dramatic photographs feature her mother playing different roles, from a uniformed maid to an upper-class woman being served. And Karen Miranda Rivadeneira’s photographs are lush and poetic, capturing herself and family members in wild and beautiful landscapes. Unfortunately, some of the work feels like it reinforces stereotypical roles for young Latinos — but the women manage to stretch out and be poetic, playful or pensive. Americas Society, 680 Park Avenue, between 68th and 69th Streets, 212-249-8950, as-coa.org/visual-arts. (Schwendener)★ ‘Swedish Wooden Toys’ (through Jan. 17) This presentation of more than 300 playthings from the late 16th to the early 21st centuries will be catnip for anyone into antique toys. The show features diminutive vehicles of all kinds from old-time wagons, trains and fully-rigged sailboats, to futuristic cars and a rocket ship. There are naturalistic and anthropomorphic animals, weapons, puzzles, games, dollhouses and architectural construction kits. While many of these items were produced by big manufacturers like BRIO and Playsam, many others are one-of-a-kind wonders like a miniature baking set from around 1900 that includes rolling pins, spatulas and other implements all lovingly carved from wood and fitting into a tray just eight inches long. Bard Graduate Center Gallery, 18 West 86th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3011, bgc.bard.edu. (Johnson)Galleries: 57th StreetJohn O’Reilly: ‘Montages 1968-2015’; Susan Jane Walp: ‘Paintings on Paper’ (through Oct. 17) One solo reviews the career of one of our greatest living artist of mysterious, erudite, confounding photomontages and shows him, at 85, moving into new territory. The other presents the latest oil-on-paper still lifes — a tangerine, a tea bowl, three zinnias — of a miniaturist exploring light and infinite ways to render edges without lines. Tibor de Nagy Gallery, 724 Fifth Avenue, at 57th Street, 212-262-5050, tibordenagy.com. (Smith)Galleries: Chelsea★ ‘Dia 15 VI 13 545 West 22 Street Dream House’ (through Oct. 24) This terrific show restages a famous sound and light installation by La Monte Young and Marian Zazeela, a work whose origins date to the 1960s. On entering the dimly lit gallery, you are immediately enveloped by an intensely powerful sound, a roaring, droning, pulsing noise with such a deep bass that you feel it in your body as well as in your ears. At the far end of the space is a work by Jung Hee Choi, a slowly changing hallucinogenic projection on a perforated black screen. Prepare to have your consciousness altered. Dia: Chelsea, 545 West 22nd Street, Chelsea, 212-989-5566, diacenter.org. (Johnson)Keltie Ferris: ‘Paintings and Body Prints’ (through Oct. 17) Ms. Ferris’s new paintings are aggressive and emphatic but also spectral and expansive, remaking the digital in supremely analog form. What read from afar (or in photographs) as pixels are, close up, thick rectangles of paint applied with a flat-ended brush that recall the pointillism of Seurat and Signac. Ms. Ferris also melds the geometry of digital media with Native American patterns, Bauhaus weaving and the ethereality of visionary painters like Lee Mullican and Chris Martin. Body prints, in which she pressed her torso, thighs, hands, feet and face against the surface have historical echoes, too. Titles are simple but vivid, underscoring the precision and force of these paintings, but the aggression here is more utopian than destructive, a record of what it takes to make great and vital painting. Mitchell-Innes & Nash, 534 West 26th Street, Chelsea, 212-744-7400, miandn.com. (Schwendener)Mark Grotjahn: ‘Painted Sculpture’ (through Oct. 29) This talented painter’s pitting of modernist abstraction and Expressionism against the crucial influences of African art is best when he pits oil paint against bronze, in this case casts of cardboard boxes for flat-screen TVs. The conceptual and inspirational stratagems are several (see the titles). The results are preposterously gorgeous and not a little perverse. Anton Kern Gallery, 532 West 20th Street, 212-367-9663, antonkerngallery.com. (Smith)★ ‘Japanese Propaganda Kimonos, 1905-1941’ (through Oct. 17) Celebrating Japanese military might, the garments in this fascinating show bear lively compositions reflecting international styles like Art Deco and Depression Moderne. In patchwork patterns and suavely muted colors, they depict fighter planes, battleships, antiaircraft artillery, aerial landscapes, maps and cute child soldiers. Edward Thorp, 210 11th Avenue, at 24th Street, Chelsea, 212-691-6565, edwardthorpgallery.com. (Johnson)★ Mike Kelley (through Oct. 24) Illuminated variations on the miniaturized and bottled, Kryptonian city of Kandor that Superman kept in his Arctic Fortress of Solitude lead to a major installation called “Kandor 10B (Exploded Fortress of Solitude).” A dark, bunkerlike construction with a walk-in, cavernous interior, it’s accompanied by a 24-minute video showing the sadomasochistic activities of some zany, fancifully costumed people within and around the “Exploded Fortress.” Produced in 2011, the year before Mr. Kelley’s suicide, the two works together exude a caustic spirit of misanthropic comedy. Hauser & Wirth, 511 West 18th Street, 212-790-3900, hauserwirth.com. (Johnson)★ Ron Nagle: ‘Five O’Clock Shadow’ (through Oct. 24) This large and stunning exhibition of the bonsai-size sculptures of Mr. Nagle — whose chief medium is glazed clay — shows off his inventive way of contrasting colors, forms and textures in ways both seductive and slightly that evoke food, furniture, body parts, spindly succulents and oozing drips of blood, chocolate, motor oil or just glaze. It should challenge some museum to do the full-dress retrospective he deserves. Matthew Marks Gallery, 522 West 22nd Street, Chelsea, 212-243-0200, matthewmarks.com. (Smith)Rachel Perry Welty (through Oct. 17) A photographer tackles nonmechanical reproduction — one hand’s ability to copy the other — in a series of large diptych drawings whose bilateral arrangements cascading multicolor lines suggest attenuated Morris Louis pours or cross sections of agate stones. Other obsessive delights await in this strange and beautiful show, including flight-of-the-bumblebee motifs rendered in sliced-up fruit stickers. Yancey Richardson Gallery, 525 West 22nd Street, Chelsea, 646-230-9610, yanceyrichardson.com. (Smith)  Galleries: Other★ ‘Double Standard: Ed Ruscha & Mason Williams 1956-1971’ (through Oct. 18) A life-size, photographic silkscreen depicting a Greyhound bus graces a wall in this new gallery. It was created in 1967 by Mason Williams, who, the following year, would win three Grammy Awards for his guitar instrumental “Classical Gas.” Mr. Williams and the Pop-Conceptualist Ed Ruscha, close friends since they were fourth-grade classmates in Oklahoma City, collaborated on numerous zany projects during the ’60s. Along with copious archival materials, the photographs, books, prints and drawings in this exhibition reveal a mutually inciting relationship comparable in some ways to that between Picasso and Braque. Alden Projects, 34 Orchard Street, between Hester and Canal Streets, Lower East Side, 212-229-2453, aldenprojects.com. (Johnson)★ David Nelson (through Oct. 24) The New York artist David Nelson (1960-2013) was primarily a painter until 1993, when his longtime partner David Knudsvig, also an artist, died of AIDS. In the years that followed Mr. Nelson began to work in distinctive forms of sculpture and photography before moving back to painting again. This survey, organized by Joseph Berger, director of 80WSE, and Nancy Brooks Brody, is a loving tribute and a very beautiful thing. 80WSE, New York University, 80 Washington Square East, Greenwich Village, steinhardt.nyu.edu/80wse, 212-998-5747. (Cotter)Eduardo Paolozzi: ‘House of Expectations’ (through Nov. 1) In the best Pop Art tradition — that is, blurring the boundary between art and life — the three Eduardo Paolozzi sculptures from the 1960s and ’70s here actually did time as playground equipment, before being stripped of paint and becoming sculpture again. Accompanying the sculptures are screen prints from two series: the bright, hallucinogenic “Z.E.E.P. (Zero Energy Experimental Pile)” series, made from Paolozzi collages from 1969 to 1970, which include images that illustrate Cold War fears and manias; and the muted and pastel “Calcium Light Night” (1974-6) series, which responds to musical compositions by Charles Ives, but also mirrors the repeating curves and mechanical patterns of the sculptures. Clearing, 396 Johnson Avenue, at Morgan Avenue, Bushwick, Brooklyn, 718-456-0396, c-l-e-a-r-i-n-g.com. (Schwendener)Public ArtJeppe Hein: ‘Please Touch the Art’ (through early 2016) People with small children likely will enjoy Mr. Hein’s three-part show. If it’s a hot day, the kids will rush to be drenched by “Appearing Rooms,” which has water spouting up unpredictably from a square platform of metal grating. Youngsters as well as grown-ups also may be fascinating by the perceptually confounding “Mirror Labyrinth NY,” which consists of mirror-surfaced planks of stainless steel in varying heights planted in the grass in a spiral formation. Meanwhile, guardians can rest on one of 16 fanciful, shocking orange park benches while their young charges clamber about on the furniture’s surrealistically altered parts. Brooklyn Bridge Park, 334 Furman Street, Fulton Ferry, Brooklyn, publicartfund.org. (Johnson)Out Of Town★ Lynda Benglis: ‘Water Sources’ (through Nov. 8) The most compelling temporary exhibition at Storm King Art Center in recent years focuses on a heretofore unfamiliar but important dimension of Ms. Benglis’s distinguished career: creating working fountains. The show’s main attraction is a quartet of gorgeous fountains rising from temporary, circular pools embedded in the lawn outside the center’s home building. Two of them have abstract forms suggesting psychic monsters surging up from unconscious depths. The others feature flower shapes stacked into majestic columns. 1 Museum Road, New Windsor, N.Y., 845-534-3115, stormking.org. (Johnson)‘Donald Blumberg Photographs: Selections From the Master Sets’ (through Nov. 22) In his early days shooting on the streets of New York, Mr. Blumberg discovered that parishioners walking out of the gaping door of St. Patrick’s Cathedral appeared to be emerging from deep, empty space. His resulting photographs, shot from 1965 to 1967, reduce St. Pat’s to a sea of black, and turn the worshipers into highly detailed, if physically awkward, specimens in the void. Soon after, Mr. Blumberg’s gaze shifted from the street to his television screen, arranging images of Lyndon Johnson or Richard Nixon into conceptually sophisticated mosaics. Now 80, he is still shooting his TV, and though he continues to keep one eye on politics, the other is gazing at the inanities of home shopping and televangelism. Yale University Art Gallery, 1111 Chapel Street, New Haven, 203-432-0600, artgallery.yale.edu. (Jason Farago)Elaine Lustig Cohen (through Oct. 19) The paintings of Elaine Lustig Cohen expand on the complicated legacy of Philip Johnson, the influential architect who also commissioned Ms. Lustig Cohen, an award-winning graphic designer, to create catalogs and signage for his buildings and other projects. The 10 paintings here, from the 1960s and ’70s, show the influence of her design work. They are geometric, hard-edged and abstract, with compositions that radiate from their centers and palettes dominated by secondary colors — particularly orange and brown in the 1970s. While the paintings might pale a little compared to other masters of geometric abstraction, they show painting and graphic design on an interesting continuum. The Glass House, 199 Elm Street, New Canaan, Conn. The show is included in tours of the Glass House, for which tickets must be purchased in advance; 866-811-4111, theglasshouse.org. (Schwendener)Dia:Beacon: Robert Irwin: ‘Excursus: Homage to the Square³’ (continuing) A walk-in maze with walls of white scrim lit by color-filtered fluorescent tubes, Mr. Irwin’s “Excursus: Homage to the Square³” had its debut in 1998 at the Dia Center for the Arts in Chelsea. It was so popular that the curators elected to keep it on view a year longer than its originally planned run. It’s reincarnation here is similarly transporting, if not as thoroughly as the original was. But to experience it at Dia:Beacon along Minimalist works by other artists that encourage heightened perceptual attention to the here and now is as spiritually calming as it is historically illuminating. 3 Beekman Street, Beacon, 845-440-0100, diaart.org. (Johnson)★ ‘Elaine de Kooning Portrayed’ (through Oct. 31) While she is probably best known for having been Willem de Kooning’s wife, Elaine de Kooning had an interesting life and career of her own. Indeed, if an enterprising filmmaker wanted to make a romantic biopic evoking the New York artworld from the rise of its bohemian avant-garde in the 1930s and ’40s through the pluralist era of the ’70s and ’80s, he or she could not find a more suitable subject than Ms. de Kooning. Adding up to a collective portrait, this show’s 18 paintings and drawings include four outstanding self-portraits by the artist herself along with works by Mr. de Kooning, Fairfield Porter, Hedda Sterne and Alex Katz. Pollock-Krasner House and Study Center, 830 Springs-Fireplace Road, East Hampton, N.Y., 631-324-4929, sb.cc.stonybrook.edu/pkhouse. (Johnson)★ ‘Enigmas: The Art of Bada Shanren (1626-1705)’ (through Jan. 3) Beginning next January, the Freer Gallery of Art in Washington will go dark for a year and a half while it’s 1923 building gets an overhaul. Its Chinese painting collection will be especially missed. And as if intent on leaving a potent memory of it, the museum has served up a sparkler of final show, centered on a charismatic 17th-century superstar whose life encompassed dramatic shifts of fortune, and whose art holds mysteries yet to be understood. 1050 Independence Avenue SW, 202-633-1000, asia.si.edu. (Cotter)★ Museum of Fine Arts Boston: ‘Made in the Americas: The New World Discovers Asia’ (through Feb. 15) One of the great gifts that multiculturalist thinking gave us was freedom from the tyranny of purity. Simply put, there’s no such thing, at least not in art. Everything is a mix, and this has always been true. Globalism, which we take to be so 21st century, is as old as the hills. In this smallish show those hills encompass the Andes, the Alps, the Appalachians and Mount Fuji between the early 16th to the late 18th century. The main setting includes large swaths of North, Central and South America being colonized by various European powers, all of which had lucrative commercial links to Asia, and they were bringing Asia with them to the New World. The result: some of the most brilliant American art ever. 465 Huntington Avenue, Boston, 617-267-9300, mfa.org. (Cotter)★ National Museum of African Art: ‘Conversations: African and African American Artists in Dialogue’  (through Jan. 24) For its 50th anniversary, this museum has brilliantly thread together work from two sources: its own holdings in African material and the Camille O. and William H. Cosby Jr. collection of African-American art. The Cosby collection, weighted toward canonical figures like Romare Bearden and Charles White, will bring in the crowds, but it is the curators and museum itself, which is in a period of renaissance, that have made the show rise well above predictability. Smithsonian Institution, 950 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, 202-633-4600, africa.si.edu. (Cotter)Parrish Art Museum: Andreas Gursky: ‘Landscapes’ (through Oct. 18) When this German artist’s immense photographs first began appearing in New York galleries in the 1990s they were terrifically exciting for their sheer size and for their implicit commentaries on capitalist globalization. Now they have about them the stale air of white elephants. Uninitiated viewers, however, might thrill to the strenuously spectacular prints in this 19-piece show, which includes a dismally dystopian, aerial view of cattle in a muddy, Colorado stockyard and a futuristic image of the gleaming, gold-hued interior of a huge gas tank on a transport ship in the Persian Gulf. 279 Montauk Highway, Water Mill, N.Y., 631-283-2118, parrishart.org. (Johnson)★ Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art (ongoing) The skilled refurbishing of the Atheneum’s storied Morgan Memorial Building reveals as never before the museum’s splendors. The Great Hall is triple-hung with European paintings encircled by a spirited art-historical Cliff Notes from Egypt to Florence. On the second floor the fabulous Cabinet of Art and Curiosities leads to even more often outstanding paintings — Baroque to Modernism — accompanied by an array of decorative objects, especially porcelains. 600 Main Street, Hartford, Conn., 860-278-2670, thewadsworth.org. (Smith)Last ChanceRoland Flexner and Japanese Bronzes of the Edo Period (closes on Sunday) Go for the four unusual bronze flower vases from the 18th and 19th centuries and their startling fusions of natural and geometric forms. Stay for the 18 drawings — small tondos made by blowing ink onto paper through a straw, that conjure nature’s infinity, molten bronze and views through microscopes. An inspired pairing. Sargent’s Daughters, 179 East Broadway, at Canal Street, Lower East Side, 917-463-3901, sargentsdaughters.com. (Smith)★ Guggenheim Museum: ‘Doris Salcedo’ (closes on Monday) Politically speaking, you don’t have to be a house to be haunted. All you need to be is someone who keeps an eye on the news; who pays attention to loss through violence; and feels a personal stake in that loss, as if it were happening to people you know and care about, to people who live in your home. The artist Doris Salcedo was born in Bogota, Colombia, in 1958, and came of age in an era when civic murder was a way of life in her country. For some 30 years, she has made such memories the essence of a witnessing art which includes the dozens of austere but viscerally animated sculptures and installations that fill all four floors of the Guggenheim’s Tower Level galleries in this career retrospective. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. (Cotter)Alicia McCarthy (closes on Sunday) This talented artist has become quite an abstract painter, all while using mostly colored pencils. Her art has always been appealing but her latest works are more rigorous than cute. They combine handmade quirkiness and a personal, slightly visionary, jewel-colored geometry with an echoing perceptual subtlety. What you see is what you see until it isn’t. Sometimes the illusions amount to gently Op Art-like trompe l’oeil. Jack Hanley, 327 Broome Street, between Bowery and Chrystie Street, Lower East Side, 646-918-6824, jackhanley.com. (Smith)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Everything Is Design: The Work of Paul Rand’  (closes on Tuesday) You may not know the name Paul Rand (1914-96), the immensely influential advertising art director, illustrator and graphic designer, but it’s a safe bet you’re familiar with some of his works. After shaking up American advertising and book cover design in the 1940s and ’50s, he created logos for UPS, IBM, Westinghouse and other American corporations. His admirers called him “the Picasso of graphic design.” This show tracks his six-decade career with 150 examples of vintage magazines, book covers, three-dimensional containers, children’s books and books by Mr. Rand about principles of design. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Johnson)Adrián Villar Rojas: ‘Two Suns’  (closes on Saturday) This fast-rising site-oriented sculptor gives festivalism a good name. Here he transforms two spaces into environments that evocatively conjure different sites, including possibly, the gallery’s own past as a showroom; contrasts kinds of available light; adds a wonderful sense of artisanal time underfoot and surprises us with one of the pinnacles of western sculpture, profoundly altered. Marian Goodman Gallery, 24 West 57th Street, Manhattan, 212-977-7160, mariangoodman.com. (Smith)★ ‘September Spring’ (closes on Saturday) This lovely performance-based show conceived by the artist Sam Falls and executed by a dance duo, Jessie Gold and Elizabeth Hart, known as Hart of Gold, is a memorial to the poet and musician Jamie Kanzler, who used the nom de plume September Spring. The show’s centerpiece is a repeated, 17-minute-long piece of choreography in which Ms. Gold and Ms. Hart basically dance into being a series of abstract paintings, which are then displayed in the gallery. Performances ended last week, at which time a total of 24 paintings were finished, corresponding to the years of Mr. Kanzler’s brief life. The Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org. (Cotter)Frank Stella: ‘Shape as Form’ (closes on Saturday) With 10 works spanning 40 years, this show is the perfect refresher for the bends-producing career of postwar American art’s least predictable figure — the subject great of a retrospective opening late next month at the Whitney Museum. Go for the Irregular Polygon painting and a Polish Village relief from the 1960s, stay for “Mosport 4.75x” (1982) from the Circuits series. Paul Kasmin, 293 10th Avenue, at 27th Street, 212-563-4474, paulkasmingallery.com. (Smith)Advertisement