AdvertisementSupported byThe TV WatchBy Alessandra StanleyThere is an antidote to “Downton Abbey.” A little-known British police thriller called “Line of Duty” is bracingly different from “Downton,” the sumptuous soap opera that begins a fifth season on PBS on Sunday: For one thing, there are no haughty peeresses, grand estates or conniving footmen on this show — just crime and cops, corrupt and less so. “Line of Duty,” a BBC2 series that is available through online sites like Acorn.tv and iTunes, offers total immersion into brutal lawlessness and the oppressive layers of inertia, special interest and political expedience that hobble law enforcement. It’s a little like “The Shield,” the FX show that starred Michael Chiklis as a corrupt cop, but it’s a lot more like “Spiral,” the sleek French crime series on Netflix that has a cult following in Britain and the United States.So basically, “Line of Duty” is the opposite of “Downton Abbey,” except in certain elemental ways: an excellent cast, skillful writing and a knack for making an exotic, unfamiliar world seem like the viewer’s second home. It’s not about position and privilege, though, of course, there are flecks of envy and class resentment even in this sodden underbelly of London. And it’s not about the erosion of manners and tradition in the early 20th century, though early-21st-century politics and new media do eat away at police taboos and old school loyalties on “Line of Duty.” A multimedia timeline explores how the actual historical events mentioned in “Downton Abbey” were covered in The New York Times.There is no doughty Earl of Grantham trying to preserve and protect a way of life, but there are a few police officers who want to buck the inertia and jobbery of the system and actually preserve and protect lives. The reason for highlighting this relatively obscure show is that it can serve as methadone for viewers who keep getting sucked in and also a little sickened by the never-ending British telenovela about wealthy aristocrats and their servants: Season 5 of “Downton Abbey” is as manipulatively charming — and shamelessly repetitive — as all the others. The year is 1924, and while change is in the air and much commented upon, most things seem very much the same. As Violet, the Dowager Countess, Maggie Smith is once again filling her days with mischief and bons mots. “There is nothing simpler than avoiding people you don’t like,” she says. “Avoiding one’s friends, that’s the real test.” As Russian aristocrats fleeing the Bolshevik Revolution seek refuge — and tea — in church basements, Lord Grantham (Hugh Bonneville) is once again fuming about progress, only this time it’s Britain’s first Labour government under Ramsay MacDonald. Lady Edith (Laura Carmichael) is still mourning the disappearance of her married boyfriend in Germany, while her sister, the widowed Lady Mary (Michelle Dockery), has moved on and is once again choosing between handsome, eligible suitors. Even Bates (Brendan Coyle), finally cleared of murdering his estranged wife, is once again in trouble with the law. Upstairs, guests are offered cocktails before dinner and marvel at a newfangled form of entertainment, radio, while downstairs, the servants have to make do with only one footman.“Line of Duty” is more focused on British incivility. Season 1 follows two interwoven cases over five episodes, and begins after a terrorist raid goes wrong, and one of its lead officers, Detective Sgt. Steve Arnott (Martin Compston), is transferred to the AC-12 anti-corruption unit. Steve and a colleague, Detective Constable Kate Fleming (Vicky McClure), are given the unenviable assignment of looking into the dealings of Detective Chief Inspector Tony Gates, played by Lennie James (“Jericho,” “The Walking Dead”), one of the most admired officers on the force, who leads a small team of ardent loyalists. Gates’s rivals, many of whom envy and mistrust his commendations and popularity, want to nail him for padding his success rate, and it’s not clear whether he is a victim of bureaucratic infighting or a mastermind of more insidious misdeeds. Steve is looking to incriminate Gates, but he, too, is under suspicion. Nothing is obvious or straightforward, and no side has a monopoly on truth or even the facts. There are so many excellent British police shows available nowadays, and this one, like “Happy Valley,” a crime series on Netflix, has to compete with so many other more mainstream ones, including “Broadchurch,” which was remade for American television as “Gracepoint,” on Fox. Yet despite all the competition and duplication, “Line of Duty” stands out as original and surprising. Season 2 is, if anything, even more brutal and thrilling. “Downton Abbey” is supposed to be the quintessential British series, but it is at heart very American, a sentimental soap opera in which love triumphs over class divides, and masters can be heroes to their valets, and vice versa. “Line of Duty” seems like a distinctively American kind of hard-boiled crime thriller in the vein of “Serpico” and “The Wire,” only it takes place on the mean streets of London. For those who consume “Downton Abbey” as a frilly signature cocktail with too many liqueurs, “Line of Duty” is a much-needed chaser, a jigger of single-malt scotch, served neat. Advertisement