JAN. 1, 2015
Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera‘Aida’ (Friday and Monday) This revival of the Metropolitan Opera’s grand production of Verdi’s classic has gotten into a groove since it opened snoozily in October. Two American sopranos singing at the Met for the first time take on the title role, Marjorie Owens on Friday (opposite Carl Tanner) and Tamara Wilson on Monday (opposite Marcello Giordani). The potent mezzo Violeta Urmana is Amneris, and the resonant baritone George Gagnidze is Amonasro. The cast also features two impressive young basses, Dimitry Belosselskiy and Soloman Howard. Marco Armiliato conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)★ ‘Hansel and Gretel’  (Saturday and Thursday) Richard Jones’ surreal, macabre production of Humperdinck’s glorious fairy-tale opera is one of the Metropolitan Opera’s best shows. In English translation for the Met’s annual family holiday presentation, this run closes with two central duos: the soprano Heidi Stober and the mezzo Christine Rice, on Saturday, and Andriana Chuchman and Jennifer Johnson Cano, on Thursday. While the supporting cast is also appealing, and Andrew Davis leads a light, luminous orchestral performance, the real stars here are Humperdinck and Mr. Jones. Saturday at 1 p.m., Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)★ ‘The Merry Widow’ (Saturday, Tuesday and next Friday) The Broadway director and choreographer Susan Stroman and a musical-theater star, Kelli O’Hara, make their Met debuts in this Lehar classic, set in Paris and filled with dance. They are joined by Renée Fleming, in her first staged performances as Hanna Glawari; the baritone Nathan Gunn and the tenor Alek Shrader, who are the love interests; and the veteran baritone Thomas Allen, who plays the envoy of the fake Balkan nation of Pontevedro. Jeremy Sams provides the English adaptation, and Andrew Davis conducts. Saturday at 8 p.m., Tuesday and next Friday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)Advertisement★ ‘La Traviata’ (Wednesday) Willy Decker’s modern-dress, strangely powerful 2010 production of this Verdi work is back at the Metropolitan Opera. The opening night performance was hindered by the last-minute withdrawal, because of illness, of the young tenor Stephen Costello. His replacement, the appealing Sardinian tenor Francesco Demuro, saved the day. Mr. Demuro, as earlier scheduled, is now singing the role for the rest of the run. The soprano Marina Rebeka brings a shimmering, bright voice and alluring temperament to Violetta. Quinn Kelsey is a vocally formidable Germont. Marco Armiliato, a house regular, conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Classical MusicArtek Holiday Concert (Saturday) It’s about time an ensemble chose Haydn’s exhilarating music for holiday fare. Artek, which presents historically informed performances of early music, is offering the program “Music for a Prince: The Esterhazy Orchestra.” The concert focuses on the pieces Haydn wrote during the three decades he worked in the court of Prince Esterhazy: Symphony No. 6 (“Le Matin”) and 49 (“La Passione”), Concerto in F for Violin and Keyboard, and an overture and aria from “Armida.” At 8 p.m., Immanuel Lutheran Church, 122 East 88th Street, Manhattan, 212-866-0468, immanuelnyc.org. (Tommasini)Advertisement★ Bargemusic (Friday through Sunday) The music-making at Brooklyn’s popular floating concert hall is not slowing down a bit during the holidays. If you want some new music for the new year Bargemusic offers the next in its Here and Now series of contemporary music programs, with works by Jesse Mills, David Del Tredici, Amy Williams, Annie Gosfield, Brett Dean and others. The enticing performers include the Horszowski Trio and the brilliant pianist Ursula Oppens. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 4 p.m., Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org. (Tommasini)New York Philharmonic (Friday, Saturday, Tuesday and Thursday) Led by Juanjo Mena, the orchestra performs colorful classics: Rimsky-Korsakov’s “Capriccio Espagnol,” Rachmaninoff’s Piano Concerto No. 1 (with the young master Daniil Trifonov) and Tchaikovsky’s Symphony No. 6, “Pathétique.” On Thursday a new program, led by Alan Gilbert, features Ravel’s “Valses Nobles et Sentimentales” and more Tchaikovsky (selections from “Swan Lake”). Most important, the orchestra completes its Nielsen Project with that Danish composer’s Clarinet Concerto, featuring its new principal clarinetist, Anthony McGill, as soloist. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Tuesday and Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Woolfe)★ ‘Saul’ (Friday and Sunday) A highlight of Trinity’s Twelfth Night Festival is the church’s acclaimed choir and Baroque orchestra, conducted by Julian Wachner, in a staged production of Handel’s dramatic oratorio “Saul.” There is an option for premium performance-level table seating, where you feel like you are in Saul’s banquet hall. Friday at 6 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Trinity Church, Broadway at Wall Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-602-0800, trinitywallstreet.org. (Tommasini)A version of this schedule appears in print on January 2, 2015, on Page C20 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.