By BRIAN SEIBERTJAN. 1, 2015
“George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” is a marvelous holiday entertainment, but it is also an education for the young. The children in the production try out adult dances and formal courtesies. The child heroine, Marie, and the hero, Drosselmeier’s nephew (who becomes the Nutcracker Prince), battle mice and imagine the independence of maturity. The children in the audience learn how to watch ballet.At New York City Ballet, which is now finishing a month of 60th-anniversary performances of the work, the “Nutcracker” is equally an education for the company’s adult dancers. The profusion of roles and the long run of shows offer an unparalleled abundance of opportunities. At the David H. Koch Theater on Sunday, fully a dozen company members, almost all from the corps de ballet, tried out roles for the first time.On Wednesday, the same dancers got second chances, and it was this iteration that I caught. The performance of the Nutcracker Prince by F. Henry Berlin, one of the children, wasn’t one of the debuts, but it stood out for its warmth. His mimed recounting of the battle with the mice was uncommonly full of feeling, and full of promise. Nearly a decade ago, Austin Bachman was a Prince like that. On Wednesday, Mr. Bachman, all grown up, made a fine Soldier doll, martially precise.Most of the debuts pooled in the second-act divertissements — new tastes in the Land of the Sweets. As Coffee, Alexa Maxwell could have connected her phrases more fluidly, but she showed remarkable rhythmic exactitude, bringing a fresh finger-cymbal percussiveness to the role. As Candy Cane, Harrison Coll was brightly charismatic. As he swung a hoop over his body in midair, all he needed was a little more height, the cushion of air that gives the move its magical ease.Ashley Hod’s Dewdrop was even more impressive, strong and quick. Her admirable tautness of line betrayed a bit too much tension, and her expansiveness wasn’t always under control. She has a force that she is still learning to regulate.Emilie Gerrity’s Sugarplum Fairy was even more of a work in progress. She shone in quieter moments, filling the insides of phrases with breath. But bending and turning at the same time gave her trouble, and despite the relaxed and sensitive partnering of Taylor Stanley, she lacked the necessary abandon in the pas de deux. Her understandable caution cut off the climaxes, but she was rock-solid in her balances, and notably freer as she gained confidence. Surely the new year will hold more chances to grow.Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Friday with a dance review of “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker,” by New York City Ballet at the David H. Koch Theater, referred incorrectly to Andrew Scordato’s performance as Mother Ginger. He has played the role before; it was not his role debut.“George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” continues through Saturday at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. A version of this review appears in print on January 2, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: In the Sweet Shop, Happily Sampling New Concoctions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.