AdvertisementSupported byFor full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.A Place to Bury Strangers  (Friday and Saturday) These brutish noise rockers from Brooklyn cop the psychedelic flurries of the Jesus and Mary Chain through volume levels that defy all logic and decorum. The band continues to support its fourth album, “Transfixiation.” At 8 p.m., Saint Vitus, 1120 Manhattan Avenue, at Clay Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, saintvitusbar.com. (Stacey Anderson)Brandi Carlile  (Friday) This singer-songwriter’s delicate falsetto lends itself to country-pop melodicism and spare acoustic backing. Her latest album, “The Firewatcher’s Daughter,” veers into more rock ‘n’ roll terrain but still has gentle, cathartic moments of balladry, most notably on the Laurel Canyon-folk-influenced single “The Eye.” At 8 p.m., Radio City Music Hall, 866-858-0008, radiocity.com. (Anderson)Frankie Cosmos (Tuesday) A former poetry student at New York University and daughter of the actors Phoebe Cates and Kevin Kline, Greta Kline constructs preternaturally poised lo-fi folk-pop with thoughtful verses and echoing vocals. She leads the group Frankie Cosmos, which released its debut, “Zentropy,” in 2014; the art set has already sought to claim her, as evidenced by a high-profile set at the Museum of Modern Art last summer. Part of the CMJ Marathon with Mega Bog, Sheer Agony and Laced. At 9 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, babysallright.com. (Anderson)★ Drinks  (Saturday) The Welsh singer-songwriter Cate Le Bon and the Californian garage-rocker Tim Presley (of White Fence) coolly push their spatial confines in this new project. Ms. Le Bon’s staccato vocals, paired with Mr. Presley’s chiming guitar, craft a sly, often eruptive friction. Their album, “Hermits on Holiday,” landed in August; its title track is an off-kilter, even droll battle march. With Droor and Big Search. At 8 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, babysallright.com. (Anderson)Gringo Star  (Saturday) Despite the Beatlemanic nod, this young quartet from Atlanta takes its influences from other British Invasion rockers: The labyrinthine, hazy hooks are ripped from the Kinks’ expansive greenery, and the tight guitar payoffs deliver a certain kind of Rolling Stones melodic satisfaction. Octopi-related anthems are pleasantly absent from the group’s third album, “Floating Out to See.” With Golden Animals and Las Hormiguitas. At 8 p.m., Cameo Gallery, back room of the Lovin’ Cup Café, 93 North Sixth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-302-1180, cameony.net. (Anderson)The Hum (Mondays through Oct. 26) This inventive weekly residency brings together female musicians across genres for collaboration. The successful first installment in April included Shilpa Ray and Teen; this time around, they’ve booked musicians from Wilsen, Balancer and Salt Cathedral, among others. At 9 p.m., Manhattan Inn, 632 Manhattan Avenue, hypnocraftpresents.com. (Andrew R. Chow)Tobias Jesso Jr. (Wednesday and Thursday) Another member of the ’70s-inflected folk-pop surge, along with Father John Misty and Patrick Watson, Mr. Jesso is fast capturing national attention for “Goon,” his debut solo album. On it, the Canadian singer-songwriter bemoans his lovelorn state over simple, crushing piano riffs, sounding like a perfectly sincere contemporary ringer for James Taylor. With Wet, as part of the CMJ Marathon. At 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)★ Luna  (Friday) The hypnotizing dream-pop singer Dean Wareham packs a heavy-lidded sexuality straight from a Warhol film. He shrewdly capitalized on it two years ago when he and his wife, Britta Phillips, composed the sweetly damaged album “13 Most Beautiful... Songs for Andy Warhol’s Screen Tests.” They both should shine in this reunion of their most famous project, the gorgeous dream-pop band Luna, which thrived in the mid-1990s and reunites this fall for its first shows in a decade. With EZTV. At 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, musichallofwilliamsburg.com, 718-486-5400. (Anderson)★ Holly Miranda (Thursday) In the right mood, on the right stage, the Detroit singer-songwriter Ms. Miranda will belt her absolutely debilitating cover of Etta James’s “I’d Rather Go Blind.” Most tracks from her hazy, self-titled blues-pop solo album, released this year, offer similarly gorgeous torture. As part of the CMJ Marathon, she headlines an acoustic day showcase that also includes Morningsiders, Frankie Cosmos and more. At 1 p.m., Knitting Factory, 361 Metropolitan Avenue, at Havemeyer Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 347-529-6696, bk.knittingfactory.com. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret The fall’s splashiest event is the return of the New York Cabaret Convention — now in its 26th year — to the Town Hall, the place it all began. The gala opening, on Oct. 13, is hosted by K.T. Sullivan and features Christine Andreas, Marilyn Maye, Amanda McBroom and Vivian Reed. Karen Akers and Ann Hampton Callaway are among the singers on the Oct. 14 program, titled “A Sentimental Journey: World War II Songs.” It’s followed on Oct. 15 with “Life is a Cabaret: The Songs of Kander & Ebb,” which includes performances by T. Oliver Reed, Steve Ross and Sandy Stewart. And Maureen McGovern is the biggest name in the Oct. 16 double-barreled finale, “What I Did For/Take a Chance on /Love: The Music of Vernon Duke and Marvin Hamlisch.” (At 6 p.m., 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, thetownhall.org.)Other notable October engagements include the jazz singer Kurt Elling swinging Sinatra standards at Café Carlyle (Oct. 13 through 17), followed by Alexa Ray Joel, Billy’s singing and songwriting daughter, on Oct. 20 through 24 and Oct. 27 through 31. (At 8:45 p.m., with an additional performance on Oct. 17 at 10:45 p.m.; 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com.)Jarrod Spector and Kelli Barrett’s show, “This Is Dedicated: Music’s Greatest Marriages,” at Feinstein’s/54 Below, salutes married show business couples from Sonny and Cher, to Beyoncé and Jay-Z (Oct. 20 through 23). Also at that venue, on Oct. 28 through 31, Barb Jungr and John McDaniel eviscerate the songs of the Fab Four in “Come Together: The Music of the Beatles.” (At 7 p.m., 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 646-476-3551, 54below.com.)At Birdland, the jazz-singing gamine Karrin Allyson swings Rodgers and Hammerstein through Oct. 10. (At 8:30 and 11 p.m., 315 West 44th Street, Clinton, 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com.)In more dangerous avant-garde mode, Tammy Faye Starlite’s “Cabaret Marianne” pays tribute to the equally nervy Marianne Faithfull (Thursdays in October at 7:30 p.m., 178 Second Avenue, between East 11th and 12th Streets, East Village, 212-995-0900, pangeanyc.com.) And that’s just skimming the surface. (Stephen Holden)Neon Indian  (Wednesday) Tinny, eight-bit scrapes of sound fit neatly into relaxed electronic noisescapes on “Era Extraña,” the second album by Neon Indian. Heavily synthesized yet straightforward, the band is a glib update on retro-pop. It releases the album “VEGA INTL. Night School” two days after this showcase for the CMJ Festival. With Tamaryn and Hannah Cohen. At 8 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)★ Panda Bear  (Tuesday to Thursday) This experimental electronics auteur — who, apropos to his stage name, is a founding member of the psych-pop squad Animal Collective — came out the better end of his dance with Death on “Panda Bear Meets the Grim Reaper,” his fifth studio album. On it, the singer and multi-instrumentalist (whose real name is Noah Lennox) merged jolting synthetic paces with his band’s brand of swooning psych-folk harmonies, delivering something both agitating in pace and deeply comforting in vocals. With PC Worship and Deakin (D.J. Set). Part of the CMJ Marathon. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)Steely Dan  (Friday, Saturday, Tuesday and Wednesday) The most triumphant intellectual jazz-rockers of the 1970s, Steely Dan amassed a fervid cult following for their obsessively conceptual albums and unpredictable muses (Charlemagne, for one). Now the front men, Donald Fagen and Walter Becker, return for a retrospective residency that began earlier this week. It features sets devoted to the performance of a record in its entirety, including the much-adored “Aja” and “Gaucho.” (Also on Oct. 16 and 17.) At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)Steep Canyon Rangers  (Monday) The members of this bluegrass group from North Carolina have talent for more than sonorous harmony and breakneck fiddle instrumentals. As Steve Martin’s onetime backing band, these musicians were also world-class straight men during Mr. Martin’s festival dates. This performance will revolve around the lead vocals of Woody Platt, quite the charmer himself. At 8 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)The Zombies  (Friday) These British Invasion cadets have heard their swooning psych-pop hit, “She’s Not There,” repurposed by such tastemaking folks as Nick Cave and Neko Case, who teamed up for a cover on the “True Blood” soundtrack. The original members Rod Argent and Colin Blunstone regrouped in 2011 for the band’s 50th anniversary and released “Breathe Out, Breathe In,” their sixth album and a conversant prog-pop throwback. The group performs their pinnacle second album, “Odessey & Oracle.” At 8 p.m., New York Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street, Manhattan, ticketfly.com. (Anderson)★ Stevie Wonder  (Wednesday) “Sir Duke” will ride again as the venerable Mr. Wonder extends his first national tour since 2009. He will perform his quintessential 1976 record, “Songs in the Key of Life,” the double album that has inspired scores of R&B dreamers. In 2005, the Library of Congress added it to the National Recording Registry. The fortunate audiences of his recent festival performances — including sets at the Global Citizen Festival and Bonnaroo — can attest to his charisma, still broad onstage. At 8 p.m., Prudential Center, 165 Mulberry Street, Newark, 800-745-3000, prucenter.com. (Anderson)★ ‘Reconfiguration: An Evening With Other Lives’  (Friday and Saturday) The Oklahoma-bred orchestral rockers have opened for several critical pop favorites, including Bon Iver and Radiohead. Their third studio album, “Rituals,” is an expansively crafted mission statement in the vein of those ensembles. The group performs as part of the 2015 Next Wave Festival with an expanded stage show of new visuals and live video. At 7:30 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Anderson)★ Yo La Tengo  (Saturday) The conquering indie-rock troubadours of Hoboken, N.J., released their most recent studio album, “Stuff Like That There,” in August, which served as a chipper and unofficial sequel to their classic 1990 album “Fakebook.” The band recently celebrated its 30th anniversary together and perform acoustically at Kings Theater with the founding group guitarist Dave Schramm. With Nick Lowe. At 8 p.m., Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Brooklyn, kingstheatre.com. (Anderson)Advertisement