By WILLIAM GRIMESJAN. 1, 2015
THE registrar at the National Arts Club in Manhattan decided last summer to impose some order on a donated collection of books that once belonged to the Ashcan artist Robert Henri.It was long overdue. Henri was one of the club’s most prominent members. He organized a groundbreaking 1904 exhibition of American painters at the club’s original building on West 34th Street in Manhattan. When the club moved to the former Samuel J. Tilden mansion on Gramercy Park South, Henri’s studio was just two doors away. His library, donated by an heir in 1994, “really cements the history of the club,” said the registrar, Robert Yahner.One oversize volume caught his eye. Misleadingly cataloged as “Monograph, Goya, the Painter,” it had a small self-portrait on the cover that Mr. Yahner recognized as the first image in “Los Caprichos” (“The Caprices”), a series of 80 satirical and fantastical etchings now regarded as one of Goya’s supreme achievements and a milestone on the road to modernism.The volume in his hands was, it turned out, the ninth edition of the “Caprichos,” published by the National Engraving Center of Spain’s Royal Academy of Arts between 1908 and 1912. The prints will be on display in “Francisco de Goya y Lucientes: ‘Los Caprichos,’ ” which opens on Monday and runs through Jan. 31.AdvertisementIt has been 20 years since the complete series of the “Caprichos” has been seen in Manhattan, as part of the blockbuster exhibition “Goya in the Metropolitan Museum of Art,” although the first-edition prints have been seen locally in exhibitions at the Zimmerli Art Museum at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J., in 2008 and the Nassau County Museum of Art in Roslyn Harbor, N.Y., in 2011. Nearly two dozen prints from the “Caprichos” can also be seen at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston in the exhibition “Goya: Order and Disorder,” which runs through Jan. 19.AdvertisementThe Goyas at the National Arts Club, although lacking the cachet of the first edition, come with an unusual story. And admission is free.Goya printed the “Caprichos” in 1799. In a newspaper announcement he described them as “a collection of prints of fantasy subjects” with a moral purpose: to ridicule “eccentricities and errors common to all civil society” and “the concerns and vulgar deceptions allowed by custom, ignorance or personal gain.”The mood is dark, the faces grotesque, as Goya summons the demons of the age in a style verging on the surreal. The most famous print in the series, “The Sleep of Reason Produces Monsters,” depicts an artist slumped over a work table, asleep, surrounded by swarms of owls and bats, and glared at fiercely by a solitary cat. Other prints in the series heap scorn on marriage and courtship rituals, Spanish social types and superstition.Goya could find no reputable bookseller willing to handle the prints, so he sold them out of a perfume and liquor store near his house. Business was not brisk. After selling 27 albums, he began to fear the wrath of the Inquisition and withdrew the rest of the print run of 300. He later gave the copper plates to the Spanish government, which, starting in 1855, periodically issued new editions.The set at the National Arts Club was given to Henri by Randall Davey, one of his students at the New York School of Art, who became a close friend and traveling companion on trips to Europe. Davey’s dedication, “To Robert Henri,” is dated Sept. 21, 1910, with a place indicator, “Madrid, España,” which, Davey jokingly explains, is “Spanish for Spain.”The gift was well chosen. “Spain was enormously important to Henri,” said Valerie Ann Leeds, an independent scholar and curator of an exhibition of Henri’s Spanish-influenced work now at the Mississippi Museum of Art in Jackson. “He went there more times than to any other country. Velázquez was No. 1 for him, but Goya was right up there as an influence.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Henri had no children, and his estate, after his death in 1929, followed a meandering path among far-flung heirs. The Goya album found its way to John LeClair, the nephew of his sister-in-law. Mr. LeClair’s wife, Janet, was a longtime member of the National Arts Club who lectured widely on Henri’s work and for many years lived in his studio building. She ultimately gave the books to the club.To emphasize the Henri connection, the club will exhibit, together with the Goya prints, another of Mrs. LeClair’s gifts, Henri’s “Portrait of Eugenie Stein,” painted in 1906 and 1907.Advertisement“We do have one of the finest collections of early-20th-century American art there is,” said Dianne B. Bernhard, director of the club’s fine arts offices. It was built by requiring all artists voted in as life members to donate one artwork that, according to a 1909 amendment to the club’s constitution, “shall have been appraised by a majority of the Art Committee at a value of not less than $1,000.”After years of turmoil culminating in the ouster (and eviction from the premises) of its longtime president, O. Aldon James Jr., in July 2013, the club has rededicated itself to exhibiting art in its four galleries.Recent shows have included “Beneath the Dress,” devoted to drawings by the fashion designer Charles James, and “A Model Point of View,” celebrating Emilia and Ilya Kabakov, a husband-and-wife team. The Goya show will run concurrently with a Modernist drawing show and, with a nod to the permanent collection, an exhibition focused on work by the Pennsylvania landscape painter Walter Elmer Schofield (1867-1944).“Our exhibit schedule has been rather ambitious,” Ms. Bernhard said. “We are trying to establish the Arts Club as one of those institution where we have the past, but we also have the future.”A version of this article appears in print on January 2, 2015, on Page C27 of the New York edition with the headline: Society’s Flaws and Foibles, Etched for Posterity.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.