By MIKE HALEJAN. 1, 2015
The police drama “The Bridge,” in both its original (Scandinavian) and American versions, took its title from its evocative opening gimmick: A body is found on a bridge that crosses an international border, lying half in one country and half in the other. The result is an unlikely partnership between detectives from two countries, Sweden and Denmark in the original, the United States and Mexico in the remake.The American series dropped any explicit tie to the border bridge in its convoluted and tepid second season, after which it was canceled by FX. The Scandinavian series kept the conceit: Its second season, online at Hulu on Friday, begins with a cargo ship mysteriously veering off course and running up against one of the piers of the Oresund Bridge.It’s a minor detail but indicative of what makes the original better. As is so often the case with European television shows and their American remakes, the Danish-Swedish “Bridge” is more modest, more focused, more contained than the FX version. Each season is about a case and a couple of cops, one of whom happens to exhibit Asperger’s syndrome-like behavior.That wasn’t good enough for the American show, which expanded the roles of secondary characters, taking screen time away from the central partners (who were wonderfully played by Diane Kruger and Demián Bichir), and used its border setting as an excuse to chase baroquely violent and weird story lines involving narcotics gangs and human trafficking.AdvertisementThe original, titled “Broen” in Denmark and “Bron” in Sweden, keeps the focus tightly on the two cops, the socially awkward Swedish detective Saga Noren (Sofia Helin) and her more effusive, less rigorous Danish counterpart, Martin Rohde (Kim Bodnia).AdvertisementAs the second season opens, Saga is called to investigate the wayward ship and discovers that the crew is gone but five people thought to be missing — three Swedes and two Danes — have been drugged and chained in the hold. That gives her an excuse to go to Denmark and ask for help from Martin, whom she hasn’t seen in the 13 months since their last case — when she shot him on the bridge to prevent his killing the man who had taken his son.Ms. Helin and the Scandinavian writers are less sentimental with Saga than the American show was with Ms. Kruger’s character. Ms. Helin’s Saga accepts her affectless state and the way it cuts her off from others, and rarely feels the need to reach across the divide. This means that when she does betray emotion, just barely, it has a greater wallop, and the early scene in which she encounters the ravaged Martin is more moving — largely for being more quiet and understated — than anything in the American show’s two seasons.In crime dramas, as in life, less is often more.A Critic’s Notebook article on Friday about the second season of the Scandinavian police drama “The Bridge,” online at Hulu, misstated the number of people found chained in the hold of a ship in the first episode of the season. It is five, not four.A version of this article appears in print on January 2, 2015, on Page C12 of the New York edition with the headline: After a Remake for American Viewers, Back to Understatement.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.