AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Roberta SmithI tend to be a sucker for movies about art and artists. It almost doesn’t matter whether these films are good, bad or middling. Watching them is like watching sports or maybe a game show. You keep score. How much is right, how much seems off, how much is so inaccurate it makes you squirm. And, yes, there’s also a certain know-it-all satisfaction in catching mistakes.Still, for an art critic it’s not just about adding up points. You also watch art movies with a great emotional investment, making you more like a nervous parent at a child’s soccer game. A bundle of mixed emotions and insider-outsider tensions are involved. You want films about artists to help decode art for the public, too. But you also want them to ring true in terms of your own knowledge and experience, to portray the world of art honestly and respectfully.I got a window on my so-called objectivity after seeing “Mr. Turner,” Mike Leigh’s engrossing, if decidedly elliptical, treatment of the last years of the great British painter J. M. W. Turner (1775-1851), whose semiabstract emphasis on paint as pure material is a cornerstone of modern art. My companion and I were discussing the film in the theater’s elevator and two other people asked our opinion; I said I loved it for getting so much right about art. What did they think? “Nothing happened,” came the blunt reply. And so, another reminder that art-worlders can like films about art for reasons unappreciated by others.The past year brought a surfeit of films about art, from the Frederick Wiseman documentary “National Gallery,” a sleek, hypnotic portrait of the London museum that houses one of the world’s greatest collections of European paintings, to “Big Eyes,” Tim Burton’s inspiring yet confused, alternately overacted and underacted feature about the painter Margaret Keane and her fight to wrest credit for her images of saucer-eyed waifs from her sociopath husband, Walter. (Among other squirm-inducing details, John Canaday, a Midwesterner who was an art critic for The New York Times in the 1960s, is played by a haughty Terence Stamp with a British accent and ascot.)There was even a new breed of 3-D offerings, including the essentially pointless “Inside the Mind of Leonardo in 3-D,” in which the actor Peter Capaldi recites and enacts excerpts from Leonardo’s notebooks, which is interesting. Much less so is seeing that artist’s sublime landscape drawings rendered in 3-D, like pop-up greeting cards.The movies that stayed most with me form an odd unlikely triad, but they connect because each — sometimes inadvertently — says so much about the activity central to both making and experiencing art, which is simply the act of looking, whether as work, pleasure or exploration of both the world and the self.“Mr. Turner” is high on my list of best art biopics ever. The other two are documentaries so unlike as to be different species: “National Gallery” proceeds without voice-over, watching and listening to the people who work at the museum and to those who come to see the art. In contrast is the scruffy “Tim’s Vermeer,” directed by the magician Teller and enthusiastically narrated by his partner magician, Penn Jillette. It concerns Tim Jenison, an inventor from Texas who becomes so obsessed with the mystery of how Vermeer made his paintings that he ultimately tries to make one himself and — in a process that is D.I.Y. to the nth degree — to some extent succeeds.Speaking as an art critic, and not a Turner specialist, I found “Mr. Turner” blissfully squirm-free. The main reason: Turner’s selfish personality and single-minded devotion to his art is the film’s through line — its driving force — supplemented by glimpses of the collateral damage to those around him. The deep content of this movie is a trifle clichéd but vividly rendered: Genius is by definition strange and also hard work; ambition has its price; and talent can hit anyone, including the son of a barber (in Turner’s case) whose ample gifts and ability to smooth some of his rougher edges helped him fit in with aristocratic patrons who could be pretty eccentric themselves. I heard that some people were put off by the extensive vocabulary of grunts and growls with which Turner, brilliantly played by Timothy Spall, often communicated, but it seems perfect for a curmudgeonly loner who remains true to his working-class accent.Mainly the film spends a lot of time showing Turner quietly doing what all artists do: looking and thinking. Luckily, Turner does so while traveling around Britain and Europe, often on foot, searching for subjects, closely observing light and weather, making rapid sketches all the while. (Mr. Spall, who draws and paints in real life, also looks convincing at an easel.) We repeatedly see Turner taking in majestic expanses of seashore, stony buttes or windy moor. These natural attractions are enhanced by the exquisite cinematography of Dick Pope, who gives the opening shot of nearly every sequence the beauty of a carefully composed painting.There are delightful accuracies large and small, from the revolving palette Turner designed for himself, to the raucous (all male) jostling of Varnishing Day at the Royal Academy of Arts, when, just before an exhibition opens, the artists put finishing touches on their canvases while one-upping one another competitively. In one scene Turner ignores the artist working next to him on a canvas involving much red. This is the landscape painter John Constable, the only contemporary who was Turner’s equal, whom our hero ridicules in a well-known incident with a bit of deft bravado: He adds a bright red buoy to his dour seascape to match his neighbor’s work.In another famous, if sometimes debated event, has Turner lashed to the mast of a ship struggling through a snowstorm to better experience its force. The scene is shot too tight, perhaps to save money; I was hoping to see the prow of the ship violently slamming into waves. But the movie leaves no doubt about the omnivorous eye, trained on nature or art, that drove Turner’s ambition.Mr. Wiseman’s “National Gallery” is in its own way as beautiful as Mr. Leigh’s Turner film. This is partly because of the languid, seemingly random way the camera wends through the museum’s grand, pristine spaces and past its astounding paintings — somewhat like the movement of the eye — and partly because of diamond-sharp editing that pulls everything together.Throughout the film there are long shots of visitors looking, under art’s spell: puzzled, rapt, delighted. The hush is broken primarily by docents talking about individual paintings to various groups, often schoolchildren. Some deliver homilies that can nonetheless open eyes: “Paintings change and how you look at them changes as well,” one says.Others ponder specifics. In front of Rubens’s “Samson and Delilah,” a docent points out the complex expression of Delilah as she watches a Philistine cut the hair of the man she has just betrayed and notes that the light in the painting comes from the left, the same direction as in the actual room — in the house of an Antwerp alderman — for which it was commissioned.The movie tracks the people who keep the place going, from janitors polishing the floors and conservators in their laboratory to the director. No one is identified, but you figure it out by what they do or say. The museum’s director (Nicholas Penny) is the one arguing with development officers who think the National Gallery isn’t approachable enough. These interactions are interesting but coming back to the art, and talk, in the galleries always feels like coming up for air.“Tim’s Vermeer” is an accidental minor masterpiece that in proving one thing also proves its opposite. Mr. Jenison, the inventor, thinks that Vermeer made his paintings by using a lens, as the British painter David Hockney and others have proposed, together with a small mirror that transfers portions of a scene to a horizontal surface. Mr. Jenison travels to Yorkshire, England, to show his new device to Mr. Hockney, who seems impressed, noting that every painting is document, in a way, of its own making.Mr. Jenison, whose sincerity and determination are at the movie’s core, sets out to make a copy of Vermeer’s “The Music Lesson,” part of Queen Elizabeth’s Royal Collection. (Buckingham Palace allows him to look at it for 30 minutes.) This involves a lot of starting from scratch and includes creating a set identical in size, light source and furnishings to the room in Delft where Vermeer painted most of his works. Mr. Jenison also had period garments made for the two people in the painting (he used a male model and his daughter) and ground his own pigments. These challenges are followed by 120 days of painstaking work using his lens-mirror combination and a very small brush. The process is clearly an ordeal for hand, back and eye.The result looks like a Vermeer from a distance but is quite uneven closer in. A white ceramic pitcher has a nice Vermeerish glow; the woman’s intricate coif looks like unskilled paint by numbers. Of course, there is no chance to compare the fruit of Mr. Jenison’s labors next to the real thing, but he takes it to Mr. Hockney, who says only, with gentle tact, that Mr. Jenison has made a document.The lesson, of course, is that Mr. Jenison may have discovered Vermeer’s secret tool, but he completely lacks Vermeer’s touch. On the voice-over, Mr. Jillette crows, “Tim has made a Vermeer!” Mr. Jenison is considerably more modest. It is hard not to admire his perseverance and hard work. But it is also impossible to ignore that the joys and rewards of looking, so evident in “Mr. Turner” and “National Gallery,” as well as in Mr. Hockney’s work, turn to drudgery in “Tim’s Vermeer.”videoAdvertisement