By KAREN ROSENBERGJAN. 1, 2015
One of the smallest but most salient works in “Jean Dubuffet: Soul of the Underground,” at the Museum of Modern Art, is a sketchbook page covered with tiny contour drawings of footprints. Made during one of Dubuffet’s late-1940s sojourns in El Goléa, a Saharan oasis, it hints at the inspiration he would find under his soles over the next couple of decades.“Look at what lies at your feet!” Dubuffet wrote in a 1957 essay. “A crack in the ground, sparkling gravel, a tuft of grass, some crushed debris, offer equally worthy subjects for your applause and admiration.”In MoMA’s stimulating show, drawn entirely from its collection, we can see how Dubuffet’s earthbound gaze nourished his reinvention of the painted surface. On view are several canvases smeared with a mixture of oil, putty, sand and gravel, some of them with incised drawings that seem to equate painting with plowing. Here too are small sculptures made with bits of organic and industrial detritus, gnarled grapevine roots and pieces of slag and charcoal.We also come to see him as a prolific and wildly inventive printmaker, one who inked impressions of leaves, fruit peels, and dirt and created a substantial “encyclopedia” of organic textures. (The project was ambitious enough to involve multiple print shops, all running at once.) He often combined lithography with assemblage, cutting up and rearranging his prints to form new images that were then reprinted to look seamless. “Everything combines and interferes,” as Dubuffet said of his technique.AdvertisementAltogether, “Soul of the Underground” offers a new, more process-oriented way of looking at this Art Brut founder. It suggests that the rawness he espoused had as much to do with groundedness, in the literal and metaphysical senses, as it did with primitivism.AdvertisementThat philosophy, especially clear in the show’s many landscapes or landscapelike abstractions, is apparent even in Dubuffet’s figurative works. “Portrait of Henri Michaux,” from 1947, seems to excavate this Belgian artist and poet from a thick ground of oil, putty, pebbles and sand. And in “Beard of Uncertain Returns,” from 1959, an unruly thicket of facial hair — a sort of underbrush — creeps over the picture plane, edging out the face to which it is attached.The show’s still lifes, though less prominent, have a similar gravitational pull. Drawings like “Table Laden With Objects” tilt the genre’s usual frontal perspective, giving us a bird’s-eye view of a cluttered surface. “I am convinced that any table can be for each of us a landscape as inexhaustible as the whole Andes range,” Dubuffet wrote.A similar vantage point characterizes his actual landscapes, which often seem to hover just over the ground, sometimes forsaking the sorts of postcard views that usually tempt artists. A 1956 collage-painting with the look of stained glass and the self-descriptive title “Soil Ornamented With Vegetation, Dead Leaves, Pebbles, Diverse Debris,” for instance, was inspired by the terrain surrounding Vence, a medieval French village. Ignoring the rolling hills and glimpses of the Mediterranean, Dubuffet chose to highlight “the dwarf, close-cropped vegetation and the pitiful plants which grow along the sides of these poorly kept roads.”He often made impressions from bits of foliage dipped in paint. Sometimes, as in “Baptism of Fire” (1959), he glued leaves and seedpods directly to the canvas and painted over them. When it suited him, he also used synthetic materials to create earthy effects; “Soul of the Underground” (1959), the show’s title piece, owes its silvery, mineral-like sheen to crumpled aluminum foil.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His love of texture reaches an apex in the “Phenomena” group of lithographs, the source of many of his other prints. During a five-year frenzy of printmaking, he inked just about every kind of surface imaginable (including orange peels and human skin). He also took sandpaper and chemicals to the lithographic stones, creating difficult-to-categorize abstractions that embrace chance and accident.MoMA is showing just a sampling of the 324-piece series, but it’s enough to give a sense of the project’s range. And nearby are some of the lithographs Dubuffet made from cutup and assembled snippets of “Phenomena,” goofy composite characters like “Carrot Nose” and “The Inflated Snob II” that play down the serious, scientific tone of the source prints.He also worked images from “Phenomena” into some of his book collaborations from the early 1960s, which feature handwritten or rubber-stamped texts with unusual spacing and placement. Just a couple of these are on view, but their playful approach to language ought to inspire an exhibition of Dubuffet’s literary projects.In the meantime, this exemplary collection show — organized by the senior curator Jodi Hauptman and the associate curator Sarah Suzuki from MoMA’s department of drawings and prints — makes us appreciate Dubuffet as a restless innovator and recycler. And it reminds us that while many European postwar artists had their heads in the clouds (the light and space explorations of the Zero Group, currently surveyed at the Guggenheim, come to mind), Dubuffet believed that the future of art was to be found just underfoot.“Jean Dubuffet: Soul of the Underground” runs through April 5 at the Museum of Modern Art; 212-708-9400, moma.org. A version of this review appears in print on January 2, 2015, on Page C25 of the New York edition with the headline: A Creative Vision, So Down to Earth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.