By ANTHONY TOMMASINIJAN. 1, 2015
Opening a new production of Franz Lehar’s enduring operetta “The Merry Widow” as a New Year’s Eve gala at the Metropolitan Opera seemed a promising idea. Here is a light comedy with a rich, tuneful score and plenty of opportunities for dancing. And, in its way, the story, which centers on an attractive widow from a Balkan land, now living in Paris, whose husband left her a fortune, touches on wistful emotions that often well up with the coming of a new year: the byways of romantic attachment, the passing of time, the difficulty of amending lost opportunities.The Met went all out for its new production, which opened on Wednesday night with the starry soprano Renée Fleming in the title role of Hanna; the debonair baritone Nathan Gunn as the freewheeling bachelor Count Danilo from her homeland, who was once involved with her; and the remarkable Kelli O’Hara, a queen of Broadway, in her Met debut as Valencienne, the coquettish wife of an officious ambassador.The production was directed and choreographed by Susan Stroman, who has won five Tony Awards and was also making her Met debut. Enlivened by sprightly dancing, this colorful production is mostly faithful to the style of the piece. And from the glowing, subtle performance that the conductor Andrew Davis coaxed from the Met orchestra, it’s clear that he loves the 1905 score.Over all, however, the production came across as tentative, as if Ms. Stroman were struggling to find a balance between respecting the idiom of the work and charging it with fresh theatricality. And for all the good work of an impressive cast, the performances felt constrained and vocally underpowered. This show never really lifts off the stage.AdvertisementPeter Gelb, the Met’s general manager, inadvertently put his finger on the problem in a comment he made for a preview article about the new production in The New York Times. Mr. Gelb said that he had come to a realization after last year’s New Year’s Eve gala, a new staging of Strauss’s “Die Fledermaus” directed by Jeremy Sams that was weighed down with lame spoken English dialogue.“What I’ve learned is, the less dialogue the better,” Mr. Gelb said. “The Met is built for opera singing, not for spoken lines.”AdvertisementExactly. At 3,800 seats, the house is a cavernous place for a genre that relies on dialogue. And if anything, “Die Fledermaus” is actually a better fit than “The Merry Widow,” a more intimate, soft-spoken piece. To make an operetta like this work in a house the size of the Met, compromises are required. It should not be surprising that the result seems compromised.For “The Merry Widow,” the Met again turned to Mr. Sams, who prepared an English translation of the original German text. It is not easy to translate lyrics into another language while hewing to the original meaning of the words and maintaining the rhyme patterns. Mr. Sams does pretty well here, though there are inevitable stiff passages and groan-inducing bits, as when Camille, a French aristocrat who is pursuing the married Valencienne, sings: “I’ve dealt with respectable wives/Who lead unimpeachable lives./Alas, you don’t waver or falter./You’re fixed as the Rock of Gibraltar.”The new dialogue basically follows the story line without straining to be up-to-date or lamely comic. To make the spoken words audible, the singers wear body microphones throughout, though only the dialogue is amplified, not the singing. But the words were still hard to catch. The house is just too big for dialogue. And, despite what Mr. Gelb says he has learned, there is still too much of it in this show.Ms. O’Hara’s ardent fans (put me in the front ranks of that group) will be delighted with the chance to hear her sing without the amplification requisite on Broadway. She is a vocalist with operatic training. And her tender voice carries nicely in the house — certainly as well as that of the gifted young tenor Alek Shrader, who sounded a little pinched as Camille in his scenes with her.Still, in trying to project her singing a little more than usual, Ms. O’Hara compromises her enormous skill at making words come through with naturalness. I kept wondering how her performance, and the entire production, would come across in a house a third the size of the Met.Hanna is a good role for Ms. Fleming at a time when she is beginning to phase out her work in opera. She wants to leave the opera stage at the top; she looked and sounded lovely.AdvertisementHanna is from Pontevedro (a stand-in for Montenegro), and her homeland is nearing bankruptcy. The story turns on the efforts of Pontevedrin officials at the embassy to compel Hanna to marry one of her fellow citizens lest her fortune go to some amorous Parisian. And they draft Count Danilo as the most suitable suitor.Ms. Fleming conveys Hanna’s elegance and glamour but also her lingering feelings for Danilo and her confusion about what to do next in her life. She gives an affecting account of “Vilja, o Vilja,” the forlorn love song that Hanna sings at the garden party she hosts at her mansion. Yet she, too, seemed not quite comfortable singing her first operetta role in a house that she knows is just too large for the intimate performance she is trying to give.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Gunn brings his suave presence and solid voice to Danilo, who has never really gotten over Hanna. But Mr. Gunn also struggles to find the right balance. In a way, the most magical moment comes in Act II, when Hanna and Danilo dance to the strands of the beguiling “Merry Widow” waltz from the orchestra and soon begin humming along.At 70, the veteran baritone Thomas Allen can still command a stage. He turns in a gruffly comic performance as Baron Mirko Zeta, the Pontevedrin envoy in Paris, clueless about his wife (Valencienne)’s infatuation with Camille.The production, honoring the period of the piece, has beguilingly simple sets by Julian Crouch, just vividly painted flat backdrops. William Ivey Long’s beautiful costumes evoke Belle Époque Paris. There is a nifty onstage scene change when Hanna’s garden party morphs into Maxim’s, alive with reveling customers and a roster of dancing grisettes. It’s not surprising that Ms. Stroman’s best work involves the dance routines, not just a teasing cancan at Maxim’s but the hardy hoofing in a Balkan folk dance at Hanna’s party.  Of note, Mr. Davis has composed a new overture comprising orchestral materials by Lehar to make a medley of “Merry Widow” hit tunes. And during the party scene, offstage piano music taken from the ballet adaptation of the work is heard during some exchanges of dialogue.All in all, though, the Met may just not be a place for operetta. For New Year’s Eve in 2010, the Met opened a new production of Verdi’s “La Traviata,” a bold, surreal modern staging by Willy Decker that is currently back at the house. Maybe that’s a better way for the Met to ring in a new year: Put on something substantive and end it early enough so that the audience can go out and party!“The Merry Widow” runs through Jan. 31 and then returns on April 24 with a new cast; 212-362-6000, metopera.org. A version of this review appears in print on January 2, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Talking (and Talking) About Love.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.