By JOE COSCARELLIJAN. 1, 2015
Minutes before midnight on New Year’s Eve at Madison Square Garden, the dance party paused for a video montage. As a look back on the year that was, it was a bit random, mixing hints of hellishness with small victories: Robin Williams’s death, Ebola and Ferguson, Mo., but also Derek Jeter’s farewell to Yankee Stadium, a goal by Clint Dempsey in the World Cup and footage from Burning Man of the night’s headlining D.J.s, Diplo and Skrillex.Farewell, 2014.The retrospective was a brief reprieve from the dance music that had started nearly four hours earlier, but there would be more to come. After the countdown clock hit zero and confetti fell, the bass dropped once again. Then again, and again.As purveyors of a very American strain of electronic dance music, or E.D.M., Skrillex and Diplo trade in constant pleasure and adrenaline, forgoing any down moments in favor of a relentless build and piling sounds like a Jenga tower until the whole thing wobbles. To ring in the New Year, each played a hyperactive solo set before joining forces as a two-headed E.D.M. Hydra: Jack U. For the amped crowd, which, like the beats-per-minute in the music, rarely slowed, the show might as well have been a cardio class.“I’ve only been to one other concert, and it was Billy Joel, so there were a lot of old people,” said one 22-year-old, who gave her name only as Haley. “It’s pretty different here.”AdvertisementShe had driven for hours from Binghamton, N.Y., with two friends, who were taking a break from the pulverizing bass to eat nachos. The three said they planned to make another musical pilgrimage to Ultra, the popular E.D.M. festival in Miami, in March.Advertisement“If you’re from out of town, make some noise right now!” Diplo commanded from the stage during his first set. Based on the crowd’s response, this was not a room full of locals.Matthew Malandro, 20, said he had driven from Vermont to see Jack U, just days after a trip to Virginia for a concert known as BassLights, which pairs the E.D.M. musicians Bassnectar and Pretty Lights.Such fan devotion, especially among young people, has turned E.D.M. into a multibillion-dollar industry — Skrillex alone made an estimated $16.5 million in 2014, according to Forbes — bringing with it concerns over the use of party drugs like MDMA, better known as ecstasy or molly.“Everyone judges these shows based on the drugs, but it’s really about the community,” Emily Gandolfo, 20, said. Of the crowds, she said, “We’re a family.”With her multicolored bikini and fuzzy leg warmers, Ms. Gandolfo fit right in. Shirts and pants were optional in the warmth of the pulsating arena, belying the frigid temperatures outside. With winter layers peeled off, sleeves were, apparently, frowned upon.Headgear, on the other hand, was in: There were animal headdresses, Uncle Sam top hats, bright bucket hats and holiday elf hats. Full-body coverage was O.K. if it was creative, like the man in the smiley-face print kimono, or another in a glow-in-the-dark skeleton onesie, or the three in full furry bunny suits. Friendship bracelets — “Stay High,” read one — were the preferred accessories.With its colorful crowd the arena felt a long way from the bottle service clubs of Las Vegas, where more mainstream E.D.M. stars like Zedd and Calvin Harris were performing on New Year’s Eve. Madison Square Garden, Diplo said, was more like a “house party.”In addition to their guests, the D.J.s were playing for an online audience, courtesy of a feed sponsored by Yahoo and Live Nation. One reveler took the digital participation a step further by dancing for absent friends using FaceTime on his iPhone. Sitting quietly on a couch with a toddler, his friends looked content where they were.AdvertisementCommanding the aisle nearby was a man in only silky boxing trunks doing calisthenics in between spits of chewing tobacco. He thrashed violently to the beat, pausing to hug passing strangers. In one show of solidarity, he held up his fingers to a woman, and she knowingly completed the secret handshake. Together they made a hand heart.A version of this review appears in print on January 2, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Turning the Garden Into a House Party.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.