AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events. Opera★ ‘Il Trovatore’  (Saturday) The return of David McVicar’s grimly effective 2009 production of Verdi’s “Il Trovatore” to the Metropolitan Opera proved a deeply moving occasion, offering the great baritone Dmitri Hvorostovsky, who has been undergoing treatment for a brain tumor, in a courageous and compelling performance as Count di Luna. Now that Mr. Hvorostovsky has returned to London for additional treatment, the role is being sung by the Ukrainian baritone Vitaliy Bilyy, who joins the other members of this superb cast: the sumptuous soprano Anna Netrebko, at her best as Leonora; the excellent, youthful tenor Yonghoon Lee as Manrico; the powerhouse mezzo-soprano Dolora Zajick as Azucena. Marco Armiliato conducts. Saturday at 8 p.m. at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)★ ‘Anna Bolena’  (Friday and Tuesday) The formidable American soprano Sondra Radvanovsky triumphs in the arduous title role of Donizetti’s “Anna Bolena,” returning to the Metropolitan Opera in David McVicar’s 2011 production. With flawless coloratura technique, earthy sound and uncanny control of colorings and vibrato, she gives an intense yet vulnerable portrayal of Anna (Anne Boleyn), King Henry’s ambitious, doomed queen. The whole cast is strong, especially the rising-star mezzo-soprano Jaime Barton as Giovanna (Jane Seymour), and the bass Ildar Abdrazakov as the king. The tenor Taylor Stayton takes over the role of Lord Percy. (The Serbian mezzo-soprano Milijana Nikolic, in her Met debut, sings Giovanna for Friday’s performance.) At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)★ ‘Otello’ (Saturday and Wednesday) In the new Bartlett Sher staging of Verdi’s “Otello,” the title character is presented as a leader and a husband trapped in the quagmire of his own perceptions. The tenor Aleksandrs Antonenko brings a virile voice and impressive stamina to the punishing role, but sometimes seems dramatically uncertain. The luxurious baritone Zeljko Lucic makes a suave, sly Iago. The production could not have a better Desdemona than the luminous young soprano Sonya Yoncheva. The brilliant conductor Yannick Nézet-Séguin leads a close-to-great performance. Saturday at 1 p.m. and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)★ ‘Tannhäuser’  (Monday and Thursday) James Levine conducts this revival of Otto Schenk’s traditionally-minded production featuring a promising cast of strong Wagnerians, including the tenor Johan Botha as the titular hero torn between carnal and pure love, the soprano Eva-Maria Westbroek as Elisabeth, the baritone Peter Mattei as the poet-knight Wolfram and Michelle DeYoung as Venus. At 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)Classical Music★ John Luther Adams  (through Saturday) The composer John Luther Adams’s shimmering sonic landscapes are inspired by nature, including the beautiful panoramas of Alaska, where he lived for decades before moving to New York. Mr. Adams recently received Columbia University’s $50,000 William Schuman Award; a three-concert retrospective begins on Wednesday with Steven Schick conducting the International Contemporary Ensemble in Mr. Adams’s “Clouds of Forgetting, Clouds of Unknowing” — a contemplative piece punctuated by enigmatic clusters of bells and named after a 14th century mystical Christian text. At 8 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (Schweitzer)American Classical Orchestra  (Tuesday) Faith, Doubt, Reason and Mockery are some of the characters engaged in a riveting contest in “Day of Judgment,” Telemann’s rarely performed dramatic cantata. This period-instrument ensemble is joined by a large cast of fine singers under the direction of Thomas Crawford. At 8 p.m., St. Ignatius of Antioch Church, 552 West End Avenue, at 87th Street, Manhattan, 212-362-2727, americanclassicalorchestra.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Axiom (Saturday) A second opportunity within a couple of weeks to hear Giacinto Scelsi’s violin concerto, “Anahit,” is one reason to note this concert: Axiom’s consistently strong performances under Jeffrey Milarsky provide another. The Juilliard players also essay another Scelsi work, “Okanagon,” as well as Gerard Grisey’s “Talea” and Kaija Saariaho’s “Lichtbogen.” At 7:30 p.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, Lincoln Center, 155 West 65th Street, 212-769-7406, events.juilliard.edu. (Allen)★ Maya Beiser  (Wednesday through Oct. 17) In a multimedia concert called “All Vows,” this adventurous cellist, who grew up in Israel exposed to the music and traditions of Christians, Jews and Muslims, explores boundaries between the sacred and profane and the desire for meaning and ritual. The lineup includes works by Glenn Kotche and Michael Gordon; Ms. Beiser’s interpretations of classic rock; and Mohammed Fairouz’s “Kol Nidrei.” At 7:30 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schweitzer)Sarah Cahill  (Tuesday) Terry Riley, the grandfather guru of American contemporary music, has been basking in the limelight this season as he celebrates his 80th birthday. Here a leading light of the new-music piano scene throws him a “piano party” chock-full of world premieres of works written in his honor by composers including Pauline Oliveros, Evan Ziporyn, Christine Southworth and others. Also on the program is Mr. Riley’s own Keyboard Studies and Fandango on the Heaven Ladder. At 8 p.m., Roulette, 509 Atlantic Avenue, near Third Avenue, Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, 917-267-0363, roulette.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Early Music New York  (Through Oct. 18) The fifth New York Early Music Celebration takes place this week, with the theme “El Nuevo Mundo.” Full details of a packed program are available online, but the main concert is on Saturday, when Frederick Renz conducts music by Boccherini and a Guadeloupian composer, Chevalier de Saint-Georges, plus an 18th-century musical comedy, “La Cantade Vida y Muerte del General Malbrú” (“Song of the Life and Death of General Marlborough”). Saturday at 8 p.m., Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, Morningside Heights, 212-749-6600, nyemc.com. (David Allen)★ David Fray  (Friday) This elegant young French pianist has attracted attention in recent years for his insightful performances and recordings of Schubert. Here, in the Park Avenue Armory’s intimate, luxurious Board of Officers room, he offers the Sonata in E minor (D 566), the Sonata in A minor (D 784, Op. 143) and the Sonata in G (D 894, Op. 78). At 8 p.m., 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org. (Schweitzer)★ Benjamin Grosvenor (Thursday) The brilliant, thoughtful 23-year-old pianist Benjamin Grosvenor has won wide critical acclaim for his recitals, concerto performances and top-selling Decca recordings. On this recital he presents an intriguing program of Baroque-inspired works by Mendelssohn, Franck, Ravel, Liszt and Busoni’s solo piano arrangement of Bach’s magnificent solo violin Chaconne in D minor. At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)★ Marc-André Hamelin  (Saturday) Once a devotee of the unusual, Mr. Hamelin is turning his attention to more expected fare. This recital, available only as part of the Peoples’ Symphony’s bargain subscriptions, features Mozart, Debussy, Schubert and the pianist’s own “Variations on a Theme by Paganini.” At 8 p.m., Washington Irving High School, Irving Place at 16th Street, Manhattan, 212-586-4680, pscny.org. (Allen)Ian Hobson  (Tuesday) This English pianist begins a new series called “Preludes, Etudes and Variations — Downtown/Uptown,” six programs he will present at SubCulture in Greenwich Village and Merkin Hall. The concerts feature works in each genre by 19th- and 20th-century composers, plus three premieres. On Tuesday, Mr. Hobson will perform Chopin’s “Trois Nouvelles études” and Études (Op. 25); Rachmaninoff’s Preludes (Op. 23) and the premiere of Stephen Taylor’s “Variations.” At 7:30 p.m., SubCulture: Arts Underground, 45 Bleecker Street, East Village, subculturenewyork.com, 212-533-5470. (Vivien Schweitzer)Emma Kirkby  (Wednesday) This pure-voiced soprano, much admired for her contributions to the early music scene, joins the lutenist Jakob Lindberg for a program of English songs. The selections include music by Dowland, Purcell, William Byrd and John Blow. At 7:30 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)National Sawdust  (Friday and Saturday) The programming at this new Williamsburg venue is particularly sprawling this week, but is most focused for a John Zorn festival that lasts through the end of the month. On Friday there’s the world premiere of his “Madrigals” (Books I and II), plus, in a later set, “Asmodeus,” with the guitarist Marc Ribot. Attention turns to improvisations on Saturday, both in an early concert with Mr. Zorn on saxophone, and later, for “Cobra.” At 8 and 10 p.m., 80 North Sixth Street, at Wythe Avenue, Brooklyn, 646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org. (Allen)New York Philharmonic  (Wednesday and Thursday) The commanding baritone Eric Owens leads a tribute to legendary African-American singers such as Marian Anderson and George Shirley who became trailblazers for future generations. Conducted by Thomas Wilkins, the program also features the Dorothy Maynor Singers of the Harlem School of the Arts and stellar soloists including Janai Brugger, Laquita Mitchell and Russell Thomas in selections that span the range from spirituals and Gershwin to Bach and Verdi. At 7:30 p.m., David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Orpheus Chamber Orchestra (Thursday) Orpheus, the impressive and popular conductor-less chamber orchestra, begins its season with a concert exploring German Romanticism in an encompassing way. Mendelssohn’s Overture to “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” opens the program and Schumann’s Second Symphony ends it. At the center is the New York premiere of the modernist German master Wolfgang Rihm’s Duo Concerto for violin, cello and orchestra, a work inspired by Brahms’s Double Concerto and scored for the same instruments. It was written for the violinist Mira Wang and the cellist Jan Vogler, who perform it here. Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)★ Mark Padmore  (Wednesday through Oct. 17) This admirable tenor joins forces with the fortepianist Kristian Bezuidenhout (replacing Paul Lewis, who is recovering from surgery) for Schubert’s complete song cycles. On Wednesday, they will perform “Die schöne Müllerin” (“The Lovely Mill Maiden”) and on Thursday, “Schwanengesang” (“Swan Song”) and Beethoven’s “An die ferne Geliebte” (“To the distant beloved”). At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org. (Schweitzer)★ Philadelphia Orchestra  (Tuesday) The charismatic conductor Yannick Nézet-Séguin leads this excellent orchestra in a program of patriotically tinged works including Grieg’s Suite No. 1 from “Peer Gynt,” Sibelius’s Symphony No. 5 and Bartok’s Violin Concerto No. 2 with the eloquent violinist Gil Shaham as soloist. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, carnegiehall.org, 212-247-7800. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Maurizio Pollini  (Sunday) This pianist’s recitals are still marked by a rare intellectual power, and this one concentrates on repertoire he has made a specialty: Schumann’s Fantasy in C major, plus Chopin, including nocturnes, a polonaise and a scherzo. At 3 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Sphinx Virtuosi  (Wednesday) The Sphinx Organization, founded in 1996 by the violinist Aaron P. Dworkin, aims to increase the number of black and Hispanic performers, composers and audience members in classical music. Each year the organization offers a concert at Carnegie Hall showcasing its most promising students and alumni. This year’s program is called “Inspiring Women,” and features selections by Gabriela Lena Frank, Jennifer Higdon and Jessie Montgomery, among others. At 6 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, carnegiehall.org, 212-247-7800. (Schweitzer)Advertisement