By KATHRYN SHATTUCKJAN. 3, 2015
3:40 P.M. (HBO Signature) THE TRUTH ABOUT CHARLIE (2002) In Jonathan Demme’s remake of the 1963 comic thriller “Charade,” Thandie Newton steps into the Audrey Hepburn role as a new wife who returns to her Paris apartment to break it off with her art-dealing husband, Charlie, only to find the place ransacked. She soon discovers that nothing is as it seems. Mark Wahlberg, in the role originated by Cary Grant, portrays the charming stranger eager to help; Tim Robbins is the man she turns to at the United States Embassy. “The sensual, butter-voiced” Ms. Newton is “so good that when she’s on screen, the movie works — or at least you think it does,” Elvis Mitchell wrote in The New York Times. “It’s a spot-specific case of alchemy.”NOON (13) RICHARD HEFFNER’S OPEN MIND Mr. Heffner’s grandson Alexander Heffner interviews Newton N. Minow, a former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, about the history of public television.1 P.M. (TBS) LOVE ACTUALLY (2003) Hugh Grant portrays a British prime minister and randy bachelor who fancies a member of his household staff (Martine McCutcheon) at 10 Downing Street — and nearly causes an international crisis when he protects her virtue from the president of the United States (Billy Bob Thornton) — in this holiday comedy written and directed by Richard Curtis. Emma Thompson is the prime minister’s sister, a housewife whose husband (Alan Rickman) is besotted with his secretary (Heike Makatsch); Liam Neeson a widower and single stepfather; and Colin Firth a writer cuckolded by his own brother. And a “genuine comic spark comes from Bill Nighy, playing a washed-up, dissolute rock star,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.8 P.M. (HBO) RIO 2 (2014) Blu and Jewel, the blue macaws voiced by Jesse Eisenberg and Anne Hathaway, flit between domestic bliss in Rio and the dangers of the Amazon rain forest in Carlos Saldanha’s eco-friendly, if frenetic, follow-up to his 2011 animated feature, “Rio.” “The cinematic equivalent of attack by kaleidoscope, ‘Rio 2’ sucks you in and whirls you around before spitting you out, exhausted,” Jeannette Catsoulis wrote in The Times, adding that “the additions of Bruno Mars (as Blu’s romantic rival) and Kristin Chenoweth (as a love-struck frog) expand the Latin-flavored musical palette to include pop crooning and Broadway belting.”Advertisement9 P.M. (CUNY) KORKORO (2011) A family of Gypsies journeys through occupied France while trying to avoid the violent Vichy patrols in this World War II drama written and directed by Tony Gatlif. Along the way, a French orphan (Mathias Laliberté) is initiated into their culture by a wild man (James Thiérrée), who finds the caravan’s inability to wander, because of a law forbidding nomadism, a form of prison in itself. Mr. Gatlif “sometimes seems more anthropologist than storyteller,” Rachel Saltz wrote in The Times. " ‘Korkoro’ (the word means freedom in Romani) has an unexpectedly leisurely quality as it shows the texture of Gypsy life — the music-making, the intense bonds with horses and the natural world — and its awkward fit with modernity.”10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS: LIVE TO TELL Robin Doan recounts the night almost a decade ago when a gunman broke into her family home, killing her mother, stepfather and brother, and how, at just 10, she played dead to save her life.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowLI’L QUINQUIN (2014) The French director Bruno Dumont builds on his obsession with things bestial and spiritual in this four-part mini-series — set in a farming community in northwestern France and featuring local actors — about a bumbling police captain (Bernard Pruvost) and his Don Knotts-like assistant (Philippe Jore) investigating a series of murders in which a victim’s chopped-up body parts are discovered in the stomach of an animal, usually a cow. Meanwhile, a towheaded boy (Alane Delhaye) and his friends prowl the countryside on their bicycles. “I would like to believe that Mr. Dumont is not a nihilistic know-it-all thumbing his nose and crowing, ‘Lord, what fools these mortals be!’ ” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “The physical beauty of ‘Li’l Quinquin’ tells me that beneath what could be interpreted as contemptuous misanthropy is a bedrock of stern compassion.” (fandor.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on January 3, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.