By CAMPBELL ROBERTSONJAN. 2, 2015
Miller Williams, a poet who championed the power of everyday language and who delivered a poem at the Capitol for President Bill Clinton’s second inauguration, died on Thursday in Fayetteville, Ark. He was 84.The cause was complications of Alzheimer’s disease, said Linda Sheets, a family friend.The father of the singer and songwriter Lucinda Williams, he would occasionally share the stage with her, reading his poetry between her songs.Tall and thin, Mr. Williams was also economical of speech, but he loved to tell stories. He was admired in literary circles for his direct, plain-spoken style.He was a workhorse, publishing 37 books of poetry and prose, both of his own and of others in translation, while also serving as a mentor to rising literary talents, including the poet Billy Collins. He taught at the University of Arkansas in Fayetteville for more than three decades and was the founding director of the University of Arkansas Press. His home there was a salon for writers and others, with a guest bedroom that hosted both the hard-bitten poet Charles Bukowski and Jimmy Carter.AdvertisementMr. Williams’s gifts were spotted by major literary figures well before he was able to make a living off them. He began his career as a college biology teacher and later sold appliances at Sears, Roebuck while publishing his poetry in journals and collections. Though he had no academic pedigree in English, he managed to get a position teaching it at Louisiana State University in 1962 with a collection of references from writers like Flannery O’Connor, Howard Nemerov, John Ciardi and Richard Yates.AdvertisementDespite the elite company he kept, Mr. Williams was allergic to pretension and what he once called “coyness” in poetry. In an interview with The Oxford American, he proudly recounted the time the singer Hank Williams Sr. told him over drinks at a gas station in Lake Charles, La., that he had “a beer-drinking soul.”Mr. Williams’s poems were written in common and accessible language, beginning with his own everyday experience but leading to something a reader could recognize as universal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The poem he read at the 1997 Clinton inauguration, “Of History and Hope,” reflected on the past and future of the country and asked: “But where are we going to be, and why, and who?/ The disenfranchised dead want to know.”Stanley Miller Williams was born on April 8, 1930, in Hoxie, Ark., the son of an itinerant Methodist minister. Mr. Williams went to college hoping to study English and foreign languages but switched to biology after a school psychologist told him he showed no verbal aptitude. He earned a graduate degree in zoology. Mr. Nemerov cited Mr. Williams’s scientific background in his reference note to Louisiana State, saying it had nurtured a talent for observation.Besides his daughter, survivors include his wife, Jordan, and two children from a previous marriage, Robert and Karyn Williams.The title of Lucinda Williams’s most recent album, “Down Where the Spirit Meets the Bone,” is a slightly altered line from one of her father’s poems, which reads in its entirety:Have compassion for everyone you meet,even if they don’t want it. What seems conceit, bad manners, or cynicism is always a signof things no ears have heard, no eyes have seen.You do not know what wars are going on down there where the spirit meets the bone.An obituary on Saturday about the poet Miller Williams misidentified the singer who once told him over drinks that he had a “beer-drinking soul.” He was Hank Williams Sr., not Hank Williams Jr.An obituary on Jan. 3 about the poet Miller Williams referred incorrectly to his father’s profession. He remained a minister for his entire life; it is not the case that he “gave up the cloth.”A version of this article appears in print on January 3, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Miller Williams, 84, Laconic Arkansas Poet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.