By EMILY STEELJAN. 2, 2015
It is the tale of a 23-year-old named Jane, a virgin, who becomes pregnant after she is artificially inseminated — accidentally.Outlandish, thought Jennie Urman, a veteran producer, when she heard the story line of a popular Venezuelan telenovela called “Juana la Virgen.” Fresh off the cancellation of a medical drama, Ms. Urman was looking for a new idea to develop, but when television executives asked her to adapt the Venezuelan series for the CW network, she initially thought the premise was too crazy to pull off.Still, she couldn’t get the idea out of her head, imagining the plight of this young woman whose life had been changed so suddenly, and so randomly. What kind of doctor could make such a terrible mistake? How could this one wild accident rock everyone’s world?“The story started to really come to life,” said Ms. Urman, who previously worked on the remake of “90210” and the series “Lipstick Jungle” and “Gilmore Girls.” “It became a story about mothers and daughters.”AdvertisementThe show that emerged this fall to resounding critical acclaim is the whimsical, melodramatic comedy “Jane the Virgin.” Critics have praised it as a nuanced story about three generations of strong Latino women that resonates across cultures and age groups.Advertisement“Jane the Virgin” recently landed a pair of Golden Globe nominations — one for best comedy series and the other for best actress in a comedy series — adding wings to the show and lifting its home, CW, along with it. The Globe nominations are the first for CW, which was also the only broadcast network to score a nomination in the comedy series category.CW’s arrival “was eight years in the making,” said Rick Haskins, executive vice president for marketing at CW. “There is no such thing as overnight success in today’s world. It takes time to figure it out, to understand what is working and get in sync with the zeitgeist.”The recognition comes as CW is in the midst of a transformation of its own: from its roots as the frothy hub for series like “Gossip Girl” and “Vampire Diaries” to a network that is for a (slightly) more sophisticated viewer and that also appeals to men. In an age when most television networks are desperate to attract younger viewers, CW is trying to grow by growing up.“We felt that by becoming too niche, we were going to niche ourselves out of existence,” said Mark Pedowitz, president of CW.The network was struggling when Mr. Pedowitz assumed the top job in 2011. Warner Bros. and CBS had established the network as a joint venture five years earlier, with the goal of improving ratings by merging their WB and UPN networks.But the plan wasn’t working. Series like “Gossip Girl,” “Vampire Diaries” and “America’s Next Top Model” generated buzz within a passionate fan base of young women, but the audiences were tiny, and total viewership was declining. The network was estimated to be losing as much as $100 million a year, and there were fears that the parent media groups would eliminate a sinking operation.Mr. Pedowitz immediately set out to find shows that would appeal to viewers outside of the 18-to-34-year-old demographic, without alienating CW’s core audience.AdvertisementExecutives also sought out shows with a backbone of optimism that would contrast with the gloom and doom offerings prevalent on television today, hoping that they would resonate with change-the-world millennial viewers. They made a successful bet on the superhero category with the series “Arrow,” about a secret vigilante based on the DC Comics character Green Arrow.This year, CW landed a hit with “The Flash,” a spinoff of “The Arrow,” about another DC Comics character who has a speed superpower.Mr. Pedowitz also called on his contacts across Hollywood, asking them to deliver fresh, original projects. One of his early phone calls was to Ben Silverman, chairman of the multimedia studio Electus.When Mr. Pedowitz was president of ABC Studios, the two had worked together on “Ugly Betty,” the adaptation of a Colombian telenovela about a quirky, nerdy young woman working in a cutthroat publishing empire. Mr. Pedowitz asked Mr. Silverman to deliver him a lineup of fresh concepts, without a filter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sifting through a catalog of ideas from South America, Mr. Silverman discovered “Jane the Virgin,” saw its potential and recommended it to CW.Mr. Pedowitz said that the title and its potential to appeal across cultures and age groups immediately grabbed him. “We live in a world where you need a hook,” he said. “The hook is either the talent, the premise or the title. This was something different, and it had a hook.”The series, starring the little-known actress Gina Rodriguez as the hardworking, endearing and earnest Jane, embraces its telenovela roots with wild plot swings and wink-at-the-audience humor.Jane is the daughter of a spirited nightclub performer who gave birth to Jane when she was 16, and the granddaughter of a religious, Spanish-speaking grandmother. Those pressures lead Jane to abstain from sex despite being in a serious, committed relationship.But Jane finds herself pregnant after a routine visit to a gynecologist goes disastrously wrong. The doctor had been distracted by her own relationship drama.AdvertisementJane decides to keep the baby after learning that the father is her handsome married boss, whom she kissed years ago. He had battled cancer, and this is the only chance for him to have a child.Originally conceived as a drama, the series is marketed as an hourlong comedy because producers and network executives thought that would allow audiences to suspend their disbelief and embrace the outrageous twists and turns. It includes over-the-top narration and elements intended to appeal to the tech-savvy generation, like texting that appears on the TV screen.On the strength of shows like “Jane” and “The Flash,” CW is on track this year for its most-watched season to date in terms of the average number of viewers in prime time, as well as its highest ratings among men 18 to 49 since the 2007-8 season. The premiere of “The Flash” set records as CW’s most-watched telecast of any of its series, with more than 6.8 million watching live and in a seven-day period after its original airing.While viewership at CW continues to rank below that of its rival broadcasters, the network has managed to register an uptick in total viewers in a season when most other networks have had ratings declines. CW also receives a significant boost from digital viewing, with audiences on laptops, mobile devices and tablets increasing the total by about 27 percent.Mr. Pedowitz declined to discuss the network’s finances, but said that the business was improving and that its corporate parents were not complaining.Marketers said the network has succeeded in broadening its audience while retaining core viewers. That strategy has helped to lure new advertisers, like automakers and financial services companies.“It’s been a younger network for so long,” said Dani Benowitz, an executive vice president at Universal McCann, an advertising agency that is part of the Interpublic Group of Companies. “Their story gets better as the demographics get older. This is new for them.”A version of this article appears in print on January 3, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Virgin Conceives; Network Profits.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.