AdvertisementSupported byTelevision ReviewBy Neil GenzlingerTelevision sure is eager to appropriate the stage musical form lately, and ABC makes a saucy, silly attempt on Sunday with “Galavant,” an eight-episode comic series featuring men in armor and devious damsels. Despite some amusing bits and clever songs, it’s only occasionally as much fun as it ought to be.The title character (Joshua Sasse) thinks he has found true love in Madalena (Mallory Jansen), only to see her kidnapped by the sniveling King Richard (Timothy Omundson), who wants her for himself. It turns out that the kidnapping victim may not have been all that unwilling, but a princess (Karen David) whose country has been ravaged by Richard enlists the dejected Galavant to go after Madalena anyway. The composer Alan Menken and the lyricist Glenn Slater, veterans of animated musicals like “Tangled,” are in naughty-boy mode here. King Richard, for instance, sings this about what he’d like to do to Galavant:I want to hurl him out a window,And shove explosives where the sun don’t shine.I want to skewer him with swords and slowly twist themAll around his reproductive system.That gives you an idea of the tone of the whole show: It’s the sort of yarn the brains behind “Tangled” might have come up with in their off hours to amuse themselves. The sensibilities of “The Princess Bride” and “Monty Python’s Spamalot” are much in evidence, but in a labored fashion.That might be a chronic problem for television that tries to be musical theater. The recent live versions of “Peter Pan” and “The Sound of Music” on NBC had their own kind of laboriousness, and so did the musical drama “Smash,” which ran for two seasons on NBC. Being part of a large audience in a theater with live actors in front of you is simply a viewing experience different from watching television. So credit “Galavant” with trying something out of the box, but don’t expect to fall in love with it. Occasionally, though, it hits the mark. Episode 2 finds Galavant in a pretty funny jousting scene, and it ends with a catchy love song. That song’s refrain: “Maybe you’re not the worst thing ever.”GalavantABC, Sunday nights at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time.Produced by Abbey C Studios Ltd. for ABC Studios. Created by Dan Fogelman; Mr. Fogelman, Alan Menken, Glenn Slater and Chris Koch, executive producers.WITH: Joshua Sasse (Galavant), Timothy Omundson (King Richard), Vinnie Jones (Gareth), Mallory Jansen (Madalena), Karen David (Isabella) and Luke Youngblood (Sid).Advertisement