Season 6, Episode 11, “Hail Mary”Well, that was quick.The last time we saw Cary Agos he was pleading guilty to — what was it, conspiracy? — just after telling a tearful Alicia Florrick that he was ready to serve his four years (two with good behavior). But when “The Good Wife” returned from its holiday hiatus on Sunday night, Cary was free by the end of the episode! His case dismissed with prejudice! Evil Geneva Pine humiliated! Querulous Judge Cuesta offering the court’s apologies!Presumably the producers realized that this story line, which kept Matt Czuchry (as Cary) sitting in hotel rooms or at the far end of the defense table looking nervous, needed to be cauterized. And you could have guessed the outcome from the episode’s title, “Hail Mary.” But still it seemed a little too good to be true.It all began with Cary, still resigned to his fate, getting “jail coaching” from a consultant played by Domenick Lombardozzi. (The part could have been the next rung down the ladder for Mr. Lombardozzi’s “The Wire” character, Herc, who went from police sergeant to investigator for a drug lord’s lawyer. Which, come to think of it, made him the Kalinda Sharma of “The Wire.”) The consultant’s most important advice, besides getting three squares a day, was for Cary to find a white friend as soon as he got inside: “There’s no such thing as a post-racial lockup.”How to accomplish this? Send Kalinda once more into the breach, of course. She made the trip back to the drug dealer Lemond Bishop’s house, where he had threatened her life on at least one occasion, and made the ask. He laughed and handed her a cellphone, and she spoke to a guy named Ray.Here things got interesting, or maybe just expedient. Ray used the term “export trade” to refer to the drug deal in which Cary had allegedly been implicated. The light bulb went off over Kalinda’s head: If the drugs were being exported from Chicago (to Toronto, as it happened) rather than imported, then they were already in Chicago when Cary had his taped conversation with Lemond’s lieutenants, and he wasn’t involved in bringing them into town.Now things began to happen very quickly. Diane Lockhart and Geneva had a series of face-offs before Judge Cuesta (the very welcome David Paymer). Skype conversations were held with polite Canadian policemen. “Six hours,” Diane told Kalinda. “We’ve had worse.” And in fact six hours was enough time for Kalinda to run over to Cary’s hotel for a quickie while the consultant stood outside yelling encouragement.That’s when life got strange. (Yes, after the sex.) Newly determined, Kalinda doctoredan email to make it look as if Detective Prima had suppressed evidence. (Wouldn’t there be an original copy on a server somewhere?) But then Other Cary found something in an interrogation transcript, and Kalinda rushed off to find Prima’s former partner. But time was running out, and Diane had to go into court, even though Peter Florrick had arranged to delay the judge by having an aide take him to lunch and pretend to offer him a spot on the state supreme court.And now, as far as I could tell, things just stopped making sense, or at least got very confusing. Kalinda walked into the courtroom just as Diane triumphantly submitted the Prima email, not knowing it had been doctored, because she had somehow taken it off Kalinda’s computer in Kalinda’s absence. (Someone needs a better password.) Kalinda whispered furiously: “Diane! Diane!” Prima yelled, quite understandably, “That’s a flat-out lie!” But then — seemingly seconds before Kalinda, and maybe Diane, would have been guilty of perjury — Prima’s former partner walked in, a shaken Geneva announced she’d been given new evidence, Diane was ferociously moving for dismissal and the judge was telling Cary he was free to go. Lawyers among you, please fill us in on what exactly happened there.Of course, all might not be entirely well. Kalinda had a sick look on her face as she hugged Cary, and Lemond was trying to call her. Had the information Kalinda obtained from Rodriguez, Prima’s erstwhile partner, regarding why he was taken off the case something that would now be a problem for Lemond? Was Lemond calling to collect on the favor Kalinda had promised him at the beginning of the episode?Where was Alicia during all this? Bothering everyone by constantly calling to find out what was going on with Cary, for one thing. But mainly she was engaged in an episode-long session of debate prep, back in the story line that, presumably, will be much more important going forward but is largely inert at the moment. In an amusing turn, the goofy absurdist Chris Elliott was brought in to play a professor who had been recruited as a Frank Prady stand-in; he was sent home when he turned out to be on medical marijuana for his “glaucoma.” (“No, I’m not high. I’m pleasant.”)His replacement was Finn Polmar, who was instructed by Eli Gold to “bury” Alicia, in order to bring out her aggression. But Finn left in a mild huff, after Peter showed up and started throwing his opinions around. So finally Alicia was mock-debating her own husband, and that, naturally, was when she really got mad. “Cook County has a history of prosecutors with serious ethical shortcomings,” she said with that glacial smile, and her campaign manager, Johnny Elfman, gleefully said, “There it is!”Feeling his oats, Johnny then got into it with Eli, accusing him of protecting Peter’s ego at Alicia’s expense. Future fireworks there. And then, in the “Good Wife” producers’ beloved closing-seconds shocker, Alicia, charged up by Cary’s victory, encountered Johnny in a parking garage and planted a deep French kiss on him. Close credits.Let us know your thoughts about “Hail Mary” in the comments. What was your favorite part of the episode? Mine may have been the running byplay between Eli (Alan Cumming) and his daughter, Marissa (Sarah Steele). Marissa, asked to do the latest in a string of demeaning tasks: “I’m her body woman, not her fluffer.” Eli: “When did you become so crass?”