By KATHRYN SHATTUCKJAN. 4, 2015
9 P.M. (13, 49) DOWNTON ABBEY The times are a-changin’ at Downton as Season 5 of this soapy “Masterpiece” drama picks up in 1924. Upstairs, Lord Grantham stews about the first Labour Government under Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald and what he perceives as its anti-aristocracy stance. Downstairs, the servants think that someone in charge might finally understand the concept of hard work. Lady Edith, meanwhile, turns to the tenant farmer Mr. Drewe and his unsuspecting wife to secret away Marigold, her illegitimate daughter with her married lover, Michael Gregson, still missing in Germany. Lady Mary finds herself inundated by dashing suitors. And when the committee in charge of creating a World War I memorial comes knocking, it isn’t Lord Grantham they want, but rather Mr. Carson, the butler. In “The Manners of Downton Abbey,” at 10:15, Alastair Bruce, an expert on royal ceremony and custom who serves as the show’s historical adviser, discusses the code of conduct that governed Britain in the early 20th century and how he goes about tutoring the actors in speaking, sitting, dressing and keeping an appropriately stiff upper lip. Hugh Bonneville, Elizabeth McGovern, Michelle Dockery (above, with Allen Leech), Laura Carmichael, Brendan Coyle, Joanne Froggatt and Lily James chime in. 8 P.M. (Smithsonian) MILLION-DOLLAR AMERICAN PRINCESSES Between 1880 and 1920, as many as 350 British aristocrats married American heiresses, a.k.a. Dollar Princesses — unions not unlike that of Lady and Lord Grantham, portrayed by Mr. Bonneville and Ms. McGovern, in “Downton Abbey.” In this three-part series set at Highclere Castle, the site of “Downton,” Ms. McGovern talks about the lives of those young women, whose families craved the social standing and respect a title would grant, and the men, crumbling estates in tow, who benefited from their wealth. This premiere episode profiles the Brooklyn-born Jennie Jerome, the mother of Winston Churchill.8 P.M. (ABC) GALAVANT Joshua Sasse, below, stars as the heroic Galavant, who once upon a time discovered the love of his life, Madalena (Mallory Jansen), only to have her snatched away by the evil King Richard (Timothy Omundson) in this eight-part comedic fairy tale, with music by Alan Menken and lyrics by Glenn Slater. “So credit ‘Galavant’ with trying something out of the box, but don’t expect to fall in love with it,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The New York Times. “Occasionally, though, it hits the mark. Episode 2 finds Galavant in a pretty funny jousting scene, and it ends with a catchy love song. That song’s refrain: ‘Maybe you’re not the worst thing ever.’ ”8 P.M. (CBS) MADAM SECRETARY An extradition issue involving a smuggler with a Mexican cartel who murdered a Texas state trooper causes Elizabeth (Téa Leoni, left) and Henry (Tim Daly) to cut short their 25th-anniversary celebration in New York. In “The Good Wife,” at 9, Cary (Matt Czuchry) hires a prison consultant (Domenick Lombardozzi) before heading to jail, and Alicia (Julianna Margulies) practices for her state’s attorney debate with an English professor (Chris Elliott).What’s Streaming NowSTARRED UP (2014) A 19-year-old violent offender (Jack O’Connell) is transferred to the same adult prison as his estranged father (Ben Mendelsohn), where his explosive temper quickly gains him enemies, leading him to question whether his father is there to protect or punish him. Rupert Friend is the psychotherapist who runs an anger management group for inmates. “Though it is, finally, an affecting story of two damaged men bound by blood and something like love (and also a thrillerish catalog of double crosses and shifting allegiances), it is, above all, a study in the patterns of chaos that govern penitentiary life,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times about this drama directed by David Mackenzie, based partly on the screenwriter Jonathan Asser’s experiences as a prison volunteer. “Much of the credit for that goes to Mr. O’Connell and Mr. Mendelsohn, whose performances unfold in a counterpoint of brute force and deep craft.” (amazon.com)KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on January 4, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.