Interview by MELENA RYZIKJAN. 2, 2015
The actor Ebon Moss-Bachrach has been kicking around Brooklyn for 15 years, since just after college at Columbia University. So a few years ago, when he heard about an HBO pilot called “Girls,” chronicling post-collegiate life in the borough, it seemed like the perfect fit. “I was begging my agents to get me an audition, and they couldn’t,” he recalled.He’s bounced among small roles in theater (“Three Sisters” Off Broadway), TV (“Damages”) and film (“Lola Versus”) and last year finally made his way into the cast of Lena Dunham’s hit series, playing Desi, a self-satisfied actor and romantic prospect for Marnie (Allison Williams). The fourth season, in which Mr. Moss-Bachrach, 37, has an expanded story line, begins next Sunday. “It is a character that I like, and I get upset a little bit — he gets called a douche so much,” he said. “I got very proprietary and defensive and protective of him.”It’s a big year for Mr. Moss-Bachrach: He also appears in the TNT sci-fi series “The Last Ship” and in February will be seen in “Verité,” a new play commissioned by Lincoln Center’s LCT3, opposite Anna Camp. Mr. Moss-Bachrach still lives in Brooklyn, in a cozy loft he shares with his girlfriend, the photographer Yelena Yemchuk, and their two daughters. While making soup for one of his girls, who was ill, he spoke with Melena Ryzik about how cooking helped him get to “Girls.” These are excerpts from the conversation.Q. Any spoilers for the season? A. I don’t know how much I’m allowed to say. We get more involved, me and Marnie, and it becomes a full-blown affair.What was your audition process like? Fortunately, I did not audition — otherwise I probably would not have gotten the part. My process was, a good friend of mine, Jesse Peretz, who’s a producer and director over there, my family was staying at his place on the beach. And Jenni Konner, who is the showrunner and producer with Lena, was out there with her husband and kids. We all had a really great weekend. I made some really good food. And I think Jenni mentioned something in passing, “We got to get you on the show.” Which people have said to me so many times — “we’ll definitely write you something” — and then that never happens. But the next season, my agents called saying they had an offer from “Girls” for a fully conceived part.What did you cook? I made a Spanish tortilla. I think it stayed with Jenni because — because I like small European bathing suits. We were swimming in the morning, and then I was making this huge egg and potato dish in this very small bathing suit. I think I looked really ridiculous, but in a memorable way.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters. Tell me about your character on “The Last Ship.” I play this biologist/virologist from Norway, who’s inadvertently weaponized a virus that has wiped out 80 percent of the world’s population. I get to do a Norwegian accent, in a submarine, which is really, really special. And I get to work with monkeys and rats.Is Desi based on any actors you know? There are parts of him that are from many people that I have spent time with, a kind of faux earthiness. Like Ralph Lauren RRL work shirts that are $500 or something — he’s got a lot of that.Have you talked with Lena about all the cultural battles she has to fight? She’s like Hercules, and it’s like, here comes the bear and here comes the swarm of bees, again and again. I would fail the first test; I would be done.The way you got onto “Girls” could not be more organic or Brooklyn-y. I know. Now I’m cooking in front of you. I’m spiraling! Should I be wearing my Speedo? Where’s my audition shorts?!A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2015, on Page AR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Rocking a Speedo and a Spatula.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.