By NATE CHINENSEPT. 30, 2015
Romain Collin“Press Enter”(Act)Jazz musicians find any number of ways to sound contemporary: through their repertory or the slant of their style or their associations. Some artists give their music such a modish gleam that they run the risk of appearing motivated by it. The pianist and composer Romain Collin walks that fine line on “Press Enter,” his otherwise winning new album.Mr. Collin was born in France and trained in the United States; his council of jazz elders includes the saxophonist Wayne Shorter, who, with a stray utterance, gave this album its title. As on his 2013 solo release, “The Calling” (Palmetto), Mr. Collin features an alert, ultramodern rhythm team: Luques Curtis on bass and Kendrick Scott on drums. He also subtly incorporates the cellist Laura Metcalf and the vocalist Megan Rose into the mix. (Mr. Collin will enlist Mr. Curtis and a substitute drummer, Nate Wood, at the Blue Note on Oct. 12.)There’s no doubting Mr. Collin’s pianism, which is lucid and flowing. As if to underscore the point, he closes the album with a sober, chiming soliloquy, interpreting Thelonious Monk’s “ ’Round Midnight” as if by sacred rite. His own compositions run toward an evocative style often described as cinematic — Mr. Collin maintains a sideline in film scoring — and distinguished by dark grandeur, dynamic swells and a chamberesque layering of texture.A few tracks carry familiar echoes: “Clockwork,” with its whirring motor and bittersweet melody, evokes recent material by Brad Mehldau; “Webs,” with its hammering pulse and gathering storm, suggests the strategic thumbprint of the pianist known as Elew. Mr. Collin’s writing becomes more distinctive on a whimsical yet propulsive track called “The Kids,” whose only liability is a title that feels a little too on the nose.But then Mr. Collin is an earnest sort. His token pick for an indie-rock cover here is Bon Iver’s “Holocene.” On “Event Horizon,” he weaves in recorded testimony from former inmates exonerated by the Innocence Project, a noble idea that feels marooned in context. It could use a larger treatment, and as Mr. Collin surely knows, that would suit the musical climate as it now stands.A version of this review appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: ‘Press Enter,’ From the Pianist and Composer Romain Collin.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.