By MARINA HARSSJAN. 2, 2015
For more than half a century, Americans have felt a kind of fascination for Danish dancers. The attraction dates at least to the 1950s, when a small group from the Royal Danish Ballet traveled to the Jacob’s Pillow Dance Festival in Becket, Mass., for the first time. At those performances, audiences and critics were charmed by the company’s buoyant dancing, amiable stage manner and seemingly natural acting abilities. The most celebrated ballets were by August Bournonville, a 19th-century choreographer in the Romantic vein who has come to define the Danish style. An ensemble of 13 dancers from the company, led by the principal dancer Ulrik Birkkjaer, will perform a program of Bournonville excerpts at the Joyce Theater in Manhattan from Jan. 13 to 18.What is it about Bournonville that has so captivated audiences? In part, it is that his ballets offer a glimpse of a world that has been largely lost but that we feel we know from lithographs of 19th-century ballerinas like Marie Taglioni, the original interpreter of “La Sylphide” (1832). This was the era that gave birth to what we think of as ballet, with ethereal women skimming the stage on the tips of their toes.Abroad, most of the Romantic ballets have disappeared, with the notable exceptions of “La Sylphide” and “Giselle.” But not in Denmark. Bournonville made more than 50 works, and he populated them with trolls, fairies, nymphs and good common folk. Only nine or so have survived. In fact, the “Sylphide” performed worldwide is not a descendant of the original — which was lost — but of Bournonville’s 1836 re-creation. This spring, a version of the Bournonville “Sylphide” will be staged in New York by Peter Martins, a former Royal Dane who went on to become a leading dancer at New York City Ballet, and later its director.Bournonville’s other ballets, however, are barely ever seen outside Denmark. That many have stories drawn from Danish folklore, contain reams of mime and are set to charming but unmemorable music has kept them from leaking into the wider repertory. (The Joyce performances will have recorded music.)A few fragments, like the playful pas de deux from “Flower Festival in Genzano” (1858) and the tarantella in “Napoli” (1842) — both in the Joyce lineup — sometimes pop up at galas. Both have idealized Italian settings. In February in Phoenix, Ballet Arizona will present the first American performances of the full “Napoli,” staged by Ib Andersen.AdvertisementMr. Martins and Mr. Andersen are only two of a long series of (mostly male) Danish dancers to find fame abroad, a tradition that continues with Alban Lendorf, who is to perform on the London leg of the Royal tour. In the 1990s, the company also attracted a young Russian dancer, Alexei Ratmansky, now a noted choreographer whose works bear traces of the Bournonville style. And then there are the boomerang cases, like Nikolaj Hübbe, who, after a quick rise to the top at the Royal Danish, became a star at City Ballet, only to return home in 2008 to direct his alma mater.AdvertisementBournonville himself was esteemed for both his technique and acting. A contemporary critic wrote, “He speaks during his mime; he soars in his dances.” This stress on persuasive acting is an important ingredient of the Danish style. “The Danes love a good story,” the dance historian Alexandra Tomalonis, a Bournonville specialist, said recently in a telephone interview.In fact, there is barely any dancing in the first act of “Napoli,” just a slice of Neapolitan street life. Unfortunately, New Yorkers won’t get to see this lively scene — the excerpts at the Joyce consist of pure dance from the third act — but they will have a taste of the mime from “La Sylphide,” including a passage featuring the evil sorceress Madge. She will be played, on some nights, by Sorella Englund, an extraordinary dance-actress.The Sylph will be interpreted on alternating nights by Gudrun Bojesen, a leading Bournonville stylist, and the younger Susanne Grinder. “God was kind to her,” Mr. Hübbe said of Ms. Bojesen in a recent phone interview. “She is blessed with a beautiful instrument, and she has such a natural way of dancing, like a singer who can’t take a wrong note.”Is there a particularly Danish quality to these Bournonville dances? Mr. Birkkjaer, the organizer of the tour, believes so. He elaborated via Skype: “We have this idea of wholesomeness, of treating the world well and being nice to each other,” reflected in the modesty of the dancers’ demeanor onstage.In recent years, however, this image of laid-back affability has been tested by Mr. Hübbe’s efforts to bring the company in line with wider trends. He has encouraged greater attack in the technique and has brought in more dancers from abroad. He has increased the proportion of classics from the international repertoire — “La Bayadère” in 2012, a new “Swan Lake” next year — and acquired ballets by Balanchine, Christopher Wheeldon and others.Controversially, he has also begun reimagining the Bournonville ballets, sometimes in radical ways, updating them and excising the Christian references. (Bournonville, a Lutheran, thought of his works as moral allegories.) Mr. Hübbe reset “Napoli” in the 1950s, replacing Bournonville’s sunny southern Italian idyll with a neorealist tableau, including a corrupt priest and a cross-dressing street performer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More radically, in his new “Sylphide,” Mr. Hübbe cast himself as the sorceress, whom he refashioned as an older man, possibly a former lover of the ballet’s hero, James. Reactions have been mixed. In a telephone interview, he said: “We have to revitalize this work and reinterpret and have a passionate and great love for it. We have a duty to step away from it and think about it.”The pure-dance excerpts to be shown at the Joyce, however, will not reflect those changes. The costumes are traditional, and there are no sets, revised or otherwise. Bournonville’s joyfully intricate choreography is also unchanged.The close relations between American and Danish ballet are the subject of a new coffee-table book, “Dancing Across the Atlantic,” by the historian Erik Aschengreen, who will be giving a talk at Scandinavia House in Manhattan on Jan. 12. Reached by phone in Copenhagen, he summarized the particular charm of the ballets and of the company. “I think it is this experience of going to the theater and coming out feeling that the world has a meaning and order,” he said, “at least for a moment or two.”A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2015, on Page AR11 of the New York edition with the headline: The Olden Days, With Nymphs and Trolls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.