By DAVID ALLENJAN. 2, 2015
Over the last few years, Riccardo Chailly and Christian Thielemann have been engaged in a quiet, almost implicit battle for the soul of the orchestral repertoire. Both pursue a markedly different style of conducting. Both relate to tradition in conflicting ways, even as they work with some of the oldest orchestras. And both, as if to confound the stories told about the industry today, have their recordings lavishly presented by major record labels.First came Beethoven, in 2011. Mr. Chailly’s release with the Gewandhausorchester Leipzig (on Decca) took cues from the “historically informed performance” movement and transferred them to a modern orchestra, quickening speeds but keeping a muscularity, as if spoiling for a fight. A set later that year from Mr. Thielemann and the Vienna Philharmonic (on Sony) appeared reactionary by contrast, an effort to reinvigorate the approach of Herbert von Karajan and Karl Böhm that never quite proved as interesting or as durable as their old recordings.Now the two conductors have turned to Brahms, Mr. Chailly again working with his Leipzig forces (on Decca), and Mr. Thielemann deploying the Staatskapelle Dresden, of which he is the new principal conductor (on Deutsche Grammophon). Both orchestras have an enviable pedigree in this composer’s music. Brahms himself conducted his first three symphonies with the Gewandhaus, and it presented the premieres of the Violin Concerto and the “German Requiem.” In Dresden, Brahms played the Second Piano Concerto several times and led the Fourth Symphony.These two sets will prove enjoyable listening to anyone willing to invest in them, especially as neither orchestra enjoys a reputation in the United States commensurate with its talents. But what’s the difference? Why, within a year, is the Universal Music Group (which owns both record labels) putting out two new versions of Brahms’s symphonies, played by orchestras based 70 miles apart in the former East Germany?AdvertisementOnce again, everything turns on a dispute over history, although this time a less dramatic one. In Beethoven, considerable divisions remain. For their performances with modern orchestra, conductors like Mr. Chailly, Simon Rattle and Paavo Jarvi have borrowed heavily from period conductors like Roger Norrington, applying lessons about how Beethoven’s audiences would have heard the symphonies. While these conductors are still presented as iconoclasts, in reality they have all the momentum. Although it’s too simplistic to imagine there was ever a single lineage of Beethoven performance, those who are more consciously traditionalist, like Mr. Thielemann and Daniel Barenboim, have lost ground. If you could pin down what today’s Beethoven sounds like, for better or worse, it is lean, fast and punchy.In Brahms, the gap is not so stark. For one thing, scholarship on early performance practice for Brahms is in its infancy. Only recently have period orchestras begun to perform his works regularly. And on the evidence of John Eliot Gardiner’s newest recordings of Beethoven and Brahms, with his original-instrument Orchestra Révolutionnaire et Romantique (on Soli Deo Gloria), it’s clear that period Brahms sounds much closer to its later successors than period Beethoven ever did. The shock of the old is correspondingly weaker.Why? Well, between the premieres of Beethoven’s First (1800) and Brahms’s First (1876), the world of orchestral performance changed. Most important, after the innovations of Berlioz and Wagner, conductors became more prominent and more expressly interpretive. As the Columbia musicologist Walter Frisch writes in “Performing Brahms,” a collection edited by Michael Musgrave and Bernard D. Sherman, there was therefore never “one authorized or authentic manner of performing the Brahms symphonies.”AdvertisementFrom the beginning, there were at least two schools of Brahms conducting. One was passed down from Hans Richter, who gave the Second Symphony’s premiere in Vienna in 1877, to Felix Weingartner and now to Mr. Chailly, who acknowledges Weingartner’s influence in his booklet notes. Straightforward in tempo and restrained in design, this style tends to sound lithe and classicized. Another path led from Hans von Bülow — who, like Richter, championed both Brahms and Wagner — to Wilhelm Furtwängler and Hermann Abendroth. This style owes much more to a Wagnerian aesthetic, with very flexible tempos and an almost interventionist approach. Mr. Thielemann belongs to this school, even if he is not as radical as many of his forebears. Brahms himself leaned this way when he conducted, while admiring other perspectives.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So what does all this mean in practice? For Universal, two takes on Brahms led by two star conductors is clearly enough to justify the dual release. But if forced, which new set of recordings would I recommend? I generally prefer the Bülow lineage, certainly when performed live, and should thus enjoy Mr. Thielemann’s performances. Yet I find the Leipzig readings more involving and more consistent than the Dresden. Under Mr. Chailly, the Gewandhausorchester sounds urgent, its light textures revealing all the complexity of Brahms’s inner parts in vibrant recorded sound. There are rough, biting edges to the playing, to be sure — this is not cosseting, luxurious Brahms — but they only enhance the anger and frustration of the Third and Fourth. Mr. Chailly’s fleet tempos prevent the Second from bogging down, and the First is plenty supple enough. While both sets add the “Academic Festival Overture” and the “Tragic Overture,” with the Leipzig recordings you also get the “Liebeslieder” Waltzes, the “Haydn Variations,” a scattering of “Hungarian Dances” and the original version of the First’s slow movement.There is much to praise in the Dresden recordings, too, with which you receive filmed versions of concertos with Maurizio Pollini and Lisa Batiashvili. Not least, the Staatskapelle possesses extraordinary depth and darkness of sound. That pays dividends in a First so majestic it threatens to engulf its own triumphalism, and in an outstanding, brutally combustible Fourth. At his best, Mr. Thielemann has a striking ability to make everything sound just so.I get the sense, though, that these performances, taped in concert at the Semperoper, worked better live. Mr. Thielemann’s broad tempos would not be a problem if tension were maintained, but the Second and Third sag without the frisson of visible creation. What may have sounded exalted in a concert hall sounds to me now as if Mr. Thielemann is aiming for a grandeur that ultimately proves grandiose.A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page AR13 of the New York edition with the headline: Brahms From Different Batons.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.