The season premiere of NBC’s “Celebrity Apprentice” resulted in an awkward juxtaposition of reality television and actual reality when one of its contestants, the “Cosby Show” star Keshia Knight Pulliam, was ejected from the program by host Donald Trump for not seeking assistance from Bill Cosby, the comedian and actor who has been accused of sexually assaulting several women. Ms. Pulliam, who played daughter Rudy Huxtable on “The Cosby Show” from 1984 to 1992, was one of 16 contestants vying to raise money for charitable causes on “The Celebrity Apprentice,” which began its latest season on Sunday night. When her team lost in a fund-raising competition, Ms. Pulliam and her teammates were brought before Mr. Trump, who asked her why she did not make a call to Mr. Cosby. In the  segment, which was taped in March, Ms. Pulliam responded, “I have not talked to Bill Cosby on the phone in I don’t know how long. So for me to pick up the phone, having not talked to you for five years, except for when we run into each other for a Cosby event, I feel that’s not my place to do.”Before he dismissed Ms. Pulliam from the show, Mr. Trump described Mr. Cosby as “this tremendous guy, with a tremendous amount of money,” adding: “I think it would have been a very good call to make, for charity.”In recent months, more than two dozen women have publicly accused Mr. Cosby of sexually assaulting them. Mr. Cosby has not commented at length on these accusations, though his lawyers say they are baseless and, in some cases, decades old. Speaking to NBC’s “Today” show on Monday morning, Ms. Pulliam said of the accusations against Mr. Cosby: “No one was there except for the two people who know exactly what happened. All I can speak to is the man that I know and love.” Many planned performances and projects involving Mr. Cosby have been canceled in the surrounding furor, including a possible new project on NBC. Network press representatives for “The Celebrity Apprentice” did not immediately reply to a request for comment on Monday morning. A version of this article appears in print on 01/06/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Odd Cosby Moment on ‘The Celebrity Apprentice’.