AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10:30 A.M. (Showtime) THE DIVING BELL AND THE BUTTERFLY (2007) Jean-Dominique Bauby, a 43-year-old French magazine editor and something of a playboy, had a stroke in 1995 that left him with a condition in which he retained vision, hearing and a functioning mind but was almost completely paralyzed. He told his story in a book that he dictated to an assistant by blinking. In this film from the artist Julian Schnabel, Mr. Bauby is played by Mathieu Amalric, above at right with Max von Sydow; Emmanuelle Seigner is Céline, the longtime partner he has recently left and the mother of his three children; and Marie-Josée Croze is a speech therapist who teaches him to use his left eyelid to communicate. “The phrase ‘triumph of the human spirit’ hovers over ‘The Diving Bell and the Butterfly,’ along with a swarm of other empty, uplifting clichés,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “But Mr. Schnabel and the screenwriter, Ronald Harwood, have other themes in mind” — among them, limitation, constraint and incarceration — Mr. Scott said. (Both men were nominated for Oscars.) “Their common subject, however, is freedom, the self-willed liberation of a difficult, defiant individual,” he added, noting that Mr. Schnabel demonstrated this with “imaginative freedom in every frame and sequence, dispensing with narrative and expository conventions in favor of a wild, intuitive honesty.”10 A.M. (CUNY) CARNEGIE COUNCIL GLOBAL ETHICS FORUM Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, discusses the Islamic State, his relationship with President Obama, and his daily routine.8 P.M. (Epix) HOLLYWOOD SESSIONS: DIRECTOR Some awards-season contenders discuss their lives and careers with reporters from The Los Angeles Times. This five-part series continues with directors, featuring J. C. Chandor (“A Most Violent Year”), Richard Linklater (“Boyhood”), James Marsh (“The Theory of Everything”), Bennett Miller (“Foxcatcher”) and Jean-Marc Vallée (“Wild”). 8 P.M. (ABC) THE BACHELOR Chris Soules, left, the gentleman farmer who was dismissed by Andi Dorfman on “The Bachelorette” last season, tries his hand at finding love among a record 30 women. Chris Harrison hosts this live three-hour opener with a studio audience filled with favorites from previous seasons.8 P.M. (13, 49) ANTIQUES ROADSHOW Season 19 begins in New York, where highlights include a book proposal by Art Spiegelman; a headboard from the set of “The Godfather, Part II”; and rare baseball cards with a handwritten letter from the 1871-72 Boston Red Stockings appraised at $1 million.8 P.M. (CBS) 2 BROKE GIRLS Max (Kat Dennings) and Caroline (Beth Behrs) grow suspicious when employees at the factory they have hired to produce their cupcake T-shirts seem a little too enthusiastic. In “Mike & Molly,” at 8:30, Molly (Melissa McCarthy) annoys Mike (Billy Gardell) and the family with multiple drafts of her book.8 P.M. (Fox) GOTHAM Detective Gordon (Ben McKenzie) finds his new job at Arkham Asylum on shaky ground when a guard is murdered. In “Sleepy Hollow,” at 9, Ichabod (Tom Mison) and Abbie (Nicole Beharie) turn to an angel, Orion (Max Brown), for help.9 P.M. (CNBC) MARIJUANA COUNTRY: THE CANNABIS BOOM Harry Smith charts the rise of the marijuana industry in Colorado and the efforts of merchants to expand their businesses to other states. He also examines marijuana in the workplace; the confusion surrounding the dosing of edibles; and dealers who transport drugs across state lines.10 P.M. (13); 11 P.M. (49) RICH HILL (2014) In this grand jury prize winner for best documentary at Sundance, the cousins Tracy Droz Tragos and Andrew Droz Palermo follow three boys in the depressed Missouri town from which the filmmakers’ parents hail as the boys aspire toward the American dream.WHAT’S STREAMING NOWTHE BRIDGE When a tanker mysteriously veers off course and runs into the Oresund Bridge between Denmark and Sweden, the Swedish detective Saga Noren (Sofia Helin) and her Danish counterpart, Martin Rohde (Kim Bodnia), are called to investigate. But there is no trace of the crew, and four people assumed missing are found drugged and chained in the hold in Season 2 of this Scandinavian police drama, which inspired an American version on FX. (The FX version has been canceled.) (hulu.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement