By SIOBHAN BURKEJAN. 4, 2015
Between the day after Thanksgiving and the first weekend of the new year, New York City Ballet gave nearly 50 performances of “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker.” That’s a lot, but if the dancers were suffering from “Nutcracker” fatigue (a common seasonal condition) on Friday afternoon at the David H. Koch Theater, it didn’t show. If anything, many seemed to summon extra verve and abandon to carry them through the homestretch of the run.For a couple of the dancers, the challenge wasn’t over-familiarity or boredom with a role but, quite possibly, first-time jitters. In the second act, presiding over the Land of Sweets, two promising corps de ballet members, Sara Adams and Harrison Ball, made their debuts as the Sugarplum Fairy and Cavalier, parts generally reserved for more senior dancers. Alone and together, they had both shining and shaky moments.During her first entrance, Ms. Adams greeted the angels — who precede their monarch’s arrival with floor-skimming passes across the stage, as if gliding on ice — with a balmy, relaxed demeanor and magnanimous port de bras. Faced with trickier sequences involving multiple turns, she was less assured but still gracious.In her pas de deux with Mr. Ball — a sturdy partner with a shock of blond hair and, for this occasion, a stern, unflinching focus — the newness of the choreography in their bodies was more evident. You could see them thinking and, at times, struggling. Mr. Ball appeared more exuberant and at ease when dancing on his own, applying his rock-solid technique to space-devouring leaps that descended into clean, pliant landings.AdvertisementIn the hierarchy of the Land of Sweets, Dewdrop, who leads the Waltz of the Flowers, is another reigning figure, and on Friday, as danced by Teresa Reichlen, she was real royalty. Ms. Reichlen approached the role with a spring in her step and a calm, happy confidence, the kind that makes it all look effortless, even fun. As the leading Candy Cane, David Prottas, too, seemed to be having a ball, bolting into the air — and through his candy-striped hula hoop — as if fueled by a sugar high. Georgina Pazcoguin and Taylor Stanley, as the Hot Chocolate stewards, also threw themselves into their confectionary duties with brilliant, carefree zest.But if anyone matched Ms. Reichlen’s energy and regal bearing, it was the littler prince and princess onstage, Avery Lin (Marie) and Philip Henry Duclos (the Nutcracker Prince), both students at the School of American Ballet. In Act I, throughout the party and battle scenes, Ms. Lin expressed wonder, fear and joy with big, clear, searching gestures. And as he retold the story of slaying the Mouse King, Mr. Duclos’s wide-open radiance transcended his diminutive stature.AdvertisementThe same could be said of all the children in this production (there are more than 100 between the two casts), thanks to coaching by the children’s ballet master, Dena Abergel. Whether as party guests, polichinelles or toy soldiers, they were remarkably vivacious, present and precise. In the words of my 8-year-old companion, “They really practiced.”A version of this review appears in print on January 5, 2015, on Page C8 of the New York edition with the headline: An Exuberant Array of Sweets Closes the Holiday Rush.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.