By JAMES R. OESTREICHJAN. 4, 2015
As all those best-of-2014 lists start to fade into memory, a strong contender for the 2015 classical music honors has already appeared.Julian Wachner and the Choir of Trinity Wall Street and Trinity Baroque Orchestra, fresh off their annual performances of Handel’s “Messiah,” offered a rare staged production of another Handel oratorio, “Saul,” at St. Paul’s Chapel on Friday evening (with a repeat on Sunday). And unlike “Messiah,” in some ways disappointing this year, “Saul,” which was presented as part of Trinity Wall Street’s Twelfth Night Festival, was simply superb.No question, this three-act work, composed to a libretto by Charles Jennens, holds drama, with its vivid characterizations of the increasingly unhinged Saul, king of Israel, and the unfailingly earnest David, slayer of Goliath and imminent successor to Saul. Saul’s son Jonathan and daughters, Merab and Michal, also come to lesser life.Trinity’s production, with James Darrah as stage director and Julia Eichten as associate director and choreographer, proved elegantly simple, placing the action mostly on an elevated platform running the length of the chapel and splitting the audience in the nave. Robert and Rachel Danes’s updated costumes were attractive, with the purposeful exception of David’s bloody tatters after that Goliath incident.AdvertisementThe staging took liberties with the plot. Handel and Jennens begin Act III with a prophecy, delivered by the Ghost of Samuel, that Saul and Jonathan will meet their ends on the field of battle. But in this production Jonathan was already dead by the end of Act II, strangled by the demented Saul, the corpse left covered onstage throughout the second intermission and Act III.AdvertisementThis solution, though it required viewers to adjust mentally in the third act, carried the drama persuasively through the second. But more than anything, it was the work of the individual performers that brought the piece to life, dramatically as well as musically.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The countertenor Anthony Roth Costanzo was utterly riveting as David, singing with a vocal purity and an emotional range that combined forcibly in this intimate space. Christopher Dylan Herbert, a baritone as Saul, was also everywhere eloquent and convincing.The cast was admirably filled out by Ryland Angel, who often performs as a countertenor, as he was identified in the program book, but was heard here in his natural baritonal range, as Jonathan; Jessica Muirhead, a soprano, as Merab; and Marie-Eve Munger, another soprano, as Michal.Dashon Burton, a bass-baritone, was typically stellar and mightily imposing as the Ghost of Samuel, and Molly Quinn sang the unnamed soprano part in the overture beautifully (and went unidentified in the program book).The chorus and orchestra were excellent, as usual. Handel’s most imaginative touch of orchestration, which calls for some sort of carillon, was well served here by a combination of celesta and glockenspiel.As a final fillip, a portion of the audience was seated at tables and provided with wine, as if to take part in a banquet in Saul’s palace. All in all, a thoroughly engaging and uplifting evening of music, drama and spirit.Trinity Wall Street’s Twelfth Night Festival runs through Tuesday at Trinity Church and St. Paul’s Chapel, lower Broadway; 212-602-0800, trinitywallstreet.org.A version of this review appears in print on January 5, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: An Unhinged King’s Downfall, in a Chapel Setting.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.