AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel E. SlotnikFrank Albanese, an actor best known for playing mobsters and their associates, most notably Tony Soprano’s uncle Patrizio Blundetto on the acclaimed HBO series “The Sopranos,” died on Monday on Staten Island. He was 84.The cause was metastatic prostate cancer, his friend Eddie Canlon said.Mr. Albanese was a real-life tough guy long before he ever played one. He told The Staten Island Advance in 2007 that he had been a heavyweight prizefighter who trained under the middleweight champion Rocky Graziano and won all 14 of his fights by knockout.“Rocky advised me: ‘Be very aggressive. Don’t be a boxer. Hit the guy on the chin,’ ” he said.Mr. Albanese stepped out of the ring after scar tissue developed on his brain, and Graziano helped him find work as a longshoreman. Graziano also helped him get his first film job, an uncredited speaking part in a scene with Kirk Douglas in the Mafia movie “The Brotherhood” (1968).He went on to appear in gangster films like Martin Scorsese’s “Goodfellas” (1990) and a 1973 made-for-television adaptation of “Honor Thy Father,” Gay Talese’s book about the Bonanno crime family.Mr. Albanese also appeared in the film “Dead Presidents” (1995), the soap opera “As the World Turns” and Shakespearean productions in Central Park.On “The Sopranos,” he appeared in four episodes as Uncle Pat, a former family soldier who has retired to a farm, where three bodies are buried. In a fifth-season episode, “Cold Cuts,” Uncle Pat struggles to remember where they are buried, causing problems for the mobsters Christopher Moltisanti (Michael Imperioli) and Tony B (Steve Buscemi), who have to destroy the evidence.In the series finale, Uncle Pat warns Tony Soprano (James Gandolfini) that his erratic, scheming sister (Aida Turturro) is trying to bilk Uncle Junior (Dominic Chianese), the enfeebled official boss of the Soprano family for much of the series, out of his remaining money.Frank John Albanese was born on May 16, 1931, in the West Brighton area of Staten Island. He lived in Bay Terrace on Staten Island and is survived by a sister.He recalled his audition for the “Sopranos” part as competitive, but he said he had been a natural.“One of the audition people told me, ‘Even in conversation, you really come across like a wise guy,’ ” he said.Advertisement