Season 1, Episode 11, “Rogues’ Gallery”Spoilers and totally unsanctioned mental health procedures lurk below.The first days of a new job, almost always fraught with anxiety, are even more so when you’re menaced by a D.I.Y. electroshock enthusiast who fries mental patients’ brains in order to spur them to violence.Recaps of the Fox crime drama.So it was for the luckless Jim Gordon on Monday night, as “Gotham” returned for the second half of its debut season. You’ll recall that back in November, before the show went on a winter break, Gordon was demoted from G.C.P.D. detective to security guard at the Arkham Asylum for the Criminally Insane. But the new setting brought precious little in the way of actual change for Gotham City’s uncaped crusader, who again found himself cornered by malevolent nutters and oppressed by bureaucrats. (It was a sheeeeame to see the great Isiah “Clay Davis” Whitlock Jr. reduced to a bad-boss cartoon.)The episode began on an agreeably odd note, with a lilting solo during an inmate production of “The Tempest” that bled into a brief montage reminding viewers of the whereabouts of some of the other series regulars. There’s Gordon’s ex-partner Harvey Bullock drinking at his desk in the police station. There’s Gordon’s ex-fiancée Barbara — I admit I couldn’t remember her name for several minutes — strung out on pills again, shacked up with Detective Renee Montoya.Soon enough we were back in Arkham, where an inmate known as the “the frogman” was bludgeoning the singer, with Gordon dragged into the fray. Gordon, being Gordon,  is immediately castigated by his boss for letting the attack happen. “Think you can’t fall any farther?” Mr. Whitlock’s blustery Dr. Gerry Lang says. “Think again.”But it’s not all bad, because soon enough the alluring Dr. Leslie Thompkins (Morena Baccarin of “Homeland” and “Firefly” fame) has arrived for a bit of charged infirmary talk with Gordon. “Get a room,” says the battered inmate, speaking for all of us, for the love connection seems preordained. It’s not just that they’re the only attractive people in the building — in Dr. Thompkins, Gordon has finally met a woman who can go toe-to-toe with him in the clunky declaration department. “All the girls are talking about you,” she says. “Brave detective brought low by City Hall.” (I should probably just let go of this particular hangup.)The character Dr. Leslie Thompkins is well-known “Batman” fixture, most often as a friend to the Wayne family. Whether she’ll amount to the same in “Gotham” remains to be seen. But Ms. Baccarin is an appealing performer and I’m hoping she’ll be allowed to do more than just be rescued by Gordon whenever things get hot in Arkham.On Monday, at least, she helped him determine that the frogman was little more than a catatonic puppet, his criminally insane brains scorched by an electroconvulsive therapy kit that appeared to involve jumper cables. A search was on for the mastermind — cue the “get a load of all the crazies!” sequence, which introduced Gordon to the culprit, one Jack Gruber (Christopher Heyerdahl), a “grade-A sociopath” who seemed only slightly less sinister than his distant cousin, Hans.To the show’s credit, however, Gruber’s guilt wasn’t completely obvious, at least to me, thanks to a few well-plotted twists and the presence of recognizable guest stars like Mr. Whitlock and Allyce Beasley, who has worked steadily for decades but will always be Agnes DiPesto to me, speaking of ’80s Bruce Willis references. Moreover, “Gotham” broke from precedent by allowing Gruber to escape with the help of a mighty inmate named Aaron Helzinger (Kevin McCormick), who in the comics becomes Amygdala, deranged muscle for multiple Gotham City baddies. Does this mean Jack Gruber will be revealed to be some other established villain? At any rate, unlike most of his creep-of-the-week predecessors, he seems destined to return to fry again.Elsewhere in Gotham City, pieces moved around within the various ongoing criminal plots, some according to plan, some not. I don’t think “THE” Penguin planned to have his “hubris” rewarded with a black eye and a lecture from Don Maroni, but his glower at said don told you all you needed to know about where this thing is headed.Fish Mooney, meanwhile, continues to play the long game with Don Falcone. There was some minor intrigue surrounding her henchman Butch’s loyalties but I can’t say I was shocked by the outcome. Or particularly moved, for that matter — it’s hard to have much emotional investment in a mob boss who’s had maybe six minutes of screen time, no matter how much good old days chitchat or chilling doo-wop you throw at me.A FEW THOUGHTS WHILE WE SORT OF SHRUG• I had higher hopes for the look and feel of Arkham Asylum itself, home to some of DC Comics’s most colorful villains over the years. While the dreary exterior is suitably Gothic, the facility itself just offered more of the show’s usual industrial decay-chic — dark, echoey corridors, chain-link, the occasional dirty window.• I did enjoy seeing Detective Bullock freed from having to function primarily as a roguish foil for strait-laced Gordon. “I can sit at my desk and look at you,” he tells an incarcerated Penguin. “It’s soothing, like a bonsai tree.”• “What’s a bonsai tree?” the Penguin’s flunky adds two beats later. The show occasionally evinces a sharp sense of comic timing, something I wish it would use more often.• Poor Barbara continues to spiral. Now Montoya has kicked her out and, thanks to young Ivy’s poisonous tongue, she thinks Jim has already replaced her. (Which even if he had, she made that particular bed herself, no?) Erin Richards may well be a fine actress but she’s been given little more to work with than a bundle of “toxic” traits, which is a bummer. But we’re stuck with her, if the traditional Batlore is to be followed — which for the record, I would love if the show went off-book on some of these things — so here’s hoping she does most of her bottoming-out off screen.• What say you? It’s probably clear that I was pretty underwhelmed by the show’s return but I’m always happy to hear a contrary opinion. Please fire away in the comments.