By KATHRYN SHATTUCKJAN. 6, 2015
6:30 P.M. (HBO Signature) THE GREAT GATSBY (2013) Leonardo DiCaprio stars as the enigmatic millionaire Jay Gatsby and Carey Mulligan portrays Daisy Buchanan, the object of his obsession. Tobey Maguire is Nick Carraway, the Yale graduate — and, conveniently, Daisy’s cousin — renting the cottage next to Gatsby’s colossal Long Island mansion in Baz Luhrmann’s stylized musical take on this F. Scott Fitzgerald novel. “Despite what you may have heard, it is an eminently enjoyable movie,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times about this film, which won Oscars for best costume and production design. Still, is the tale “a credible love story?” he asked. “Fitzgerald himself was not sure, but Mr. Luhrmann, Mr. DiCaprio and Ms. Mulligan make it an effective one.”3 P.M. (Fox Business) COUNTDOWN TO THE CLOSING BELL Liz Claman visits the International Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas on Tuesday and Wednesday, where she interviews chief executives from BlackBerry, iHeartMedia, Ford and Qualcomm.8 P.M. (CBS) NCIS The unit investigates a series of crime scenes that resemble those in previous cases, and two former wives of Gibbs (Mark Harmon) try to get his attention. In “NCIS: New Orleans,” at 9, the gang learns that a deadly explosion at a joint Navy and Marine gala was intended for Pride (Scott Bakula). And in “Person of Interest,” at 10, a cyberattack on the stock exchange forces the team to undertake a possible suicide mission.9 P.M. (Fox) NEW GIRL Winston (Lamorne Morris) graduates from the police academy, and Jess (Zooey Deschanel) uses Schmidt (Max Greenfield) to persuade a councilwoman to halt construction outside their loft. “The Mindy Project,” at 9:30, finds Mindy (Mindy Kaling) making a less than stellar impression in her fellowship class at Stanford.Advertisement9 P.M. (NBC) MARRY ME The gang devises ways to remember the name of the host of a baby shower. In “About a Boy,” at 9:30, Marcus (Benjamin Stockham) and Will (David Walton) celebrate their anniversary at a music festival headlined by Lisa Loeb (playing herself).Advertisement9 P.M. (OWN) THE HAVES AND THE HAVE NOTS The second season of this Tyler Perry creation about a wealthy family in Savannah, Ga., and its hired help picks up after the kidnapping of Judge Jim Cryer (John Schneider) by his former mistress, Candace Young (Tika Sumpter), who will stop at nothing to exact money and revenge.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (Oxygen) LIVING DIFFERENT Women described as nonconformists — including an androgynous model, a mixed martial arts fighter, a tackle football player, a psychic healer and some Hasidic rockers — discuss their lives.10 P.M. (13, 49) GUNNED DOWN: THE POWER OF THE NRA Using the December 2012 shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn., as a backdrop, “Frontline” investigates the National Rifle Association; its political evolution and influence; the rise of its executive vice president, Wayne LaPierre; and how it has succeeded in defeating new gun control legislation. Among those weighing in are Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.; Warren Cassidy, a former N.R.A. executive vice president; John Aquilino, a former N.R.A. spokesman; and relatives of victims of mass shootings.10:15 P.M. (TCM) BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID (1969) Paul Newman and Robert Redford star as the legendary Wild West outlaws on the lam — destination: Bolivia — with Katharine Ross as the woman in their lives in George Roy Hill’s adventure, part of a tribute to Mr. Redford, TCM’s star of the month for January.10:30 P.M. (TBS) COUGAR TOWN Jules (Courteney Cox) agrees to stop drinking wine while Laurie (Busy Philipps) is pregnant, so Tom (Bob Clendenin) turns his garage into a speakeasy. Grayson (Josh Hopkins) uses a baby pig to help prepare Travis (Dan Byrd) for fatherhood.What’s Streaming NowAGNÈS VARDA AND PERSONAL CINEMA Ms. Varda, the French filmmaker, explores her favorite themes — among them “the spectacle of the everyday,” the differences between photography and cinema, and the lives of the working class — in this SundanceNow Doc Club collection. The five films include “Daguerreotypes” (1978), an examination of the daily routines of Parisian shopkeepers; “The Gleaners and I” (2001), in which she travels with scavengers; and “The Beaches of Agnès” (2008), a look back at her own life. (docclub.com)An earlier version of the “What’s Streaming Now” entry misstated the name of the video subscription service offering the Agnès Varda films. It is the SundanceNow Doc Club, not the Sundance Doc Club.A version of this schedule appears in print on January 6, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.