AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Roberta SmithAlberto Burri’s prescient paintings — in patched, burned and otherwise abused burlap, plastic or wood — form a lavish, beautiful and admirable, if sometimes monotonous retrospective at the Guggenheim Museum. It presents an artist who is impressive less for the profundity of his work than for his consistency and his ideas, which remain very much alive even among young artists not familiar with his work.In a dazzlingly researched, often eloquent catalog essay, Emily Braun, an art historian who oversaw the Guggenheim show, “Alberto Burri: The Trauma of Painting” (and is also curator of the Leonard A. Lauder Collection of Cubist Art), argues that Burri’s art is a crucial, underacknowledged link in the development of collage and assemblage and helped set the stage for a host of postwar art movements — Neo-Dada, Process Art, Arte Povera and more. Indeed, Burri is relevant today as a grandfather of what has lately been called “painting without paint,” and what was referred to in the 1960s as“unpainted paintings.” Unfortunately, he may also inaugurate a bane of current art: the use of found materials so inherently affecting — burlap being one — that they require little of the artist.Burri (1915-1995) became an artist because of World War II. Born in Città di Castello in the Umbrian region of Italy, he trained as a surgeon and served with distinction as a medic in the Italian Army in the early 1940s. He had risen to the rank of lieutenant by 1943 when Allied troops captured him in Tunisia, briefly put him to work caring for captured German soldiers and then shipped him to an American prisoner-of-war camp near Hereford, Tex.As an officer, Burri was exempt from manual labor, but he was also not permitted to practice medicine. Like many of his fellow officers, he took up painting, sometimes using burlap gunny sacks as canvas, and even exhibited in a show of prisoners’ art. Once repatriated, he continued to make art, teaching himself as he went, in Rome.Abandoning traditional paint on canvas, Burri was soon at the forefront of an international wave of younger artists who pushed at and beyond the perimeters of painting by introducing unorthodox materials and techniques, a group that included Robert Rauschenberg, Yves Klein, Donald Judd, Günther Uecker and Burri’s friend Lucio Fontana. He had his first gallery solo show in Rome in 1947, and his first two solo exhibitions in this country in 1953, at the brand-new Allan Frumkin Gallery in Chicago and the cutting-edge Stable Gallery in New York.Critics have long associated Burri’s art work with wounds, scars and various forms of destruction and decay. But for the most part he denied that his wartime experiences inspired his art works, which he emphasized were simply paintings of an unusually physical kind. Nonetheless, the war caused a dearth of conventional artistic materials that at the least brought out Burri’s inborn talent for using scavenged scraps – especially burlap – in physically imaginative, pictorially arresting ways.The Guggenheim has long been New York’s go-to museum for postwar modern art outside the United States. In 1979 it astonished New York with the first museum survey in this country of the German artist Joseph Beuys. More recently, it has surveyed the art of postwar Japan and more specifically its Gutai artists; the Zero artists of Germany and Italy; and the individual careers of Antoni Tàpies, Lucio Fontana and Lee Ufan.The Burri show is another in this line, the first large show of his work – nearly 100 pieces, dating from 1949 to 1989 — in this country since the museum’s previous Burri survey in 1978. It also affirms a longtime connection. The Guggenheim acquired its first Burri in 1953 after its director at the time,  James Johnson Sweeney, visited the artist’s studio in Rome. Burri was prominent in the inaugural show at the museum’s Frank Lloyd Wright-designed building that Sweeney organized in 1959. An unusually sweet moment in the current exhibition is a group of 16 miniature works, displayed in a vitrine as if in a little gallery, that Burri sent the Sweeney family at Christmastime. (Ms. Braun assembled the exhibition with Megan Fontanella, an associate curator at the Guggenheim.)Burri’s development suits the Guggenheim. His successive series unspool smoothly up its spiral ramp. Nearly everything has a handsome, elegant toughness and rich sense of color, both applied and intrinsic. But they also present, I’m afraid, as artworks that collectors of a daring mind-set once liked to put above their sofas.Two small canvases from 1949 and 1950 are the most traditional works. But even here the paint is mixed with tar – inspired by Miró’s tar-paper paintings, which Burri saw on a trip to Paris. Their near monochrome, heavily worked surfaces and flattened compositions are full of things to come. The bulk of the show is devoted to works primarily from the 1950s and early ’60s — an amazingly productive phase. By 1952, Burri is fashioning roughly collaged surfaces from fabric, burlap and Vinavil, a glue not unlike Elmer’s. He mixes it with white paint to create thick strata of crazed, beautiful craquelure in different scales like those cultivated in Chinese porcelains, or skins punctured with big holes, as in the small “Bianco.” For his “Muffe” (molds) series, he adds ground pumice, creating gravelly surfaces that resemble waste or festering skin.Burri also starts applying his surgical skills, sewing pieces of fabric together; stitches of varying sizes become a recurring motif, at once structural and visual. Then he zeros in on the burlap bags, patching together their often already-patched surfaces with bits of other faded fabrics and areas of stark black or white acrylic, evoking abject landscapes or mended walls or tents. And by now we’re barely out of 1953. These works have an immensely resonant complexity, yet it’s conveyed by relatively conservative compositions of large and small parts that artists like Klein, Fontana and Judd were deliberately avoiding.As Italy’s postwar recovery gained traction, new materials come into play in Burri’s work, along with fire, and its resonance narrows. Paintings are made from wood veneer with scorched plumes of black, or thin sheets of welded steel. (The small “Ferro” from 1958 is the busiest and best, its circular forms suggesting the canvas and wire reliefs that the American artist Lee Bontecou started making in 1959.) Most plentiful are sheets of clear, red or black plastic, burned to create gaping, sooty holes and skinlike sags, sometimes layered together as in the elegant, fiery horror of “Rosso plastica M 2” of 1962. Elsewhere Burri just marks time rearranging component parts, for example tastefully combining red and black paint with wood veneer.Around 1966 Celotex, a composite insulating board, starts to become his preferred working surface. He could layer it with paint, which he takes up again with a vengeance, or change its texture by chiseling. It dominates the upper reaches of the show, with austere black on black and white on white works in which thickly layered acrylic paint – mixed with different amounts of medium – is fissured by large deep cracks, suggesting parched, lunar landscapes. A wall text calls them “some of the widest and deepest craquelure in the history of art.”These cracks become environmental in “Grande Cretto,” Burri’s nearly 22-acre memorial to the Sicilian hill town of Gibellina, which was destroyed by an earthquake in 1968. Burri began work on the project in 1985, compacting the town’s ruins into large irregular blocks – all level to a height of four to five feet — and then covering them with roughly finished cement painted white. Completed only this year because of financial reasons, this usually poignant work of land art is represented here by a film by Petra Noordkamp that ends the show on a high note. Burri’s cracks are in this case pathways for visitors, evoking both a ghostly street plan and an earthquake’s rivening power.In her essay, Ms. Braun sees Burri’s precedent in so many artistic developments since the 1950s that it can feel like overkill. She may be right, though Burri’s work relies excessively on the suggestiveness of materials and processes, rarely going deep. But however much he pioneered, he still left more for others to explore.“Alberto Burri: The Trauma of Painting” runs through Jan. 6 at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum; 212-423-3500, guggenheim­.org,Advertisement