AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Anthony TommasiniOne of the first measures Peter Gelb instituted when he arrived as general manager of the Metropolitan Opera in 2006 was to introduce a rush ticket program, which offers up to 100 or so $25 tickets in prime seating locations for each performance. Surprisingly, people are still grumbling.In principle, it should not be so hard to make discounted seats available. In practice, devising a fair and easy way to offer inexpensive tickets is more complicated than you might think. Recently, as he was gearing up for the Met’s new production of Lehar’s “The Merry Widow,” Mr. Gelb talked about the tweaks that have been made in recent months to the rush ticket program. It’s a lesson in the difficulties of giving something away for almost nothing.The program was made possible by a $2 million grant in 2006 from Agnes Varis, the founder and chief executive of Agvar Chemicals, a patron of the Met who died in 2011. “Agnes believed deeply in democratization of the arts,” Mr. Gelb said. The funding makes up the difference between the $25 charge for a ticket and its full cost. (Rush tickets cost $20 when the program began.) So the Met benefits both from making a ticket affordable to someone who might not otherwise be able to attend, while also taking in the full price of the seat. The program continues to be subsidized by donors, including the Agnes Varis Trust.The company also has a student rush ticket option that is not subsidized and applicable only to certain performances. These tickets cost $35 and can be bought in advance by anyone with a valid college or graduate student ID who registers for the program. As of last month, the Met had sold more than 13,000 student tickets this season.The student rush program, though, does raise the awkward issue of fairness, as Mr. Gelb pointed out. In a way, an “unsubsidized rush ticket is unfair to those who paid full price,” he said. But most good-willed patrons understand that it is important to make the art form as accessible as possible, even if that means that someone sitting next to you might have paid $35 for a seat that cost you hundreds.In any event, after it started in 2006, the subsidized rush ticket program seemed to work well. Still, there were problems.Originally, the tickets were sold starting two hours before the performance to people who had to stand in line and wait. Those with jobs they could not leave were couldn’t participate. And some lack the physical stamina to wait in a line. To accommodate older opera lovers, as Mr. Gelb explained, the company began “a sub-allocation for seniors” who could phone in at a specified time and reserve a seat first come first served.Over time, however, other drawbacks emerged. The whole idea of rush tickets was “to bring in new audiences,” Mr. Gelb said. But from online surveys, it became clear that the “same people were coming every day,” Mr. Gelb said, and some were scalping the rush tickets. Striving for fairness, the Met put the program online this fall and distributed tickets through a lottery. Those who wanted a ticket would enter the Met’s website the evening before a performance and place their name in the pool. Winners would receive an email at noon the next day offering them the chance to buy two $25 tickets (the limit) to that evening’s performance.There’s something appealing about the tried-and-true protocol requiring opera lovers to stand in line: it rewarded those who cared the most about attending performances. Of course, the show-up-and-stand approach was simply impossible for many passionate fans.Other problems with the new system became apparent. Administratively, it was “difficult to operate a daily lottery,” Mr. Gelb said. Also, to the company’s surprise, many of the same people kept winning the lottery by flooding the website with entries.So, the lottery was replaced with the current first-come-first-served online program. Those seeking tickets must go on the Met’s website and register, creating a login ID. Tickets go on sale at noon for performances Monday through Friday; four hours before curtain time for Saturday matinees; and at 2 p.m. for Saturday evening performances. With “our new computer technology ticket-monitoring service,” Mr. Gelb explained, the company can easily place a weekly limit on purchases: customers are allowed up to two tickets for a single performance every seven days. This is fairer, Mr. Gelb said, and prevents people from “jamming the system.” In tracking the ticket buyers, the Met has found that in November there were about 1,000 new ticket purchasers who were not in the company’s records, which suggested that the program was fulfilling Ms. Varis’s goal of bringing affordable opera to new audiences. I have had emails from readers complaining about the difficulty of navigating the Met’s online rush ticket system. I tried it out and it seems accessible, with one exception. A message sometimes appears stating “All tickets matching your criteria are in another customer’s cart.” This means that someone ahead of you online is still debating whether to buy a ticket. Mr. Gelb is pleased over all. “This program is fair to anyone who knows how to use a computer,” he said. If people have trouble with it, he added, “they should write to me and we’ll figure it out.”The Met has been going through much-reported financial challenges. Ticket sales have been slipping. With a house of 3,800 seats, there are often hundreds of unsold tickets for a performance. In theory, the Met could sell those tickets at the last minute at a discount. Opera lovers would gain entry to a performance and the Met would make at least some money. This would be unfair, of course, to those who bought tickets in advance, especially subscribers. “We want people to know you should buy tickets in advance, at full price,” Mr. Gelb said. “That’s the goal.” But as a program that makes opera affordable for at least small numbers of people, the rush ticket program is working. No version will ever be ideal. Those frustrated with the program should remember that things could be worse. These days, for example, you can buy a standing-room ticket for a specific spot, know that there will be a place for you to lean on and have your own Met Titles screen to look at. At the old Met, once you bought a standing-room ticket, you had to rush into the house, claim a place and wait forever for the performance to start. Advertisement