AdvertisementSupported byNew MusicBy Nate Chinen and Ben RatliffART HIRAHARA“Libations & Meditations” (Posi-Tone)We live in an age of riches, at least where the subject concerns working jazz pianists. You could stick with established names, many of them playing as well as ever, and feel abundantly fulfilled. Or you could focus on new arrivals, still in their 20s, and savor a sense of discovery. What you’d miss either way is the possibility of an astute, well-traveled pianist making a breakout statement — like the one by Art Hirahara on “Libations & Meditations,” his thoughtfully assured new album.Mr. Hirahara, just shy of 44, has been a workhorse on the New York jazz scene for more than a decade, since moving from the San Francisco Bay Area. A graduate of the Oberlin Conservatory of Music and the California Institute of the Arts, he brings a broad base of knowledge to his enterprise: electronic composition, West African music, Balinese gamelan, multiple strains of the avant-garde. But his dialogue with the jazz tradition on this album isn’t inherently radical or envelope-pushing; it often sounds respectfully at ease, without being hemmed in by convention.And his sturdy trio, with Linda Oh on bass and John Davis on drums, works just as convincingly with hard-swinging momentum (in parts of “Bop Bim Be” and its partner track, “Be Bim Bop”) as it does with minor-key crescendo building (“Big Country”) and dirgelike semi-abstraction (“Dead Man Posed”).There’s a back story to the original material, involving the death of Mr. Hirahara’s father in 2011, but it was surely more useful to the creation of the compositions than to any understanding of them. (Mr. Hirahara’s trio will perform this music on Feb. 16 at Smalls.)Whatever the case, Mr. Hirahara’s instincts as a composer are sensible and clear, and he isn’t too serious to acknowledge some standard influences: “With Two Ice Cubes,” the opener, is a syncopated slalom through the form of Cole Porter’s “What Is This Thing Called Love?,” and “Only Child” is a Bill Evans piece played with a fondness approaching deference.The only other nonoriginal is “Karatachi No Hana,” a Japanese standard (by the composer-conductor Kosaku Yamada) that Mr. Hirahara imbues with an air of churchlike solemnity, as in a hymn. Playing unaccompanied, with a patient cadence and an impeccable touch, he creates a moment at once personal and unabashedly artful. NATE CHINENDEATH GRIPS“Fashion Week” (thirdworlds.net)The noise-rap group Death Grips, which broke up in July, taught you to listen with your defenses up. Principally the rapper Stefan Burnett, a.k.a MC Ride, and the drummer Zach Hill, it wasn’t a normal band. It was a cabal issuing recordings, gigs, mysterious videos and broken promises, generally on its own unpredictable schedule.If a band can still break through to you when your defenses are up, the contact becomes more meaningful. Death Grips could do that, in very short bursts. Mr. Burnett’s vocal style is a hail of dense and harrowing lyrics, all phrasing and no melody; Mr. Hill, playing polyrhythmically around and in between the bellows and shrieks and the warped, juddering, explosive, electronic samples, is one of the most exciting live drummers we’ve got.Still, they never gave you anything straight. Within a song they would follow the logic of tension and release and then become profoundly frustrating; they made no-shows, violations of contract and a disinterest in promotion cycles almost essential to their aesthetics. As Death Grips’s breakup notice on Facebook stated, the group “was and has always been a conceptual art exhibition anchored by sound and vision.” Its gift to you, finally, after a few musical jolts, was wariness and distrust for the usual relationship between artist and audience. If you had any obvious question — for instance, why its sound checks could be more exciting than its actual live sets — you sensed the answer would be “that’s not the right question.”Here, issued by surprise digital release without explanation on the band’s site thirdworlds.net, is an all-instrumental album, “Fashion Week.” Before calling it quits last summer, the band announced a new double-album, “The Powers That B,” that would appear in two parts. The first appeared in June, and the second, to be titled “Jenny Death,” was to be released at some point by its new label, Harvest. This appears not to be “Jenny Death.” The first track on “Fashion Week” is “Runway J,” the second “Runway E” and so on, until all 14 spell out the phrase “Jenny Death When.” Yeah: When? But that’s clearly not the right question.So here’s a different one: Although we’ve heard instrumental music from Death Grips before — it released instrumental parts without vocals to two of its albums via Twitter — is there a value in hearing Death Grips without Mr. Burnett? This record — fairly linear electronic music with Mr. Hill playing live drums on top — is aggressive and twitchy, sometimes like mid-'90s Atari Teenage Riot, yet comparatively streamlined and elegant; it’s sometimes cerebral, sometimes even cool. And this is a band that, at its best, resisted being cool, particularly through the voice of Mr. Burnett.And to the degree that it is cooler, “Fashion Week” is less exciting than the band’s previous music even at its densest and most indirect (which would be the 2013 album “Government Plates”). Still, the band continues to confuse. Is it an advertisement or a provocation? Is it the equivalent of a dub album, or is it to encourage remixes? Is it a preparation for a reunion? Are these instrumental parts to discarded tracks, or to “Jenny Death”? Are any of these the right questions? BEN RATLIFFAdvertisement