AdvertisementSupported byTelevision ReviewBy Mike HaleThe title “Marvel’s Agent Carter” may create a misleading impression for a show set in 1946 New York and featuring automats and fedoras. This latest product of the Marvel comics-adventure factory, an eight-episode series starting on Tuesday, has less in common with its sister ABC show, “Marvel’s Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.,” than it does with some of the more active British mysteries on PBS. Viewers with long memories may even be reminded of “Remember WENN,” the serving of World War II-era schmaltz that was AMC’s first scripted show.That’s not a knock on “Agent Carter,” which is a fairly entertaining conglomeration of nostalgia, postwar intrigue, comic-book science fiction and screwball comedy (with frequent interludes of bone-crunching violence). The first thing we see is a scene from the Marvel film “Captain America: The First Avenger,” one of the primary sources for the new series. Agent Peggy Carter (played by Hayley Atwell in all her Marvel-universe iterations, including the new series) listens as the Captain, her superhero boyfriend, crashes into the Arctic ice to save New York from a nuclear barbecue.We know the Captain will be found and revived half a century later, but Carter doesn’t. So the show takes place in his shadow, with Carter fending off lesser men and listening to an awful radio serial about her dead boyfriend’s exploits. That’s largely what the show’s about: Carter, now relegated to a desk job in her secret spy-science agency, proving she’s more than just the former girlfriend of an action hero.That the show would embrace the theme of postwar feminism is unsurprising, probably even inevitable, but not particularly dramatic in its own right. When Carter serves coffee to get into a meeting to which she’s not invited or runs to prevent a man from opening a door for her, the humor is slight and familiar.But the writers have also played with the theme in larger, potentially more interesting ways. The two men most willing to accept Carter as an equal are both fighting their own limitations: Her fellow agent Sousa (Enver Gjokaj) lost a leg in combat, while her right-hand man in her clandestine adventures, Jarvis (James D’Arcy), is a comically repressed butler. Jarvis is excited by her battles with shadowy villains and wants in on the action, but just as the men in her agency look down on her, Carter looks down on him.Mr. D’Arcy is amusing as Jarvis, and so is Lyndsy Fonseca (“Nikita”) as Carter’s pal, a wisecracking waitress. The early episodes also feature guest spots by reliable scene stealers like Ray Wise and Dominic Cooper. They all help “Agent Carter” go down easily, though you may wish that it were just a little bit more fun, more dashing, more stylish. One issue is Ms. Atwell, who looks great in the period costumes and hairstyles and doesn’t do anything wrong, but is a bit too much like Carter: ferociously capable and awfully tightly wound. That’s fine for a character, but the actress could stand to loosen up a little.Marvel’s Agent CarterABC, Tuesday night at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time. Produced by ABC Studios and Marvel Television. Tara Butters, Michele Fazekas, Christopher Markus, Stephen McFeely, Chris Dingess, Kevin Feige, Louis D’Esposito, Alan Fine, Joe Quesada, Stan Lee and Jeph Loeb, executive producers.WITH: Hayley Atwell (Agent Peggy Carter), James D’Arcy (Edwin Jarvis), Chad Michael Murray (Agent Jack Thompson), Enver Gjokaj (Agent Daniel Sousa), Lyndsy Fonseca (Angie Martinelli), Ray Wise (Hugh Jones), Dominic Cooper (Howard Stark) and Shea Whigham (Chief Roger Dooley).Advertisement