By NEIL GENZLINGERJAN. 5, 2015
The odd has become commonplace these days. Do you have anatomical malformations or enjoy looking at them? Pinterest has a board for you. Does your collection of mustard bottles number in the thousands? A reality TV show will be calling shortly.“Ripley: Believe It or Not,” Tuesday’s “American Experience” on PBS, does a nice job of winding the clock back to a time when unusual things weren’t so omnipresent. It’s about Robert L. Ripley, a newspaper cartoonist who almost by accident realized that people’s appetite for the exotic, lurid or just plain surprising far exceeded what could be met by carnival sideshows.His newspaper feature, “Ripley’s Believe It or Not!,” became the foundation for an empire that included books, a radio program, a television show and museums Ripley called Odditoriums. The Hearst organization syndicated his cartoons beginning in the late 1920s and sent him all over the world in search of oddities, or so the public thought. As the program points out, Ripley often wasn’t so much searching as he was following a path suggested by his researcher, Norbert Pearlroth, who was “discovering” the curiosities by spending long days plowing through books at the New York Public Library.Ripley’s offerings were part freak show, part brain food. Often his believe-it-or-nots were simply facts: “There are 293 ways of giving change for a dollar,” reads one drawing seen in the program. The program might make you wistful about how little it once took to feed the public hunger. The brand continues (Ripley died in 1949 at 58), but today it seems quaint against what is being done in some corners of reality television and the Internet.AdvertisementA couple of things stand out in the “American Experience” portrait. One is that Ripley, an ordinary, rather homely fellow with a knack for drawing, was able to harness his creation and ride it to fame over a variety of media despite being painfully awkward on radio and on camera.Another is how much of the current age Ripley seemed to anticipate. The endless human capacity for gawking is only part of it. He also invited public participation and was rewarded with an avalanche of readers’ personal believe-it-or-nots. (“Mr. and Mrs. Frederick Butsky vowed on their wedding day to always eat from the same plate. They have never dined otherwise in 49 years.”) It was social media of a sort long before the term existed.AdvertisementIncidentally, if Ripley’s type of tidbit appeals to you, last month an unrelated but somewhat similar enterprise, Guinness World Records, marked the 60th anniversary of its annual book by posting 13 short videos about various records on its YouTube channel. Some, like the one on Roger Bannister running the first sub-four-minute mile, are straightforward and dignified. Others have a certain garishness. When the woman with the longest fingernails (total nail length: 28 feet 4.5 inches) met the man with the longest fingernails (32 feet 3.8 inches), did they shake hands? That and many other questions you didn’t know you had are answered there.American ExperienceRipley: Believe It or NotOn PBS stations on Tuesday night (check local listings).Produced by Desert Penguin Pictures for “American Experience.” Directed, written and produced by Cathleen O’Connell; Mark Samels, executive producer for “American Experience.”A version of this review appears in print on January 6, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: For a Trailblazer, Odd Was the Norm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.