By ANTHONY TOMMASINIJAN. 5, 2015
You never know what might inspire a composer to write a piece. On Sunday afternoon, for a Winter Festival program in the Here and Now contemporary-music series at Bargemusic in Brooklyn, several of the extremely diverse works derived from unusual sources.One piano piece was inspired by a poem, which, admittedly, is not that uncommon. But another one represented an attempt to mimic at the piano the words and speech patterns of the quirky composer Percy Grainger as recorded during a radio interview in 1952. And how’s this for an unusual source? A piece for cello and electronics incorporated the recorded droning of a truck siphoning water on the corner of First Avenue and 12th Street in the East Village.The program began meditatively with the premiere of James Nyoraku Schlefer’s “Brooklyn Tsuru no Sugomori” (“Life of the Cranes”), for solo shakuhachi, an old-style Japanese bamboo flute. Mr. Schlefer performed the piece, walking slowly up the aisle from the rear of the barge while playing delicate phrases full of bent notes and slides, alternating with flutters and squawks.The formidable pianist Ursula Oppens then asked the poet Brian Philip Katz to read “Falling,” his poem that inspired the composer Amy Williams’s piano piece of the same title, which Ms. Oppens played beautifully. It is a short work run through with hauntingly repeated midrange pitches encircled by pungent chords and lacy filigree.AdvertisementAnnie Gosfield introduced “Burn Again With a Low Blue Flame,” her piece for cello and electronics beholden to that droning truck. The electronic track uses the siphoning sound as a kind of pedal tone. The cello part, played brilliantly by Michael Nicolas, emerges in fits and starts, with high-pitched wails sometimes mingling with electronic buzzing.AdvertisementThe pianist Marc Peloquin then played the premiere of “Flight Thirteen,” a fugue with a theme based on the last name of the composer David Del Tredici, a short piece thick with pointillist polyphonic lines and rippling figurations. This served as an introduction to the last two of five pieces from a piano suite by Mr. Del Tredici.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Mummification,” music of veiled chords and ominous bass stirrings, evokes the “gentlest form of S-and-M” practices, Mr. Del Tredici explained in spoken comments, giving details I will refrain from sharing. Then Mr. Peloquin played “Mandango,” a long — really too long — boldly episodic piece, a kind of cross between a fandango and a Strauss tone poem, written by Mr. Del Tredici for a male go-go dancer he was dating at the time.The piece that incorporated the actual voice of Mr. Grainger in an interview was “The Art of Agony” for Solo Piano and Tape by Rob Davidson, played here dynamically by Sonya Lifschitz, who then performed Brett Dean’s impetuous “Equality and Prayer,” for which Ms. Lifschitz also had to speak enigmatic texts by Michael Leunig, a popular Australian cartoonist and writer.There was also a pensive piece for fadolin (a six-string violin) and an electronic instrument called the Boomerang looper that repeats and fractures sounds, written and played by Ljova Zhurbin.The program ended with the impressive Horszowski Trio playing a restless work, “Painted Shadow,” by Jesse Mills (the violinist in the ensemble) and the frenetically playful “Ostifugo!” by Roger Stubbiefield.A music review on Tuesday about a Winter Festival program in the Here and Now contemporary-music series at Bargemusic in Brooklyn misspelled the name of the six-string violin played by the composer and performer Ljova Zhurbin. He calls it a fadolin, not a fandolin.A version of this review appears in print on January 6, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Still Music to the Ears, but From Odd Sources.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.