Season 2, Episode 12: “Paradise Lost”
Yes, I realize that there are few things more useless than a recap of an episode that aired two days ago, but the flu bug that Moloch apparently unleashed just before he was vanquished in the Dec. 1 show packs a Hades of a wallop. It knocked me out for the last half of the holidays, and I’ve only just now caught up with Monday night’s “Paradise Lost,” the first “Sleepy Hollow” episode after a month-long hiatus.First, if you’re going to introduce an angel into a TV series, aren’t you obliged to dig a little deeper into the special-effects budget? Orion (Max Brown), the angel who turned up in this episode, was given a not-at-all-convincing pair of wings and some airborne moments that recalled “The Flying Nun” in their cheesiness. The Angels Union, if there is one, ought to be writing letters of complaint to Fox.Anyway, as the hour began we learned that — duh — Abbie Mills (Nicole Beharie) and Ichabod Crane (Tom Mison) had survived the cataclysmic ending to the previous episode and had been knocking around for weeks without much to do, the apocalypse apparently having been averted. But then Orion turned up with the news that the skewering of Moloch had opened up purgatory and allowed the escape of assorted creatures who were now looking for a new dark lord to follow. He, Orion, was after those creatures, and Abbie and Ichabod teamed up with him.Perhaps they should have been tipped off by his black garb — what angel dresses in black? — that Orion wasn’t what he seemed. Yes, he was an angel, but, as they eventually figured out, he was an angel gone rogue; he wanted to vanquish evil only to absorb its power for himself and pass vengeful judgment on everyone else. I don’t want to pile too much baggage onto a frivolous TV show, but watching the episode when I did — that is, Wednesday morning — gave it a weird current-events resonance. The world is full of false angels eager to claim exclusive access to the truth and judge everyone else.This was, again, an episode with very little of the show’s trademark humor, except for a brief flourish in which Ichabod was mystified by the farm-to-table food trend. (See, in the century he’s from, there was nothing BUT farm to table.) Me, I wish the writers would lighten up a little. There used to be humor sprinkled throughout the episodes; now, it seems as if they throw in one obligatory comic scene, then get all gloomy.The best thing about the episode, of course, came at the very end: the reappearance of Frank Irving (Orlando Jones), who had seemed to be dead back before the hiatus. Perhaps he is dead — perhaps he’s now a zombie, or demon, or whatever? — but there he was in a convenience store, gulping milk from the carton. I guess we’ll find out next time what his deal is.