By STEPHEN HOLDENOCT. 8, 2015
The pop-jazz singer Gabrielle Stravelli might be described as a level-headed sensualist. When she addressed the game of love on Tuesday evening at Feinstein’s/54 Below, she smiled mischievously, with a twinkle in her eye. When love is good, she revels in it with voluptuous delight, savoring the moment.In “Prism,” an original song written with her bass player, Pat O’Leary, she declared, “Your wonder makes me look around the world with more hope and less fatalism.” Now, that’s seriously happy. An even more intense joy infused her version of “Midnight Sun,” whose flowery lyrics by Johnny Mercer describe a moment of such intense rapture that its memory lingers.Even expressions of frustration and romantic disappointment, such as a perfect mating of “Can’t We Be Friends?” and “A Fine Romance,” were leavened with a good-humored shrug, as if to say, “Oh well, you win a few and lose a few.” The torchiest moment was a rendition of the Lesley Gore-Ellen Weston ballad, “Love Me by Name,” whose narrator, tired of casual sex, demands a more intimate connection.Ms. Stravelli’s emotional intelligence coincides with a phenomenal voice that she wielded with an easygoing confidence and impeccable taste. Her clear, rounded timbre, reminiscent at times of Ella Fitzgerald’s, didn’t strain for effect. A formidable scat improviser, she held back enough so that I never felt that she was indulging in empty display. Her twirling of notes and phrases infused her performance with extra energy. She swings playfully, without seeming to try.AdvertisementAided by her director, Marilyn Maye, and a group that included Joshua Richman on piano and Eric Halvorson on drums, she put songs together ingeniously, so that they reflected on one another and constructed a narrative of life’s ups and downs that ended on a positive note with a fragment of “I’ll Take Romance.”The high point of Tuesday’s show was a mash-up of Stephen Foster’s “Hard Times Come Again No More”; “Tomorrow” (from “Annie”); and the tough, wised-up “Now You Know” (from “Merrily We Roll Along”). They added up to a statement about living on hope and learning to accept reality. It was one of the most ambitious such juxtapositions I can remember.AdvertisementGabrielle Stravelli will perform on Tuesday at Feinstein’s/54 Below, Manhattan; 646-476-3551,54below.com.A version of this review appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Torchy and Intense About Love and Life.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.