Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.BEETHOVEN, BRAHMS, WEBER
 Jon Manasse, clarinetist; Jon Nakamatsu, pianist; Clive Greensmith, cellist
 (Harmonia Mundi) 
The clarinetist Jon Manasse, the pianist Jon Nakamatsu and the cellist Clive Greensmith open this disc with Beethoven’s Trio in B flat (Op. 11), Mr. Nakamatsu’s fleet-fingered clarity enhancing the vivacious outer movements and all three playing with deep expression in the Adagio. Mr. Manasse demonstrates a lovely, limpid tone throughout, such as in the second movement of Weber’s Grand Duo Concertant in E flat (Op. 48). Also included on the disc is a passionate rendition of Brahms’s autumnal Trio in A minor (Op. 114). (Vivien Schweitzer)JOHN LUTHER ADAMS: ‘Become Ocean’
Seattle Symphony; Ludovic Morlot, conductor
(Cantaloupe, CA 21101, CD and DVD)
John Luther Adams’s Pulitzer Prize-winning masterpiece, “Become Ocean,” is finally available on disc. The recording is clearer and less lush than the Seattle Symphony’s Carnegie Hall performance earlier this year, which is only to the piece’s benefit. Cantaloupe’s presentation is less impressive; the disc’s aquatic hues don’t make up for a lack of liner notes or the trite imagery on an accompanying DVD. (David Allen)‘DUMKA’
Lada Valesova, pianist
(Avie)
The Dumka, a slow and moody ballad with a rustic central dance section, appealed to a number of composers including Dvorak, Liszt, Tchaikovsky and Martinu. Here, the pianist Lada Valesova offers an emotionally probing and musically luscious journey into the deep recesses of Slavic melancholy. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)‘s_traits’  
Bill Seaman, media artist; John Supko, composer
 (Cotton Goods) 
The composer John Supko has collaborated with the media artist Bill Seaman to create this hypnotic disc, derived from more than 110 hours of audio sourced from (among other things) field recordings, digital noise, 1960s documentaries and piano music. A software program developed by Mr. Supko juxtaposed samples from the audio database into multitrack compositions; the duo then finessed the computer’s handiwork into these trancelike, emotive and eerily beautiful tracks. (Schweitzer) ‘DANCES AND SONGS’: Works by Bach, Liszt, Ravel and Wagner/Liszt
 Alexandra Joan, pianist
(The Victor Elmaleh Collection)
 Putting together a program of dance-inspired piano music is easy; doing so without overdosing on waltzes is another. The French-Romanian pianist Alexandra Joan offers elegant renditions of Ravel’s “Valses nobles et sentimentales” and Liszt’s “Valse-Impromptu,” but also a refreshingly temperamental reading of Bach’s English Suite No. 3 in G minor and a preposterously fun arrangement of the Spinning Chorus from Wagner’s “Flying Dutchman” by Liszt. (Fonseca-Wollheim)SHAI WOSNER: Schubert and Missy Mazzoli
 (Onyx) 
The pianist Shai Wosner again proves himself a fine Schubertian with a gorgeously phrased and soulful interpretation of the “Moments Musicaux” (D. 780) that traverses the full palette of intimacy and power. He brings similarly vivid contrasts to his elegant, wholly satisfying performance of Schubert’s Piano Sonata No. 20 in A (D. 959), enhanced by his beautifully warm touch. Appropriately sandwiched between the two works is Missy Mazzoli’s alluring “Isabelle Eberhardt’s Dreams of Pianos,” which meshes evocative wisps of Schubert into a turbulent, digitally enhanced soundscape. (Schweitzer)SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)A version of this article appears in print on 01/09/2015, on page C15 of the NewYork edition with the headline: What Do Plants Sound Like? One Composeru2019s Answer, and More.