Phylicia Rashad, who played Bill Cosby’s wife on two popular sitcoms, broke her silence on Tuesday to defend the comedian, who has been accused of sexually assaulting many women.Ms. Rashad, speaking to Roger Friedman of Showbiz 411, said that she had never seen any of the behavior attributed to Mr. Cosby, a longtime friend. More than two dozen women, including three on Wednesday, have publicly said Mr. Cosby sexually assaulted or raped them in incidents from 1965 to 2008, in some cases drugging them first.“Forget these women,” Ms. Rashad said. “What you’re seeing is the destruction of a legacy. And I think it’s orchestrated. I don’t know why or who’s doing it, but it’s the legacy. And it’s a legacy that is so important to the culture.”Talking to Mr. Friedman at a lunch held for the new movie “Selma,” Ms. Rashad added: “Someone is determined to keep Bill Cosby off TV. And it’s worked. All his contracts have been canceled.”A pilot in the works for NBC was scrapped, as was a Netflix comedy special. The Cosby Chair for the Humanities at Spelman College in Atlanta has been suspended, and Mr. Cosby has stepped down from the board at Temple University.Many dates on his comedy tour have been canceled or postponed. But shows planned this week in Canada are expected to go ahead. Mr. Cosby’s promoter, Adam Epstein of the Chicago-based Innovation Arts & Entertainment, told The Associated Press that he was legally bound to present the concerts, and that Mr. Cosby, who has never faced criminal charges in the matters, deserves the presumption of innocence.“If the allegations are true, of course I find them abhorrent, but at the same time at this point I find it presumptuous for anyone to expect me to take action and break an agreement with another business client at this stage,” Mr. Epstein said. “What if it is not true? If there’s an indictment and conviction that’s one thing.”But protests are planned. In London, Ontario, where Mr. Cosby is scheduled to perform on Thursday, there will be a demonstration outside the theater, according to Megan Walker, executive director of the London Abused Women’s Center.A version of this article appears in print on 01/08/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Rashad Defends Cosby, Saying ‘Forget’ His Accusers.