AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (HBO) THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY (1999) Starting with the loan of a jacket with a Princeton insignia, Tom Ripley, a New York men’s room attendant played by Matt Damon, begins his ascent of the social ladder — then murders his way up the rest of the rungs — in Anthony Minghella’s adaptation of the Patricia Highsmith thriller. Jude Law (above right, with Mr. Damon, center, and Rosario Fiorello) is Dickie Greenleaf, the scion of a rich American family, whose father has hired Tom to bring him back to the United States from Italy; Gwyneth Paltrow is Marge, who must share Dickie’s affections with his new friend. And Philip Seymour Hoffman is Freddie, who isn’t buying Tom’s act. Writing in The New York Times, Janet Maslin said the film “offers diabolically smart surprises wherever you care to look.”7 A.M. (CUNY) REMEMBERING MARIO CUOMO CUNY-TV pays tribute to former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York, who died on Thursday, with rebroadcasts of four interviews: “Baruch College Special,” at 7; “Richard Heffner’s Open Mind,” at 8; “Eldridge & Co.,” at 9; and “City Talk,” at 9:30.6:55 P.M. (Starz) HOTEL RWANDA (2004) In this fact-based political thriller from Terry George, Don Cheadle plays Paul Rusesabagina, the Hutu manager of a luxury hotel, who harbored over a thousand Tutsis and Hutu moderates during the 1994 genocide. Sophie Okonedo (above, with Mr. Cheadle, right, and Antonio David Lyons) is his Tutsi wife. “The personal experience of the Rusesabagina family is played for maximum suspense and tear-drenched drama,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “The movie’s sentimental excesses are forgivable, given the subject matter.” Still, he added, “you wonder if your emotional buttons have been pushed too hard and too often just to squeeze out an extra drop of sympathy.” Mr. Cheadle and Ms. Okonedo were nominated for Oscars.8 P.M. (Fox) AMERICAN IDOL Season 14 begins as Jennifer Lopez, Keith Urban and Harry Connick Jr. audition hopefuls in Nashville.8 P.M. (13, 49) WILD FRANCE “Nature” journeys from Alsace and the Alps to the Pyrenees and the island of Corsica to document the diversity of France’s wildlife, including red deer, griffon vultures, wolves, golden eagles, marmots, brown bears, wild boar and horseshoe bats. Laila Robins narrates.8 P.M. (NBC) THE MYSTERIES OF LAURA The team takes on New York’s culinary world, where Laura (Debra Messing) develops a crush on a potential suspect. In “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit,” at 9, Detective Rollins (Kelli Giddish) must confront her past to support another female office and stop a predator. And in “Chicago P.D.,” at 10, a seemingly routine check on a potential terrorist threat lands Burgess (Marina Squerciati) in the hospital with gunshot wounds. 9 P.M. (CBS) PEOPLE’S CHOICE AWARDS 2015 Anna Faris and Allison Janney of “Mom” will host this ceremony, broadcast live from the Nokia Theater in Los Angeles, in which a viewer poll determines favorites in television, movies and music. Shailene Woodley, in movies, and Sam Smith, in music, each received four nominations; the television shows “Grey’s Anatomy,” “Supernatural” and “The Vampire Diaries” lead the television category with five each. Ben Affleck will be honored as favorite humanitarian. Iggy Azalea, Lady Antebellum and Fall Out Boy will perform. 9 P.M. (Cooking) EXTRA VIRGIN The actress Debi Mazar and her musician husband, Gabriele Corcos, decide to give back to the neighbors who welcomed them to Brooklyn by taking over a local restaurant and cooking a Tuscan meal.9 P.M. (ABC) MODERN FAMILY A car crash prompts the Dunphys to re-evaluate their lives. In “black-ish,” at 9:30, Dre (Anthony Anderson) worries that Rainbow (Tracee Ellis Ross) is questioning his machismo after another man dismisses him in front of her. Ruby (Jenifer Lewis), meanwhile, likes what she sees when Pops (Laurence Fishburne) helps his son maintain his dignity. 10:30 P.M. (A&E) DONNIE LOVES JENNY The newlyweds Donnie Wahlberg and Jenny McCarthy open a window on their relationship. Season 3 of “Wahlburgers” leads in at 10.What’s Streaming NowGOOD WILL HUNTING (1997) This is the film — about a janitor cum math genius and the therapist trying to uncover what’s holding the young man back — that made the childhood friends Matt Damon and Ben Affleck famous and earned them an Oscar for best screenplay. (netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement