
Antiques By                     
EVE M. KAHN

OCT. 8, 2015
Peter Tucci, a lawyer in Philadelphia, has organized the first major American display of artifacts that belonged to Napoleon Bonaparte’s older brother, Joseph Bonaparte, who lived in exile near Trenton in the 1810s and 1820s.That exhibition, “From Waterloo to New Jersey: The Bicentennial of King Joseph Bonaparte’s Escape to America,” opening Oct. 17 at the Pennington School in Pennington, N.J., contains objects salvaged from two long-vanished homes that Bonaparte, a former king of Spain and Naples, built in Bordentown City at a riverfront property called Point Breeze. (The first was destroyed in a fire, and the second was razed by a new British owner.)Mr. Tucci owns Joseph Bonaparte’s books, letters, furniture and a porcelain punch bowl, as well as coins minted during his reigns in Spain and Naples and catalogs from auctions in the 1840s that dispersed his possessions. Fragments excavated at the Point Breeze site by Monmouth University researchers will also be on view, including hardware and wine bottle shards. Music from the 1810s, some of it celebrating Napoleon’s defeats, will be played in the Pennington School gallery.Material related to Point Breeze occasionally surfaces on the market. Last year, at Wiederseim Associates auction house in Chester Springs, Pa., Mr. Tucci paid about $5,000 for a mahogany chest trimmed in gilded swans that Bonaparte most likely took to New Jersey from his French chateau. In June, at Freeman’s auction house in Philadelphia, Mr. Tucci paid about $11,000 for a riverfront painting dated 1827 and generically identified as “Landscape With Children, Dog, and Distant Boats.” He recognized it as a view of Point Breeze.“I’m still a little giddy,” he said about unearthing that sleeper.He jokingly credited his Italian-American heritage as the source of his obsession. The banished ruler, he said, “was the king of my ancestors.”Mr. Tucci said he was still hoping to acquire invitations to Point Breeze parties and paintings that hung on its walls. Its art collection — with works by Rembrandt, Rubens and Leonardo da Vinci — ended up scattered among museums, private collections, galleries and auction houses.The Pennington School exhibition, through Nov. 20, is slated to travel to Monmouth University in a few months. Mr. Tucci is also developing plans to lend it to European institutions.A version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page C27 of the New York edition with the headline: A King’s Collection.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »