By STEPHEN HOLDENJAN. 6, 2015
A gentle reminder to hedge fund managers everywhere: “The sweet things in life to you were just loaned/So how can you lose what you never owned.” These words from “Life Is Just a Bowl of Cherries” have never sounded more pertinent than in our new gilded age. This breezy but profound standard was introduced by Ethel Merman in 1931, and it was a latter-day Merman, the brass-knuckled belter Mary Testa, who punched it out as the opening salvo of her terrific show, “Have Faith,” at the Laurie Beechman Theater on Monday evening.A collaboration with her musical director, Michael Starobin, who plays piano and a little tuba, the show, which featured Alisa Horn on cello, is a bold, purposeful compendium of material taken mostly from their album, “Have Faith” (Ghostlight Records). Ms. Testa is not a “nice” singer — lyrics are splashed out in bright primary colors — but she is a fiercely intelligent one. Should you need the vocal equivalent of a placard at a political rally to shout a message, she would be a top candidate.The show is all the riskier because Ms. Testa pushes her natural gift for raucous comedy into the background, the better to deliver songs with strong political and social content like the Jill Sobule broadsides “Heroes” and “Soldiers of Christ.” “Soldiers” is the monologue of a fundamentalist Christian who warns, “When we’re in heaven/You’ll be sorry.”Monday’s show included some potent song pairings, in particular Rodgers and Hammerstein’s euphoric “Oh, What a Beautiful Mornin’ ” interwoven with Neil Young’s “The Needle and the Damage Done,” to make a stark juxtaposition of hope and ruination. Ms. Testa’s rendition of Leonard Cohen’s “Hallelujah,” near the end of the show, was one of the strongest and clearest I’ve heard. Instead of ending on a note of defeat and bitterness, Ms. Testa rallied her resources and finished on a note of affirmation, suggesting that self-knowledge was worth the agony and betrayal that came before.“Have Faith” runs through Monday at the Laurie Beechman Theater at the West Bank Cafe, 407 West 42nd Street, Clinton; 212-695-6909, westbankcafe.com. A version of this review appears in print on January 7, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Fleeting Sweetness, and Pits.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.