AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy David AllenThere aren’t many words among the sighs, belts and purrs of Caroline Shaw’s vocal octet “Partita” (2009-12), and at first hearing they sound like gibberish. Take these, purloined from Sol LeWitt’s “Wall Drawing 305”: “The eighty-sixth, eighty-seventh and eighty-eighth points are located symmetrically across the central vertical axis of the wall.” It’s about lines and connections, words that in Ms. Shaw’s “Passacaglia” movement disappear into a thicket of nonsensical sibilance as eight speakers overlap.“Partita” won a Pulitzer Prize in 2013, and made up the bulk of Monday’s short, sweet Roomful of Teeth concert, which concluded Trinity Wall Street’s Twelfth Night Festival. Seven of Roomful’s members have sung or still sing in Julian Wachner’s Choir of Trinity Wall Street, so the concert was both a homecoming and a demonstration of possibilities. And while I tapped my feet to this infectiously gleeful performance’s groove, even danced surreptitiously in my pew — sorry, neighbor — I kept thinking about the lines to and from a work, about how much “Partita” has made Roomful’s name, and Roomful that of “Partita.”That’s the benefit of being a composer-performer-collaborator like Ms. Shaw. Developed as a homage to a Baroque suite and to the geographical medley of Roomful’s influences, “Partita” is tied to the techniques that the choir has borrowed and extended — here Korean p’ansori, Georgian pitch bends, Tuvan throat singing, among others. As Ms. Shaw writes in the score’s opening pages, future performers should listen to Roomful’s Grammy-winning recording of the work as a guide to how specific notations work.Can “Partita” escape the group? Of course, but it doesn’t need to yet: It’s still changing in their hands. This was my first live experience of the work, and its darts of direction seemed freshly improvisatory. On record, euphoric moments of swooping inflections in the “Allemande” movement have a satisfying, almost Auto-Tuned funk. Live, that elation sounded all the more powerfully human, suggesting the glowing richness of a church choir. The tight hums and open chords of “Sarabande” had a tender fragility, a sad promise. And the sheer physicality of the work is striking, whether in the opening of “Courante,” where Inuit-inspired breaths sound both erotic and like a jogger’s gasps (“courante” means running), or simply in the way facial muscles transform vowels in a baring of teeth in “Passacaglia.”The program’s five other works were calmer, more ruminative. “Render” (2013), by Brad Wells, Roomful’s artistic director, movingly unfolds wordless laments over held drones, its lushness seeming to hide an absence at its core. In “Otherwise” (2012), also by Mr. Wells, a septet does the choral equivalent of beatboxing behind the bass-baritone Dashon Burton’s powerful, melismatic line. The tenor Eric Dudley’s “Suonare/to sound” (2010) smoothly, artfully layers Italian and English versions of the same poem, “Suono suona sempre” (“Sound sounds always”), drifting into space at the end, unresolved. Rinde Eckert’s “Cesca’s View” (2009) showcases striking yodeling from Estelí Gomez, while Judd Greenstein’s “AEIOU” (2009) strives to complete the vowel series with a magnetic, disturbed pulse. All were precisely, joyously done.Advertisement