By JON CARAMANICAJAN. 6, 2015
“Hindsight,” a clever, affecting and sly new show about bad choices begetting worse ones, begins somewhere near the intersection of romance and horror. On the eve of her second wedding, to a onetime childhood friend turned midlife paramour, Becca (Laura Ramsey) blacks out in a New York elevator and wakes up back in 1995, on the eve of her first wedding, to a set of oily abdominals named Sean (Craig Horner). Sean has an appealing Australian accent, and looks like an extra from “Singles”: He is, of course, a tortured artist. The new guy is, of course, neither of those things.Once Becca confirms she isn’t hallucinating — apart from the grand hallucination that is life — she sets about undoing the mistakes of the two decades she believes she’ll never get back: fraught first marriage, dead-end job, crumbled relationship with her best friend, Lolly (Sarah Goldberg). Lolly is a free spirit, the curly hair to Becca’s straight. Sometime in the intervening years, their friendship went sour. Going back in time, Becca believes, can save them.Though it’s not aesthetically recognizable as such, this is science fiction — more “Sliding Doors” or “Early Edition” than “Black Mirror,” but still.Becca is a contagion from the future, disrupting everyone. All the things she perceived as leading to her midlife disappointment, she eighty-sixes. She smokes in bars. She makes new choices that she thinks will make her happy but bring only different types of unhappiness. (Attempts to use her knowledge of the future to advance at work are particularly hilarious.)AdvertisementBut her foreknowledge also becomes a cudgel — to Lolly, who knows what’s happening to Becca, and decides to start changing her life based on Becca’s warnings; and to others, who don’t know what’s going on but are inexorably reshaped by it. Becca’s capacity for change suddenly spurs change in those around her. But to know is not to know better, and undoing your past doesn’t mean improving your life.Advertisement“Hindsight” begins on Wednesday on VH1, a channel that was remade by nostalgia in the 2000s but has lately been moving beyond it. That theme became a burden, reduced to a cacophony of “I Love the ’90s” effluvia, but “Hindsight” invigorates it in promising, unflashy ways. This show doubles as credible period dramedy, somewhere between “Beverly Hills 90210” and “Friends,” and an armchair rumination on destiny and will.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Aesthetically, a result is a combination of easy visual punch lines — the O. J. Simpson trial! Susan Powter! a VHS-tape rewinding machine! — and vibrant fashion, from halter tops and baby-doll dresses to red flannel shirts. Lolly works in a video rental store called ... wait for it ... sex, lies, and videostore.As shtick goes, it’s good shtick. Paging was once a viable way of getting someone to call you back. AOL was once the totality of the Internet for millions. These are ideas just outmoded enough to be hilarious but not so outmoded as to be ancient history.But that’s merely a milieu — the real vividness in “Hindsight” is in the storytelling and acting, which is earnest without being cloying. Ms. Ramsey plays a compelling blend of naïve and seen it all. (The faintest hint of a Midwestern accent seems to poke through at times.) At root, Becca is a romantic lead fumbling in her search for love. But she’s also a tough-minded tough-love giver who holds a cruel mirror up to herself. Even when those around her strike single notes, interacting with her makes them complex.There are some stereotypes “Hindsight” doesn’t bother to avoid, though — the mystical figure who appears in both timelines to bless Becca with wisdom is black, a stock Hollywood idea that verges on the offensive. (It doesn’t help that Becca seems not to have any black friends.) And the male characters here are far more emotionally bumbling than the women, though that makes room for strong, emotionally comic female-to-female dialogue, much of it featuring Becca’s mother (a tart Donna Murphy).Becca refuses to set foot in another elevator for fear of undoing what’s happened and being teleported back to her old, uninspired life. Maybe, though, if she solves the quandary of her 1995 love life, “Hindsight” can go full sci-fi: Every time Becca does enter an elevator, she jumps, “Quantum Leap”-style, to another decision she thinks she flubbed. She can learn that there are no right or wrong choices, only the ones we make.HindsightVH1, Wednesday nights at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Created by Emily Fox; Ms. Fox, John A. Norris, Carl Beverly, Sarah Timberman, Maggie Malina and Alexander A. Motlagh, executive producers; Susan Levison and Jill Holmes, executive producers for VH1.WITH: Laura Ramsey (Becca), Sarah Goldberg (Lolly), Craig Horner (Sean), Donna Murphy (Georgie) and John Patrick Amedori (Jamie).A version of this review appears in print on January 7, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Oh, to Have the ’90s, and All Those Bad Judgment Calls, Back.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.