AdvertisementSupported byTelevision ReviewBy Alessandra StanleyThe president of the United States has extended an invitation to a state dinner. Lucious Lyon (Terrence Howard), a music industry kingpin, looks put upon. “O.K.,” he instructs his assistant, “tell Barack that, yes, but this is the last one for the next few months.” Lucious strides on, busy as a head of state with the final details for taking his record company, Empire Entertainment, public.“Empire,” a series that begins Wednesday on Fox, is a classic ’80s-era nighttime soap opera retrofitted for the age of Jay Z and Beyoncé. There is glitz, bling, skulduggery and family feuding, played out to the pounding rhythm of hip-hop and rap. The story is not surprising — almost every turn seems obvious and a little hackneyed — but it is surprisingly enjoyable. Lee Daniels (“Precious,” “Lee Daniels’ The Butler”), a co-creator of the series, also directed the pilot and gives it some big-screen pizazz. Like “Nashville” on ABC and “Power” on Starz, “Empire” is a rollicking family drama that has glints of wit and self-awareness behind the brio. A stellar cast helps. Mr. Howard (“Hustle & Flow”) is silky and understated as a rapper and drug dealer turned celebrity mogul. Gabourey Sidibe (“Precious”) plays the assistant struggling to keep up with Lucious’s cascade of A-list invitations. The series really lights up when Taraji P. Henson (“Person of Interest”) appears as Lucious’s ex-wife, Cookie, freshly released after serving time for the family’s starter business — drug dealing. Cookie strides through the prison gates in the clothes she was wearing when she was incarcerated, an animal-print sheath and white fur coat, determined to make up for lost time.Lucious’s plan to take the record company public gives Cookie leverage, because she can threaten to divulge where the seed money for Empire Entertainment came from. She demands reconciliation with her three sons and her fair share of the business. In every scene, Cookie is a pistol, a swaggering, seductive bully one moment, a sad-eyed portrait of maternal sorrow the next. No empire is safe without a dynasty, of course. Lucious, who has a terminal disease, decides to groom the rightful heir to his company. He pits his sons against one another in the fight for succession: Andre (Trai Byers), who has an M.B.A. and a talent for business but not music; Jamal (Jussie Smollett), a gay singer-songwriter; and Hakeem (Bryshere Gray), a spoiled, feckless rapper.Any resemblance to a Shakespeare tragedy is acknowledged, and deflected. When Lucious announces to his sons that he will pick one of them to run the company, Jamal says, “What is this, we ‘King Lear’ now?” His father is not amused. “In order for it to survive I need one of you Negroes to man up and lead it,” he says sternly.Jamal is possibly the ideal candidate — he is both musically gifted and levelheaded — but Lucious cannot accept that his son his gay. Lucious’s homophobia is shown in a flashback, when a young Jamal teeters into the room in his mother’s high heels and his father is so enraged he shoves the boy into a garbage bin. Cookie, on the other hand, always accepted Jamal and now wants to persuade her son to be more commercial minded and become a full-fledged music star. Andre isn’t a good alternative; he has the business credentials but no standing in the artistic world. He’s also a bit of a prig. Hakeem is the opposite, gifted but selfish and irresponsible. Together, Jamal and Hakeem make great music but are egged into becoming rivals. The music, most of it original and packaged for downloading on iTunes and Amazon, is potent and infectious; the actors are all appealing; and the whole thing is opulent and as smooth as paint, and that is a problem.What’s missing from “Empire” is the inspired crack of incongruity — a setting or character that displaces the familiar with the unexpected. The best shows rattle expectations. “The Sopranos” focused on a New Jersey Mafia boss in therapy for panic attacks, “Breaking Bad” was about a high school science teacher turned meth dealer and underworld kingpin, and the heroine of “Homeland” is a C.I.A. officer with bipolar disorder. Those kinds of deviations work best on cable channels that cater to niche audiences, but broadcast networks have been known to mix it up more. Fox, after all, took a risk and put “Arrested Development” on the air. “Empire” has prestige, great music and gifted actors, but it is what it appears to be: “Dynasty” in the age of hip-hop. EmpireFox, Wednesday nights at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time.Produced by Imagine Television in association with 20th Century Fox Television. Created by Lee Daniels and Danny Strong; Mr. Daniels, Mr. Strong, Brian Grazer, Ilene Chaiken and Francie Calfo, executive producers. WITH: Terrence Howard (Lucious Lyon), Taraji P. Henson (Cookie Lyon), Malik Yoba (Vernon Turner), Jussie Smollett (Jamal Lyon), Bryshere Gray (Hakeem Lyon), Trai Byers (Andre Lyon), Grace Gealey (Anika Gibbons), Kaitlin Doubleday (Rhonda Lyon) and Gabourey Sidibe (Becky).Advertisement