The Tony Award winners Chita Rivera and Roger Rees will star on Broadway this spring in “The Visit,” a darkly romantic musical that has been evolving over the last 15 years; its creators are the acclaimed theatrical songwriters John Kander and Fred Ebb (“Chicago,” “Cabaret”) and their frequent collaborator, Terrence McNally. The producers announced on Thursday that “The Visit,” directed by the Tony winner John Doyle (the 2005 Broadway revival of “Sweeney Todd”), will begin performances March 26 at the Lyceum Theater and open on April 23 – the eligibility deadline for 2015 Tony nominations.Ms. Rivera, in a telephone interview on Thursday, described herself as “very emotional” about the arrival of “The Visit,” which she has been working on since 2001 with Broadway as the ultimate dream destination. She turns 82 later this month, and said she was grateful to have a role – as a vengeful widow reckoning with a broken heart from her youth – that suited her at this point in her life, much like some of her past characters on Broadway such as the young Anita in the original “West Side Story” in 1957 and the glamorous movie star in “Kiss of the Spider Woman” in 1993.“I think this character is right in time with who I am, and how old I am, and my maturity and my life in the theater,” said Ms. Rivera, a two-time best actress Tony winner for “Spider Woman” and “The Rink,” which were also by Messrs. Kander, Ebb and McNally. She then seemed to start reflecting on whether “The Visit” might be a swan song.“Will this be – it doesn’t feel like it – but is the universe painting a picture for me? I’m wondering, is this going to be sort of like – no, I’m not going to say it. I feel like I’ve been given a gift with this show, and when you’re given a gift, you really respect it,” she said.Versions of “The Visit” ran in 2001 at the Goodman Theater in Chicago; in 2008 at Signature Theater in Arlington, Va.; and last summer at Williamstown Theater Festival, in a 95-minute production that will be the one to come to Broadway. (Those last two productions received mixed reviews from Times critics.) Ms. Rivera has starred in all three versions as the wealthy widow Claire Zachanassian, who returns to her impoverished European hometown with an offer for the people there: Money in return for them killing a lover from her youth, played by Mr. Rees as an adult. “The Visit” is based on the satirical play by Friedrich Dürrenmatt, as adapted by Maurice Valency.“All during these 14 years you get excited about going to Broadway, then relax, then excited again, then relax, then excited again – and you try to keep putting it behind you and say, ‘if it’s to be, it will be,’” Ms. Rivera said, speaking from her home in Blauvelt, N.Y., in Rockland County. “You just keep yourself busy and have another birthday.” (In the intervening years Ms. Rivera has starred on Broadway in “Nine,” “Chita Rivera: A Dancer’s Life” and “The Mystery of Edwin Drood.”)“Finally, when we got to Williamstown, John Doyle had really added a European feeling to the piece, which it very much needed. It is dark, it is sexy – Roger is very sexy. And why can’t older people be very sexy? C’mon on – there’s nothing wrong with any of us,” she said.As for doing eight performances a week on Broadway this spring at 82, Ms. Rivera laughed when asked for her secret.“I don’t have any secrets. I’m so Catholic. But I think being a dancer has put some things in my head since I was 8 or 9: You eat a certain amount, you never overdo anything, you listen to your body. And when you go away from a show, when you do party, when you have fun, you have it but then you pull it back. I like my work too much not to do it.”In addition to Mr. Doyle’s direction, “The Visit” will be choreographed by Broadway veteran Graciela Daniele. Further casting will be announced later. The producers are Tom Kirdahy – Mr. McNally’s husband and a lead producer of their current Broadway hit, “It’s Only a Play” – and Tom Smedes, Hugh Hayes and Judith Ann Abrams.A version of this article appears in print on 01/09/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Chita Rivera on Broadway.