AdvertisementSupported byBy The NumbersBy Stephen HeymanCritics who think the days are numbered for 3-D cinema should think again.Over the past few years, as the quantity of 3-D screens has grown dramatically around the world so has the backlash among elite directors who claim the format is overused and makes movies too dark or headache-inducing. Among them are Christopher Nolan, who has said he has grown “weary” of 3-D, and Danny Boyle, who has dismissed the format as a mere “phase.” Recent figures seemed to back up Mr. Boyle’s claim: The take from 3-D films, as a percentage of the global box office, has fallen by 20 percent over the past four years, according to the research firm IHS. An even sharper decline was seen in the so-called 3-D take-rate, which measures the percentage of moviegoers who opt to see a film in 3-D versus 2-D. In 2009 and 2010, following 3-D success stories like “Avatar,” two-thirds of moviegoers in North America preferred 3-D. But the number dropped to 52 percent in 2012 and to 41 percent in 2014. Take-rates in other film markets, including China, have also retracted in recent years, though not as sharply as in North America.But analysts say that this short-term but steep decline of 3-D is more a result of growing pains than proof that moviegoers are abandoning the format en masse. Charlotte Jones, who monitors the international film market for IHS, said that while the novelty of 3-D has worn off for some, studios have gotten more selective in choosing which 3-D films to produce and market. As a result, 3-D’s global decline bottomed out in 2013 and, last year, the format reached a kind of “maturity,” she said. The take-rate (41 percent) and the number of 3-D films released in North America (38) remained unchanged from 2013 to 2014. In China, 3-D films still represent more than 40 percent of the box office.Ms. Jones said that 2015 could actually be a “banner year” for the 3-D film industry. “There’s just a really strong slate, from ‘Star Wars’ to an ‘Avengers’ film to ‘Jurassic World,”’ she said. Meanwhile, newer innovations — like laser projections — may soon help to make 3-D films as bright and vivid as their 2-D counterparts. Advertisement