LONDON — Yesterday and today cartoonists around the world created drawings responding to the attacks in Paris that killed 12 staffers at the satirical French weekly Charlie Hebdo. Many of the responses quickly gained traction on social media, gathering likes, shares and retweets.A cartoon by the Canberra Times political cartoonist, David Pope, was among the most popular on Twitter with nearly 69,000 retweets. Mr. Pope shared the image — which shows a gunman saying “He drew first” as he stands over a dead body — from his personal account with the words: “Can’t sleep tonight, thoughts with my French cartooning colleagues, their families and loved ones”Can't sleep tonight, thoughts with my French cartooning colleagues, their families and loved ones #CharlieHebdo pic.twitter.com/LqIMRCHPgK— David Pope (@davpope) January 7, 2015Jean Plantureux, a cartoonist who goes by the pen name Plantu and whose work appears frequently in Le Monde, created another wildly popular cartoon that has gathered more than 31,000 retweets and nearly 11,000 likes. His work shows a red pen scrawling the words “My whole heart with Charlie Hebdo” as blood drips from the page.De tout coeur avec Charlie Hebdo. pic.twitter.com/8KwTipn3Wp— PLANTU (@plantu) January 7, 2015The Dutch illustrator Ruben L. Oppenheimer’s image, which shows a plane flying into two pencils — simultaneously representing the twin towers  in New York and Charlie Hebdo’s writers — garnered over 23,000 retweets.#CharlieHebdo pic.twitter.com/15O4YC2KWg— Ruben L. Oppenheimer (@RLOppenheimer) January 7, 2015A cartoon artist who goes by the name Tommy Dessine dared to add some bittersweet humor to his take on the attack. He shows a group of writers arguing as they arrive in heaven, where a God or St. Peter-like figure says to himself, “Oh no … Not them …”#CharlieHebdo pic.twitter.com/GNh2ZAEArf— Tommy dessine (@Tommydessine) January 7, 2015The International New York Times ran a cartoon by Patrick Chappatte dedicated to the memory of four of the paper’s staffers in particular. The comic reads “Without Humor We Are All Dead.”IN MEMORY OF MY COLLEAGUES AND FRIENDS FROM CHARLIE HEBDO, a cartoon for the International New York Times pic.twitter.com/2v21S7ZmGJ— Chappatte Cartoons (@PatChappatte) January 7, 2015Other artistic responses that were widely shared online include a 2012 cartoon by the New Yorker cartoon editor Bob Mankoff that satirizes self-censorship. And shortly after noon Paris time, to coincide with a nationwide moment of silence, the official account of Asterix — a beloved comic franchise in France — paid homage to the victims by tweeting an image of two of its characters bowing solemnly.pic.twitter.com/WNMiyedO9B— Astérix (@asterixofficiel) January 8, 2015A lawyer for Charlie Hebdo told Agence France-Presse that one million copies of the next edition of the paper would be published next Wednesday. The paper normally prints fewer than 100,000 copies of each issue. Patrick Pelloux, a columnist for Charlie Hebdo, told the radio station France International: “We’ll write it in our tears.”Click here for a live blog on the ongoing search for the suspects.