AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (Showtime) FINDING VIVIAN MAIER (2014) In 2007, John Maloof bought a box of negatives — nearly 40,000, taken from the 1950s to the ’70s — at a Chicago auction for about $400. He was told they were by Vivian Maier, but a Google search revealed no information about her. Eventually he mounted some of the works on Flickr, which led to a story in the British newspaper The Independent and an exhibition at the Chicago Cultural Center about Ms. Maier, a nanny and amateur street photographer who died in 2009. This film, which Mr. Maloof directed with Charlie Siskel, documents his search for the woman behind the images while serving as a sort of feature-length advertisement for the work he owns, Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “It’s no surprise that Maier is now the subject of a documentary, given the quality of her work, the nominal exoticism of her life and the secrets that still drift around her,” Ms. Dargis said. “She’s a terrific story — part Mary Poppins, part Weegee — who was at once emancipated and in service.” Still, she added, “time and professional pronouncements will decide if she was an outsider artist or just an unorthodox one who, as a single 20th-century woman, found freedom, her voice and her own private bohemia while under cover of other people’s bourgeois domesticity.” The documentary has been shortlisted as an Oscar contender.8 P.M. (CBS) THE BIG BANG THEORY Wolowitz (Simon Helberg) tries to distract Raj (Kunal Nayyar) as he awaits data from a space probe. A dress-shopping excursion with Penny (Kaley Cuoco-Sweeting) and Amy (Mayim Bialik) leads to a confrontation between Leonard (Johnny Galecki) and Sheldon (Jim Parsons). In “Mom,” at 8:30, Christy (Anna Faris) spends an evening by herself and ends up meeting her dishy single neighbor (Colin Hanks). Bonnie (Allison Janney) finds her date with Alvin (Kevin Pollak) interrupted by his ex-wife (Beverly D’Angelo). In “Two and a Half Men,” at 9, Walden (Ashton Kutcher) discovers that he has intimacy problems with women when his foster son, Louis (Edan Alexander), is in the house. And in “The McCarthys,” at 9:30, Marjorie (Laurie Metcalf) gets competitive when her sister (Jane Kaczmarek) comes to visit.8 P.M. (E!) ENCHANTED (2007) Amy Adams sings and dances her way through this revisionist fairy tale as Giselle, a princess who falls from her animated world to Times Square and finds shelter with a Manhattan lawyer and single father (Patrick Dempsey) while waiting for her prince (James Marsden) to come. Susan Sarandon is the evil Queen Narissa, who will stop at nothing to knock off her future daughter-in-law; Timothy Spall is her bumbling henchman; and Kevin Lima, who directed, and Jeff Bennett lend their voices to Pip, a computer-generated chipmunk with some of the best scenes. Writing in The Times, Manohla Dargis called the film “unexpectedly delightful.”9 P.M. (Travel) EXPEDITION UNKNOWN The adventurer Josh Gates tackles some unsolved legends using his archaeological expertise and new information. He begins in Papua New Guinea, where a tribe believes it has found Amelia Earhart’s wrecked plane. Then he heads to Fiji to examine evidence suggesting that Earhart was stranded on a nearby island. But first he has to find her bones.10 P.M. (FX) ARCHER In this Season 6 opener, Archer (the voice of H. Jon Benjamin) must salvage a crashed plane in a jungle filled with World War II relics.10 P.M. (IFC) PORTLANDIA A fifth season begins with a flashback to the ’90s and a dance-off between Toni (Carrie Brownstein) and Candace (Fred Armisen) to Snap!'s “The Power.”10 P.M. (WE) LOVE THY SISTER Three high-flying Southern siblings — Ruby, Ellen and Ione Rucker — struggle with money, romance and general dysfunction.10 P.M. (NBC) PARENTHOOD Zeek (Craig T. Nelson) is rushed to a hospital, where the family convenes by his side.What’s Streaming NowSECRET STATE When the British prime minister’s plane crashes into the Atlantic after a deadly industrial accident involving an American petrochemical company, Deputy Prime Minister Tom Dawkins (Gabriel Byrne) is left in charge of the country — and of unraveling an international conspiracy — in this four-part 2012 thriller based on the novel “A Very British Coup” by Chris Mullins. (acorn.tv)Advertisement