How do you design a book for the ages?  When it came to the Murty Classical Library of India, whose first five books were published this week by Harvard University Press, part of the answer turned out to be: think pink. “When you look at a shelf of Harvard University Press books, this isn’t a color you see,” Timothy Jones, the press’s director of design and production, said of the series’ covers, which come in a deep, rich rose known to designers as Pantone 220. “In some small way,” he said, “it announces right away, ‘A classic isn’t what you think.'”The Murty Library, a series of volumes of pre-1800 Indian literature that is projected to reach 500 books over the next century, is modeled on the Loeb Classical Library, founded in 1911 as means of getting accessible dual-language editions of the ancient Western classics into the hands of ordinary readers. Over the past century, the trim red (Latin) and green (Greek) Loeb volumes, also published by Harvard, have become fetish objects, beloved of book-design geeks and shelter-magazine art directors alike.  To create as durable and flexible a cover design for the Murtys, Harvard held an international competition, which attracted some 180 entries. The winning design, by Andrea A. Stranger, features a traditional Indian textile pattern along the spine, and, as the series logo, a semi-abstract elephant forming the letter M.“We had a lot of elephants, lotus flowers and banyan trees,” Mr. Jones said. “If I had thought about it ahead of time, I probably would’ve said, ‘No elephants.’ But this one was so elegantly done.”The interior design, by Rathna Ramanathan and Guglielmo Rossi of M9Design, was particularly complicated. A template was needed that could work for poetry and prose, for short lines and long lines, in potentially dozens of languages (the series has works in 15 languages under contract so far), using numerous different scripts, all harmonized, Ms. Ramanathan explained, according to the modern Indian idea of “unity in diversity.”“At the first briefing we were told, ‘We want the girl in Chennai to be reading the Hindi books, and the boy in Delhi to be reading the Tamil books,‚” said Ms. Ramanathan, who works in London and in Chennai, in the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu. “This series is really for young, modern Indians, for whom the old divisions don’t matter.”The designers undertook 18 months of research into the history of Indian books, including traditional palm-leaf manuscripts. They also researched the long history of bilingual texts in India, from street signs to currency to textbooks.For the Murtys, Harvard commissioned entirely new typefaces for several of the Indic scripts or significantly tweaked existing ones, to arrive at versions that would balance well against the Roman script of the English text, and would be equally readable at full size and in the smaller endnotes. “At one point, we realized we had typographers working on four continents,” Mr. Jones said.  (John Hudson and Fiona Ross of Tiro Typeworks, the main contributors so far, designed the typefaces used for Hindi, Punjabi and Telugu.) There are plans to eventually digitize the series, as Harvard recently did with the Loebs. “We imagine the series continuing in whatever form books are distributed in 100 years from now,” Mr. Jones said.But in the meantime, the printed Murtys, as beautiful as they are, come with deliberately generous margins that are very much designed to be written in.“I feel very strongly about the book as a usable object, about giving people space to make their own impression,” Ms. Ramanathan said. “A text is incomplete until the reader comes in.”