AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Neil GenzlingerIf you’re fishing for reality-TV viewers, you want to start the year off with something attention-getting, and normally a show about men with a fetish for dressing in latex suits that make them look like giant female dolls would do the trick. But for TLC, the network that loves to make itself hateable, guys-as-dolls (Wednesday night’s Season 6 premiere of “My Strange Addiction”) was only an appetizer.The channel’s real welcome to 2015 comes on Sunday night with “My Husband’s Not Gay,” a one-hour special about Mormon couples in Salt Lake City whose male halves acknowledge being attracted to men. It’s a classic example of the Law of Incendiary Acceleration that presumably is taught in reality-TV-making school: Take one subject guaranteed to inflame some people, in this case religion, pair it with another, in this case homosexuality, and you’ll get much more than twice the usual reaction.The program has already inspired a petition drive on Change.org calling on TLC to pull the show. (Signature count as of Wednesday: more than 90,000.) These days, that kind of protest is just what some programs and channels are going for. There’s no such thing as bad publicity.The petition was begun by Josh Sanders, who identifies himself as “a gay Christian man who’s seen first hand how this message can harm people.” And that harmful message, the petition says, is that gay, bisexual and transgender people “should lie to themselves and to their faith communities about who they are and who they love.”So what is actually in the program? It’s territory that a television critic ventures into with trepidation because a certain segment of the hate-mail-writing readership somehow assumes that merely describing what a show contains means endorsement, but here goes: Three couples (Jeff and Tanya, Pret and Megan, Curtis and Tera) talk about their marriages and, briefly, their sex lives. More focus is on the point in the relationship at which the man acknowledged what everyone involved calls same-sex attraction, or, to use the acronym heard repeatedly, S.S.A. The word “gay” is studiously avoided, except by Tom, a single man whom the others set up on a date with a woman.“I’m not afraid to be called gay; I just feel like it’s not real accurate,” Tom says. “I don’t feel like the label totally describes me or who I am, and sometimes I feel like if someone says ‘he’s gay,’ it means that you’re in relationships with men. And I’m not.”If statements like that are likely to register as denial to the Change.org petitioners, other remarks in the show will be like gas on a fire. “I think it’s really important that the wives of men with S.S.A. stick together,” Tanya says, sounding as if she’s talking about a disease support group. Earlier, she said this on behalf of the wives: “None of us feel oppressed. We’ve chosen to be here.”So have the men, at least by what they say in the show. The program is a masterpiece of image manipulation, juxtaposing things in a way calculated for incongruity. There are Pret and Megan walking with their daughter, flanking her, enacting the contented-parent cliché of swinging her by the arms. There are the guys, taking a break during their basketball game to describe the 0-to-4 ranking system they use when ogling passing male strangers. (“A 4 pretty much means you’re requiring restraints,” Pret says.) The program does have a few interesting and genuine-sounding moments in which the couples or their friends explore the collision of faith and feelings, but they’ll be drowned out. The channel, by the way, has another premiere, this one on Saturday night, that might get some attention: “All About Sex,” a talk show with an opinionated group of hosts: Margaret Cho, Heather McDonald, Marissa Jaret Winokur and Tiffanie Davis Henry. Will they talk about “My Husband’s Not Gay”? It would certainly be a lively exchange. Advertisement