AdvertisementSupported byTelevision ReviewBy Mike HaleThe British series “Babylon,” a complicated and darkly satirical comedy about law enforcement and its discontents that runs on the Sundance Channel starting Thursday, is eerily timely for American viewers. It touches on issues from pensions to prison privatization, but the story is built around two questionable police shootings. One, of a young black man, leads to riots that escalate because aggrieved police officers refuse to leave their stations.The anger and violence are wrapped, however, in farce and the kind of bitter, erudite insult humor at which the British are so adept. “You’re the best thing that’s happened to London since the plague,” an oily public-relations officer says to his rival, with perfect civility. Plotting strategy behind her back, he tells an ally: “We try to get rid of her now, we’re going to look like a racist Darth Vader trying to drown Luke Skywalker. In a bag. With some kittens.”Danny Boyle, the “Slumdog Millionaire” director, was a creator of the show and directed the pilot. The primary brains behind it, though, are the writers Sam Bain and Jesse Armstrong, whose credits include the barbed TV comedies “Peep Show” and “That Mitchell and Webb Look” and, most significantly, Armando Iannucci’s political satire “The Thick of It,” the forerunner to “In the Loop” and “Veep.”“Babylon” operates on two interlocking levels: the top of Scotland Yard, where an old-school commissioner (James Nesbitt of “The Missing”) hires an American public-relations expert (Brit Marling) away from Instagram; and the rank and file, where we see how the management politics and truth-spinning affect the work and love lives of an armed tactical team and an unarmed team of street cops.Most of the fun of the show is in the snake pit at headquarters, where the new hire, Liz, tries to instill new-world values of “transparency.” The main character in the large ensemble, she’s a latter-day Daisy Miller, the naïve American among the jaded Europeans who turns out to be more devious and amoral than they are. In this British perspective, the natives may be backstabbers, but they stick to their principles and don’t have second thoughts; the American switches sides at the drop of an incident report and then feels bad about it.The in-the-field story lines, with their affairs and guilt and post-traumatic stress, tend toward the sentimental, and the series as a whole is weaker for trying to have it both ways — to be both a no-holds-barred, absurdist satire about the primacy of image-making and a straightforward drama about the nobility of public service. (It doesn’t help that Sundance is showing the six-episode first season in isolation from the pilot, which it showed in September. Several central themes, like the sexual tension between Liz and the commissioner, are slightly bewildering without that context.)But the jokes are pretty good over all, though most of them can’t be printed here and an awful lot of them involve anal sex. And there are nice performances from, among many, Paterson Joseph (“The Leftovers”) as the deputy commissioner, Jonny Sweet as an overenthusiastic officer and Mr. Nesbitt, who turns the pugnacity he exhibited as the father in “The Missing” in an entirely different direction. Asked how life is at the “cop shop,” Liz says, “Everyone’s a racist, we’re all corrupt and at night we lock ourselves in the holding cells” and have sex. The joke, of course, is that it’s at least half true.BabylonSundanceTV, Thursday nights at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Created by Danny Boyle, Robert Jones, Sam Bain and Jesse Armstrong; Mr. Boyle, Mr. Jones, Mr. Bain and Mr. Armstrong, executive producers.WITH: Brit Marling (Liz Garvey), James Nesbitt (Richard Miller), Paterson Joseph (Charles Inglis), Nicola Walker (Sharon Franklin), Bertie Carvel (Finn Kirkwood), Ella Smith (Mia), Jill Halfpenny (Davina), Adam Deacon (Robbie), Nick Blood (Warwick) and Daniel Kaluuya (Matt Coward).,Advertisement