
Antiques By                     
EVE M. KAHN

OCT. 8, 2015
Cornelia Guest, the steel heiress, actress, former horseback riding champion, author, accessories and clothing designer, caterer and animal rights activist, is parting with much of the contents of her family compound in Old Westbury, N.Y. Last year she sold the property, known as Templeton, and she has consigned silver, artwork, furniture and porcelain to fall sales at Sotheby’s in Manhattan and Stair Galleries, an auction house in Hudson, N.Y.Her parents, the polo player Winston Frederick Churchill Guest and the socialite C. Z. Guest, had worked with the Parisian interior design firm Maison Jansen in the 1950s. The family kept the décor largely unchanged.The Sotheby’s lots, including horse paintings and dinnerware shaped like crabs and lettuce leaves, reflect the Guests’ equestrian pursuits, whimsical streak and fondness for large parties, which were attended by the likes of Truman Capote and Oscar de la Renta. Stair Galleries will offer, among other antiques, five polo mallets ($300 to $500 for the group) and a watercolor ($8,000 to $12,000) of a mallet-wielding athlete on horseback, by the Argentine painter Florencio Molina Campos. Colin Stair, the auction house’s owner, found the watercolor in a pile of prints in a Templeton barn.Ms. Guest, 51, is moving to a farm in Columbia County, N.Y., which she plans to turn into an animal sanctuary. Her menagerie of dogs and feral cats (eight each), a tortoise and a donkey will join her there. The new house is not suited to Templeton’s formal furnishings, she said. There was no room for the society portraitist Cecilia Beaux’s painting — more than four feet tall — of Ms. Guest’s great-grandfather Henry Phipps Jr. Last Friday, it sold for $6,875 at Sotheby’s.AdvertisementMs. Guest is salvaging some Templeton heirlooms, including cut velvet curtains in peony patterns, barn doors and horse nameplates from the stables. She has also kept parquet flooring, inlaid with cherub and musical instrument patterns; it turned up in storage and may have originally come from a Phipps townhouse in Manhattan.Parting with the objects for sale, she said, “just pulls at your heart in a way that you never expect.” Her next book, she said, will contain a family memoir partly based on surviving scrapbooks and albums.AdvertisementA version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page C27 of the New York edition with the headline: Cornelia Guest to Sell Contents of Family Estate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »