As the number of women accusing Bill Cosby of spiking their drinks before sexually assaulting them continues to grow, the comedian has not commented on the allegations, except obliquely. But on Thursday night during a performance in London, Ontario, Mr. Cosby did make a joke about them.As one woman in the audience walked past the stage during the show Mr. Cosby asked where she was going, according to the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. When she said she was heading to the lobby to buy a drink, Mr. Cosby responded, “You have to be careful about drinking around me.” Loud applause greeted the remark.Later in the show, a heckler yelled out that Mr. Cosby was a rapist. As the crowd began to boo Mr. Cosby motioned them to stop. “It’s O.K.,” he said. “Stay calm. Don’t applaud.” Security officers then ejected the heckler.In a statement after the show, which ended with a standing ovation, Mr. Cosby addressed his fans, saying: “One outburst but over 2,600 loyal, patient and courageous fans enjoyed the most wonderful medicine that exist for human-kind. Laughter. I thank you, the theater staff (Budweiser Gardens), the event organizers and the London, ON Community for your continued honor and support. I’m far from finished.”More than two dozen women, including three more on Wednesday, have publicly said that Mr. Cosby sexually assaulted them, in instances stretching from 1965 to 2008. Mr. Cosby, 77, has never been criminally charged in connection with the accusations and his lawyers have denied them.Thursday was not the first time Mr. Cosby has joked about allegations that have dogged him. In 2005 officials decided not to bring criminal charges against him in the case of a woman who said Mr. Cosby had drugged and sexually assaulted her the previous year in his Pennsylvania home. Just days later, after calling a woman up to the stage during his performance at the State Theater in New Brunswick, N.J., he said, “Before I get started, let me ask you: Did I put anything into your drink?”The woman who said she had been assaulted at his home, Andrea Constand, later filed a civil complaint against Mr. Cosby, alleging battery and assault. The case was settled confidentially.A version of this article appears in print on 01/10/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Cosby Makes a Joke Referring to Accusations.