A new report from the Association of Art Museum Directors compiled from a survey of its 236 members offers a sometimes surprising snapshot of the state of the museum ecosystem.On the 61 million trips to art museums in North America over the last fiscal year, each visitor on average spent less than $8 on admission, shopping and eating, according to the report, “Art Museums by the Numbers 2014.” Museums, in turn, invested $53 on each guest, with revenue covering only 15% of their total expenses.Private donations sustain art museums. Individuals accounted for 54 percent of contributions to the museums (far more than corporations, which made 13 percent of contributions) and donated or bequeathed over 73,000 works of art — nearly six times the number of artworks purchased by institutions.More than two-thirds of the museums’ annual expenses went to supporting collections, exhibitions, education and infrastructure, as opposed to revenue-generating activities.While the association has collected information from its membership since the 1980s, it had significantly fewer members and the survey wasn’t completed by all, so specific comparisons would not be accurate. Nonetheless, Christine Anagnos, executive director of the association, calls the results reassuring. “I see consistency,” she said. She acknowledged that the under-$8 figure spent by visitors would look very different if major cities like New York, Chicago and Los Angeles museums were isolated but said that the intention was to reflect the art museum field as a whole, including the many free museums and those that rely on family memberships.It is the first year the organization has had the digital ability to aggregate the data, said Ms. Anagnos, who plans to release new numbers every year as a public resource to follow museum trends over time. “These numbers tell us museums invest a lot in their visitors and in their communities,” she said. “Private financial support is also essential and corporate philanthropy isn’t as strong as it used to be. That’s coming through loud and clear in this report.”  A version of this article appears in print on 01/10/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Museums and Visitors: Counting Up the Dollars.