Kochi-Muziris Biennale
Various venues.
Dec. 12-March 29.
This year’s biennial, titled ‘‘Whorled Explorations,’’ focuses on Kochi’s history as a trading port and hub in the early days of globalization (companies including the Dutch East India Company operated out of the city’s ports). Set in and around Kochi’s airy colonial waterfront buildings, the biennial includes works by a wide range of international artists, including local names and major artists like Yoko Ono, Mona Hatoum and Anish Kapoor. A number of artists — like Valsan Koorma Kolleri, who built a site-specific sundial from organic materials that will decay throughout the exhibition — tailored works specifically for this show.The Magic Flute
Royal Danish Opera at the Operaen.
Jan. 15-March 29.
This year marks the 10th anniversary of the company’s gleaming modern opera house, and the celebrations kick off in earnest with a new ‘‘Magic Flute.’’ The Operaen was marred by controversy when it first opened — the building’s patron insisted on incorporating design features that motivated the architect Henning Larsen to denounce the final product — but has since evolved into a key part of the city’s cultural landscape. Marco Arturo Marelli of Switzerland will direct Mozart’s opera. Rory Macdonald and Wolfgang Wengenroth share conducting duties.

International Arts GuideA selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Opening 
Philharmonie de Paris.
Jan. 14; ongoing.
The Orchestre de Paris will inaugurate Paris’s long-awaited new concert hall on Wednesday with a concert of music by Ravel, Gabriel Fauré, Henri Dutilleux and Thierry Escaich, led by the conductor Paavo Jarvi. The hall will serve as the orchestra’s new home and will play host to contemporary concerts, interdisciplinary performances and exhibitions (‘‘David Bowie is,’’ a show about the performer, will open in March). The building has attracted controversy for its large budget, and for encroaching on the turf of Salle Pleyel, the orchestra’s former home. Its supporters have praised the building’s forward-thinking design.Olafur Eliasson: Contact
Fondation Louis Vuitton.
Through Feb. 23.
The Danish artist Olafur Eliasson — who built his international reputation with neon artworks but has also dabbled in installations and land art — created this exhibition specifically for the new museum, which opened in the fall. The show features several large-scale works, like a dark room in which a flashing light illuminates a gurgling stream of water; and a massive installation that surrounds viewers with a thin band of orange light. Above, ‘‘Map for Unthought Thoughts,’’ a work from the show.Scirt World Buskers Festival
Various venues.
Jan. 15-25.
Contortionists, cabaret singers and burlesque dancers will appear at the 10-day festival, set in venues across this verdant coastal city. Founded in 1994, the festival now attracts performers from around the world. The American acrobatic dance troupe Galumpha and ‘‘The Boy With the Tape on His Face,’’ a wordless comedy act, are among this year’s diverse array of performers. In addition to outdoor family-friendly events, several indoor night shows geared toward adults are scheduled.Quartier des Bains Openings
Various venues.
Jan. 15; Jan. 29; various dates.
Several times a year, a group of the city’s galleries and art institutions cull their resources, throwing an opening-night bash that takes over the hip arts district that abuts the city center. This year’s first vernissages take place on Thursday and inaugurate a wide swath of shows — including one dedicated to the salacious American artist Paul McCarthy. The festivities continue with another late night on Jan. 29, during artgenève, a citywide ‘‘salon d’art.’’ James Siena’s ‘‘Two Switchbacked Loops,’’ above, will be shown at Xippas Art Contemporain from Jan. 29.James McNeill Whistler Retrospective
Yokohama Museum of Art.
Through March 1.
The American painter moved to Paris in 1855, where he closely studied the emerging Impressionist movement and developed the contemporary appetite for all things Japanese. Around 130 works have been amassed for this exhibition, which includes sections focusing on Whistler’s portraits, landscapes and Japonaiserie. The show includes prints, watercolors and oils. Right, the 1864 ‘‘Symphony in White, No. 2: The Little White Girl,’’ one of several works in which the artist experimented with how to layer color.Orfeo
Roundhouse.
Jan. 13-24.
The storied Royal Opera joined forces with Roundhouse — a pop performance venue in London’s youthful Camden Town — for this new production, directed by Michael Boyd, who ran the Royal Shakespeare Company from 2002 to 2012. Monteverdi’s 1607 ‘‘Orfeo,’’ generally regarded as the first major opera ever written, follows the mythical musician who heads to the underworld to find his wife. The large-scale production stars Gyula Orendt and features recent arts graduates in some of the roles.MOFO 2015
Various venues.
Jan. 15-18.
On each morning of this eclectic music festival, different performers will lead open meditation sessions at a local Baha’i Center. A number of unlikely collaborations will take place here — including a performance and an installation by the duo Senyawa, above, and the artist Lucas Abela. (The interactive artwork incorporates elements of traditional Indonesian instruments and a pinball machine.) Amanda Palmer — a punk performer known best as the lead singer of the neo-cabaret group the Dresden Dolls — will perform a concert with the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra.Systems for a Score
Tashkeel.
Through Feb. 14
The sound artists Fari Bradley and Chris Weaver will occupy a space in the middle of the gallery during this show, assembling a recording inspired by digital images that they saw when they hacked an Atari computer. The duo, who explore topics like how visual media is related to sound, will present several sound and video pieces during the show, part of their ongoing residency here.