AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera‘Aida’ (Saturday) This revival of the Metropolitan Opera’s grand production of Verdi’s classic has gotten into a groove since it opened snoozily in October. The American soprano Tamara Wilson, singing at the Met for the first time, has taken on the title role opposite Marcello Giordani. The potent mezzo Violeta Urmana is Amneris, and the resonant baritone George Gagnidze is Amonasro. The cast also features two impressive young basses, Dmitry Belosselskiy and Soloman Howard. Marco Armiliato conducts. At 1 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)‘La Bohème’ (Thursday) The Metropolitan Opera’s run of Puccini’s classic opera continues with a new cast. Mimi is the delicate, detailed soprano Kristine Opolais, Jean-François Borras is Rodolfo and the wonderful baritone Mariusz Kwiecien is Marcello. Marina Rebeka, lately appearing at the Met in Verdi’s “La Traviata,” is Musetta. Riccardo Frizza conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)‘Les Contes d’Hoffmann’ (Monday and next Friday) The director Bartlett Sher’s phantasmagorical 2009 production of Offenbach’s “Les Contes d’Hoffmann” (“The Tales of Hoffmann”), though somewhat jumbled with imagery and overly busy, gets at the delusional fantasies of the haunted poet Hoffmann and has moments of stage magic. It returns to the house with the charismatic Italian tenor Vittorio Grigolo singing the daunting title role. The enticing cast includes Erin Morley as Olympia, Kate Lindsey as Nicklausse and Thomas Hampson playing the four villains. Yves Abel conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)★ George London Foundation Recital Series: Angela Meade and Nicholas Pallesen (Sunday) Among its many valuable activities, the George London Foundation presents a series of recitals at the Morgan Library & Museum, including artists who have been winners of the foundation’s prestigious awards. Programs are typically shared by an established and a rising singer. Ms. Meade, a soprano whose triumphs include acclaimed performances in the title role of Bellini’s “Norma” at the Metropolitan Opera in 2013, shares a program with Mr. Pallesen, a gifted, fast-rising baritone. They will be accompanied by the pianists Craig Rutenberg and Danielle Orlando. At 4:30 p.m., 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org. (Tommasini)‘The Merry Widow’ (Friday and Tuesday) Given the creative team and cast that the Metropolitan Opera lined up for its new production of this Lehar operetta, it looked most promising. But the production by the director and choreographer Susan Stroman, a five-time Tony Award-winner making her Met debut, though colorful and full of lively dancing, feels tentative and timid. Renée Fleming looks and sounds lovely as the widow Hanna, who is left a fortune by her banker husband; Nathan Gunn is debonair as Count Danilo, Hanna’s former flame who falls for her again; and Kelli O’Hara, a queen of Broadway, in her Met debut, brings a sweet voice and sassiness to the ingénue role of Valencienne. The Met, however, is far too big a house for this intimate operetta: The spoken dialogue (written by Jeremy Sams for this production) has to be amplified. Over all, the performances seem a little constrained and underpowered. Andrew Davis conducts the score sensitively. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)★ ‘La Traviata’ (Saturday and Wednesday) Willy Decker’s modern-dress, strangely powerful 2010 production of this Verdi work is back at the Metropolitan Opera. The opening night performance was hindered by the last-minute withdrawal, because of illness, of the young tenor Stephen Costello. His replacement, the appealing Sardinian tenor Francesco Demuro, saved the day. Mr. Demuro, as earlier scheduled, is now singing the role for the rest of the run. The soprano Marina Rebeka brings a shimmering, bright voice and alluring temperament to Violetta. On Wednesday, the exciting young Bulgarian soprano Sonya Yoncheva takes over the role. Quinn Kelsey is a vocally formidable Germont. Marco Armiliato, a house regular, conducts. Saturday at 8:30, Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)Classical MusicArgento Chamber Ensemble (Thursday) Next up in this innovative ensemble’s thoughtful Mahler in New York Contemporary series is Schoenberg’s arrangement for chamber group of “Das Lied von der Erde,” with the alto Jennifer Beattie and the tenor James Benjamin Rodgers. Before that, the ensemble will give the United States premiere of Oliver Schneller’s “Clair/Obscur” (2005-6) for seven instruments and live electronics, and perform Jesse Jones’s “Threshold” for tenor and ensemble. At 7:30 p.m., Park Avenue Armory, 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, argentomusic.org, armoryonpark.org. (David Allen)Chamber Music Society (Sunday and Thursday) Dvorak’s “American” Quintet in E flat (Op. 97) roots this group’s first concert of the week, which also features Beethoven’s darkly turbulent String Trio in C minor (Op. 9, No. 3) and Kodaly’s folky Serenade for Two Violins and Viola (Op. 12). A further rarity opens Thursday’s Rose Studio concert, in the shape of a Clarinet Quartet from a Swedish contemporary of Beethoven, Bernhard Crusell. Mendelssohn’s Second Piano Trio (Op. 66) makes up the balance. Sunday at 5 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, and Thursday at 6:30 p.m., Rose Studio, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Allen)★ Green Mountain Project  (Friday and Saturday) Deriving its clever name from the Baroque master Monteverdi, this centerpiece of the season for the early-music ensemble Tenet and its artistic director, Jolle Greenleaf, returns with both its brilliant version of that composer’s 1610 “Vespro Della Beata Vergine” and a new reconstruction of vespers by Charpentier. Vespers by Charpentier: Friday at 7:30 p.m., Church of St. Joseph, 371 Avenue of the Americas, at Washington Place, West Village; “Vespro Della Beata Vergine”: Saturday at 7:30 p.m., St. Jean Baptiste Church, 184 East 76th Street, Manhattan. More details: 646-470-5809, tenetnyc.com. (Woolfe)New York Philharmonic  (Friday, Saturday, Tuesday and Thursday) Alan Gilbert is back at the helm of his orchestra. This weekend he leads a program featuring Ravel’s “Valses Nobles et Sentimentales” and selections from Tchaikovsky’s “Swan Lake.” Most important, the orchestra completes its Nielsen Project with that Danish composer’s Clarinet Concerto, featuring its new principal clarinetist, Anthony McGill, as soloist. Thursday brings Mr. Gilbert’s first Verdi Requiem with the orchestra, including the New York Choral Artists and a talented quartet of soloists: Angela Meade, Lilli Paasikivi, Brandon Jovanovich and Eric Owens. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Tuesday and Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Woolfe)Orchestra of St. Luke’s  (Thursday) Martin Helmchen recently performed Dvorak’s Piano Concerto with the New York Philharmonic, and here’s another chance to hear the work, this time with the outstanding Stephen Hough at the keyboard. Wagner’s “Siegfried Idyll” and Haydn’s last symphony complete a weighty program under the conductor Harry Bicket. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)★ Prototype Festival (Friday through Jan. 17) This bracingly innovative festival of music theater is only in its third season, but it has already become a point of reference. This year’s highlights include the composer Stefan Weisman’s chamber opera “The Scarlet Ibis,” with a libretto by David Cote, at Here in the South Village. It features puppetry and shadow puppetry; a promising cast, led by the soprano Hai-Ting Chinn; and Steven Osgood conducting the American Modern Ensemble. In its production of “Toxic Psalms” at St. Ann’s Warehouse in Dumbo, Brooklyn, the vocal theater company Carmina Slovenica promises an evening of darkly chilling choral storytelling through a sequence of scenes mined from an array of poets and composers. Two workshops offer glimpses of operas in the nascent stages: “Winter’s Child,” at St. Paul’s Chapel in Lower Manhattan, with a libretto by Amanda Jane Shank, with music by Ellen Reid, and, at the Park Avenue Armory, “Aging Magician,” which draws on the talents of the composer Paola Prestini, the multigenre vocalist Rinde Eckert, the designer-director Julian Crouch and the Brooklyn Youth Chorus. There’s also a staged version of Bora Yoon’s “Sunken Cathedral,” at La MaMa, and Courtney Love’s theatrical debut, with Todd Almond, in “Kansas City Choir Boy,” at Here. At various times, 212-647-0202, prototypefestival.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)The Song Continues  (Tuesday through Thursday) This annual festival of master classes and concerts, led by the great mezzo-soprano Marilyn Horne, returns with the usual bevy of talented young singers, including solo recitals from the baritone John Brancy on Tuesday and the soprano Diana Yodzis on Thursday and master classes with Anne Sofie von Otter, Warren Jones and, on Thursday, Ms. Horne herself. At various times, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Woolfe)Advertisement