AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe CoscarelliTHE itinerant avant-pop singer Neneh Cherry has a routine when she visits New York, where she lived as a child and has intermittently since. Most of the stops are food-related: a diner breakfast, pastrami from Katz’s, Veselka on her old corner in the East Village, and, of course, a slice of pizza.“Walk a lot, get the subway — there’s a whole little O.C.D. round that I have to do to feel like I’m there,” she said over the phone from London ahead of her forthcoming trip.Conspicuously missing, until now, has been music. Despite calling the city her “backbone and biggest inspiration,” Ms. Cherry has never played a proper show of her own in New York. That changes on Friday night at the Highline Ballroom, where she will bring her singular mix of jazzy pop, vintage hip-hop and electronic music in support of “Blank Project,” her 2014 album and first solo release since 1996.“It’s kind of really absurd,” Ms. Cherry said of her prolonged absence from the city’s stages. “There isn’t really a logic or an explanation. It’s been down to weird timings and strange mishaps.” A 1989 tour with Fine Young Cannibals after the release of her debut album, “Raw Like Sushi,” for instance, was canceled after Ms. Cherry contracted Lyme disease.Fittingly, Ms. Cherry said she would open this week’s show with her newest album’s first track, “Across the Water,” in which she sings, “New York City, she speaks to me in tongues/Keeps me to her breast, pumps air into my lungs.” Ms. Cherry’s earliest memories, she said, are of Williamsburg, Brooklyn, where she stayed as a toddler in 1966 with her mother, Monica Karlsson (known as Moki), a Swedish textile artist, and her stepfather, the jazz trumpet player Don Cherry. “More or less every year, we would come back and check into the Chelsea” before settling into a sublet, Ms. Cherry recalled, her faint English accent befitting an international upbringing. From the mid-’70s until 2012, the family kept a loft in Long Island City, Queens.Over the years, Ms. Cherry bounced between her native Sweden and the punk scenes of Lower Manhattan and London, singing with the English group Rip, Rig and Panic, and even hitting the pop charts with a crossover solo hit, “Buffalo Stance,” in 1989. (“That song still pays my rent quite often,” she said, promising to perform it along with her newer material. “It’s like an old friend.”)There had also been a brief stint with the Slits, the influential postpunk band, during which, Ms. Cherry recalled, they opened for the Clash during the band’s 1981 run of 17 shows at Bond International Casino in Times Square. (She also appeared in a 2011 tribute show in Brooklyn for Ari Up, the Slits singer who had died the year before.) But as a fully formed solo artist, “the roads never really took me back,” she said. Now 50, Ms. Cherry credits her return to a new period of inspiration after the death of her mother in 2009. “Blank Project” was “about me coming back and bringing myself out from a very dark place,” she said, momentum she plans to maintain with the release of a new EP before summer, and an LP soon after.“I’m getting fast in my old age,” she said.But first comes a long overdue New York debut, followed by a tour across Britain, New Zealand and Australia. “I could end up feeling quite nervous,” Ms. Cherry said of finally playing in New York, adding that the performance is “quite a big thing” to family and friends. There was the risk of “overcompensating” or “thinking too much,” she said. The city, Ms. Cherry knows, has also changed since the vibrant punk clubs of her youth. “It’s not a quiet city, but it’s quieter,” she said. “It is very neat, but you can’t make it too neat. It will never be too neat.” Advertisement