The American Dialect Society has overwhelmingly voted to name #blacklivesmatter its word of the year for 2014, marking the first time that the group has chosen a Twitter hashtag in its annual vote.“While #blacklivesmatter may not fit the traditional definition of a word, it demonstrates how powerfully a hashtag can convey a succinct social message,” Ben Zimmer, the chairman of the society’s new words committee, said in a statement. “Language scholars are paying attention to the innovative linguistic force of hashtags.”#Blacklivesmatter, which became a social media rallying cry following the deaths of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo., and Eric Garner in Staten Island, grabbed 196 votes, far outpacing rivals like bae (a sweatheart or romantic partner, 3 votes), columbusing (cultural appropriation, especially the act of a white person discovering supposedly unknown aspects of minority culture, 11 votes), and manspreading (sitting with one’s legs spread widely on public transit, 5 votes).#Blacklivesmatter was also named hashtag of the year, in the first time the society had voted on that category. (“Hashtag” was its word of the year in 2012.) Ferguson was voted name of the year in a separate vote held by the sibling American Name Society.The dialect society, founded in 1889, has chosen a word of the year since 1990, as a means of “highlighting that language change is normal, ongoing and entertaining,” according to a statement. The vote, held this year during the group’s annual meeting in Portland, Ore., is said to be the oldest continuous such effort, and the only one unaffiliated with a dictionary publisher or other commercial enterprise.The most useful category was won by “even,” used on its own as a verb to refer to the failure to master difficult situations or emotions, as in “I can’t even.” Most outrageous was won by “second-amendment,” used as a verb, ironically, by gun-control proponents to describe killing someone with a gun. As in, “He second-amendmented them.”“EIT,” an abbreviation for “enhanced interrogation technique,” was voted most euphemistic. “Salty,” meaning bitter, angry or upset, was voted most likely to succeed, while “platisher,” an online media company also serving as a platform for creative content, was voted least likely to succeed. “Baeless,” as in without a bae, was deemed most unnecessary.The vote involved more than 200 lexicographers, linguists, etymologists, historians, grammarians and others. It also attracted some sardonic commentary on Twitter, under the hashtag #WOTY2014.“@americandialect just voted for ‪#blacklivesmatter‬ as WOTY,” one linguist tweeted. “And somewhere a small but loud @muricandialect votes for ‪#AllLivesMatter‬.”