AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Zachary WoolfeMuch of “Toxic Psalms,” a striking new work by the rabidly talented Slovenian female vocal ensemble Carmina Slovenica, is dark. Literally: Enveloped in shadow, the vast stage of St. Ann’s Warehouse in Brooklyn, where the piece runs through Sunday, has rarely looked as forlorn as it did on opening night on Thursday.The content of this abstract, ominous reflection on gender roles and ethical responsibility can be forbidding, too. “The grieving mother stood weeping by her daughter,” the first number begins, setting the mood for the 90 minutes to come. Why, then, did I leave St. Ann’s smiling? Because “Toxic Psalms” proves that with even the most somber material, there can be delight in sheer virtuosity, in the intensity of live performance and in being introduced to a group one hopes will become a regular visitor to New York.The ensemble and its director, Karmina Silec, have created haunting images. As the 31 young performers, many wearing billowing black gowns, sing “Rejoice, O Virgin” from Rachmaninoff’s Vespers, the stage is suffused with dim blue light. One singer — then another and another — traces sinuous lines through space with a flashlight. Lemons strewn over the floor become a loaded symbol of purity under threat.Their facial expressions sliding from seductive to stunned, the singers move over the stage with the nervous, halting energy of bees in a hive. Crisp marches along the perimeter evoke both fashion shows and repressive regimes: The oppression suggested by the piece is as much about standards of beauty and sexual violence as totalitarianism.The organizers of Prototype: Opera/Theater/Now, an invaluable annual festival now in its third year, deserve credit for bringing Carmina Slovenica here. The city is not exactly bursting with pristinely staged choral investigations of man’s inhumanity to man — or, more to the point, woman.Yet “Toxic Psalms” doesn’t appear in a complete vacuum. When the Berlin Radio Choir performed alongside the Berlin Philharmonic in Peter Sellars’s production of Bach’s “St. Matthew Passion” at the Park Avenue Armory in October, it demonstrated beyond a doubt that a chorus could act.And Carmina Slovenica’s hooting, hissing, ululating vocal techniques feel right at home amid this season’s celebrations of Meredith Monk, closely associated with such sounds for five decades. Among others, Roomful of Teeth, an a cappella octet, has recently become popular recreating those techniques for a new generation.“Toxic Psalms” adds a savage yet polished theatricality to the mix as well as an ambiguity all too rare in American performance. It was hard to tell where each one of the eight “tableaux” referred to in the program ended and the next began. Even the divisions between the radiantly sung musical selections (which included Syrian Orthodox chant, Pergolesi, Rachmaninoff and contemporary composers from the United States, Latvia, Slovenia and elsewhere) were blurry.But though the piece could be tightened — I wouldn’t have missed some long spoken monologues — Ms. Silec is savvy about maintaining dramatic momentum, and the performers execute every shift in tone with subtlety and agility. Andrej Hajdinjak’s resourceful lighting and Belinda Radulovic’s evocative costumes are both superb. All add up to an evening that’s bracing yet, perversely enough, enchanting.“Toxic Psalms” runs through Sunday at St. Ann’s Warehouse, 29 Jay Street, at Plymouth Street, Dumbo, Brooklyn; 718-254-8779, stannswarehouse.org; Prototype runs through next Saturday; prototypefestival.org. Advertisement