AdvertisementSupported byThe TV WatchBy Alessandra Stanley“Togetherness,” a beguiling new comedy beginning Sunday on HBO, is an intimate, bittersweet look at the travails of a clique of disaffected middle-class friends. So, of course, is “Girls,” which returns the same night for a fourth season, and so is “Looking,” which begins its second season.Bourgeois privilege is not exactly a selling point in popular culture at the moment, even though it is still a dominant force. That’s one reason the main characters on “Togetherness” are baptized not by fire but by embarrassment — the scalding, headbanging, toe-curling kind. A husband and a wife each catches the other masturbating. A single woman tries to make a connection with the man she just slept with, but he mini-vacs his living room while she talks. A sexy woman asks a straight, single male friend what he would think of her outfit, “if you were a guy.” Like its HBO stablemate “Girls,” which offers a mordant look at self-absorbed Brooklyn millennials, “Togetherness” right off the bat strips its characters of their dignity and self-importance. The derision is affectionate and mostly short-lived, less a statement than a way of inoculating these shows from charges of preciousness and presumption — there is, after all, an entire online industry devoted to lampooning the solipsism of Lena Dunham, the enfant terrible creator of “Girls.” (Complaining about Ms. Dunham is the social media generation’s version of hating Hope and Michael of “Thirtysomething.”) In Season 4, Ms. Dunham makes a point of spoofing herself — and her critics. Her character, Hannah, is thrilled to have been admitted to the Iowa Writers’ Workshop but discovers that she isn’t accepted quite as easily by her peers. At a class where the other students are of different races and backgrounds — possibly one of the most ethnically diverse groups featured on the series — Hannah reads her short story involving an S & M encounter, expecting to shock and awe her audience. When the professor asks the students to say what it’s about, one of them says disdainfully, “It’s about a really privileged girl just deciding she’s going to let someone abuse her.”“Togetherness,” like “Girls,” has some very barbed comic moments, but it’s gentler with its characters, softening the caricatures and peeling away surface jokes to reveal men and women who are complicated, struggling but well-meaning, losers who are actually quite winning. Neither show is a flat-out satirical farce like two other series set in show business: “Curb Your Enthusiasm” and “Episodes,” a very funny, too-often-overlooked Hollywood sendup that returns for a fourth season to Showtime, also on Sunday night. But both are a lot more biting and funny than the HBO series “Looking,” an up-close-and-personal depiction of gay life in San Francisco that is careful, slow and unimaginative. “Togetherness” is an insular bildungsroman for grown-ups written by authors who understand that anything too self-serious can be stamped with that most dismissive of labels, “white people problems.”And “Togetherness” has a tough road in that regard: It takes place in Hollywood, a milieu that Americans love to hate even more than Park Slope or Williamsburg. The brothers Mark and Jay Duplass, independent filmmakers and Sundance Film Festival darlings, created the show with Steve Zissis, who like Mark Duplass, is one of the stars of the series. The setting isn’t one of those West Los Angeles ZIP codes where parents don’t vaccinate their children but do hire private security firms to patrol their gated communities. It’s the West Coast Williamsburg: Eagle Rock, a gentrifying, diverse, artsy neighborhood in northeast Los Angeles. The lead characters are in show business, but not at the top of the heap — closer to the working-stiff middle. Mark Duplass plays Brett, a movie sound designer, married to Michelle, played by Melanie Lynskey (“Two and a Half Men”), who stays at home with their two small children. They also have two childlike adults under their roof, Michelle’s older sister Tina (Amanda Peet), a past-her-prime party girl, and Alex (Mr. Zissis), an unemployed actor and Brett’s best friend.All four are restless and in varying degrees of crisis: Brett and Michelle are out of sync and never have sex; Tina, visiting from Houston, has no career and no steady boyfriend; and Alex is the most pathetic of the four, plump, balding, penniless and homeless. He also turns out to be the most appealing, largely thanks to Mr. Zissis, who gives this sad sack an odd, understated charm and inner resources. But all the actors are excellent, making their characters sympathetic and surprising even in the midst of the most predictable early midlife crises. “Togetherness” is what could happen to the heroines of “Girls” if they grow up only a little bit. Advertisement