Season 6, Episode 12: “The Debate”“The Good Wife” finished a two-episode midseason pivot on Sunday night. Last week Cary’s drug case was resolved, and this week the balance of attention swung to Alicia’s campaign for state’s attorney. Politics now trumps law — there was no courtroom action, though there was a conference-room subplot. Now we wait until March to see how Alicia fares.Titled “The Debate,” the episode was stuffed with action: Alicia’s televised debate with Frank Prady finally took place, on the same day that a not-guilty verdict in a shot-by-cops case threatened to cause riots in Chicago, and on the same day that Florrick Agos’s most important client (Neil Gross of Chumhum) threatened to leave. It was a constant-motion hour — one of those where the breathless pace was a good idea because you didn’t want to think too long about some of what was going on.It began with disclaimers that the episode was filmed before “events” in Ferguson, Mo., and Staten Island — the real-life riots that took place when police officers who had killed young black men were not indicted. I won’t try to sort out the complicated plot, in which everything took place simultaneously and everyone watched everyone else on television — Peter, Diane and Cary watching Alicia in the debate; Alicia, Eli and Johnny watching Peter at the protests. Here are the main currents:* Alicia, after receiving too much advice from Josh and Johnny, stumbled early in the debate but rallied when a weasel reporter brought up Peter’s infidelity. “How dare you, sir!” she exclaimed, invoking the tender ears of her daughter, Grace, who was in the audience. (Makenzie Vega’s entire dialogue consisted, if memory serves, of “Good job, Mom.”) When the debate was stopped because the TV stations switched to coverage of the verdict, Alicia and Frank ran into each other in the hotel kitchen, where they began an impromptu mini-debate that, Capra-style, ended up with them arguing about race and justice to a diverse group of hotel workers. You could picture the scene in the writers’ room when someone said, “It’ll be a kitchen debate!” —  the “Good Wife” writers’ room probably being one of the few where no one had to be told who Nixon and Khrushchev were. Interestingly, Alicia, arguing for a pure meritocracy in the prosecutors’ office, was to the right of Prady, whose arguments about inherent racism and diversity in hiring were cast as formulaically liberal.* Peter, ever opportunistic, took advantage of the Chicago mayor’s absence to do some effective grandstanding. Asserting that there was an imminent danger of the protests over the verdict turning into riots (which the mayor’s chief of staff denied), he had the wife of the victim in the shooting brought downtown and stood beside her as she called for calm. At the same time, he took a few minutes to get into an SUV with his lawyer-on-the-side, Ramona, and break up with her. (Hey, at least he didn’t do it by text.) As always with Peter, it was impossible to know whether this was motivated more by concern for Alicia or by self-preservation. (The weasel reporter had obtained photos of Peter and Ramona leaving her apartment.) Asked by his former spiritual adviser, the young pastor Isaiah Easton, “Do you want to be good?,” Peter replied: “I think it’s a little late for that. I want to be effective.”* Diane welcomed Cary back to the Florrick Agos offices, but the mood soured immediately when they discovered that the lawyer who replaced David Lee as the head of family law was mishandling Neil Gross’s divorce settlement — and he was being beaten by David, now representing Mrs. Gross. Fortunes rose and fell, in standard “Good Wife” style — Kalinda had photos of Neil’s wife in flagrante with a Chumhum competitor; David called the bluff, saying the photos would embarrass Neil more than his wife; Diane invoked Neil’s wife’s noncompete clause; finally David won by threatening to cast blame for the fappening (nude celebrity photos) on Neil and Chumhum. And, in the episode’s one real surprise, Neil fired Florrick Agos, which will certainly have consequences, with luck including some good belt-tightening humor.The real reason for the Neil Gross plot became apparent shortly after, when Alicia came to the Florrick Agos offices after the aborted debate. She encountered David Lee, who had just been taken back into the firm by Diane and Cary (knowing when they were beaten). Livid that she hadn’t been consulted, she lashed out at Diane — “I’m a named partner, it’s a decision for all of us” — and Diane fired back that Alicia’s continuing her campaign should have been a decision for all of them as well. Then things got a little weird, as far as I was concerned, when Alicia replied that Diane and Cary were being sexist and wouldn’t question a man in her situation. Really? The scene played, to me, as an example of Alicia’s hubris and self-absorption, but maybe I’m the sexist one. The tone seemed to be the opposite — generally, the show keeps presenting her in determined, heroic terms. I’ve left for last the unresolved sexual tension between Alicia and Johnny, or Will Lite. They had an awkward moment at the debate, whose importance was emphasized by having Marissa Gold notice it. Thoughts on that? Is there any chemistry there? What do we call them, Jalicia? Please give us your thoughts, comments, questions about “The Debate” in the comments. And I’ll see you in March for the last 10 episodes.