The HBO comedy by Lena Dunham.Season 4, Episode 1: “Iowa”Like an ex, the needy and often off-putting characters of “Girls” go away just long enough to make you forget what they’ve put you through. Then, with the quickness of an “I miss you” text, they’re back with a new season. But first some introductions on our end: I’m Joe Coscarelli, an under-30, Brooklyn-dwelling music reporter here at The Times — and yes, I realize that could easily be a “Girls” character. Joining me in these weekly recap chats will be Lydia Polgreen. How firmly are you within the target demo, Lydia?Lydia: I could not be further from it, Joe. I’m on the cusp of 40, a smug married living in the Hudson Valley with a middle-management job. As a born-late member of Generation X, I hopped on one of the last express elevators to gainful, (hopefully) lifelong employment in a meaningful career, long past the struggles at the heart of the show. Joe: The struggles are real. Sunday night’s Season 4 premiere, “Iowa,” picks up pretty much exactly where we left off last spring: Not in Iowa quite yet, but its looming, as our not-quite-a-hero Hannah Horvath (Lena Dunham) has decided to attend the prestigious Iowa Writers’ Workshop. With an achievement of her own to distract her, she seems to have come to terms with the budding acting career of her boyfriend Adam (Adam Driver), although overwrought commercials for happy pills (some side-effects included) are  leaving him rather unfulfilled. As for the others, Shoshanna (Zosia Mamet)  seems to have figured out her credit load and has graduated from N.Y.U., giving her divorced parents — Mel and Mel Shapiro, one of a handful of great little jokes in this episode — an excuse to bicker. Jessa (Jemima Kirke) has solidified her deep bond with Beedie, the aging artist, after an abandoned assisted suicide. And Marnie (Allison Williams) is officially the other woman — we first see her having relatively adventurous daytime sex with her musical partner, Desi, before they perform at a jazz-less jazz brunch.Did you miss these supremely flawed (but also magnetic!) people?Lydia: I did miss them. And I thought the opening of this episode was a deft echo of the show’s deeply arresting pilot: Hannah with her parents at a restaurant, measuring her progress from the nest and into the world. In the that scene, readers will recall, Hannah’s parents broke the news that they could no longer support her financially, and she needed to take care of herself. In this episode, her father’s emotional toast  — “Slow to grow, but oh, how beautiful is the blossom!” was offered as much in relief as pride, it seemed to me, though it seems their financial commitments on Hannah’s behalf will continue now that she is back in school. Parents were all over this episode, placed in ways that situated our foursome. Marnie’s mom (Rita Wilson) has become an undermine-y stage mother. When she suggests hair extensions moments before that disastrous jazz brunch, Marnie’s defense —  “I have plenty of hair!” — feels like a cri de coeur.Joe: Shout out to Marnie’s mom’s brass-knuckles iPhone case. Lydia: I also loved the pure comedy of Shoshana’s parents, Mel and Mel, played by Ana Gasteyer and Anthony Edwards, bickering over which address her diploma should be mailed to, making even the anticlimax of her presumably late graduation all about them. These were all graceful ways to catch us up with where the girls are in their lives, even though no time has really passed since the end of last season. But it felt a bit like housekeeping. Looking forward to going, as Marnie sang, “onward and inward.” I wonder: what did you make of the state of the friendships? Joe: Save Shosh, who has her hands full with post-grad anxiety and grumpy Ray, her (once and future?) ex, Hannah is the center of everyone’s world again, apparently. We know that to be true in her own head, of course, but I was surprised especially by Jessa’s sudden separation anxiety when we haven’t seen much evidence of their bond lately. I didn’t buy that she would care as much as she did. Iowa is only temporary.That said, I found Jessa’s moment with Beedie, played by Louise Lasser, in the presence of the artist’s pissed off daughter Rickie (Natasha Lyonne, who deserves any renaissance coming to her), to be one of the purest emotional connections we’ve seen on this show, like, ever. Jessa’s were the only parents we didn’t see this episode, but she clearly craves some maternal guidance and has found it with Beedie. Lydia: Until I saw Rickie I didn’t realize how deep a well of loneliness had opened up in my life since “Orange Is the New Black” went on hiatus! Joe: And of course Marnie would show up early, with coffee, to help Hannah finish packing. That’s what Type A friends are for. Adam, meanwhile, played doting boyfriend, insisting they didn’t need a long-distance relationship plan, until the moment Hannah had to go. Then he opted to not even say goodbye. All I can say about their impending breakup — or at least serious issues — is that I hope we get the window-shaking Adam Driver monologue we deserve. What else are you looking forward to this season?Lydia: You know, this is a show that was so earth-shattering and epoch-defining when it landed in 2012. And watching this first episode of Season 4 I was struck by how, well, ordinary it felt. Sure, there were the graphic sex scenes — especially Marnie’s kitchen-sink tryst with Desi  (Ebon Moss-Bachrach) — to remind us that this wasn’t TV, it was HBO. But since the show’s debut, so many others have picked up the gauntlet of transgression and run much, much further with it. Jenny Slate (a Season 1 guest star, as the horror show memoirist of Hannah’s nightmares) made “Obvious Child,” a movie in which her abortion was a foregone conclusion, exceeding the shock in the first season of Jessa’s pregnancy scare and ultimately unneeded abortion clinic visit. And the breakout heroines in “Broad City” have taken lewd and rude to a whole new level of pee-your-pants hilarity. Joe: “Broad City,” it’s worth noting, is back for a second season starting Wednesday, and has yet to attract any semblance of a Dunham-style backlash… We’ll see if that lasts. Lydia: So I think the only place “Girls” can go is truer and more authentic, fathoming the profound depths of these relationships. I was glad you brought up Jessa. Her words to Hannah in the bathroom (notice how many of these conversations happen in bathrooms?) struck me: “You are,” she said, wimping out  “on this thing we are all trying to do, which is making it work regardless of location, right where we are.”Joe: Jessa’s pleas notwithstanding, it looks like “right where we are” won’t be New York City, at least for Hannah, at least for a little while (if we’ve learned anything, it’s that she’s not the best at finishing what she starts). Anyway: See you in Iowa City!