AdvertisementSupported byBy Bruce WeberAndraé Crouch, a singer and songwriter whose plaintive, passionate gospel songs knitted religious music to rhythm and blues, soul and contemporary balladeering and found their way into mainstream pop music, died on Thursday in Los Angeles. He was 72. Brian Mayes, his publicist, said the cause was complications of a heart attack Mr. Crouch had on Saturday. Mr. Crouch had been in poor health for some time, Mr. Mayes said, with cancer, diabetes and congestive heart failure. A gospel crooner with a keen sense of melody and a voice both velvety and powerful, Mr. Crouch won seven Grammy Awards for his performances of songs professing his ardent Christian faith. His best-known, often performed with a choir, included “The Blood Will Never Lose Its Power,” a slow, pulsing, bluesy number that he wrote as a teenager; “My Tribute (To God Be the Glory),” which begins with the longing of a torch song and swells to an anthem; and “Soon and Very Soon,” which, with its joyous R&B flavor, was sung by a choir at a public memorial for Michael Jackson. They were both churchly and rocking, and they gave Mr. Crouch a following beyond the realm of gospel fans. From the mid-1960s into the ’80s, he led the group Andraé Crouch and the Disciples, which performed at the Hollywood Bowl, at Carnegie Hall and on “The Tonight Show” and toured in Europe, Africa and the Caribbean. He appeared a handful of times on “Saturday Night Live.” The easy-listening group the Johnny Mann Singers recorded an album of his songs. Mr. Crouch was also an arranger, producer and choirmaster, and led choirs that sang on pop hits including Michael Jackson’s “Man in the Mirror” and Madonna’s “Like a Prayer.” Paul Simon included his song “Jesus Is the Answer,” featuring the Jessy Dixon Singers, on his 1974 album “Paul Simon in Concert: Live Rhymin’.” His song “I’ve Got Confidence” was covered by Elvis Presley in 1972 on his gospel album “He Touched Me.” Mr. Crouch also worked in the movies and television. He composed, arranged and conducted music for the “The Color Purple” (1985), for which he shared an Oscar nomination with Quincy Jones and others. He was also the choral arranger and conductor for “The Lion King.” He composed the theme music for the television comedy series “Amen,” starring Sherman Hemsley as a church deacon. In the 1994 television movie “In Search of Dr. Seuss,” he was the voice of Yertle the Turtle. Andraé Edward Crouch was born in San Francisco on July 1, 1942. His father, Benjamin, and his mother, the former Catherine Hodnett, operated dry cleaners and a restaurant and later founded a church, now known as New Christ Memorial Church, in San Fernando, Calif., near Los Angeles.At his death Andraé, who lived in the Pacoima section of Los Angeles, was a pastor of the church, along with his twin sister, Sandra, also a Grammy-winning singer, who is his only immediate survivor. According to an often-told story, young Andraé, who began singing as a boy, wrote his first song, “The Blood Will Never Lose Its Power,” at a picnic, but, thinking it was no good, crumpled it up and threw it in a wastebasket, where it was rescued by his sister. By the end of the picnic everyone was singing it. He was still in high school when he started his first musical group, the Church of God in Christ Singers, which included Billy Preston, who later played keyboards behind the Beatles and the Rolling Stones.Mr. Crouch studied elementary education at a local college and worked as a drug counselor, The Los Angeles Times reported. But by the mid-1960s he had founded the Disciples, and his musical career began in earnest.His albums with the group included “Take the Message Everywhere,” “Keep On Singin’ ” and “Live at Carnegie Hall.” As a solo artist his recordings included “Finally,” “Mighty Wind” and “Mercy,” for which he won his most recent Grammy, in 1995. Over the years Mr. Crouch faced criticism from gospel purists and observers of strict church tradition that his music was overly secular.“Every song I’ve written takes you through the Scriptures and reinforces the word of God,” he told The Los Angeles Times in 1982. “I give people a beautiful message, but I do it with pop, rock, funk, jazz or disco or anything that will make it appealing. “It’s a pity that a lot of great messages have been wasted because they have been paired with bad music. That’s what’s wrong with a lot of traditional church music. That’s why most of it bores me.” Advertisement