AdvertisementSupported byPlaylistBy Jon ParelesOut with the old? Not quite yet. Before the year fully gears up, this Playlist lingers over some albums from 2014 that earned some belated notice — and welcomes some 2015 albums that defy the January doldrums.Jazmine SullivanREALITY SHOWJazmine Sullivan’s third studio album, “Reality Show” (RCA), to be released this week, isn’t a celebrity chronicle. Most of its songs are about rougher realities. They’re character studies of a gold digger who’s all too aware she can be replaced (“Mascara”), a woman whose love is a toxic addiction (“Veins”), a girlfriend getting ditched just as her boyfriend starts to make it in the music business (“Brand New”). Breakups loom throughout the album, all the better for Ms. Sullivan to let loose all the extremes of her voice: tearful, stinging, deep, airborne, velvety, raspy, aching and downright bluesy in the unfashionably guitar-backed “Forever Don’t Last.” The production cannily meshes programmed beats with retro echoes of the 1960s and ’70s; she’s learned from Amy Winehouse (particularly in the backhanded “Stupid Girl”) as well as Stevie Wonder, Prince and Alicia Keys. Playing a woman too often scorned, she comes out victoriously soulful.Gazelle TwinUNFLESHPressure, paranoia, fear, pain, nightmares, madness, solitude, the inevitable decay of the body, and the will to face down all of those — and more — are the makings of Gazelle Twin’s “Unflesh” (Anti-Ghost Moon Ray/Last Gang). Gazelle Twin is the studio project of Elizabeth Bernholz, a British musician working with electronics, samples and her own voice. She deploys brittle, unyielding sounds that throb darkly in the background or that suddenly and mercilessly close in and attack; propulsive beats, when they occur, stoke tension rather than dancing. Ms. Bernholz sings, chants, wails, turns herself into choruses, pitch-shifts her voice or chops it up. In her synthetic universe, nothing is stable and anything can be a threat, a condition she greets with matter-of-fact bravery even at her most fragile moments.Chad VanGaalenSHRINK DUSTThe prolific low-fi songwriter, visual artist, instrument maker and proud oddball Chad VanGaalen opened up a little on his 2014 album, “Shrink Dust” (Sub Pop). He still loves noisy, overloaded mixes; he still has an imagination that mixes the cosmic and the macabre, flinging around lyrics like “Perfect-looking humanoids we’re all that remains/Identically insane, our rotting little brains,” in his high, quavery voice. But this batch of songs also proffers some unvandalized melodies (often with echoes of Neil Young) and some glimmers of heart amid the phantasmagoria.Toumani and SidikiTOUMANI AND SIDIKIThe celebrated Malian kora player Toumani Diabaté has made many high-concept recordings with cross-cultural collaborations and ensembles large and small. But the concept of “Toumani and Sidiki” (World Circuit/Nonesuch) is simple: Mr. Diabaté and Sidiki Diabaté, his son, the latest two generations of a centuries-old lineage of griots, play unadorned duets for kora, the 21-string harp, live in the studio. With Toumani on the left and Sidiki on the right, they are attuned and simultaneously meditative and flashy. Most pieces are built on two alternating chords. Like a fond father with a hot-rodding son, Toumani often sets up a low, resonant foundation while Sidiki races all over the place — in zooming scales, in jabbing staccato crosscurrents, in shimmering trills. Not always, of course; there are sage, equally virtuosic epigrams from Toumani’s side and passages where father and son are utterly, prismatically merged. The album pauses for one nontraditional piece, “Lampedusa,” a bell-toned elegy for the more than 300 African migrants who died in a burning shipwreck off the Italian island of that name. Pensive or hyperactive, the duets are always gorgeous.ClarkCLARKThe repetition that makes electronic dance music so enveloping in a club can be, well, just repetitive in other listening circumstance. Clark, the English electronic musician who started his recording career more than a decade ago as Chris Clark, is more impatient. His seventh full-length album, “Clark” (Warp), is on the consonant side of his diverse output, and it often relies on brisk house and techno beats and synthetic keyboards. Yet it also refuses to let anything simply repeat for very long; a riff gets a countermelody, a beat gets dismantled with its components altered or reassigned. It’s an album that plays as an album, not a D.J. set.Panda BearPANDA BEAR MEETS THE GRIM REAPERA blur of voices, bouncing from ear to ear in staggered syncopation, suddenly realigns and focuses for the chorus of “Boys Latin,” the single from Panda Bear’s fifth solo album, “Panda Bear Meets the Grim Reaper,” arriving this week. Noah Lennox, a.k.a. Panda Bear, sings “Dark cloud descended again/And a shadow moves in.” There has always been angst behind the vertigo of Panda Bear’s songs, but he brings it closer to the surface on this album. His music, as usual, is full of electronic loops and sustained vocal lines and pop harmonies, like the Beach Boys in a virtual hall of mirrors; this album also takes side trips toward krautrock, disco and Debussy. And in these songs, Panda Bear has lifted his voice above the instrumental swirl, just enough to reveal some worries about family, friends, purpose and mortality, and to move his music ever so slightly toward pop.Advertisement