
Inside Art By                     
 ROBIN POGREBIN and
 

 HILARIE M. SHEETS
 
OCT. 8, 2015
This is an important moment for the International Center of Photography, as it prepares to open its new space at 250 Bowery in the spring. To help lead this chapter, the center has selected Charlotte Cotton, a British photography writer and curator, as its first curator in residence, a new position.In a telephone interview, Ms. Cotton said she would emphasize a more thematic approach to shows, along the lines of biennials, “which allows us to explore things deeply.”For the year starting in May 2016, when the space opens, for example, the center’s shows and events will focus on “privacy in our image world, including the right to be anonymous,” Ms. Cotton said, “and surveillance — these kinds of dual spectrums of photography: voyeurism and exhibitionism.”“Exhibitionism is kind of a 21st-century modality out of social media,” she added, “moving from wanting to look to wanting to be looked at.” In 2017, the focus will be on social change.AdvertisementMs. Cotton, 45, has held positions as curator of photographs at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London and curator and head of the Wallis Annenberg Department of Photography at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. She is the author of  “Photography Is Magic,” released last month.AdvertisementThe center has struggled at times to attract visitors and financial support. Last year, it decided to buy a building on Bowery near the New Museum and relocate, after its lease in Midtown ended. (The center’s school remains in Midtown.)Despite a new world, in which everyone with an iPhone is arguably a photographer, Ms. Cotton said she continued to believe in photography as an art form and in the importance of the center as a place to explore it. “We have to be fast, and we have to be definite and committed,” she said. “That’s why I like joining institutions that really know they have to change.”If Pier 26 on the Hudson River in TriBeCa has any claim to fame, it is in having been the location for the Village People’s 1978 “Y.M.C.A.” video.The pier is also in being redeveloped by the Hudson River Park Trust, which on Friday will announce the selection of two prominent designers: the architect Rafael Viñoly, who has offered to donate his services to design the long-planned science education and research center (known as an estuarium), and the landscape firm OLIN to lead the design team for the pier’s new park.The trust will also announce a $10 million gift from Citigroup toward completion of the $30 million pier, between North Moore and Laight Streets. Another $10 million came from the city, and the trust has applied to the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation for the rest.The $20 million estuarium — toward which the state has contributed $10 million — will be operated by Clarkson University, in Potsdam, N.Y., along with the New York Hall of Science in Queens and the Hudson River sloop Clearwater. The park is to be completed by early 2019.“The park as a whole has made a transformation of the West Side,” Mr. Viñoly, a TriBeCa resident, said in a telephone interview. “It’s a way of contributing,” he added, referring to his involvement. (Mr. Viñoly’s son, Román, is also on the board.)AdvertisementThe trust will meet on Oct. 19 to hear from neighborhood residents. “We want to make sure we put a program there that everybody wants,” said Madelyn Wils, the trust’s president and chief executive. “And then we’re going to start designing.”When the Minnesota art dealer Gordon A. Locksley mounted Andy Warhol’s first exhibition in Minneapolis, he introduced Warhol to two local collectors, Miles and Shirley Fiterman, whom he went on to photograph for his celebrated Polaroids.Now 12 items from the Fitermans’ extensive collection — valued at about $70 million and including works by Oldenburg, Miró, Lichtenstein and Picasso, as well as Warhol — are coming up for auction at Christie’s, to be sold in three evening sales, on Nov. 9, 10 and 12. “They have artists in great depth,” Laura Paulson, Christie’s chairwoman of postwar and contemporary art, said of the collection. “Miles and Shirley were incredibly passionate — it really can’t be overstated — they were actively involved as a couple in collecting. They had deep relationships with their dealers and with the artists they collected.”Ms. Fiterman, 90, lives in Palm Beach; her husband died in 2004 . Among the highlights of the sales are Roy Lichtenstein’s “Crying Girl” (1964) and Picasso’s “Homme Assis” (1972). Over several decades, the Fitermans donated or aided in the purchase of some 70 works for the Walker Art Center. In 1993, they donated a 15-story building to the City University of New York.“Sigmar Polke was unpredictable as a person, and that proved true for his work,” the dealer David Zwirner said, referring to the German-born artist who experimented fluidly across media and techniques and resisted the confines of a signature style. Now Mr. Zwirner’s gallery has been selected to represent the estate of Polke, who died in 2010.The gallery’s first collaborative exhibition with the estate, opening next May in Chelsea, will focus on Polke as a “point of reference” to younger generations, Mr. Zwirner said.Polke achieved early success for his paintings and drawings of consumer goods, first exhibited in 1963 in Düsseldorf, Germany, with his fellow students Gerhard Richter and Konrad Lueg. Together they coined the term “capitalist realism” for their work, a West German foil to the style of Socialist Realism in the East.By a decade later, Polke had achieved financial security, which meant he could be picky about what he sold. “Polke kept many of his important works,” said Mr. Zwirner, who is bringing “Auto (Jeep)” to Frieze Masters in London next week, the first time that large-scale 1992 painting has been for sale.Polke painted the cartoonish outline of a jeep on polyester treated with resin to give it transparency (so the wood stretcher shows through). “Polke was a compulsive scientist in the studio,” Mr. Zwirner said. “His interdisciplinary approach — he worked in film, painting, photography, prints, drawings, sculpture, performance — is like an invitation for younger artists to experiment.” HILARIE M. SHEETSA version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page C22 of the New York edition with the headline: Part Exhibitionism, Part Surveillance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »