AdvertisementSupported byBy Melena Ryzik“I remember this couch,” Mark Ronson said, eyeing a brown suede number in the basement of Electric Lady, the storied recording studio in the West Village. It was here that Mr. Ronson, the club D.J. turned in-demand producer, made his first proper album, for the singer Nikka Costa. “It was that era — D’Angelo was still finishing ‘Voodoo,’ and you’d just walk through the halls at any given moment and it would be like, Common or Erykah Badu,” Mr. Ronson recalled. “I was like 23 or 24, kind of star-struck and also trying to be cool.”Fifteen years later, Mr. Ronson was back in the same studio, finishing his own record this time — “Uptown Special” (RCA Records), due Tuesday. It’s hard, now, to imagine him star-struck by anyone. Stevie Wonder, perhaps, but then Mr. Ronson enticed him to contribute harmonica to the opening and closing tracks on the album. It’s his fourth effort as a solo artist, although for Mr. Ronson, a musician and songwriter but not a vocalist, that means collaborating with pop stars like Bruno Mars. Their single “Uptown Funk,” a revivalist jam with a Funkadelic-caliber bass line, is Mr. Ronson’s first song to crack the Billboard Top 5 in America.A song that seems headed to No. 1 is a feat he could scarcely believe. “Everything about how this is going is incredibly exciting but feels like it’s happening kind of in a bizarro universe,” he said, taking off his double-breasted suit jacket and sinking into the couch.Fretful and self-deprecating by nature, wry and warmly candid, the British-born Mr. Ronson, 39, has spent his career shaping hits for other people: Amy Winehouse, Lily Allen, Adele. His production credits range from Ol’ Dirty Bastard to Paul McCartney, and his sound spans everything in between, leaning heavily on the throwback Daptone horns of “Uptown Funk.” “The audience has been going crazy for this song,” said Sharon Dastur, senior vice president for programming at I Heart Media, the radio conglomerate formerly known as Clear Channel. “It was one of those times where you hear it, and you know right away that it was going to be a big hit. It’s just so different than what’s out there.” It didn’t come easily. The single and the album were made at a moment when Mr. Ronson was becoming disillusioned with D.J.ing and wrestling with his place as an artist in America, where his last album, “Record Collection,” in 2010, disappointed. Ms. Winehouse’s death, in 2011, just as they were making plans to get in the studio again, left him bereft. The rise of Electronic Dance Music disrupted his dance-floor style. “I was pretty much lost,” he said.So Mr. Ronson tried something new. For the first time, he surrendered himself to the guidance of another producer, Jeff Bhasker, a megahitmaker who has worked with Jay Z, Kanye West, Taylor Swift and Beyoncé. And he persuaded the Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist Michael Chabon to write most of the album’s lyrics. There are also guest vocals (and indie cred) from Kevin Parker, of Tame Impala, and Andrew Wyatt, of the Swedish act Miike Snow, and a track from the New Orleans rapper Mystikal. A reformed party boy — in 2011, he married Joséphine de la Baume, a French actress; he wears her name tattooed in a heart on his right arm — Mr. Ronson was ready to make “a grown-man record,” he said.The seeds were planted at a party for Mr. Chabon’s 2012 novel, “Telegraph Avenue.” Mr. Ronson, who came as a fan, described it as a book signing when in fact it was a swish Manhattan soiree thrown by the über-producer Scott Rudin. “It’s quite cute that that’s what he thinks book signings are like,” Mr. Chabon said, laughing, of Mr. Ronson, who is a privileged son of the society-page staple Ann Dexter Jones and stepson of the Foreigner guitarist Mick Jones. A year later, Mr. Ronson “sent me this amazing, miraculous, magical email,” Mr. Chabon, 51, said, inviting him to collaborate on an album with a narrative style. Mr. Ronson was unexpectedly feeling a Steely Dan vibe.“He didn’t realize that I was actually an insanely passionate and dedicated Steely Dan fan and I had been my whole life,” Mr. Chabon said.Mr. Ronson was already holed up in the Venice Beach home studio of Mr. Bhasker. They met as producers of Mr. Mars’s “Unorthodox Jukebox” album, and quickly considered themselves “simpatico,” Mr. Bhasker said, especially in their love for retro R&B and Quincy Jones. On Mr. Ronson’s record, “we wanted to revive a blues notion or even a jazz element,” Mr. Bhasker said. “A lot of the harmonies on the songs are really pushing the palette of normal pop music.”They were working on piano-heavy backing tracks when Mr. Chabon’s rich verses began to arrive. “The opening lyric,” Mr. Ronson recalled, was, more or less, “‘In the back room of the El Mago casino,/under a portrait of Kolar the Great,/between an ex-whale and a paradox of Zeno,/soft candy betting hard eight.” It was the first time Mr. Ronson had written songs around lyrics, and that meant a lot of back-and-forth. (Only two of those opening lines survived into production.) Also, they needed singers, ideally a Chaka Khan sound-alike. One night Mr. Bhasker hit upon the solution. “It’s 2 in the morning and he’s had a few, whatever, Jamesons, and he’s like, ‘We should go and drive in the heart of American music, the heart of gospel and soul,’ ” Mr. Ronson recalled. “ ‘We’ll call it ‘Mississippi Mission,’ and we’re gonna go find this girl.’ ”In Jackson, they recruited Keyone Starr, a 23-year-old preacher’s daughter who lent her husky vocals to the synthy R&B track “I Can’t Lose” and sang backup on a few others. They recorded the bulk of the album at Royal Studios, the family-run home of Hi Records in Memphis, where Mr. Ronson was astounded to find the Coca-Cola crate Al Green used to count off the intro to “Love and Happiness.” Fed by steady deliveries of barbecue — “everyone got really fat,” Mr. Chabon said — he gladly toiled over his lyrics, featured on nine of the album’s 11 tracks.“It would take four, five hours to get one couplet to work,” he said. “I would be completely absorbed in a way that is hard to get when I’m writing fiction.” The result is sometimes spacey imagery — “Sweet volcano violence/Vast new continents spawning,” Mr. Parker sings on “Daffodils” — paired with dreamy keys. “Uptown Funk,” written by Mr. Mars and others, was among the most difficult songs to finish, Mr. Ronson said, as they had to follow the singer on tour. Mr. Mars played the drums and created the sticky baseline — “that doah-do-do-do,” Mr. Ronson said, “that’s the last thing that came.” Thanks in part to the D.J.s of E.D.M., the notion of producer-as-artist, with featured singers, is no longer so strange, said Ms. Dastur of I Heart Media. “You’re seeing it more and more, with Calvin Harris and David Guetta, coming out from the producer board and getting people to go along for the ride,” she said. Mr. Ronson still D.J.s, though less regularly. Two years ago, “I started having these intense anxiety attacks anytime before I started D.J.ing,” he said, worried that his own music was out-of-date. He turned to other outlets — he scored the coming Johnny Depp caper “Mortdecai” — but his early club days stay with him.“When I’m working on something that has a beat,” he said, “I always picture that little dance floor. I’m like: Who’s dancing? Am I keeping them there?”Now, “whenever a D.J. tweets or tells me, ‘Uptown Funk’ gets everyone on the floor,’ it’s like: Yes! I am a D.J. doing service to other D.J.s,” he said, pleased at last.Advertisement