AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Brian SeibertThe American Realness festival can be a cliquish affair in which the performers seem to be interested mainly in one another. But with the participation of the Bulgarian-born provocateur Ivo Dimchev, this genre-crossing series has at least acquired a saving sense of humor about itself. Mr. Dimchev’s “Fest,” which had its North American premiere at the Abrons Arts Center on Thursday, is a short play about performing in an arts festival not unlike American Realness, except that it takes place in Copenhagen. The plot is straightforward in outline. In the first scene, Mr. Dimchev, playing himself, negotiates with a Danish presenter. In the second, he rehearses with the Danish theater’s technician. In the third, he performs his solo and then engages in a post-show discussion with a young local critic. That “Fest” is a comedy can be sensed first in the flat affects of Mr. Dimchev and the three other actors. Mr. Dimchev’s voice is at once creepy, cranky and droll. Making no tonal distinction between the banal and the outrageous, it conveys the impression that nothing is safe. And indeed, without changing tone, the negotiation quickly escalates into simulated sex acts. The technical rehearsal, throughout which the actors shiver as if freezing, involves another sex act, less simulated. Less transgressively but just as absurdly, Mr. Dimchev’s character participates in the post-show discussion while dead. Bloody and listing to one side, he answers typical questions, having been stabbed moments before in a “critical intervention.” Believe it or not, this is all quite funny. The humor arises from the breaking of taboos and from Mr. Dimchev’s comic timing, but also from the script’s satirical accuracy. The presenter, who complains about egocentric artists, imagines that by hiring a performer with a radical reputation, she might acquire a radical reputation herself. When, in inviting Mr. Dimchev to her festival, she praises him for appealing to many people, he takes the compliment as an insult. He says he is not interested in a broad audience. He wants a guarantee that the audience will include a lot of gay and bisexual people. Later, during his solo, he says, “If you don’t respect art, that’s O.K.” The consistency of Mr. Dimchev’s irreverence gives him a kind of integrity, though it doesn’t leave many other values standing. Keith Hennessey, who also has a reputation as a radical, is a much more earnest artist, and his one-man show “Bear/Skin,” which had its premiere earlier in the evening, grapples with material of much greater consequence. Where “Fest” seeks merely to shock and amuse, “Bear/Skin” aspires to educate and heal. Its opening poem, recited breathlessly, is acute in its satire of the revenge fantasies prevalent in action movies. Mr. Hennessey is astute in suggesting the cathartic function of such films in American society. And there is some connection between those films and the ostensible central focus of “Bear/Skin”: Stravinsky’s “Rite of Spring.”But Mr. Hennessey heaps on more, lecturing about which groups of people are prone to suicide and listing paternalistic interventions he defines as torture. After nervously explaining the connections, he performs in the character of an absent-minded, addled artist. When he dons a bear suit and exhausts himself (he is 55) leaping through the sacrificial victim dance from Millicent Hodson’s reconstruction of Nijinsky’s “Rite” choreography, you might wonder if a suicide is what you’re watching.Neither at this moment nor later, when he dances dully as a glittery kitsch shaman, does “Bear/Skin” itself achieve theatrical catharsis. “A ritual needs a reason,” he says. Mr. Hennessey supplies many, some of them urgent. What’s missing is magic. The American Realness festival continues through Sunday at the Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side; 866-811-4111, americanrealness.com. Advertisement