AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Gia KourlasFor those who think American Realness 2015, a festival of dance and performance, is about promoting one kind of art, two recent shows, seen Friday at Abrons Arts Center, presented two sides of contemporary choreography. One was by a brash young duo from Europe; the other, an experienced New York formalist. In “Kein Applaus” (whose full title includes a word unprintable here), Vincent Riebeek vomited blue liquid all over Florentina Holzinger’s body. An hour later, Tere O’Connor unveiled the New York premiere of “Sister,” a deceptively simple duet for Cynthia Oliver and David Thomson that maintains an air of courtly grandeur. Ms. Holzinger, from Austria, and Mr.  Riebeek, from the Netherlands, met at the School for New Dance Development in Amsterdam. “Kein Applaus,” part of a trilogy, marks their first collaboration. While they seem to thrive within a messy, do-it-yourself aesthetic, their performance crumbled as it wore on. Mr. Riebeek confided that they hadn’t presented it in a year and were a little rusty; that seemed about right. But in an odd way, the gradual deterioration improved the piece: It showed the collaborators’ sweet-natured resilience. In the first half of “Kein Applaus,” the stage is a canvas for lewdness. Soon after Ms. Holzinger whirls in chaîné turns while holding a sparkly scarf overhead, she sits in a chair, parts her legs wide and begins to chew on a long, thin pink string. Mr. Riebeek crouched between her legs and using his teeth pulls more of it from her vagina. The vomiting scene is then followed by — what else? — urination. It was off-putting how Ms. Holzinger endured more in these violent acts, which, however harrowing, were marginalized by an episodic structure that made each scene as forgettable as a burlesque act. After some technical difficulties, Mr. Riebeek addressed the crowd while Ms. Holzinger wound herself in silk high above the floor for an impressive aerial performance. But when she came down and stood on a chair to fire an apparent paint bazooka, nothing happened. They sang a song instead. “I’m sorry we couldn’t get over customs with our gun,” Ms. Holzinger said in defeat. Later she added, “We’re not going to tell you what would have happened.” Different sorts of mysteries occurred in Mr. O’Connor’s “Sister,” a sleek reimagining of “Four Sister Dances,” a work he created in 1989. In program notes, he writes that he originally wanted to contradict the idea of theme and variation in dance; instead, he immersed himself “in what I call ‘variation and variation.’ ” Without an “anchoring point,” Mr. O’Connor, in his new work, choreographs a rich tapestry of movement, ornate and intricate, that points to his more recent and gratifying approach of stripping his dances down to the essence. With the magnetic pairing of Ms. Oliver and Mr. Thomson, two mature dancers who perform Mr. O’Connor’s detailed movement without commenting on it — younger dancers can’t always achieve that — they lend every facet of the choreography a sense of purpose. The merest raising of the sternum or tilt of the cheek shifts the mood, and though it’s not exactly playful, there is whimsy when, say, they rub their fingers together as if snapping without making a sound. All the while, Mr. O’Connor’s stringent structure keeps them in line, as if they’re gliding along a track. In “Sister,” which runs at a taut 35 minutes, frenetic moments occur along with more somber images, as when Ms. Oliver lays her body across Mr. Thomson’s chest. But the work remains strangely soothing as it knits together passages of silence with Mr. O’Connor’s music collage, which includes Poulenc and Liquid Liquid. For this veteran choreographer, the drama is in the details, every last variation. American Realness 2015 continues through Jan. 23 at various locations; americanrealness.com. Advertisement