It turns out that spring will come again after all, or at least something like it.The classical music world mourned last year when Spring for Music, an innovative festival that brought adventurous American orchestras to Carnegie Hall each spring for four years, ended for lack of funding. But now a successor festival is being planned in Washington.A new three-year festival, to be called Shift: A Festival of American Orchestras, is being planned by the Kennedy Center and Washington Performing Arts, the organizations announced on Tuesday. It will bring four or five North American orchestras to Washington each spring beginning in 2017 to showcase not only their musicianship but also the work they do outside their concert halls to build relationships with their communities.It is the first major new initiative undertaken by Deborah F. Rutter since she became the president of the Kennedy Center in September after 11 years as president of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra Association. The festival aims to continue affording a broader stage to American orchestras that might not otherwise be able to tour, while making the case to policymakers in the nation’s capital that modern ensembles do more than play concerts.“It’s a natural for us to say, let’s use it as an opportunity to showcase orchestras in the nation’s capital,” Ms. Rutter said in an interview.The original Spring for Music festival rewarded orchestras for their innovative programming. The new festival, Shift, will showcase their work in community outreach. The festival is being paid for in part by a  grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation for $900,000, of which $700,000 will be used to attract matching funds. The idea is not only for orchestras to perform at the Kennedy Center, but also to perform and hold workshops and talks in nontraditional venues around Washington to show the kind of work they do in their hometowns.Jenny Bilfield, the president and chief executive officer of Washington Performing Arts, said in a statement that the festival’s title, Shift, “recognizes the dynamic, evolving work and role of orchestras in the 21st century and underscores our mission to play a role in shifting preconceived notions about orchestras.”Orchestras will be invited to apply to participate in the festival later this month, and their proposals will be due in March.