By MIKE HALEOCT. 8, 2015
Today’s young television viewer rewards extremes. The highest-rated, most talked-about shows — “The Walking Dead” (last season’s No. 1 scripted series in the 18-to-49 demographic), “Empire” (No. 2), “Game of Thrones” (No. 6) — are the ones willing to go as big as possible in emotion, melodrama, violence, horror, nobility and, crucially, spectacle. They’re the epics of our time.“The Walking Dead,” AMC’s post-apocalyptic zombie fantasy, has always built toward and ebbed away from great set pieces of carnage and battle. Its 90-minute sixth-season premiere on AMC on Sunday night is essentially an episode-long combat operation, and it reaches for a new level of cinematic wallop. A double narrative that shows the preparations for, and execution of, an elaborate zombie-clearing action, it variously recalls Hollywood biblical epics, European art-house pastorals and the teeming photographs of Sebastião Salgado.It’s likely, though, that a lot of the show’s 20 million viewers (13 million of them in the under-50 demographic) would watch it if even if it were shot on an iPhone on a backlot in Burbank rather than on 16-millimeter film on location in Georgia. Like all zombie stories, “The Walking Dead” is a life-or-death proposition at nearly every moment. That kind of unremitting intensity stretched over so many episodes can make the question of who survives take on transfixing interest, despite dialogue that’s not always convincing and an uneven cast.Season 6 begins immediately after the events of the Season 5 finale — when Rick Grimes (Andrew Lincoln) executed a member of the Alexandria community who had just killed the husband of the community’s leader, Deanna Monroe (Tovah Feldshuh). The 13 remaining members of Rick’s band of survivors are safe with the Alexandrians, though one of them shows signs of cracking up and another, Rick’s son, Carl, is mysteriously absent from the episode.(Perhaps the young actor who plays him, Chandler Riggs, was unavailable, but devout “Walking Dead” fans will want to know where he is. And if their count of the survivors matches mine, they will wonder why the obsessive Eugene says there are only 12. My guess: He’s not counting Father Gabriel. And neither of us is counting baby Judith.)AdvertisementAs the dead man’s body is disposed of — outside the community’s walls, at Rick’s insistence — and people come to terms with what happened, the limited set of ideas that percolates through “The Walking Dead” gets its weekly airing. Is Rick’s aggressive, hypervigilant approach the only way, or is it possible to live by pre-apocalyptic rules? (In World War II movies, that is what’s known as appeasement.) Who gets to lead and how absolute should their power be?AdvertisementThe problem with these questions as themes to be developed in a continuing TV series — and it’s a fundamental problem with any open-ended post-apocalyptic tale — is that Rick is always, obviously right, in his worldview and his strategy if not his tactics. He agonizes, and people encourage him to loosen up a little. (That’s the essential function of the peripatetic, stick-wielding Morgan, charismatically portrayed by Lennie James, who has temporarily settled in with Rick’s group.) But he’s right, even if his plans don’t always exactly work out, and even if the writers feel the need to soften his edges by having him occasionally show unexpected mercy.That’s proved again, in an episode that’s elegantly shot and assembled, with a steady tension. A chance discovery during the burial trip convinces Rick that urgent, dangerous action is required, and with Deanna’s help he persuades the other Alexandrians that his plan is worth its risks. This timeline is presented in wintry black and white, as alliances shift and arguments are made. The later zombie action, with which it’s intercut, is in bright, sun-washed color, the better to see Rick’s plan unfold.The big, scary moments in “The Walking Dead” pump up the action, but they also serve a practical function: They weed out the cast, the expansion and contraction of which constitutes much of the show’s drama. Sunday’s episode shows an early-season restraint with the body count, but it introduces new dangers and opens up the possibility of some major human cleansing in the near future. Even when Rick’s wrong, he’s right.A version of this review appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Going Big With Zombies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.