AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10 P.M. (TLC) MY BIG FAT FABULOUS LIFE After Whitney Thore received a diagnosis of polycystic ovarian syndrome, this once slender dancer quickly gained more than 200 pounds. Struggling with self-doubt but still eager to dance for all to see, she posted a performance piece on YouTube last January — and it became a viral hit. Eventually she founded the No Body Shame Campaign, a movement created to promote body acceptance, centered on the motto “Love yourself. Live fully. No excuses. No shame.” This new series follows Ms. Thore as she tries to find happiness through teaching and performing, confronting online bullies, dating and even wearing a bikini on the beach for the first time in a decade.4:05 P.M. (Starz Cinema) LE DIVORCE (2003) Kate Hudson plays Isabel Walker, an American who arrives in Paris to visit her pregnant half sister (Naomi Watts), whose marriage to a French artist (Melvil Poupaud) is a shambles. After a style and sensibility makeover, lust and romance ensue. Despite a cast of very fine actors — among them, Stephen Fry, Sam Waterston, Stockard Channing, Glenn Close, Leslie Caron and Thierry Lhermitte — this Merchant Ivory adaptation of Diane Johnson’s novel “is pretty weak tea, a thin and unsatisfying concoction that somehow manages to make one of the richest and most durable sources of culture-clash comedy into an occasion for dullness,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “What’s French for annulment?” In “L’Auberge Espagnole” (2002), at 6:10, Xavier Rousseau, an uptight Parisian student played by Romain Duris, moves into a communal apartment in Barcelona and soon learns the international language of love and friendship in this comedy from Cédric Klapisch. Audrey Tautou is Xavier’s worried girlfriend; Kevin Bishop, Federico D’Anna, Kelly Reilly, Barnaby Metschurat and Cristina Brondo round out the cast. “ 'L’Auberge Espagnole’ presents an appealing and persuasive picture of European integration, in which national differences, which once sparked military and political conflict, are preserved because they make life sexier and more interesting,” Mr. Scott wrote. “The ending, though, feels like a bit of a cop-out, as Mr. Klapisch decides that Xavier’s pleasant year abroad must yield a lesson.”8 P.M. (Nickelodeon) WHAT IS TITLE IX AND WHY DO YOU CARE? After Title IX was passed in 1972, no school that received federal money could discriminate on the basis of gender. The result was a 100 percent increase in girls’ participation in high school sports — and, at times, an uneven playing field. Here, “Nick News With Linda Ellerbee” examines gender equality in sports through interviews with female and male athletes.9 P.M. (FYI) MARRIED AT FIRST SIGHT: THE FIRST YEAR At the end of last season, the three couples who agreed to wed legally the moment they met had to decide on the outcomes of their unions. This new series follows the two couples who decided to stay married (the other divorced) as they inch toward their first anniversary. “Mikie Saves the Date,” at 10, follows the wedding planner Michael Russo as he helps clients turn their dreams into reality.10 P.M. (CNBC) RESTAURANT STARTUP Each week two teams pitch their concepts to the restaurateurs Tim Love and Joe Bastianich and try to persuade the men to invest in them. The chosen team is given the keys to a restaurant on Melrose Avenue in Los Angeles, where its members have 36 hours and $7,500 to open a pop-up eatery, complete with a branding campaign and a business plan, devised under the tutelage of the consultant Antonia Lofaso. Then they’ll test their idea on the public. Based on diners’ reactions and the quality of the team’s work, Mr. Bastianich and Mr. Love then decide whether to back it. In this Season 2 premiere, Rice Paper Scissors, which creates pop-up events in San Francisco featuring Vietnamese cuisine, and Lone Wolf, whose food truck in Tulsa, Okla., puts an American spin on classic Vietnamese banh mi, try to realize their culinary dreams.What’s Streaming NowHOUSE OF CARDS With a Golden Globe for Kevin Spacey and the release of the trailer for Season 3, which has its premiere on Feb. 27, the time is right to brush up on the first two rounds of this thriller about Frank Underwood, who schemed his way from minority whip to president of the United States, and the ne’er-do-wells with whom he surrounds himself. (netflix.com)Advertisement