AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimThe concert by the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday featured no timpani jolts or cymbal crashes. These were works for strings, after all: trios by Beethoven and Kodaly and the “American” Quintet by Dvorak. But give these works to fiercely temperamental players, and they’ll still find ways to make you jump out of your skin.Beethoven’s Trio in C minor for violin, viola and cello draws its turbulence from a liberal peppering of sforzandos and fortepianos, dynamic accents that thrust the music forward in impatient shoves.In the opening movement, the violinist Benjamin Beilman, the violist Yura Lee and the cellist David Finckel ripped into these accents with a tremendous force that at first seemed excessive to me. But as the music found its shape — the quiet, squirrelly runs played by Mr. Beilman with understated brilliance — I came to appreciate the extreme contrasts. The loud outbursts no longer felt like stun grenades but rather like flare gun signals illuminating the surrounding music.For Kodaly’s Serenade for Two Violins and Viola, Mr. Beilman was joined by the violinist Ani Kavafian and the violist Paul Neubauer. The viola is the undisputed star of this lovely folk-inflected and viscerally dramatic piece, and Mr. Neubauer embraced the role, playing with a luminous tone. In the second movement, he and Ms. Kavafian delightfully brought out the flirtatious back-and-forth as their parts act out a scene of wooing, pleading, chastising and reconciliation. The last movement again sported more energetic sforzandos, including one so propulsive that it made Ms. Kavafian jump.After the intermission, all the players came together for a burnished performance of Dvorak’s Quintet in E flat. Ms. Kavafian played the first violin part with limpid sweetness, but again it was the violists who most often seized the spotlight with superb playing. Mr. Neubauer’s solo in the second movement became a gorgeous outpouring of lyricism, his tone silky with flickers of heat. The players created arresting nuances of sound in the third movement, a series of variations on a theme that flips from minor to major halfway through. The fourth variation was especially atmospheric, with ghostly tremors and shivers casting a spell, which the shift to major never quite shook off. After an afternoon of exceptional playing, the stormy final movement brought for the first time rhythmic imperfections and moments where the sound turned scratchy — the force taken, perhaps, a few microns too far.The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center presents this program, with some variations, on tour in Cleveland on Tuesday; Hanover, N.H., on Wednesday; and Santa Monica, Calif., on Saturday, with additional dates following in Canada; chambermusicsociety.org. Advertisement