AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Zachary WoolfeThere was a telling moment in her recital on Sunday afternoon at the Morgan Library & Museum when the soprano Angela Meade’s voice did something surprising: It didn’t do what she wanted it to. She was finishing the recitative that leads into “Non mi dir,” one of Donna Anna’s arias from Mozart’s “Don Giovanni,” and she sent up a floating high note, like a gymnast launching herself into the air.While it was no disaster, it didn’t quite soar. Coming from any other singer, the note’s failure to fly barely would have been noticeable, but Ms. Meade, 37, has made her rising reputation on flawlessness. “I may not be the most emotive or vibrant singer,” she has seemed at times to be telling the public, “but I will give you technical perfection.”More and more lately, the situation has been reversed. A fast run will be smudgier now, the final note in a phrase — previously shaped with marble smoothness — less delicately handled. But she is compensating with increased involvement and intensity: When Donna Anna claimed she’d die of grief, this time you believed her.Ms. Meade’s tone, which has always been cool, now takes longer to warm up. In her opening set of four Meyerbeer songs, her high notes edged toward shrillness. But it was a rare, valuable opportunity to hear these grandly lyrical narratives. They seemed (who knew?) to have helped pave the way for Strauss, four of whose songs Ms. Meade sang, with earnest authority if not mystery or seductiveness, in the program’s second half.She shared the program, presented by the George London Foundation, with the young baritone Nicholas Pallesen, his large, steady voice genially conversational in Poulenc’s bustling “Chansons Villageoises.” Only in the song “C’est le joli printemps,” its tempo slow and its register high and airy, did he seem at all strained.In five Ives songs, most notably the classic “Housatonic at Stockbridge,” Mr. Pallesen managed to be simultaneously dreamy and grounded, and “Charlie Rutlage” was alternately genial and solemn. He attacked with gusto and powerful tone an aria from Marschner’s “Der Vampyr,” which he sang with the American Symphony Orchestra in 2013.He and Ms. Meade came together at the end, partnering excitingly in a duet from Verdi’s “I Due Foscari.” This composer is clearly a fixture in both singers’ futures, and they were incisive in his declamatory dialogue and impassioned in his rich melodies.The George London Foundation Awards Competition Finals are on Feb. 27 at the Morgan Library & Museum, 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street; 212-956-2809, georgelondon.org. Advertisement