AdvertisementSupported byTelevision ReviewBy Mike Hale“Klansville U.S.A.” is a documentary about the Ku Klux Klan, but it’s short on images of terrorists on horseback and bodies hanging from trees. It more often resembles home movies of a Sunday outing: picnics, dancing, cooking a pig. And much of it looks like the civil rights rallies and marches that were taking place at the same time, except for the white robes and the occasional 60-foot burning cross.An “American Experience”  documentary making its premiere on PBS on Tuesday night, Callie T. Wiser’s “Klansville U.S.A.” (based partly on the book of that title by David Cunningham) is about the third wave of Ku Klux Klan activity, which came in the 1960s in response to the civil rights movement. Specifically, it’s about the mid-’60s North Carolina Klan, which grew from nothing to nearly 10,000 members in just two years, in what was supposedly the South’s most progressive state.The film capsulizes the history of the Klan’s earlier incarnations, and the rampant violence of its branches in the deep South in the ’60s, and sets these in contrast to the relatively orderly, politically minded organization in North Carolina. It also serves as a mini-biography of the canny organizer and recruiter Bob Jones (no connection to the university), the former lightning rod salesman who masterminded the Klan’s brief North Carolina blossoming. The hourlong “Klansville U.S.A.” is a small but continuously interesting film, full of jolting details: Mr. Jones’s being installed as a grand wizard 11 days before the March on Washington; a clip of a country music radio show sponsored by the Klan; the role of the House Un-American Activities Committee in bringing down Mr. Jones; film of President Lyndon B. Johnson warning Klan members to “return to a decent society before it is too late.” The film is limited by its subject’s evanescence: Murders and bombings in other states focused the federal government on the Klan in general, and Mr. Jones’s financial chicanery helped bring about the disintegration of his group after just a few years.Ms. Wiser makes the point that the desire of North Carolina’s politicians to be seen as the leaders of a racially enlightened New South helped push poor and segregationist whites into Mr. Jones’s arms. But her film is basically a snapshot, rather than an argument. There is a late quotation from a historian about the “durable” nature of Mr. Jones’s innovations in organizing people around racial prejudice — enabling just enough militance to attract dues-paying members, but containing it within politically acceptable bounds — but Ms. Wiser does not draw lines to the present. It’s up to the viewer to decide whether any current political movements have picked up on Mr. Jones’s lessons.American ExperienceKlansville U.S.A.On PBS stations on Tuesday night (check local listings).Produced by Five O’Clock Films for “American Experience.” Directed by Callie T. Wiser; written by David Espar and Ms. Wiser, based in part on the book by David Cunningham; produced by Ms. Wiser; Mark Samels, executive producer for “American Experience.”Advertisement