AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimNot every career has a watershed moment. But the violinist Johnny Gandelsman, who gave a mesmerizing performance of Bach’s sonatas and partitas for unaccompanied violin at Bargemusic on Saturday, recalled the pivotal experience that forever changed his approach to this music.In 2013 he received a last-minute invitation from the Helicon Foundation, which presents performances and discussions of chamber music, to perform the Chaconne from the second Partita. The gig came with a requirement: He was to play, for the first time, on gut strings and use a Baroque bow. He had one week to prepare. The new tools profoundly reshaped his understanding and playing of Bach’s music, he said on Saturday in remarks from the stage. He said he recalled thinking: “After this, nothing will be the same.”Mr. Gandelsman’s performance at Bargemusic bore the fruits of that “after,” laced with the experience of world-music traditions that he has gained as a member of the Silk Road Ensemble and the string quartet Brooklyn Rider. This time he used a transitional bow, more elongated than earlier Baroque models, but still lighter, and quicker to dance, than a modern bow. Mr. Gandelsman has a gift for teasing out the emotional nuances at the low edge of the dynamic range, where his sound feathers into near-silence even as it remains subtly illuminated. This lent a fearsome vulnerability to the expressive slow movements, which became doubt-riddled inner conversations full of tentative, questioning pauses. At the start of the Grave of the second sonata his sound was at is most radiant and singing; at the end it thinned into quiet desolation.The fugues brought out an entirely different character of Mr. Gandelsman’s playing: athletic, lithe and rhythmically rigorous. The technical difficulties of the double-, triple- and quadruple-stops cause many violinists to play them with teeth-gritted force, but Mr. Gandelsman managed to imbue them with a sense of freedom. In the concluding movements of the E major Partita, Mr. Gandelsman’s experience of playing alongside folk music masters like the fiddler Martin Hayes showed through. With a bright, zesty sound and nimble-footed grace, he danced his way to the finish line of this memorable marathon.Mr. Gandelsman performs Bach’s sonatas and partitas for solo violin at Michigan State University in East Lansing, Mich., on Tuesday and Wednesday; Johnnygandelsman.com. Advertisement