LONDON — “Mr. and Mrs. Brown first met Paddington on a railway platform. In fact, that was how he came to have such an unusual name for a bear, for Paddington was the name of the station.” Michael Bond wrote those words in 1958, and 10 days later, had finished the book that became “A Bear Called Paddington.” At the time, he was a BBC cameraman who was writing in his spare time. He wasn’t sure that the book would find a publisher, let alone become a best seller. To date, Mr. Bond has written 15 collections of Paddington stories, and the books have sold more than 35 million copies worldwide and been translated into 30 languages. They have been adapted into an animated television series and a stage play, and found new life in numerous children’s board books and annuals, games, cartoons and a cookbook. Most recently, Paddington has become the hero of a feature film, starring Hugh Bonneville, Sally Hawkins, Ben Whishaw and Nicole Kidman, which opens in the United States on Friday.But Mr. Bond, now 88, has never rested on his laurels. He has written other series, including one about a guinea pig, Olga da Polga, and detective stories featuring a French restaurant inspector, Monsieur Pamplemousse, as well as  novels and an autobiography (nicely titled “Bears and Forebears”). Mr. Bond spoke recently with Roslyn Sulcas over tea and biscuits in his West London home about the new Paddington film, his life and the enduring popularity of his most famous creation. Here are edited extracts from their conversation.Were you apprehensive about “Paddington” being made into a big-budget movie?Paddington has been part of my life for 58 years and it was like handing over a child in a sense. The main issue was that all my books are seven chapters and seven different stories. They are always linked by a season or a theme, but I’ve never done a Paddington story that is a novel-length one, so anyone making a film has to dream up a plot.I O.K.’ed the original script, but you never know with a film; once they start filming, people come in with different ideas. But in fact in this case, the script improved. I think it’s very good on all sorts of levels. It’s got funny moments, and moments of drawing-room comedy, everything really.What was really nice about the film was that all the actors in the main parts had been brought up on Paddington. Did you play any part in developing the story for the movie?No. The only thing I saw was after they sent me the first script, in which the Browns want to take him to an immigration center after they find him at Paddington station. I put my foot down – I never write about things that don’t exist, and there isn’t an immigration center of the kind they were inventing. I think certain things have to correspond to people’s childhood memories of the books and their expectations. He needs to have tea on the station, all that. If you get the basic stuff right, then you can do anything really.Were you a great reader as a child?Yes, I never went to bed without a story, and I think it’s more and more essential for parents to start that at home now. There are so many easier things to do now, so many electronic things. But to be able to read a book is such a big plus, something that is with you forever. I was brought up on a magazine called The Magnet, which taught me, looking back on it, the value of catch phrases and repetition. There was a character called Billy Bunter, and he’d keep saying, “I say you fellows, can you lend me five bob.” You knew all about his character from that. It’s something I use in Paddington. How did you come to be a writer?I started almost by accident. I was in the army in Egypt and I wrote a short story because I had time. It was accepted by a magazine and I got paid seven guineas, which was a lot of money at the time. And I thought, this is good, I want to write! I had been working for the BBC before the war and I went back afterward, but I carried on writing in my spare time, doing a lot of radio stuff. I was working as a cameraman when I wrote Paddington, and I only gave that job up in 1965.Did you decide to write a children’s story?Not at all. I was looking at a blank sheet of paper and I thought, “Well, no one else is going to put anything on it, I had better think of something.” To get my mind working, I looked round the room and caught sight of this toy bear I had bought for my wife as a stocking filler at Christmas. I suddenly wondered what would happen if a bear landed on Paddington Station, jotted down the idea and carried on with it. Perhaps I had a picture of my mother and father finding him. Like the Browns, my mother would have taken him in straight away, my father would have been worried about breaking the law. I gave him what I was wearing; a government surplus duffel coat and hat, and as we were living near Portobello Road, I put all the places I really knew well into the book. It all came alive. I felt very free, because I didn’t plan what it would be; I never said to myself, “I’m going to write a children’s book.”My agent liked it and it made the rounds of about five publishers, who for one reason or another didn’t take it. Maybe they had a bear already? Harper Collins then did, and did very well out of it.Were you surprised by the success of the character?The thing about bears, as someone once said to me, is that you can pass on your secrets to them and they are not going to tell anyone. I’ve found out over the years that people talk to their bears. I once went on a long signing tour of Australia and I had to fly everywhere carrying a big bear, and I kept being invited to the flight desk because people wanted to meet Paddington. There were all these grown men talking to him. On one occasion, they sent me a message saying, do you mind if Paddington stays here because he wants to try landing the plane?Why did you make him from “darkest Peru”?Because it was far away and no one ever went there, at least not in 1958. The Peruvians themselves weren’t so keen on being called darkest Peru, but they’ve come round. We had a book launch there at some point, and they gave me a passport for Paddington.I’ve always thought that Paddington is a quintessentially English character.Yes, I think that’s true. There is a lot of my father in Paddington. He was a very polite man who always wore a hat. Even when we went to the seaside, he would wear his hat into the sea in case he saw someone he knew and had to raise it.  We live in an age now in which that kind of politeness has largely gone out the window. When I was young I was always taught to move aside for elderly people, and that people would do it for me, but they bloody well don’t. I think Paddington embodies some of those old-fashioned virtues, including a sense of values. The good old hard stare is when he thinks someone is not behaving as they should. I love the way that phrase has gotten into common usage. There was a picture in the paper some weeks ago of the French president meeting the pope, and the caption was about him giving the pope a hard stare.In all the time I’d been writing before Paddington, I’d always done very plot-driven stories. Paddington taught me about writing character-driven fiction, that things happen out of the character. He is very nice to write about because he is so totally optimistic as a character. He makes me laugh sometimes when I’m writing. I’m midway through another Paddington book now.You’ve written a lot of other books. How do you decide what you are going to focus on?When I have finished a Paddington, I think, that’s it, I’m out of ideas. When I get to the end of a Monsieur Pamplemousse, I think that’s it, but maybe I’ll go back to another Paddington. I’m a great believer in the subconscious. Graham Greene wrote about going to bed in the evening and waking up to discover you’ve solved the writing problem that had been worrying you. Alternating between characters is a way for me of staying fresh. My wife found a website that lists everything people have written. I’ve done over 200 books apparently; there are quite a lot I’ve totally forgotten I’ve written.