A Broadway revival of “Gigi,” the 1973 musical by Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe about a Parisian girl being trained as a courtesan, will begin performances in March at the Neil Simon Theater with Vanessa Hudgens (Disney Channel’s “High School Musical”) in the title role, the producers announced on Wednesday.The show will also star the Tony Award winner Victoria Clark (“The Light in the Piazza”) as Gigi’s grandmother; Corey Cott (“Newsies”) as Gaston, the playboy with whom Gigi becomes romantically entangled; Howard McGillin as Honore, Gaston’s uncle; Dee Hoty as Alicia, Gigi’s aunt; and Steffanie Leigh as Liane, Gaston’s mistress. The director is Eric Schaeffer (the 2011 Broadway revival of “Follies”) and the choreographer is Joshua Bergasse (“On the Town”).While the musical’s score includes such classics as “Thank Heaven for Little Girls” and “I Remember It Well,” the producers are replacing the original Lerner script with a new book by the British playwright and screenwriter Heidi Thomas (“Call the Midwife”). Lerner’s script drew some negative reviews from critics in 1973; Clive Barnes in The New York Times, while calling the musical “bold and brave” and praising the score, also wrote, “We see too little of Gigi perhaps, and more importantly we learn too little of her background and ambiance.” The musical is based on a novel by Colette as well as a 1958 musical film directed by Vincente Minnelli and starring Leslie Caron, which featured some of the Lerner and Loewe songs. It won the Academy Award for best picture. The revival is starting a tryout run on Friday in Washington at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, which goes through Feb. 12. The Broadway run will have an official opening night of April 8 at the Neil Simon Theater, where the new musical “The Last Ship” is closing on Jan. 24.A version of this article appears in print on 01/15/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Vanessa Hudgens to Star In Broadway’s New ‘Gigi’.