By BRIAN SEIBERTOCT. 8, 2015
About a decade ago, the veteran choreographer Deborah Hay was watching a video of her 2004 dance “The Match,” and it seemed to her like a play. So she wrote a description of what her dancers had done in the form of a script and invited the Austin-based theater collective Rude Mechs to use it as stage directions for a new work.That work, “Match-Play,” had a well-received run in Austin in 2005, but its New York debut came only on Wednesday, at New York Live Arts. In the interim, one of the characters has acquired the poignancy of obsolescence. He is an answering machine.The other principal characters are human, four housemates. (There’s also a cameo by their neighbor, a talking cow.) But the sentient answering machine is crucial. In an offstage voice somewhere between that of the HAL robot from “2001: A Space Odyssey” and the faceless neighbor on “Home Improvement,” he is a guru who periodically leads the audience in perception exercises. In this way, he is a clever stand-in for Ms. Hay, whose instructions run from the simplest of movement directions to impossible-sounding suggestions and unanswerable questions, which straddle the line between profound and absurd.The Rude Mechs players have the absurdity down. While following Ms. Hay’s movement directions, which she at one point describes as “deliberately inconsequential” and which are included for reference in the program, they could be parodying avant-garde dance. But although they make peculiar noises as instructed by Ms. Hay, and tease the audience with a mute opening monologue (forcing us to guess at meaning without the help of verbal language), they also talk, drawing on text by Kirk Lynn and from the notebooks that the experimental playwright Richard Foreman offers free for the taking online.However off-the-wall, these aphorisms and anecdotes are more comprehensible than a dance by Ms. Hay. The acting may be purposely artificial, and the sets designed to highlight their fictional character, but “Match-Play” is unmistakably about something: consciousness and the difficulty of communication between separate minds and how to live a life of greater awareness, recognizing in ordinary moments windows onto eternal truth.The randomness and whimsy of the material and the delivery, while often entertaining, are often too strained and knowing. Still, there are moments when the exercise gets rolling — when self-consciousness falls away and the stunt of a theater troupe turning a dance into a play recedes, and what is ridiculous suddenly appears as true.­“Match-Play” continues through Saturday at New York Live Arts, Manhattan; 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. A version of this review appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page C12 of the New York edition with the headline: Leading an Audience in Perception Exercises.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.