Taylor Swift rules the album charts yet again, in a slow week of sales as the music industry gears up for the Grammy Awards next month.Ms. Swift’s “1989” (Big Machine) notched a ninth week at No. 1 on Billboard’s album chart, selling 111,000 copies of the full release and about 439,000 downloads of individual tracks, according to Nielsen SoundScan. The album has sold just under four million copies since it came out 11 weeks ago, and even though its numbers are cooling down, “1989” remains a far better seller than anything else out there.Late last year Billboard updated its album chart formula, counting the popularity of song downloads and streams in addition to traditional album sales. Week by week, subtle changes are now apparent, as albums in the highest positions are reshuffled according to variations in their popularity on the different formats.Ed Sheeran and Nicki Minaj’s latest albums, for example, had the week’s best numbers on streaming services like Spotify and Rdio, but it was not enough to make up for weak sales. Mr. Sheeran’s “x” (Atlantic) sold 34,000 copies and had 11.5 million streams, rising one spot to No. 2, while Ms. Minaj’s album “The Pinkprint” (Young Money/Cash Money/Republic) fell one spot to No. 3. “The Pinkprint” sold only slightly fewer copies than “x,” and also had more streams — 12.2 million — but Mr. Sheeran’s track sales were nearly twice as great.Sam Smith’s “In the Lonely Hour” (Capitol) holds at No. 4 with 30,000 sales — not as many as the No. 5 album this week, “SremmLife” (Ear Drummer/Interscope) by the young rap duo Rae Sremmurd, which sold 34,000. But Mr. Smith, who has maintained strong streaming numbers for months, won with 10.5 million song streams, versus 4.2 million for Rae Sremmurd. (That group’s odd moniker, by the way, is derived from the name of its label — Ear Drummer — spelled backward.)Also this week, Mark Ronson holds the No. 1 spot on Billboard’s singles chart for a second week with “Uptown Funk,” which features Bruno Mars on vocals. The song sold 341,000 downloads and had 11.6 million streams.A version of this article appears in print on 01/15/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Swift Still Tops Chart.