Paris – Hours before the official inauguration of the Philharmonie de Paris concert hall on Wednesday, its architect, Jean Nouvel, declared his intention to boycott the gala because he said the towering, 386 million euro (about $455 million) building is not ready to open. In the days approaching the scheduled opening Wednesday night, construction workers have labored 24 hours a day on the sprawling, layered structure in the 19th arrondissement of Paris. The 2,400-seat performance space is finished, but major sections are not completed, including the hall’s restaurant and exhibition space.Mr. Nouvel wrote a column that appeared on the website of the French daily Le Monde denouncing the “contempt” of the concert hall managers for “the architecture, the work of the architect and the architect.” As a result, he said he would refuse to appear at the opening concert Wednesday night, featuring the Orchestre de Paris. Dignitaries, including the French president François Hollande, are attending the concert, which will be dedicated to the victims of the Charlie Hebdo terrorist attack and related killings.. Mr. Nouvel, 69, won an architectural competition in 2007 to design the concert hall, a project that has been wracked by infighting, political debates, cost overruns and a work stoppage that lasted months. The costs of the building are shared by the state of France and the City of Paris, which recently announced that it was cutting back its share of the annual operating budget for the Philharmonie. Tensions have long existed between the French architect and the concert hall managers, who last Friday acknowledged that they did not know whether Mr. Nouvel would attend the opening. Each side has blamed the other for rising costs and delays. Laurent Bayle, the president of the Philharmonie, said that the concert hall needed to open in January because of a full schedule of more than 200 concerts and programs that are planned through the year. Mr. Nouvel, the winner of the 2008 Pritzker architecture prize, has designed a number of landmark buildings for French cultural institutions. He is now working on the Abu Dhabi satellite of the Louvre museum, which will open later this year. A version of this article appears in print on 01/15/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Architect Is Boycotting Opening of His Building.