AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8:20 P.M. (Starz Cinema) HELLO I MUST BE GOING (2012) A divorced 30-something (Melanie Lynskey, above, now starring in HBO’s “Togetherness”) finds a haven from her adult problems in the suburban Connecticut home of her critical mother (Blythe Danner) and indulgent father (John Rubinstein) in this comedy written by Sarah Koskoff and directed by Todd Louiso. She also discovers sex and romance with a 19-year-old — the stepson (Christopher Abbott) of a potential client her father is desperate to impress — who has allowed his doting mother (Julie White) to believe he is gay. “Needless to say, there are complications, some farcical, some belonging more to the realm of therapeutic melodrama,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “This is ultimately a tale of affirmation, self-acceptance and second chances, and its lessons, while not unwelcome, are a bit too forced and neatly packaged to make it fully satisfying. But when Ms. Lynskey and Mr. Abbott are together, there are inklings of a wilder, riskier, less predictable movie — one you may wish the characters could escape into, even though you know they never will.” 7 P.M. (ESPN) SNOOP & SON: A DAD’S DREAM Cordell Broadus is a senior at Bishop Gorman High School in Las Vegas, the Nevada Division 1 state football champion, and ranked the 19th-best wide receiver in the country. He also happens to be a son of the rapper Snoop Dogg, who coached a younger Cordell as part of the Snoop Youth Football League he founded a decade ago. This series follows father and son as Snoop Dogg watches and analyzes each of Cordell’s games during his final season in preparation for recruitment by a college team.8 P.M. (Pop) ROCK THIS BOAT: NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK The TV Guide network rebrands itself and introduces some series, starting with this reality show, which boards a four-day cruise with the New Kids on the Block and some of their most loyal fans. “The Story Behind,” at 9, begins by going behind the scenes of “Everybody Loves Raymond.”8 P.M. (ABC Family) MELISSA & JOEY After Mel breaks her leg, the newlyweds must cancel their Tahiti honeymoon. When Joe decides to surprise her with a getaway to a cabin instead, their dream trip spirals into a nightmare. 9 P.M. (13, 49) BIG BANG MACHINE In July 2012, scientists at CERN, the European Organization for Nuclear Research, announced the discovery of a subatomic particle that was a near-match to the Higgs boson, thought to be responsible for imbuing elementary particles with mass, and a key element in the “standard model” that underlies modern physics. In its 42nd-season premiere, “Nova” travels to the Switzerland-France border to watch as scientists restart the Large Hadron Collider — this time at higher energy — hoping to break new ground and foster a better understanding of dark matter, dark energy and a concept called supersymmetry.9 P.M. (CBS) CRIMINAL MINDS When frozen bodies surface in Nevada waters, the unit suspects the people were part of a cult. Grant Show stars as its leader.10:30 P.M. (Comedy Central) BROAD CITY Ilana Glazer, far left, and Abbi Jacobson, left, return as best friends just squeaking by in New York in this Season 2 premiere, which finds them in search of an air-conditioner as the city’s temperature rises. Seth Rogen and Kumail Nanjiani guest-star.What’s Streaming NowDA SWEET BLOOD OF JESUS (2014) In Spike Lee’s Kickstarter-financed film, due in theaters next month, a doctor (Stephen Tyrone Williams) is overtaken by an uncontrollable thirst for blood after encountering a cursed artifact from an ancient African tribe — but he’s not a vampire. Soon he embarks on a dangerous affair with a married woman (Zaraah Abrahams) that forces him to question the nature of love, addiction, sex and social status in this reinterpretation of Bill Gunn’s 1973 horror cult film, “Ganja & Hess.” (vimeo.com)BROADCHURCH This police drama, starring David Tennant and Olivia Colman, right, as detectives in a British seaside town (and spun off, with Mr. Tennant, into the Fox series “Gracepoint”), returns for a second season on March 4 on BBC America. Season 1 of this Chris Chibnall (“Doctor Who”) creation, in which they investigate the death of a boy who appears to have jumped off a cliff onto a beach, is available for streaming on Netflix. (netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement