AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Jon ParelesWeariness, isolation, loneliness, futility, imminent collapse — those are situations Dr. Dog likes to sing about, in music that solidly contradicts any such sentiments. “What does it take to be lonesome? Nothing at all!,” band members sang, in hearty harmony over rowdy guitars, as they wound up their set at the Music Hall of Williamsburg on Monday night, a show that was webcast on Yahoo.Dr. Dog has just released a live album, “Live at a Flamingo Hotel” (Anti-), and it was halfway through eight shows in New York City, moving from Williamsburg to the Bowery Ballroom for four nights through Saturday. Back in the LP era, before concerts were available at a click, a live album was a career marker. It was both a boast and a summation, a signal that a band had a live sound worth preserving, an enthusiastic audience and a repertoire substantial enough to revisit. “Live at a Flamingo Hotel” is that kind of affirmation: sweaty and overloaded on the surface, fully in control behind it. Much of the Williamsburg set also appears on the album; the band isn’t retiring its barnstormers. Dr. Dog’s music unabashedly harks back to the LP era; so does its unchoreographed, loose-limbed stage presence. Its fallback songwriting styles come from the Beatles, the Band and the Beach Boys, with glimpses of Big Star, Little Feat and the Replacements. Some of Dr. Dog’s songs rival their obvious models: “We All Belong” is pure, benevolent Paul McCartney, and “Truth” has the Band’s hymnlike stolidity. But in more than a decade of recording, Dr. Dog has consolidated its own style. Its alternating lead singers, Toby Leaman on bass and Scott McMicken on guitar, have voices that are scraggly in two different ways, lower and higher; disheveled as they sound, they harmonize neatly when the other band members join the choruses. The arrangements often start out with a hint of fragility but build to a melodic blare that still keeps something messy poking through: a whizzing synthesizer, a guitar on the verge of feedback. As things fall apart in the lyrics, Dr. Dog’s music is a bulwark of solidarity amid the mess.MeWithoutYou, the opening band, also played guitar-charged songs, rooted in folk-rock and rising from fingerpicking intricacies to galvanic crescendos. The heave and swell of the music backed the literary-minded, allusive lyrics of Aaron Weiss. Its opening song name-checked Oak Ridge, Chernobyl, Garry Kasparov and Mary Magdalene, and as the set built, Mr. Weiss wasn’t shy about yelling his polysyllables. Dr. Dog performs Wednesday through Saturday at the Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side; 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. Advertisement