AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony TommasiniCarnegie Hall has tended to tap prestigious out-of-town orchestras to open its seasons. But this year, the institution’s 125th anniversary, Carnegie invited its hometown band, the New York Philharmonic, to do the honors, a fitting gesture. Given the chronic complaints about the acoustics of the Philharmonic’s own hall, now renamed after David Geffen, the musicians must relish every chance they get to play Carnegie.On Wednesday evening, under Alan Gilbert, its music director, the Philharmonic delivered with a glittering gala concert. The program was more ambitious and more excitingly played than the one Mr. Gilbert conducted last month to open the Philharmonic season, which offered Grieg’s Piano Concerto, with Lang Lang, the flashy soloist, and a routine account of Beethoven’s Seventh Symphony.The Carnegie concert opened with the premiere of Magnus Lindberg’s “Vivo,” a teeming eight-minute piece. Of course, any program that includes the brilliant Russian pianist Evgeny Kissin in Tchaikovsky’s popular First Piano Concerto and ends with Ravel’s sumptuous “Daphnis et Chloé” Suite No. 2, as this one did, has plenty of crowd-pleasing appeal. In composing “Vivo,” Mr. Lindberg linked the music subtly and sonically to the Ravel score, which made this new piece more than a typical opener for a festive occasion.The gala took place at a time of internal strife for Carnegie Hall. This summer, Ronald O. Perelman, who became the chairman of the board in February, raised alarms over whether Clive Gillinson, the hall’s executive and artistic director, was hewing to certain laws concerning nonprofit institutions. Last month, Mr. Perelman announced he was stepping down as chairman, and this complex matter is still being investigated. But for now, Mr. Gillinson, who has earned widespread respect for his artistic leadership, seems secure.Institutional tensions did not impede the music-making or, to judge by the ovations Wednesday, the audience’s pleasure. Mr. Lindberg’s “Vivo” begins with a brassy yet quizzical flourish of riffs and fragments that pile up to make tart sustained chords. The piece then takes off in swirling stretches that swell, crest and overlap. Every time you think the buildup is over and, finally, some grand theme is about to sound, another buildup begins. As an overture, “Vivo” is an exhilarating tease.Mr. Kissin, who turns 44 on Saturday, has been playing Tchaikovsky’s First Concerto since his teens. Yet the hallmark of this performance was the searching curiosity he conveyed throughout. Taking a somewhat spacious tempo in the well-known opening section of the first movement, with its soaring melody and resounding piano chords, Mr. Kissin emphasized its majesty and lyricism. Not surprisingly, this consummate virtuoso effortlessly dispatched the difficulties of the piece — the arm-blurring bursts of octaves, spiraling flights of finger-twisting passagework and more.Yet his playing abounded with milky colorings and poetic wistfulness. Backed by Mr. Gilbert and the orchestra, Mr. Kissin played the slow movement with uncommon tenderness and delicacy until the scurrying middle section, which whisked by, all uncanny lightness and clarity.The finale came across like a wild Russian dance, crisp yet never heavy-footed. After receiving an enthusiastic ovation, Mr. Kissin, who has a multiperformance Perspectives series at Carnegie this season, played an encore: a dreamy rendition of Tchaikovsky’s Meditation in D.Mr. Gilbert will be leaving the Philharmonic in 2017. Those who have found his work in the standard repertory insufficiently exciting should have heard this incandescent performance of the Ravel suite. He captured the shimmering bloom of the “Daybreak” section while bringing out its dangerous undertow and ambiguity. Though the “Pantomime” had playfulness aplenty, currents of sexuality roiled these games. The final dance section was slashing, incisive and sonically glorious.After a rare night at Carnegie Hall, Mr. Gilbert and his players are now back at Lincoln Center, where the Philharmonic is immersed in searching for a music director and planning an expensive and still-in-flux renovation of Geffen Hall. Talk about internal struggles.Advertisement