AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Brian SeibertThomas Benjamin Snapp Pryor is the producer of American Realness, a dance and performance festival that he founded in 2010. He is also the manager of several artists. His main client is Miguel Gutierrez, who has appeared at American Realness every year. At the Abrons Arts Center on Monday, the festival presented four premieres. One was by the excellent Tere O’Connor. One was Mr. Gutierrez’s latest work, “Age & Beauty Part 2: Asian Beauty @ the Werq Meeting or The Choreographer & Her Muse or &:@&.”If this already seems like nepotism, as Mr. Gutierrez admitted it was, what is the word for Mr. Pryor’s participation in the piece, playing himself? Much of the work consists of recitations of past conversations between the two men about scheduling, money and tensions in their professional relationship. One of those discussions turns on the decision to present “Age & Beauty Part 2” at American Realness.For a festival sometimes disparaged as an insider affair, this is going all out. But you don’t have to be interested in Mr. Pryor and Mr. Gutierrez to find the performance intermittently effective and affecting. Being bored by their behind-the-scenes exchanges only increases the sadness evoked by the piece and its dramatization of the difficulties of making art amid the distractions of an artist’s career.Michelle Boulé, who has appeared in all of Mr. Gutierrez’s group works since 2001, plays herself too, reprising bits from other roles. But she is also a ghostly muse. As Mr. Pryor and Mr. Gutierrez talk, she stands on the table between them, at one point blindfolded and bound, softly blowing on the face of the oblivious choreographer. She knocks the table askew, but they keep prattling on. She is a muse who works very hard, racing around and flailing like someone possessed through much of the performance’s 90 minutes. She gives her all to her fast-forward impersonation of a weepy James Dean (from the 2009 show “Last Meadow”), and this tour-de-force performance is eclipsed by the men’s prosaic exchanges and griping. Mr. Gutierrez, both grateful for his career and trapped within it, says he often feels like a ghost in his life. He is a ghost for much of this piece, sitting on the sidelines and moaning into a microphone as Sean Donovan takes his part in the discussions. That Mr. Donovan lacks Mr. Gutierrez’s charisma contributes to the work’s melancholy. The choreographer participates in its typically fun and clever songs, but he gives the spotlight to Ms. Boulé and his longtime lighting designer, Lenore Doxsee. The big diva moment goes to Mr. Pryor.Mr. Pryor acquits himself fine, yet he deserves more praise for programming work by Mr. O’Connor, an experimentalist who is also a formalist. The maturity and invention of Mr. O’Connor’s choreography are welcome additions to a festival that can be awfully ragged and sophomoric.His “Undersweet” is a duet with the compelling Silas Riener and Michael Ingle. The sound collage, by Mr. O’Connor, alternates between Baroque opera by Jean-Baptiste Lully and electronic drips and rhythmic croaking. Accompanied by either kind of sound, the men promenade and do ballet steps, but also more eccentric moves, naturalistic gestures, snippets of salsa. There are stabs of beauty and swerves of wit.The men regard each other now with courtly distance, now with gazes of heavy-lidded sensuality. The work plays with ballet’s representation of sex. Mr. Riener stands in an upright split with one of his legs propped up on Mr. Ingle’s chest and arches his torso in a deep backward bend. His legs spread wide as the men roll together on the floor. Connected by clasped hands, they extend legs away from each other, making symmetrical shapes that speak to the subtext of form. The American Realness festival continues through Sunday at the Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side; 866-811-4111, americanrealness.com. Advertisement