AdvertisementSupported byBy the NumbersBy Stephen HeymanThe crowdfunding site Kickstarter has radically changed the way creative ventures can raise money in the Internet age. Last year, 3.3 million people around the world contributed more than $500 million — roughly $1,000 a minute — to finance more than 22,000 projects. Some involved notable personalities: The Chinese artist Ai Weiwei, for instance, raised almost $90,000 to fill the former federal prison on Alcatraz Island with his work. Other projects made their founders famous: An Ohio man’s $10 campaign to make a batch of potato salad became an Internet phenomenon over the summer, raising more than $55,000. The year’s most successful project — a reboot of 1980s American educational program “Reading Rainbow” — received more than $5 million in donations to support children’s literacy.While creative projects like these grab headlines, they represent only a tiny sliver of the activity on Kickstarter, according to statistics released by the New York company. In fact, most campaigns have much more modest results — the average successful project raises about $6,000, while the average individual contribution is just $25. The site functions on an all-or-nothing financing model: If a project does not reach its preset financial goal, all donations are returned to backers and the project founder gets nothing. This is the fate of most campaigns on Kickstarter — the overall success rate is about 40 percent.“It’s not what the creator is looking for, but for some projects the right answer will be no,” said Yancey Strickler, a Kickstarter co-founder and the company's chief executive. “I think we are as meritocratic as a place can be.”Not all categories perform equally well. While creative enterprises that are more easily commodified — gadgets, computer games — tend to raise the most money over all, they have some of the lowest success rates. Mr. Strickler said, “Projects aligned with traditional fine arts — dance, theater, music — have a lot more success but at smaller scales.”Dance is the most successful category on Kickstarter, with nearly 70 percent of projects successfully funded, followed by theater, with a success rate of 62 percent. By contrast, games have a success rate of just 34 percent but have raised more than $250 million since Kickstarter began, making it the largest category by total contributions — more than art, music, theater and publishing combined. “In the technology space, there’s a potential for something to be truly a blockbuster and also a total dud,” Mr. Strickler said.Kickstarter contributions can come from anywhere around the world, but because of various financial and regulatory hurdles, projects can be started only in 10 countries, including the United States, Canada, Britain, Australia and New Zealand. Last year, the company expanded to Ireland, the Netherlands and Scandinavia. More countries are expected to be added in 2015.“Such a huge percentage of the money already comes from outside U.S., which tells us that this is a form that crosses boundaries quite easily,” Mr. Strickler said. “Obviously, in Europe, there’s a much stronger budget for arts funding. The truth is that a lot of that is to protect the cultural canon. It’s not really supporting new artists. So I think that need is absolutely there.” Advertisement