AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10:15 P.M. (TMC) IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER (1993) Daniel Day-Lewis and Pete Postlethwaite star in Jim Sheridan’s adaptation of “Proved Innocent,” Gerry Conlon’s memoir about an Irishman whose coerced confession for an Irish Republican Army bombing he didn’t commit imprisons his father as well. Emma Thompson plays the lawyer who tries to free them. Writing in The New York Times, Janet Maslin called the film, which was nominated for seven Oscars, “scathingly brilliant” and Mr. Day-Lewis’s performance “dazzling.”7:15 P.M. (Sundance) UNFAITHFUL (2002) Diane Lane plays a housewife who surrenders to an erotic whim and embarks on an affair with a French rare-book dealer (Olivier Martinez) that spins out of control. Richard Gere is her devoted husband. “The saddest and most unsettling element of ‘Unfaithful’ is its portrayal of an affluent, articulate couple who for all their individual sensitivity can barely bring themselves to communicate on a less than superficial level,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times.8 P.M. (CW) THE WORLD DOG AWARDS George Lopez hosts this inaugural ceremony, which honors dogs that have achieved fame in entertainment and on social media as well as more ordinary pets that have positively affected the lives of their human companions. Categories include best in film, top TV dog, supporting actor to a dog and dog of the year.8:30 P.M. (CBS) MOM Christy (Anna Faris) decides to move beyond waitressing, and Bonnie (Allison Janney) and Alvin (Kevin Pollak) work to recapture their youth. On “Two and a Half Men,” at 9, Walden (Ashton Kutcher) risks losing Louis (Edan Alexander) after a social worker learns that he and Alan (Jon Cryer) are not really a couple. And in “The McCarthys,” at 9:30, Marjorie (Laurie Metcalf) tries to protect the feelings of Gerard (Joey McIntyre) by letting him believe that he was inducted into the High School Hall of Fame.9 P.M. (Discovery Life) OUTRAGEOUS BIRTHS: TALES FROM THE CRIB Parents for whom labor and birth didn’t go as planned share their unusual stories, from a baby born during a hurricane to another supposedly born twice. In “50 Ways to Kill Your Mother,” at 10, the daredevil Baz Ashmawy takes his mother, Nancy, around the world on a series of extreme adventures — among them, sky diving, mountaineering, white-water rafting and alligator wrestling.9 P.M. (A&E) THE 20TH ANNUAL CRITICS’ CHOICE MOVIE AWARDS The Broadcast Film Critics Association celebrates cinematic achievement at this ceremony broadcast live from the Hollywood Palladium in California and hosted by Michael Strahan. Kevin Costner will be honored for lifetime achievement; Ron Howard will receive the genius award; and Jessica Chastain is the recipient of the first MVP award, honoring a single actor for several standout movies in the course of a year.10 P.M. (IFC) PORTLANDIA When his mother (Gretchen Corbett) visits with her new boyfriend (Justin Long), Lance (Carrie Brownstein) finds pressure put on his relationship with Nina (Fred Armisen).What’s Streaming NowVALLEY UPRISING (2014) Peter Mortimer and Nick Rosen chronicle the evolution of rock climbing in Yosemite National Park, including the recent escapades of Alex Honnold and Dean Potter, who climb barehanded and without ropes in a technique called free soloing. The men, along with three other professional climbers, recently lost their sponsorships by Clif Bar for undertaking risks the company said it would no longer support. (vimeo.com)THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING (1988) Tomas (Daniel Day-Lewis), a Czech surgeon and smooth operator, finds himself unwittingly drawn into commitment and politics as he grapples with relationships — one with the emotionally detached Sabina (Lena Olin), the other with the adoring Tereza (Juliette Binoche) — in the aftermath of the Prague Spring in 1968. Mr. Day-Lewis, Ms. Binoche and Ms. Olin “are surprisingly fine — both modest and intense as lovers whose private lives are defined by public events,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times about Philip Kaufman’s adaptation of the novel by Milan Kundera. (iTunes)Advertisement