AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Mike HaleAmazon won’t be sneaking up on anyone this time. It’s posting its latest batch of original pilots on Thursday, just a few days after winning a Golden Globe for one of the shows from the last batch, “Transparent.” Last week it was the supporting player of streaming video on demand; now it’s pushing Netflix for the lead role. Children’s shows aside, the new group includes four hourlong pilots, two of them dark-comic contemporary satires and the others earnest period pieces; two half-hour Southern California comedies; and, in a first for Amazon, a magazine-style nonfiction show produced by an actual magazine, The New Yorker.As with Amazon’s initial groups of pilots, these come with some notable television names attached, including Shawn Ryan of “The Shield,” Carlton Cuse of “Lost” and Frank Spotnitz of “The X-Files.” That’s been no predictor of success — Chris Carter, a TV legend for creating “The X-Files,” delivered a dreary pilot last year (“The After”) that Amazon originally ordered to series and then abruptly canceled last week. (By contrast Jill Soloway, despite a great track record, wasn’t widely known before creating and writing “Transparent.”)Of course, Amazon’s unusual practice of posting all its pilots warps perceptions somewhat. Television networks commission numerous pilots from celebrated writers and directors that are never seen, being quietly shelved to avoid embarrassment for all involved.So no more stalling. The verdict on the new pilots is mixed. The overall level of quality is the highest yet — none of these shows would embarrass a broadcast or cable executive or advertising buyer. That hasn’t been true in the past.They’re also, for better and worse, very TV-like — occasionally pushing (slightly) at boundaries of taste or treading on risky subject matter like guns, bullying and slavery, but safely conventional in their storytelling. Nothing here looks like a show that would have anything resembling the impact of “Transparent” or offer the pleasure of “Mozart in the Jungle,” another recent Amazon series.The next real test of Amazon’s staying power will be its full-series posting of an hourlong show, the cop drama “Bosch” starring Titus Welliver, on Feb. 13. In the meantime, here’s a look at the new offerings, loosely ranked in descending order of interest.‘COCKED’ Created by the writers Samuel Baum (“Lie to Me”) and Sam Shaw (“Manhattan”), this show embeds a fathers-and-sons melodrama reminiscent of “Dallas” or “Tyrant” in a satire of a milieu you don’t often see on scripted TV: the gun industry. It stands out, though, because of its cast. Jason Lee and Sam Trammell are the alpha- and beta-male sons of an old-school gun maker, played by the great Brian Dennehy, who hasn’t been the best steward of the family business. The family dynamics, an industrial espionage subplot and the cocaine-and-sex binges of Mr. Lee’s character are what’s central to the story, but the depictions of and debates about gun culture will probably draw the most attention. ‘THE MAN IN THE HIGH CASTLE’ Mr. Spotnitz wrote this adaptation of the Philip K. Dick alternate-history novel, in which the Nazis developed the nuclear bomb first and early 1960s America is partitioned between the occupying forces of Germany and Japan. It’s a straightforward adventure thriller, buoyed by Dick’s ideas and plotting but lacking his eccentric, hardboiled-mystical texture. Fans of speculative TV fiction can relate it to “Jericho” and “Revolution,” though it’s less action-oriented and much more about mystery and nostalgic production design — a lot of the fun is in watching the backgrounds for the ways in which swastikas and rising suns have been incorporated into the period. Alexa Davalos (“Mob City”) and Luke Kleintank (“Bones”) star as people sent on secret missions, one from the German zone and one from the Japanese zone, into the neutral Rocky Mountains.‘DOWN DOG’ Robin Schiff (“10 Things I Hate About You”) wrote this warmhearted comedy about a California dude (Josh Casaubon) who has coasted through life. When his longtime girlfriend and business partner (Paget Brewster, “Criminal Minds”) leaves him to heed her ticking biological clock, he decides, stumblingly and reluctantly, to man up and learn how to run their yoga business by himself. The pilot isn’t wildly funny, but it has moments that feel real and genuinely touching, which is rare these days for a mainstream sitcom.‘SALEM ROGERS’ Unlike “Down Dog,” this comedy by the actress Lindsey Stoddart — which made it onto Amazon through an open-submission screenplay competition — is thoroughly over the top. Leslie Bibb (“About a Boy”) plays a former model trying to reignite her career after 10 years in rehab. Stealing every scene she’s in is Rachel Dratch as the model’s former assistant, who has parlayed her experience with being bullied into a moderately successful career writing self-help books for young adults. Ms. Stoddart isn’t much of a storyteller, but she writes heavily profane, lightly transgressive dialogue that’s funny as long as you don’t dwell on it: “You’re like the AIDS of people. There’s just no stopping you.”‘THE NEW YORKER PRESENTS’ Docutainment, somewhat in the style of “This American Life” though with even less edge. The pilot contains a short comedy film starring Alan Cumming, an interview with Marina Abramovic, a poem read by Andrew Garfield and a 15-minute film by Jonathan Demme that revisits (uncritically) the subject of a long, controversial 2014 profile. It’s a highly polished and tasteful distillation of the magazine’s sensibility onto video, overseen by the Oscar-winning documentarian Alex Gibney. But it seems a little extraneous, outside of business considerations, when the whole point of The New Yorker is how that sensibility is rendered into words each week.‘MAD DOGS’ Cris Cole wrote this pilot based on his British mini-series about five old friends gathering at the island villa one of them owns and becoming embroiled in exotic and dangerous criminal doings. Mr. Ryan is an executive producer; Michael Imperioli, Romany Malco, Ben Chaplin, Steve Zahn and Billy Zane are the American embodiments of Mr. Cole’s male midlife clichés.‘POINT OF HONOR’ Mr. Cuse is a creator and writer of this Civil War soap opera, which uses the plot device of the family caught on both sides of the conflict as a way to let us root for the noble Confederate protagonists. The pilot doubles down by having the Rhodeses, owners of the plantation named Point of Honor, free their slaves just as the war is beginning.Advertisement