AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperFor years, the Metropolitan Opera has gently encroached on the symphonic terrain of its Lincoln Center neighbors with orchestral concerts at Carnegie Hall. Now the shoe is on the other foot: Lincoln Center and the New York Philharmonic said on Wednesday that they would join forces to mount several fully staged opera productions.The partnership is to begin this August with the first American stagings of George Benjamin’s “Written on Skin,” one of the most highly praised new operas of recent years, at the David H. Koch Theater as part of the Mostly Mozart Festival. That will be followed in 2016 with Gerald Barry’s “The Importance of Being Earnest” at Jazz at Lincoln Center’s Rose Theater as part of the next installment of the Philharmonic’s new-music festival, the NY Phil Biennial. A third opera, which has not been announced, is being planned for 2017.The somewhat unusual collaboration benefits both groups. Lincoln Center will receive a producing partner with musical talent to tap into, and the Philharmonic, which has increasingly hosted semi-staged performances in recent years, will have a chance to do fully staged operas. Officials of both institutions said they hoped the partnership would help smooth the way for a difficult task: the planned renovation of Avery Fisher Hall, which will require them to agree on hard choices and figure out how to survive a couple of seasons while the hall is dark.Describing how the partnership came about, Jane Moss, Lincoln Center’s artistic director, asked, “Is there a positive equivalent of a perfect storm?”She said that a confluence of events had led her to seek a teaming with the Philharmonic: her admiration of its pathbreaking semi-staged performances of Ligeti’s opera “Le Grand Macabre” and Janacek’s “The Cunning Little Vixen”; her desire to bring “Written on Skin” to New York; and her search for top-flight orchestras.Alan Gilbert, the Philharmonic’s music director, said that he considered the partnership a way to make good on a founding goal of Lincoln Center. “This is really true to that original vision, to be able to work together and to use the energy and the possibilities of all the different constituents and the people who are working all on the same campus,” he said.More than most artists, he has lived by that idea: Mr. Gilbert is beginning rehearsals this week as conductor of the Met’s production of “Don Giovanni.” But in an indication of how tough it can be to make such collaborations work, the initial opera, “Written on Skin,” will be missing something: Philharmonic musicians, who are scheduled to be off then after a busy summer that will have taken them to California, Shanghai and Vail, Colo. So Mr. Gilbert will instead conduct the Mahler Chamber Orchestra, which played at the work’s premiere in 2012 at the Aix-en-Provence Festival in France. The Mostly Mozart staging, scheduled for Aug. 11, 13 and 15, will be a revival of that original production, which was directed by Katie Mitchell.Philharmonic musicians will be part of the next collaboration: A chamber orchestra made up of Philharmonic members will perform “The Importance of Being Earnest,” based on the Oscar Wilde play, under the baton of Ilan Volkov. That production, by Ramin Gray, was performed in 2013 at the Royal Opera House’s smaller Linbury Studio Theater in London. It will be performed in June 2016 at the Rose, which is increasingly being sought as a space for smaller-scale operas. The decision by Lincoln Center and the Philharmonic to begin the collaboration with works by living composers suggests that things may be looking up for contemporary opera in New York. In recent years, the Met has staged three major John Adams operas and “Two Boys” by Nico Muhly. It also plans to present Kaija Saariaho’s 2000 opera, “L’Amour de Loin,” in its 2016-17 season. The Philharmonic and Lincoln Center have not announced what their third opera might be, but indicated that it would be contemporary or modern. Ms. Moss of Lincoln Center said that she hoped this collaboration could lead to more. “Who knows where it will take us?” she asked.Advertisement