AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperThe philanthropist Mercedes T. Bass was elected the acting chairwoman of Carnegie Hall on Thursday, succeeding Ronald O. Perelman, the billionaire businessman who stepped down from the post after eight months, amid clashes with the hall’s leadership and its board.Ms. Bass, an arts and opera patron who has been on the board for 26 years and has served as a vice chairwoman since 2006, was elected at Carnegie’s annual meeting of its board of trustees, the hall said. She will hold the post while the hall searches for a new chairman to succeed Mr. Perelman, whose abrupt and bitter departure stunned the worlds of music and philanthropy.Mr. Perelman stepped down after battling with Clive Gillinson, who has been the executive and artistic director of the Carnegie for a decade. In a letter to the board last month Mr. Perelman accused Mr. Gillinson of a lack of transparency with the board and of failing to follow the laws governing nonprofit organizations. He suspended Mr. Gillinson in August, but the board’s executive committee reinstated him the following day. One board member said the committee had felt blindsided by Mr. Perelman’s actions.Mr. Gillinson, who has overseen the renovation of Carnegie’s building and the expansion of its education programs, is now under an internal investigation that the board started after Mr. Perelman’s accusations. He got a warm ovation from board members and donors on Wednesday night at a gala dinner following the opening-night concert. “It’s certainly been the most extraordinary 10 years of my life,” Mr. Gillinson told the crowd, “with the last half-year extraordinary in a different way.”Mr. Perelman roundly criticized Carnegie’s governance when he announced last month that he was leaving his post; one board member said that he should have realized that he had lost the support of the board and could not have been re-elected. At its annual meeting on Thursday, the board created a new governance committee to oversee policies related to board stewardship.Ms. Bass, a vice chairwoman at the Metropolitan Opera, where the Grand Tier level bears her name, said in a statement that “as someone who has long loved Carnegie Hall — its unparalleled commitment to artistic excellence and its service to education and community — I feel privileged to assume this new post.”Scott A. Edelman, who had been the secretary of the board, left the board, a Carnegie official said. In his letter last month, Mr. Perelman said that the decision to suspend Mr. Gillinson had “input” from Mr. Edelman, who did not immediately return a call and email seeking comment about his departure. Carnegie’s treasurer, Edward C. Forst, who Mr. Perelman wrote had joined him in the suspension decision, will remain in his position.The board meeting was held the afternoon after Carnegie’s opening-night gala, which featured the New York Philharmonic and the pianist Evgeny Kissin. Mr. Perelman was not there; he went to the premiere of the new film “Truth” instead.Advertisement