As of this writing, days before the release of its new album “No Cities to Love,” @Sleater_Kinney — an official band account on Twitter established in late October last year — has roughly 10,000 followers. But it’s fair to assume that many of those followers think Sleater-Kinney was the greatest rock band of the last 25 years.The New York Times music critics talk each week about the latest pop music news. Subscribe in iTunes.
Based in the Pacific Northwest, active from 1994 to 2006 and now entering its surprise second stage, the trio first represented an extension of the feminist, anti-oppression riot grrl movement, but distinguished itself with stability, musical and professional. It was not built to self-destruct. It started with two singer-guitarists, Corin Tucker and Carrie Brownstein (now famous from the sketch comedy show “Portlandia”), who met at Evergreen State College, writing songs that found ignition through counterpoint and fury. And especially after the entrance of the drummer Janet Weiss, in 1996, their stability could accommodate change, such that it’s hard to tell which of their phases — the stark, ropy anthems of “Dig Me Out,” the confident guitar pop of “One Beat,”  the blown-out, jammy noise of “The Woods” — is the true Sleater-Kinney.  Those who loved them really loved them; their gigs were sacramental, and they became heroes, representing an idea of communal strength greater than themselves or the indie-rock they were playing.To talk about the band’s place now and then, and the place of “No Cities to Love” in the full span of its work, I’m joined by the Times pop critic Jon Pareles, who visited the group late last year for a recent Arts & Leisure piece; and Caryn Ganz, editorial director at RollingStone.com, who wrote one of the last major pieces on them for Spin, just before the long break.Listen above, download the MP3 or subscribe in iTunes. RELATEDJon Pareles on Sleater-Kinney’s “No Cities to Love”
SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks by artists discussed this week. Spotify users can also find it here.
