St. Jerome’s Laneway Festival
Various venues.
Jan. 24-Feb. 8.This roving pop music festival kicks off in Singapore before going to Australia and New Zealand. The English singer FKA twigs — whose dreamlike 2014 album “LP1” became an unexpected international hit — will perform in Singapore and Australia. Other acts include the American St. Vincent (recognizable for her distinctive shock-white updo); the singer-songwriter Raury, also from America; and Iceage, a rock band from Copenhagen. Acts vary somewhat in the tour’s different locations, which include Adelaide, Auckland, Brisbane, Fremantle, Melbourne and Sydney.
International Arts GuideA selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.PuSh International Performing Arts Festival
Various venues.
Jan. 20-Feb. 8.An eclectic mix of dance, theater and mixed media performances are scheduled for the festival. It will include a magic and theater show in which an audience member will fire a gun at the performer Rob Drummond’s head in a trick called “the bullet catch.” Other works include a massive public dance event featuring volunteer performers, which will take place outside the Queen Elizabeth theater; a frenetic piece by the Canadian dancer-choreographer Louise Lecavalier (above); and “The Adventures of Alvin Sputnik,” a puppet and performance piece loosely based on Orpheus and Eurydice.Mozart Week
Various venues.
Jan. 22-Feb. 1.A group of trained horses, Salzburg’s Bach choir and Les Musiciens du Louvre Grenoble will perform together in a new stage version of Mozart’s cantata “David Penitente,” created by the horse choregrapher Bartabas. The performance is one of the less traditional offerings at this festival, which is mostly dedicated to Mozart concerts, and which this year marks the 259th anniversary of the composer’s birth. The Mozarteum’s orchestra will perform concerts, as will the Camerata Salzburg. Nikolaus Harnoncourt, Andrés Orozco-Estrada and Thomas Hengelbrock will each lead the Vienna Philharmonic in a guest concert.Openings at European Capitals of Culture
Various venues. (Mons) (Pilsen)
Jan. 17; Jan. 24. Continuing.This year, Mons and Pilsen are sharing the title of “European Capital of Culture,” and each city sets off with a large-scale spectacle. On Jan. 17, Pilsen will host its opening ceremony, which features four parades that will converge for a celebration in the city center. Mons ignites festivities on Jan. 24 with a ceremony featuring fire art, light installations and dancing. Events like a Van Gogh show at Mons’s Museum of Fine Arts and a Feb. 20 “Festival of Light” in Pilsen’s historic center take place throughout the year.Mass Group Incident
Various venues.
Jan. 17-May 31.The Yangjiang Group — whose works have included a “fireworks battle” staged over the Docklands in Liverpool, England, and large calligraphic artworks penned with food — kicks off the festivities at this citywide art extravaganza with a show featuring new work. In March, “Tell Me My Truth,” a group show by artists including He Xiangyu — who creates ambiguously political works, like a full-sized military tank crafted of Italian leather — opens at the 4A Center for Contemporary Asian Art. Both events belong to “Mass Group Incident,” an art happening focused largely on East Asian artwork that incorporates audiences into the practice. One-off events are sprinkled throughout “Incident,” including a Chinese New Year’s party where the Yangjiang Group will perform.Jeff Koons
Pompidou Center.
Through April 27.This exhibition has already set attendance records at Beaubourg, and has also attracted a share of controversy — including the threat of a lawsuit over a work that has been accused of mimicking a 1985 French advertising campaign. The exhibition brings together a wide swath of Mr. Koons’s distinctive post-pop art — including his metal balloon sculptures; his 1988 rendering of Michael Jackson and his pet chimpanzee; a marble self-portrait; and some more recent oils on canvas. Above, “Gazing Ball (Ariadne),” a 2013 plaster and glass sculpture by the artist.Fantaisie Merveilleuse: Classicism in French Art Deco
Tokyo Metropolitan Teien Art Museum.
Jan. 17-April 7.The 1925 Paris exposition, which showed luxury goods, art, fashion and furniture at venues across the city, is often cited as the birthplace of the Art Deco movement. This exhibition brings together around 80 works from the Art Deco era, including urns, cabinets and paintings, many of which hail from French museums. The Teien museum — which just opened a new wing dedicated to contemporary and performance art — is itself an Art Deco relic, built in 1933 for the imperial family. The show is part of the museum’s 30th anniversary celebrations.Golden Hours
Kaaitheater.
Jan 23-31.
Brian Eno’s staccato, synthesized song of the same title inspired this new dance piece, which the choreographer Anne Teresa de Keersmaeker created for her company, Rosas. Ms. de Keersmaeker has set a number of her simple, pared down dances to classical compositions, in particular the work of Bach. She said in an interview that after a period dedicated primarily to classical scores, she turned to modern sounds after asking a collaborator what music she could incorporate into her work. He responded, “the Beatles.”