AdvertisementSupported byTelevision ReviewBy Mike HaleThe British network ITV is a more important part of the American television diet than most viewers realize. It sends us both the sweet clotted cream of “Downton Abbey” and the greasy late-night doner kebab of “Broadchurch.” But just as important for some of us, it’s the leading source of that bland bangers-and-mash called cozy mysteries: Marple, Poirot, “Midsomer Murders,” “Foyle’s War,” “Lewis.” Its latest contribution is “Grantchester,” about a village vicar who solves crimes in the 1950s, and it’s the perfect distillation of the form.“Grantchester,” beginning on Sunday night on PBS as part of an expanded “Mystery!” series, squeezes many common features of the cozy into 50 whirlwind minutes: a picturesque setting, a literary source (the mysteries of James Runcie), a brilliant amateur detective with a plodding policeman as his foil. And murders, lots of murders.The detective is Sidney Chambers, an improbably handsome vicar played by James Norton, who broke out playing a killer on the BBC series “Happy Valley.” Just as “Grantchester” is a little too perfect, so is Sidney. You suspect that 1950s country clergymen didn’t often look like him or possess his many endearing qualifications: jazz lover; war hero; whiskey drinker; defender of blacks, gays and German widows. He also regularly breaks several commandments in pursuit of the truth. He has to draw the line somewhere, though, and in one of the six episodes of the show’s first season, he draws it at euthanasia.“Grantchester” will be breezy fun for fans of the form, though the more discerning will be put off by how rudimentary the actual murder mysteries are after being squeezed into 50 minutes (half the norm for this type of show). Others are liable to find it faintly ridiculous, more of a haiku than an actual drama. It benefits from the presence of the veteran Robson Green (“Wire in the Blood,” “Touching Evil”) as Sidney’s sidekick, Inspector Keating. But Mr. Norton, while amiable and good to look at, is a little dim: The bland quality that made him interesting as a psychopath in “Happy Valley” is just bland here. As religiously inclined young British sleuths go — and I apologize for a reference that only my fellow British-mystery zealots will understand — he’s no Hathaway.Masterpiece Mystery!GrantchesterOn Sunday nights on PBS stations (check local listings).Produced by Lovely Day and Masterpiece. Directed by Harry Bradbeer, Jill Robertson and Tim Fywell; written by Daisy Coulam, adapted from the novel “Sidney Chambers and the Shadow of Death,” by James Runcie; Emma Kingsman-Lloyd, producer; Diederick Santer, executive producer for Lovely Day; Rebecca Eaton, executive producer for Masterpiece.WITH: James Norton (Sidney Chambers), Robson Green (Inspector Geordie Keating), Morven Christie (Amanda Kendall), Tessa Peake-Jones (Mrs. Maguire), Al Weaver (Leonard Finch) and Pheline Roggan (Hildegard Staunton).Advertisement