AdvertisementSupported byInside ArtBy Carol VogelThe French conceptual artist Pierre Huyghe often plunges viewers into his own, fantastical universe. It can take a surprising number of forms. His creations can include film, performance, sculpture, magic, biology, even nature like insects. So when Sheena Wagstaff, the chairwoman of the Metropolitan Museum’s modern and contemporary art department, and Ian Alteveer, a Met associate curator, saw the beguiling environment Mr. Huyghe created at Documenta 13 in 2012 and the retrospective first at the Pompidou Center in Paris and now on view at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, they asked him to create a site-specific installation for the roof of the Met next spring. “His work is so captivating, and the way he thinks about the layers of a site, taking into account history, environment and science is so compelling, we thought he’d create something particularly interesting,” Mr. Alteveer said.While the dates are set at the Met — his installation is to be on view from April 28 through Nov. 1 — the project itself is a mystery. “He’s still working on it,” Mr. Alteveer said, revealing only that “it will be an installation with a film component.”The contemporary art world is already familiar with Mr. Huyghe’s work. At the Venice Biennale in 2001, he created three rooms about music, sound and light. One contained an eight-minute film of two tower blocks typical of the French housing projects that sprang up in the 1970s. Against a background of fog, windows light up and go dark in interludes marked by changes in the atmosphere. At the Wollman skating rink in Central Park in 2005, he made a glacial landscape that was the setting for “A Journey That Wasn’t,” a musical film based on a trip to Antarctica. More recently, he has created a fog-filled arboretum in Sydney and an ever-blooming garden in a crystal palace in Madrid. Perhaps one hint about his project at the Met that Mr. Alteveer let slip: “Pierre loves the fact that the park is full of animals.”ALBERTO BURRI AT THE GUGGENHEIMFor the last two years, the Guggenheim Museum has been focusing on aspects of post-World War II art. In 2013, there was “Gutai: Splendid Playground,” devoted to the work of the Japanese collective; followed by “Zero: Countdown to Tomorrow, 1950s-60s,” which closed this month and explored the avant-garde German artists’ group.Now the museum is moving its focus to Italy with the exhibition “Alberto Burri: The Trauma of Painting.” The first major retrospective of the Italian artist’s work in 35 years, it will explore how Burri, who died in 1995, became a major pioneer of postwar European art. (A traveling Burri retrospective made a stop at the Guggenheim in 1978.)“Burri’s work symbolizes how you reconstruct art in the wake of catastrophe,” said Richard Armstrong, director of the Guggenheim Museum and Foundation. “Are these wounds ever healed? And as a former surgeon and an army doctor, Burri’s wounds are quite literal.”The show, which will occupy the museum’s landmark Frank Lloyd Wright rotunda from Oct. 9, 2015, through Jan. 6, 2016, is being organized by Emily Braun, an expert in 20th-century Italian art and a professor at Hunter College and the Graduate Center of the City University of New York.Burri, however, was originally better known in the United States. “There is a historical irony here.” Ms. Braun explained. “He first reached international fame starting in 1953, when he had several shows, including one at the Allan Frumkin Gallery in Chicago and the Stable Gallery in New York.” James Johnson Sweeney, a former Guggenheim director, included his work in a show of European paintings in 1953 and wrote the first monograph on Burri two years later. Burri also married an American dancer, Minsa Craig, and in 1963 began spending his winters in Los Angeles and the remainder of the year in Italy.His work could never be classified as either painting or sculpture. Nor was it installation. Rather than using the traditional canvas, he worked with found materials, like burlap sacks, discarded bed linens, wood veneer, industrial plastics and rolled sheet metal, which he would stitch, staple, glue, melt or solder. He also tended to work in series — among them were “Sacks,” his stitched and patched bits of torn burlap bags often with gashes of red pigment or touches of gold; “Whites,” fashioned from old linens and white pigments; and Plastic Combustions,” burned or scorched sheets of industrial plastics. The exhibition will include examples of all of them.“Although long recognized for his use of materials, what the show will also illustrate how he was a key figure of the monochrome in white, black and red,” Ms. Braun said. “Burri was often wrongly categorized as a gestural painter,” she added, referring to artists who used bold, physical gestures like dripping or smearing. “But his range and his manual dexterity was extraordinary.”The show’s title, “The Trauma of Painting,” she said, refers both to the physical trauma of the artwork as well as the psychological trauma of Europe after World War II.ANDREA DEL SARTO DRAWINGSThe Frick Collection and the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles have joined forces to organize “Andrea del Sarto: The Renaissance Workshop in Action,” an exhibition of about 50 drawings by this Italian master on loan from museums including the Louvre in Paris, the Uffizi in Florence and the British Museum in London. The show, officials at the Frick say, is the first major monographic exhibition on this artist ever presented in the United States.In recent years, drawing shows of more famous Renaissance masters like Leonardo and Bronzino have been hugely popular. But as an artist, del Sarto has been “sort of left out of the picture,” said Ian Wardropper, the Frick’s director. “Yet he’s been hiding in plain sight.” The show’s mission, he explained, was to explore how his drawings — red and black chalk figures, intricate heads and compositional studies — were crucial to the artist’s paintings.The show, which will be at the Getty from June 23 through Sept. 13 and at the Frick from Oct. 7 through Jan. 10, will also include three paintings, two from the Pitti Palace in Florence and one from the National Gallery in London. At the Frick they will be displayed in the Oval Gallery alongside corresponding drawings and technical studies.Advertisement