AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck9 P.M. (CUNY) ARMY OF CRIME (2009) The Armenian poet Missak Manouchian (Simon Abkarian) leads a heroic ragtag group of anti-Fascist partisans to sabotage the Nazi regime in occupied Paris in this biopic, directed by Robert Guédiguian, a Marseille-based filmmaker of German and Armenian parentage. Virginie Ledoyen portrays Missak’s beautiful, adoring French wife, Mélinée; Jean-Pierre Darroussin is a double-dealing inspector in the neighborhood where the Resistance is centered. “Was it all for naught?” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times. “Only weeks after the 23 partisans were arrested (and all but two promptly executed), Paris was liberated. ‘Army of Crime’ is a passionate act of remembrance.”10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY As Martin Luther King’s Birthday approaches, church leaders in Ferguson, Mo., talk with Judy Valente about helping to heal their community. Fred de Sam Lazaro reports from India on prosthetic limbs made of a construction material that are changing lives among the poor. And Kim Lawton speaks with Haris Tarin of the Muslim Public Affairs Council about the attacks on the Charlie Hebdo newspaper in Paris. In “Richard Heffner’s Open Mind,” at noon, Mr. Heffner’s grandson Alexander Heffner interviews former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey about the Democratic Party.8 P.M. (ABC) JUST GO WITH IT (2011) Adam Sandler plays a plastic surgeon who persuades his assistant (Jennifer Aniston) to pose as his soon-to-be-former wife in a ruse to win the heart of a schoolteacher (Brooklyn Decker) he wants to marry. Writing in The Times, A. O. Scott called this remake of “Cactus Flower” (1969) a “passive-aggressive, naughty but nice, sometimes obnoxious and occasionally quite funny late-winter romantic comedy.”8 P.M. (FXM) THE SESSIONS (2012) John Hawkes portrays a virginal 38-year-old disabled by polio, and Helen Hunt, in an Oscar-nominated role, is the sexual surrogate who initiates him into intimacy in this drama, directed and written by Ben Lewin and based on the article “On Seeing a Sex Surrogate,” by Mark O’Brien, who died in 1999. In The Times, Stephen Holden wrote that he would like to nominate Mr. Hawkes and Ms. Hunt “as the movie couple of year,” noting that “their extraordinary connection” infuses the film “with a piercing depth of humanity and no small amount of humor.” The movie will be repeated at 10.9 P.M. (Sundance) THE GRADUATE (1967) A double bill of Dustin Hoffman begins with this Mike Nichols classic about a recent college graduate who has an affair with the wife (Anne Bancroft) of his father’s law partner before falling for the couple’s daughter (Katharine Ross). In “Tootsie” (1982), at 11:15, Mr. Hoffman transforms himself from Michael Dorsey, a struggling actor, into Dorothy Michaels, a soap opera star, through the use of heels, high-neck blouses and heavy makeup — the better to cover his 5 o’clock shadow — in this comedy by Sydney Pollack.10 P.M. (Playboy) GROUNDBREAKERS In this new series, the director John Waters (“Hairspray,” “Pink Flamingos”) dissects five vintage pornographic films, starting with “Deep Throat,” while exploring their role in the struggle for artistic freedom and free speech.What’s Streaming NowHALF LIKE ME Inspired by a family reunion, Al Madrigal, the comedian and “Daily Show” correspondent, embarks on a quest to get in touch with his roots and learn to be “a better Latino” in this comedy special, available for streaming on Hulu before its television premiere on Thursday on Fusion. (hulu.com)COMEDIANS IN CARS GETTING COFFEE: SINGLE SHOT Jerry Seinfeld and friends including Seth Meyers, Tina Fey, Bill Burr, Ricky Gervais and Michael Richards order eggs for breakfast. (crackle.com)THE HONORABLE WOMAN  Maggie Gyllenhaal just won a Golden Globe for her portrayal of this British-Israeli businesswoman — the daughter of an arms dealer and Zionist — intent on bringing prosperity to the Palestinians in this Sundance TV mini-series created by Hugo Blick (“The Shadow Line”). “While there are some deeply disturbing images, ‘The Honorable Woman’ is an astute, sensitive and at times delicate psychological drama that is evenhanded in the nonincendiary sense of the word,” Alessandra Stanley wrote in The Times. “No side is entirely to blame, and there are villains, innocent victims and foolish dupes on both sides.” (netflix.com)Advertisement