AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Alastair MacaulayHow can a production as visually beautiful and stylish as the Mariinsky Ballet’s “Swan Lake” be so unmoving? The exquisitely medieval look of this staging, which this St. Petersburg company presented on Thursday to open its two-week season at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, is marvelously right, and other balletic felicities abound. But four central problems remain. Most of the dance beauties of this ballet’s 1895 choreography, made for the Mariinsky by Marius Petipa and Lev Ivanov, were leached out of the company’s tradition back in the Soviet era. Second, the Mariinsky’s way with the classical dances of its inheritance is akin to taxidermy: chilly, pedantic, curatorial, life-draining. (Just compare it with the radiantly fresh dancing of the Royal Danish dancers in August Bournonville’s even older choreography, danced this week at the Joyce Theater.) Next, nothing in this gorgeous, 32-year-old production of ballet’s most famous tragedy is remotely tragic. Finally, the nuances of Mariinsky “Swan Lake” style are at odds with the brisk tempos established by the company’s maestro, Valery Gergiev. These complaints aren’t new. They arose both in 2013 in a live 3-D broadcast from its home theater in St. Petersburg, and in 2014, when the company fielded three casts in Washington. Still, there was something startling about the coldness on Thursday.Many beauties were evident throughout. The distinction of Mariinsky upper-body carriage and épaulement, “placing of the shoulders,” is delectable — nowhere more so than in the ballroom-scene Hungarian Dance, when you feel you’ve never seen necks so marvelously stemlike, heads carried with such refinement, shoulders angled with such texture. Elegance of legs and feet, grand sweep of through-the-body line, handsomely complex three-dimensional alignment: All are splendid. The sheer drill of the large ensembles is superlative. The panache of the ballroom’s scene’s national dances has real charm. The harmonious colors and vivid period detail of the costumes and sets are lessons from which every other “Swan Lake” in the world today should learn (but none have done so). Apart from a briefly off-color trumpet during the ballroom’s Neapolitan number, the Mariinsky Orchestra played superbly for Mr. Gergiev. Especially fine was the legato of the strings: not just tonally lovely but suspenseful. Yet you had only to watch the opening phrases of the first scene’s pas de trois to sense the punctilious but unaffectionate way this noblest of ballet troupes executes the choreography. Two women and one man crisscross the stage in zigzags of basic steps. With other companies, these steps light up the stage with springlike innocence; here they become steely elocution exercises. Alas, everything that followed was equally shiny and unfeeling. In the final scene, when the ballerina Viktoria Tereshkina, as the heroine Odette, returned to the lake in despair, she seemed to be saying (to the corps and to us) “Please observe my admirable self-command; no need to be distressed by this temporary crisis.” This kind of unemotional glaze isn’t peculiar to her: Few current Mariinsky interpreters of the role are any more passionate.Why has Mr. Gergiev, omnipotent at the Mariinsky, permitted this lovely production to become congealed? He’s the most eminent Tchaikovskian in history to advocate this 1895 version of the score, extensively rearranged by Riccardo Drigo after Tchaikovsky’s death in 1893; no other modern conductor surpasses the dramatic blaze he has brought to Tchaikovsky’s operas in the last 25 years. His conducting on Thursday (as in his 2007 recording and 2013 broadcast), demonstrates that he loves the sound of this score but is less interested in its drama. More crucially, nothing suggests that dance itself appeals to him. His way with rhythm is not one that breathes life into dances — least of all the Mariinsky way of dancing. True, the company he inherited was plagued by lax musical standards: its dancers were both accustomed to dictate convenient tempos and then prepared to lag behind them. He’s reformed that, making the music lead and altering the entire musical emphasis of the company’s dancing. It’s astonishing to observe how the whole company now steps on the downbeat, as Western companies have for decades, rather than using it as a preparation, as this St. Petersburg troupe long used to. Though this production’s sets (by Igor Ivanov) and costumes (by Galina Solovyova) date from 1982, its basic framework goes back to 1950, when Konstantin Sergeyev supervised it. And many of its choreographic tinkering go further back. The avoidance of mime, the addition of a trite Jester, the rearrangement of several corps patterns in Act II, the acrobatic alterations to the ballerina’s lakeside and ballroom adagios are the most obvious. This version has whittled away many of the ballet’s narrative details. Prince Siegfried’s mother never suggests he should think about marriage until she has confronted him in the ballroom with a choice of brides. The prince goes alone to the lake; therefore neither he nor Odette ask his companions not to shoot her swan maidens. Though the program tells us that she returns his passionate love, there’s no evidence of this in performance. The few moments of dramatic freshness came from the sweetly heroic Vladimir Shklyarov as Prince Siegfried. But, though this was an improvement on his merely functional interpretation of the role a year ago in Washington, this winning artist should be making far more impact. I’m sad to see Ms. Tereshkina, an admirable artist elsewhere, reduce Odette-Odile to stereotype; but that’s just what the company’s other ballerinas have been doing, too. Can the Mariinsky management see how it has allowed this ballet to become polished rote work? And, though the company has long needed a musical shake-up, Mr. Gergiev’s way with “Swan Lake” suggests he is merely exacerbating this ballet company’s troubles.The Mariinsky Ballet performs through Jan. 25 at Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene; 718-636-4100, bam.org. Advertisement