AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Brian SeibertPilobolus, the mix of acrobatics, dance and dreamlike theater that became famous under the name of a fungus, first germinated in a 1970s Dartmouth College dance class taught by Alison Chase. Ms. Chase joined the troupe, and though, in 1980, she helped found the offshoot Momix, she stuck with Pilobolus until an acrimonious parting in 2005. Four years later, she started another company, Alison Chase/Performance, and at the Miller Theater this weekend, this latest venture had its New York debut.It is recognizably another offshoot. Its strengths are those of Pilobolus: ingenious transformations of human bodies that are at least impressive and, at best, expressive of strange poetry. Its faults are also those of Pilobolus: cute gags that tip over into cutesiness, all of that ingenuity often expended upon ideas that aren’t worth the effort. In “Drowned,” the longest and most ambitious of the program’s four pieces, a dead body (in the form of a limp dancer) washes up on a beach and is discovered by some primitive tribe. The principal ingenuity here is theatrical. Working with the photographer Sean Kernan and the videographer Derek Dudek, Ms. Chase adeptly combines video with low-tech sheets of fabric to conjure not just stormy seas but also the turbulent, lightning-flash imagery of sexual fantasy.The members of the tribe move in semi-simian fashion, hunkered over, swinging their limbs. They treat one another’s bodies as trees to climb. Through their loose-hanging motion and the smooth arrangement of scenic elements, the work maintains a floating quality that could be hypnotic. It’s possible to imagine how a dance centered on a corpse could be uncanny, how necrophiliac scenes could expose dark corners in the human psyche, but “Drowned” doesn’t get there, and Paul Sullivan’s kitschy score doesn’t help. With too many effects with sheets done for sheets’ sake, the work is like a dance equivalent of the movie “Avatar,” visually arresting primitivism allied to a bad script.“Red Weather” has an inoffensive score by Rob Flax, who played live, vocalizing along with his violin. The dance is semi-abstract, with conflict flaring up intensely but vaguely among the work’s three couples. This motivation for movement, coming and going and not making much sense, is as mystifying as the erratic quality of the choreography, terrible one moment and striking the next. “Devil Got My Woman,” back in narrative mode, has a light, jazzy charm that hardens into something less appealing. A man (the compact and charismatic Shane Rutkowski) lives on a small jungle gym. A seductress joins him, teases him, tickles him and eventually takes away his house. “Tsu-Ku-Tsu,” which Ms. Chase made with Pilobolus in 2000, is more of a straight acrobatics display. The taiko-drum score by Leonard Eto gives it some exotic coloring, but it’s mainly a collection of tricks, many highly inventive. It’s a show-off piece for the capable crew assembled by Ms. Chase, a survivor voted off her island who has managed to stay afloat. Advertisement