By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMJAN. 16, 2015
Critics of Avery Fisher Hall and its acoustics usually agree that it is too big. But on Thursday evening, during the galvanic Dies Irae (Day of Wrath) in the New York Philharmonic’s performance of Verdi’s Requiem, it suddenly felt as if the hall were too small to contain such an explosion of sound. As the massed forces of the excellent New York Choral Artists invoked the Day of Judgment, shrieking piccolos pierced through the orchestral texture, and ear-shattering offbeats on the bass drum answered thundering orchestra chords. Trumpeters had been stationed on both sides of the second balcony, and the metallic bite of their salvos seemed to cut into the listener from all directions.It was an all-out sonic assault and one of the highlights of the performance, which was conducted by the orchestra’s music director, Alan Gilbert. His reading of the score was most compelling in hellfire moments like this; at other times, I would have wished for more expression in the small details of the orchestral score that can add urgency to the singers’ pleading, trembling and sighing utterances and that might have transformed a powerful performance into a transcendent one.The quartet of soloists consisted of the soprano Angela Meade (in her Philharmonic debut), the mezzo-soprano Lilli Paasikivi, the bass-baritone Eric Owens and the tenor Russell Thomas, who replaced an ill Brandon Jovanovich. Given the massed orchestral and choral forces behind them and the heightened theatricality and pathos of the music, many soloists tend to approach their parts as opera. What made Mr. Owens’s contributions on Thursday so profoundly moving was the sense of vulnerability he brought to them. On a crowded stage, he managed to give the impression of being utterly alone, gripped with awe. He colored the word “mors” — death — in icy pallor. When he sang “salva me”— “save me” — the faintest quiver in his voice suggested a man fully aware that his plea might be denied.Mr. Thomas appeared uncomfortable at times, capable of delivering and sustaining notes of great power but sounding constricted and ill at ease in quieter moments.Ms. Paasikivi is a fascinating singer with a multifaceted color palette and a laser-sharp delivery that accords primacy to the text. Her voice proved a good foil for Ms. Meade’s blooming, sweet soprano in duets like the Recordare, which hummed with the tension between hope and fear. In the concluding Libera me, Ms. Meade’s voice soared commandingly over the orchestra and chorus — an operatic feat, undoubtedly, and a magnificent one.The New York Philharmonic performs Verdi’s Requiem on Saturday at Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. A version of this review appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Shaking the Rafters With the Thundering Chords of a Monumental Requiem.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.