AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Neil GenzlingerMel Gibson’s character got to explore one mystery of the universe in the movie “What Women Want,” but a far bigger enigma — as any parent who has tried to raise one knows — is what teenage girls want. Three new series aimed at the youth market begin in the next few days and shed light on that question, giving us heroines living out what are presumably young female fantasies. Let’s look at those fantasies, in ascending chronological order.What the youngest teenage girls — tweener types — want, apparently, are expanded opportunities to sustain concussions. We learn this from “Bella and the Bulldogs,” a Nickelodeon comedy that begins Saturday night in which the title character (Brec Bassinger) goes from being a cheerleader to being quarterback of the boys’ middle school football team. The boys, nasty rotters, rebel at having her on the team, which brings up an ingredient common to all of these shows: Don’t expect to see many male characters who are smart, wise or caring. For girls to rule, as they do in these shows, apparently boys and men must take over the airhead roles formerly reserved for female characters. Turnabout is fair play, though in “Bella” that makes the humor fairly dumb and predictable. Another thing we learn from “Bella” is that girls, like boys, seem to find flatulence jokes hilarious; the first one comes less than nine minutes into the premiere. “K. C. Undercover,” a comedy that begins Sunday night on the Disney Channel, must be aimed at a slightly more sophisticated crowd; here the gas gag doesn’t show up until 20 minutes in. K. C. (Zendaya) is a 16-year-old who discovers that her seemingly nondescript parents are secret agents. The show teaches us that what 16-year-old girls really, really want is to live in 1965, because once the parents take K. C. into their confidence and she becomes an agent herself, she enters a world full of goofy spy devices reminiscent of the shoe phone in “Get Smart.” The humor here is zippier than in “Bella,” because K. C. has a smart, quick mouth that calls to mind “Hannah Montana.” In the premiere, she tries to ward off a room full of threatening figures by commanding: “Stand back. I watch reality shows. I will scratch your eyes out and scar you emotionally.” The show can be pretty funny, though again pity those male characters: K. C.’s brother is pure goofball, and her father is the clueless-dad type.Fathers, at least, get some redemption in “Open Heart,” which begins Tuesday on TeenNick. There’s no dumb comedy here; this is a drama, and it tells us something that the Nancy Drew franchise first proved 85 years ago: What girls really, really, really want is to be private investigators.Dylan (Karis Cameron), another 16-year-old, seems to have a knack for getting into mild trouble, which lands her in a community service program at the hospital where her mother and sister are doctors. She has a lot on her mind: Her beloved father has recently vanished, and she doesn’t buy the explanation that it was a simple case of abandonment. It’s a decently made, serious show, and flatulence-free in the premiere. But Dylan does twice compel boys to remove their pants in the episode. Ah, they grow up so fast.Advertisement