By GIA KOURLASJAN. 16, 2015
New York Theater Ballet  may be small, but its repertory is mighty. For the latest installment of the Legends & Visionaries series, Diana Byer, the artistic director, dusted off some of the company’s amiable works by an array of accomplished choreographers. Leading off the program at the 92nd Street Y on Saturday was Pam Tanowitz’s “Short Memory,” created for the company in 2013 and set to music by Lou Harrison and Henry Cowell.“Short Memory” was the evening’s freshest offering, notably the section set to Mr. Harrison’s “Reel.” The music’s lively warmth made Ms. Tanowitz’s stringent steps playful, imbuing her rhythmic footwork with a pulse in which eccentricities — heels landing forcibly on the floor, crossings with flexed feet — were integrated into the dancers’ bodies.It helped that the music was live. The pianist Michael Scales, joined by the violinist Pauline Kim Harris, played from the back of the stage. (The only low point was when the dancer Steven Melendez led Ms. Harris, with a lugubrious air, to her spot.) In her work, where shapes are absolute and precision is everything, Ms. Tanowitz provides the dancers with some much-needed rigor.A balcony scene from “Romeo and Juliet,” by Sallie Wilson, followed, which was so perfunctory it made you wonder: Why include it? The dancers, Elena Zahlmann and Choong Hoon Lee, were more aloof than passionate. In “A Rugged Flourish,” from 2011, the British choreographer Richard Alston found inspiration in Aaron Copland’s “Piano Variations.” In this ballet for seven, a young man encounters a group of green-clad nymphs. In his opening solo, Mr. Melendez, with serene virility, stretched a leg behind and pressed the floor with a hand — repeating the pose at different angles — as if marking his territory. The nymphs crossed briskly in jumps that tickled the stage, and one of them, Rie Ogura, emerged for a pas de deux with Mr. Melendez.It was hard to grasp what their relationship was all about; Ms. Ogura seemed nearly indifferent to Mr. Melendez’s touch. A more intriguing pairing was between Mayu Oguri and Amanda Treiber in Jerome Robbins’s “Rondo.” In this 1980 work, staged by Kyra Nichols, Mozart is the backdrop for two women who perform classroom steps while supporting or mirroring each other. It’s not a major Robbins ballet, but it’s comely; the partnering creates a delicate strength, and Ms. Treiber’s musicality was especially edifying.The program closed with Matthew Neenan’s “Game Two,” from 2008 and dedicated to a company member, Julie-Anne Taylor, who died in August of cancer. Mr. Neenan takes inspiration from Bizet’s “Jeux d’Enfants”; a spirited sense of fun permeates the dance. Still, for all its jauntiness, it’s underwhelming, though Nayomi Van Brunt, an impish new member of the company, belied her daintiness with an appetite for space. “Game Two” needs that frisky feeling.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.