AdvertisementSupported byOpera ReviewBy Michael WhiteLONDON — A modern curiosity of opera is that we spend vast amounts on theaters customized with all the comforts and amenities the art form needs, only to get excited by the prospect of performances in train sheds. It is the thrill of living rough. And it explains why the operatic event of the moment in London is a new Covent Garden production of Monteverdi’s “Orfeo” that is not actually playing at Covent Garden but at the Roundhouse: a cavernous industrial building in North London’s edgy Camden Town that once held trains but now holds music, though not often music of this kind.The Roundhouse repertoire is generally commercial rock and pop: more Lady Gaga than lyric theater, and a far cry from the chandeliers-and-Champagne culture of the Royal Opera House. But that is what makes this new Orfeo, which opened on Tuesday and runs through Jan. 24, a head-turning project. It was conceived with missionary zeal and a sense of outreach that has drawn in local schools and emerging artists.Directed by Michael Boyd, who used to run the Royal Shakespeare Company but has no track record in opera, it plays minimally on a bare, circular stage that echoes the circularity of the building around it. The audience sits on all sides, stadium-style. What you see in the dark, atmospheric space is largely emptiness enclosed by scaffolding — with an impressive catwalk sweeping down from the far distance of an upper gallery at such a steep rake that you worry for the singers as they walk it. Susan Bickley, singing the messenger Silvia in high heels, treads with noticeable caution.Ms. Bickley’s care is understandable, since she is the nearest to a seasoned veteran on the cast list. Everybody else is young, agile and heedless, with music college students in the chorus. The show also employs a school-age movement group that slips into break-dance routines when it is not acting as the human equivalent of scenery. This group plays such a major role that it comes close to branding the production as community theater. But that is clearly what we are meant to feel: a sense of Covent Garden stepping off its pedestal.The piece is sung in English translation, something the Royal Opera rarely does — with words by Don Paterson that serve well. It tells the legendary story of Orpheus descending to the Underworld to find his wife, Eurydice, in terms that would make sense to any first-timer in the audience. And there are probably a good number of first-timers at this “Orfeo” because, quite apart from playing at a rock venue in Camden Town, it is a piece the Royal Opera has never staged before: a strange omission given its iconic status as the first work to survive in mainstream operatic repertory.One reason is that Renaissance opera suits neither the conventional proscenium stage at Covent Garden nor the traditional orchestra in the Covent Garden pit. It demands a different sort of engagement with those who watch it. And it needs a period band — which in this case is the hired-on Early Opera Company, conducted from the keyboard by Christopher Moulds — that offers a colorful, evocative if curdled sound with an approximation of the musical forces Monteverdi asks for in his printed score. As with the voices, there are electronic interventions to enhance the sound. Exciting venues are all very well, but they do not necessarily provide the right acoustics.Playing with the fact that “Orfeo” was first written for the Duke of Mantua’s court in 1607, Michael Boyd’s staging suggests a modern-dress equivalent of courtly entertainment with the Duke and his attendants looking on. But this court is the kind that also deals out justice. The performers are for some reason on trial, presenting an opera as though they were pleading a case. And “Orfeo” seems to be their choice because it illustrates a conflict between authority (the rules of life and death as laid down by the gods) and humanity (the love of a man for his lost wife). Orpheus’s descent to Hades is a challenge to authority. And if it does not quite succeed because the rules prove insurmountable, his efforts are at least acknowledged when the gods receive him in heaven.This “assumption” to heaven is, in fact, the most impressive thing about the staging — done with Orpheus suspended in a sling but desperately trying, as he is lifted up, to clasp the raised hand of Eurydice below him. It is aerial theater whose sheer danger stops your heart (this is a singer, after all, not a trapeze artist), and is spectacularly done by the young Transylvanian baritone in the title role, Gyula Orendt. On opening night, he generated initial reservations, partly for the fact that he is a baritone (a tenor is more usual), but also for the powdery lightness of the voice and casual laddish demeanor more like someone on an East European stag night than a demigod. But he grew more engaging over time. And the great central aria, “Possente spirto,” that he sings to charm his way past Charon charmed the audience, too, if not brilliantly embellished.With Mary Bevan as a Eurydice so adorably feminine it is hard to believe that the role was written for a male castrato, and with some striking newcomers like Callum Thorpe as Pluto, it is a memorable evening. Inclusive opera is a fine idea, as is the Royal Opera’s readiness to venture into the wilds of Camden Town in search of a new audience. But you can only go so far with inexperienced performers and community ideals. “Orfeo” pushes them to their limits.Orfeo.  Directed by Michael Boyd. Roundhouse. Through Jan. 24.Advertisement