By JON PARELESJAN. 16, 2015
The British singer and songwriter Sam Smith has made himself pop’s king of cling, its bard of dependence. He started his sold-out Madison Square Garden show on Thursday evening with a song that insisted, “You’re my life support,” and finished it with his million-selling hit “Stay With Me,” begging someone to do just that, if only for a one-night stand.In between were “I’m Not the Only One,” in which a betrayed spouse moans, “I still need you here”; “I’ve Told You Now,” which confesses “You’re everything I want”; and “Lay Me Down,” a near-hymn that concludes, “I don’t want to be here if I can’t be with you tonight.” Acting out its loneliness, he sang the first verses a cappella, though he was immediately and loudly joined by the high voices of many in the audience.Mr. Smith exulted, though with a bit of British self-deprecation, that he had played his first New York City show in August 2013 at a small club, the Mercury Lounge, and that less than a year and a half later he was headlining Madison Square Garden. His album has also sold more than a million copies, and “Stay With Me” and the album have brought the 22-year-old Mr. Smith nominations for this year’s four top Grammy Awards. As a ballad singer leaning toward retro styles, he’s the kind of performer Grammy voters often reward.Nearly every song on Mr. Smith’s debut album, “In the Lonely Hour,” proclaims yearning and love, usually unrequited, in ballads that draw on 1960s and ’70s soul. “I feel like a lot of people think that I’m this really sad, depressing person that writes poetry every night and cries,” he said onstage, before insisting that he’s actually happy.AdvertisementBut pleading is built into Mr. Smith’s voice. It’s doleful and insistent, a reedy high tenor that sails up to a plummy, androgynous falsetto. The tone is choirboy-pure, except when he chooses to apply a slight touch of grain. His sound is startling but rarely shrill, even as he opens up for big crescendos; he’s a crooner who contemplates pain with fastidious control. When he sings a melisma, the pitches are as clearly delineated as keys on a piano — no bluesy bends.Mr. Smith has had to adjust quickly to larger stages, and he has wisely chosen not to attempt much spectacle. The focus of the concert was his voice and its variations on longing; he delivered “My Funny Valentine” as a tragedy with sweeping crescendos, even as he added some octavewide leaps to the melody. He was backed by a small band, a string quartet and three singers. Sometimes he pared them down to a lone guitar or keyboard. In “Restart,” a relatively upbeat song from the Prince school of funk, Mr. Smith tried a dance routine that was more like walking in rhythm. At one point a piano was placed at center stage so Mr. Smith could perform solo — “the way I wrote my record, just me and a piano,” he said. But there were technical problems: “I spent all this money on this, and it’s not working,” he announced, so his band’s keyboardist backed him instead.AdvertisementHe did have a surprise. Like many 21st-century singers, Mr. Smith got his break as a featured vocalist and songwriter on an electronic club track: “Latch,” by Disclosure, with a falsetto chorus that vows, “I won’t let go of you.” His album includes a retro-style version of it with acoustic instruments, and that’s how he started it on Thursday, backed by piano and cello. But he stopped partway through. “I can’t play Madison Square Garden without Disclosure,” he said. “Wouldn’t it be amazing if Disclosure were here tonight?” Up rose platforms with Disclosure’s two members — the brothers Guy Lawrence on drums and Howard Lawrence on keyboards — and they started their sparse, thumping version of the song. Mr. Smith was clinging to them, too.A version of this review appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Preaching Loneliness to a Packed House.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.