By KATHRYN SHATTUCKJAN. 28, 2015
10 P.M. (13, 49) GRANTCHESTER James Norton (“Happy Valley”), above, portrays Sidney Chambers, a small-town vicar with a love of jazz, whiskey and complicated women who discovers an enthusiasm for sleuthing after a concerned parishioner compels him to investigate a grisly suicide in this new “Masterpiece Mystery!” series, based on the mysteries by James Runcie. “ ‘Grantchester’ will be breezy fun for fans of the form, though the more discerning will be put off by how rudimentary the actual murder mysteries are after being squeezed into 50 minutes (half the norm for this type of show),” Mike Hale wrote in The New York Times about what he called “cozy mysteries.” And while “it benefits from the presence of the veteran Robson Green (‘Wire in the Blood,’ ‘Touching Evil’) as Sidney’s sidekick, Inspector Keating,” Mr. Hale added, he found Mr. Norton, though amiable and good to look at, “a little dim”: “As religiously inclined young British sleuths go — and I apologize for a reference that only my fellow British-mystery zealots will understand — he’s no Hathaway.” In “Downton Abbey,” which leads in at 9, Lady Mary (Michelle Dockery) and Lord Gillingham (Tom Cullen) check into a Liverpool hotel — the better to check out their love. The art historian Simon Bricker (Richard E. Grant) turns his attention from a Piero della Francesca painting to its owner, Lady Cora (Elizabeth McGovern). A secret from the past of the Dowager Countess (Maggie Smith) resurfaces. And the police continue to investigate the death of Lord Gillingham’s valet.9 P.M. (HBO) GIRLS Hannah (Lena Dunham, left), settling in at the Iowa Writers’ Workshop, discovers that she can get more apartment for her money than in Brooklyn. But she doesn’t get the response she expected after warning her fellow scribes that her stories might trigger intense emotions. In “Togetherness,” at 9:30, Tina (Amanda Peet) tries to jolt Alex (Steven Zissis) out of his malaise by involving him with her bouncy-castle business and promising to help him develop an acting career. She also persuades Michelle (Melanie Lynskey) to spice things up in the bedroom. Brett (Mark Duplass), meanwhile, finds that his co-workers aren’t as impressed by his creative instincts as he is. And in “Looking,” at 10, Patrick (Jonathan Groff) and Kevin (Russell Tovey) decide to develop a gay game app. Then Patrick gets a rash.10 P.M. (MTV) NICKI MINAJ: MY TIME AGAIN In Part 2 in this documentary trilogy, Ms. Minaj, left, shares recollections of life before fame: living with her family in a one-room apartment in Southside Jamaica, Queens; her job at Red Lobster; and the end of an 11-year romantic relationship.10:30 P.M. (Showtime) EPISODES Matt (Matt LeBlanc, playing a fictional version of himself) tries to solve his financial woes after his money manager absconds with $32 million before committing suicide. Sean (Stephen Mangan) and Beverly (Tamsin Greig) listen to networks grovel for the rights to their new show. And Carol (Kathleen Rose Perkins) tries to make amends with her boss, whose former husband she once slept with.What’s Streaming NowTHE ADVENTURES OF PUSS IN BOOTS With accent and attitude more or less intact, Eric Bauza steps in for Antonio Banderas as the voice of the title character in this new DreamWorks series set in San Lorenzo, a bastion of innocence separated from the rest of the nasty world by a magic spell, until Puss accidentally disarms its protective shield. Soon thieves come in search of the city’s treasures, and Puss prepares to be its defender — his decision made all the easier by the alluring Dulcinea (Jayma Mays). “The show is nicely drawn, and San Lorenzo is populated with some appealingly odd young residents, human and otherwise; children will have no trouble finding a favorite,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times. “And Puss is an endearing guy in a small-scale sort of way. He was stretched to his limits trying to carry a feature-length film, but for these 22-minute episodes, he seems just right.” (netflix.com)KATHRYN SHATTUCK A version of this schedule appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.