Season 4, Episode 2: “Triggering”
Welcome back to our weekly “Girls” chat — I’m Joe Coscarelli and joining me in this judgmental writing workshop is Lydia Polgreen. The second episode of this season did not come with a trigger warning of its own, but the viewer might have been cautioned: “Copious amounts of Hannah.” The HBO comedy by Lena Dunham.Lydia: With its cold-open flyover of endless cornfields, the episode reminds us: We are not in Brooklyn anymore. Arriving in Iowa to begin a two-year program at the University of Iowa’s prestigious writing program, Hannah Horvath (Lena Dunham) discovers the joys of life outside New York. We first find her pacing out the length of her spacious new digs. Rent? $250 a month. A fellow grad student tells her there is no need to lock up her bike in Iowa — no one would steal it. In a gleeful video chat with her BFF Marnie (Allison Williams), she gushes, “We should all move here and start the revolution!” Marnie is too busy to join any revolution. She’s knitting a scarf for Desi (Ebon Moss-Bachrach), her musical and romantic partner, who is cheating on his longtime girlfriend Clementine (Natalie Morales). And she assumes Hannah is pining too, wanting to know what is happening with Adam (Adam Driver), Hannah’s boyfriend, left behind in Brooklyn. Hannah isn’t biting. “Honestly I feel like I made the right decision, which is a totally new sensation for me,” she declares to Marnie. But the call soon dissolves into digital static. Joe: This show has always jerked back and forth between overblown satire and millennial cinema vérité, but their frozen Skype call was the realest.Lydia: The cracks in Hannah’s idyllic image of life in Iowa appear almost immediately. At the bookstore, her acerbic style quickly wears down the patience of the Midwest-nice store clerk. She gets a nocturnal visit from a bat, prompting her to sleep on the bathroom floor of her expansive new apartment. Joe: In New York, there would have likely been rats or cockroaches on that floor, so let’s call that part even.

Lydia: And then there’s her first class, which is a disaster. After an ill-advised trigger warning, her story falls flat, prompting unwelcome comparisons to “50 Shades of Grey.” Hannah struggles with the format of the class, which requires her to hear critiques silently.

This episode felt like a real return to form to me, hitting all the most satisfying notes in the Lena Dunham repertoire. It played resonant, hilarious chords by pairing hubris with humiliation, political correctness with tone deafness, wrapping it all up with an awesome party scene, where Hannah is always at her best/worst.

Joe: First, let me quibble: No college party in 2015 would be playing a decade-old Ying Yang Twins song, even in Iowa, even ironically (it’s too old to be fun, too new to be a throwback). Give these people some credit.Beyond that, I’m torn. Because while a little self-awareness goes a long way, too much can feel like a half-hour inside joke, solipsistic not just on the part of the characters, who are always that way, intentionally, but by the show’s creators, who seem to be assuring us that they have an active “Girls” Google Alert.(For what it’s worth, Ms. Dunham tweeted ahead of Sunday’s episode that it “may seem like we’re trolling recent critics but it was written like NINE months ago.” While she did face a new round of controversies after the publication of her book, “Not That Kind of Girl,” discussions about the show’s bubble of privilege predate that.)  Without doing a thorough headcount, I think it’s safe to say there was more diversity in Hannah’s small fiction workshop than in the previous three seasons put together, including a black professor and star student (not to mention an Asian man named Chester Chong). It’s through these new classmates that Hannah is reminded to check her privilege, something Ms. Dunham has been told, with varying degrees of grace, since the show started. But the criticisms are played as a gag, with one dope telling her that the story has “a lack of sympathy toward the male perspective.” Another asks, “How are we supposed to critique a work that is very clearly based on the author’s experience?” The latter is valid, the former much less so, but by combining them all in this meta-hodgepodge, the legitimate complaints are conflated with the nonsense.(This sort of response to critics was better played, and more appropriately timed, at the start of Season 2, with her then boyfriend, a black Republican, Sandy, played by Donald Glover.) Eventually, Hannah is wisely told, “You can’t go to everybody’s house individually and defend your work.” But isn’t that kind of what this episode is doing, albeit with Hannah’s cluelessness adding some levity? Lydia: Perhaps I am giving Lena Dunham too much credit, but I read this episode less as a response to her critics than as a way to bring those critiques into the show in a legitimate, plot-driven way. The fact is that academic environments are often the first place where people who grow up in the privileged bubble of whiteness confront diversity. Universities, unlike, say, Greenpoint, are socially constructed to look like that workshop classroom. Joe: In that sense, Hannah, like so many of us, seems to not have made the most of her undergrad years…Lydia: Yet the way the black student and Hannah were played against each other was risky and revealing. The overwhelming praise heaped on the black male writer was cringe-worthy. “I want to say this was one the best pieces I have read so far in this program, and I am a second year,” a blonde student declares in hushed, reverent tones. “Gut-wrenching,” says another classmate, played by the rising star Desiree Akhavan. “You played with gender in a way that was really surprising, almost offensive, but not,” an Asian student declares.Having been the only black person in many rooms, I am familiar with the experience of receiving uncritical praise, and know how unhelpful and downright condescending it can be. The student graciously accepted their praise, playing along with the shuck and jive. Indeed, when the class piles on to Hannah, the black student comes to her defense, perhaps knowing what a performative sham it all is, saying, look, who cares? It’s her voice! Joe: It is definitely that.

Lydia: After that scene, it was a huge relief to see Elijah (Andrew Rannells), always the life of the party. Hannah clearly needed a pick me up, and a candystriper arrives! Song choice aside, what do you make of the Iowa party scene? Joe: While I did appreciate Elijah creeping in like a home invader to save us from an all-Hannah, all-neuroses episode, I think I may be in the minority when it comes to the gay bestie/ex-boyfriend character, and the way Mr. Rannells plays him. It’s too broad a caricature for me, all affect and no heart, verging uncomfortably close to a stereotype from an earlier era of television — “Sex and the City” had some of these problems — especially when “Girls” is followed in the Sunday night HBO lineup by a show as nuanced as “Looking.” Let’s just say I miss Adam (Adam Driver), Jessa (Jemima Kirke) and Shoshanna (Zosia Mamet) more than Hannah does, for now at least. 
Lydia: On this we certainly agree: That glimpse of Jessa and Shoshanna watching “Scandal” and failing to accept a collect call from Hannah was not nearly enough of the girls for me. Let’s hope for more Skype calls next week. 