AdvertisementSupported byWeekend MiserBy Jonathan WolfeA seasonal shift is in the air, a sign that it’s time to prepare indoor projects — particularly those that can be done next to a warm radiator. This weekend consider picking up a new hobby or stocking up on supplies at one of the crafts events around the city.The Autumn Crafts Festival at Lincoln Center, which displays work by more than 250 artisans from across the United States, is wrapping up its second and final weekend. Most of the wares are priced above the Miser’s budget, but admission is free and you can scout designs and creative know-how. Here, master crafters will demonstrate techniques for painting leather handbags, beading lampshades and hand-tinting etchings.Live classical and jazz musicians in Damrosch Park and Hearst Plaza will provide the soundtrack, and entertainers from the Big Apple Circus will distract children who don’t yet appreciate the artistry of blown glass or reclaimed hand-dyed silk. Case the festival for fall knitwear and cozy-looking blankets — for patterns, since those are meditative projects for rainy weekends.Knitting courses are offered at yarn stores across the city, but often at high prices. (This is New York City after all.) Instead, drop by the Kings County Fiber Festival at the Old Stone House in Brooklyn on Saturday to learn a needleless technique called arm-knitting (imagine a productive game of cat’s cradle) and make chunky fall scarves and accessories. Other options for learning a craft are the dozens of free meetups and workshops at New York Public Library branches.(Autumn Crafts Festival: Saturday from 11 a.m. to 8:30 p.m., Sunday from 10 a.m. to 6:30 p.m., Lincoln Center, 62nd Street between Columbus and Amsterdam Avenues; craftsatlincoln.org; Kings County Fiber Festival: Saturday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., 336 Third Street, between Fourth and Fifth Avenues, Park Slope, Brooklyn; kingscountyfiberfestival.org.) Stumbling onto a movie set or a protest are unpredictable moments of the New York experience. A stroll down 14th Street this weekend is likely to leave pedestrians with a similar sensation of big-city kismet.Performances and artworks by more than 40 artists will line the thoroughfare as part of the free Art in Odd Places festival, now in its 11th year. The diverse works, meant to promote a hyperawareness of the area, include “Black Lives Matter Street Signs,” in which the artists point out what they consider to be hypocrisy between the stated law and how it’s enforced, and “Orchid Clinic,” in which Skowmon Hastanan offers free demonstrations and consultations on orchid care.(Friday through Sunday at various times, 14th Street from Avenue C to the Hudson River; recall.artinoddplaces.org. A full schedule is at recall.artinoddplaces.org/calendar.)Advertisement