By ROBIN POGREBINJAN. 17, 2015
Architecture for Humanity, a nonprofit design group that sought to repair the world with socially conscious construction in places like Kosovo, Haiti and hurricane-ravaged Mississippi, has abruptly closed its San Francisco headquarters and plans to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection.The organization has not officially announced its demise, but its founders, who left in 2013, and the chairman of the board confirmed the news on Friday.“Our hearts are with the staff and chapter members who worked so hard to build a wonderful organization that did so much for communities around the world,” the founders, Cameron Sinclair and Kate Stohr, said in an email to associates. Mr. Sinclair and Ms. Stohr, who are married, started the group in 1999 and are widely seen as leaders in the field of altruistic architecture.Matt Charney, the board’s chairman, said in an interview on Friday that the group had tried to survive by reducing its payroll, selling its main building and moving to smaller offices, but those steps had proved inadequate. The roughly 30 employees who remained were laid off on Jan. 1.Advertisement“Very recently, it just became clear that we would be unable to completely reduce our operating deficit,” Mr. Charney said. “We ultimately lacked the funding to continue.”AdvertisementIt is unclear what will happen to the group’s domestic chapters, which are run by volunteers, or its international chapters, which operate independently. There are about 60 chapters in all.“Our hope is they will continue this work in some fashion,” Mr. Charney said. “I don’t think Architecture for Humanity going out of business is going to stop the people dedicated to this work from doing this work.”Others in the field of socially conscious architecture mourned the group’s disintegration.“While there are open questions about the culture and finances of this organization over many years, there is no question that they put humanitarian design on the map,” said John Cary, the former executive director of Public Architecture, a nonprofit based in San Francisco. “One of the things Architecture for Humanity did best was capture the public’s imagination about the potential of design, particularly in times of disaster, in a way few before it ever had.”The details of what hastened the group’s end were unclear. But questions arose about its spending under the stewardship of Mr. Sinclair, a 2006 TED Prize winner, and Ms. Stohr.Both said they had left of their own accord with the organization’s finances in order.“Part of our thought process was that if this is a truly sustainable organization, it should survive without its founders, and 15 years was a good time for that to happen,” Mr. Sinclair said in an interview last week. “We never had a deficit for 14 years, we grew exponentially. Our biggest problem was, I think we grew too quickly.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Eric Cesal, the most recent executive director, said that the shortfall reached $2.1 million at the end of 2013, an untenable sum for an organization whose annual operating budget ranged from $2 million to $12 million, depending on the scope of projects in a given year.Ms. Stohr acknowledged in an interview that the organization “had some debt” but said “we were figuring out how to correct that.” She added that, contrary to the assertions of some former staff members, Architecture for Humanity did not promise more than it could deliver.“There were lots of projects we said no to,” she said. “Some projects were too small or the timeline was hard or we did not have the right staff person or it was an insecure place to work.”AdvertisementFor many volunteers and staff members, the organization — whose prominent financial backers included the Clinton Foundation and the Curry Stone Foundation — was an inspiring vehicle for using design skills for something broader than showy buildings underwritten by corporations or wealthy individuals.Mr. Sinclair told The Guardian in 2006: “Think about a prestige architect like Zaha Hadid. There are probably 20 people in Britain who can afford to commission her. I, on the other hand, have somewhere between four and five billion people on the planet who are looking for my help..”Among the group’s projects were a soccer field in Rwanda built to help unite members of the Hutu and Tutsi tribes, and the Football for Hope program — with FIFA and streetfootballworld — which builds community centers in Africa.Several projects remain undone: a school in the Philippines; a joint project with Nike to rebuild the disaster-stricken area of Tohoku, Japan; and renewal efforts in New Jersey areas damaged by Hurricane Sandy and parts of Oklahoma hit by tornadoes.“There were definitely cost overruns on projects,” Mr. Charney said, adding, “I hope that issues that have caused the closure, while important, I hope the overwhelming good that Architecture for Humanity has done can overshadow that. We’re proud of the work.”An article in some editions last Sunday about plans by Architecture for Humanity, a nonprofit design group based in San Francisco, to file for bankruptcy protection, paraphrased incorrectly in some copies a comment by Kate Stohr, a founder of Architecture for Humanity, about the group’s finances. She acknowledged a shortfall in the organization’s unrestricted funds, not that the company had spent money intended for certain purposes on other expenses.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: A Leader in Socially Conscious Architecture Is Closing Amid Financial Woes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.