By NATE CHINENJAN. 16, 2015
Chris Potter Underground OrchestraIMAGINARY CITIESThinking big has rarely been an obstacle for Chris Potter, a saxophonist of inquisitive temperament and superhuman technique. “Imaginary Cities,” released this week on ECM, expands his frame with an 11-piece cohort he calls the Underground Orchestra; as the name suggests, it’s a beefed-up version of Underground, his groove-minded flagship band. The augmentations include Scott Colley on acoustic bass, Steve Nelson on marimba and vibraphone, and a string quartet made up of seasoned improvisers like the violinist Mark Feldman. And Mr. Potter’s writing for them is ambitiously assured, notably on the four-part suite that lends the album its title. Working with accretion and contrast, he layers parts in a way that adds mass without lumbering: “Sky” involves an intrepid melody, a Bollywood-inspired chamber interlude and momentum-building solos (by Mr. Potter and the pianist Craig Taborn). The whole effort feels at once like a culmination and a new chapter: reason enough to note that Mr. Potter is taking this music on tour, appearing at the Jazz Standard Jan. 27 through 31.Ryan BinghamFEAR AND SATURDAY NIGHTThe old saw often foisted on purveyors of fiction — “Write what you know” — could easily have been a mantra for Ryan Bingham during the making of his fifth album, “Fear and Saturday Night” (Axster Bingham/Thirty Tigers). Due out on Tuesday, it’s a product of ragged interiority, comprising a dozen songs Mr. Bingham wrote in seclusion and then fleshed out with an ace band: the guitarist Daniel Sproul, the bassist Shawn Davis and the drummer Nate Barnes. Mr. Bingham’s parched voice, like the shape of his songs, still points toward dusty Americana, but he’s less reliant on archetype than he used to be. Whether he’s crowing about his satisfaction (“Top Shelf Drug”), pledging his constancy (“Snow Falls in June”) or musing about the future (“Broken Heart Tattoos”), he’s chasing after the feeling of lived experience. Setting aside the issue of authenticity, he sounds credible even when, on the title track, he wheezes this chorus: “But I don’t fear nothin'/Except for myself/So I’m gonna go out/And raise me some hell.”Aaron GoldbergTHE NOWA post-bop pianist of exemplary taste and range, Aaron Goldberg has worked mainly in collaborative settings since the release of his 2010 album, “Home.” His superb new work, “The Now,” due out on Sunnyside on Tuesday, features Reuben Rogers on bass and Eric Harland on drums — Mr. Goldberg’s main rhythm team for the last 16 years — and inhabits precisely the sort of high-proficiency, no-nonsense, self-possessed air you’d expect. There are sure-footed sprints through bebop tunes by Charlie Parker and Warne Marsh, and sensitive readings of Brazilian standards by Chico Buarque and Toninho Horta (along with “Triste Baía da Guanabara,” made famous by Djavan). There’s a brisk interpretation of a traditional Haitian song, "Yoyo.” And among the four appealing originals is a floating anthem, “One Life,” featuring a guest turn by the guitarist Kurt Rosenwinkel, who gradually carries its bittersweet melody into the realm of spooky grandeur.Rob MazurekALTERNATE MOON CYCLESThe cornetist Rob Mazurek has been responsible for his share of music packed with incident, but he has also explored the dark beauty of the drone. “Alternate Moon Cycles” (International Anthem) comes out of this recent preoccupation: Each of its roughly 15-minute-long tracks, “Waxing Crescent No. 1” and “Waxing Crescent No. 2,” takes up one side of an LP and finds him locked in on a single tone, against a backdrop created by Mikel Patrick Avery on pump organ and Matt Lux on electric bass. (On the first track, using a mute, he plays a D against his partners’ drone in C.) This is ambient music, suitable for meditation, but its shifts in texture reward real listening — especially on the cassette edition, which comes in a carved wooden box and includes "Alternate Moon Cycles (Waning Crescent),” an alternate take whose rustling quiet unfolds as an irresolvable question.Tanya TagaqANIMISMIt has taken awhile for the United States release of “Animism,” Tanya Tagaq’s breakout third album, but that’s hardly any reason for restraint. Ms. Tagaq, a vocal polymath rooted first in the throat-singing of her Inuit heritage, caused a stir last year when “Animism” won the Polaris Music Prize, Canada’s top music honor. Her performance at the ceremony — a medley of “Uja” and “Umingmak,” which land side by side on the album — caused a separate but related stir, which was surely her intention. The album, which sounds no less artful and provocative for all of its acclaim, presents a series of tersely embodied concepts: “Howl.” “Flight.” “Fight.” And while Ms. Tagaq best grabs attention with heaving ferocity, she can also sing with a delicate sweetness, often overdubbing the extremes. As for the political dimension of her art, it lurks in one track titled “Genetic Memory” and grows almost unbearably clear in another called “Fracking.”A version of this review appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page AR18 of the New York edition with the headline: Inspiration: Some Find It Alone, Others in Collaboration.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.