AdvertisementSupported byBy Roslyn SulcasThe word “ballerina” simply means, in Italian, a female dancer. But in the Anglo-Saxon dance world, it means quite specifically a female practitioner of ballet — and not just any female practitioner, but one who has reached the summit of her art, who exemplifies the essential attributes of classical dance. (France and Italy still don’t use the word in this sense, although the Paris Opera Ballet gives us “étoiles” or stars.) What those attributes must be has probably changed from era to era. Today we value, indeed expect, absolute technical mastery from a top ballerina, and we want musicality, dramatic power, charm, assertiveness and radiance, too.Within the top ranks of ballerinadom, there are subtle gradations. While major ballet companies usually have plenty of dancers who fully deserve the title of ballerina, most don’t boast more than one or two who will define their generation and redefine its accomplishments. At New York City Ballet, however, there are, right now, at least five ballerinas — Ashley Bouder, Sterling Hyltin, Sara Mearns, Tiler Peck and Teresa Reichlen — who are at the peak of their powers and among the greatest exemplars of the art form right now. (The company’s other female principals are no slouches either.) These five all did their final years of training at the City Ballet-affiliated School of American Ballet, and all joined the company between 2000 and 2005; perhaps there was something in the water.Of course there have been major figures — Maria Kowroski, and until their retirements, Jenifer Ringer and, most of all, Wendy Whelan — over the past 15 years. City Ballet watchers will evoke similar convergences of talent — Suzanne Farrell, Merrill Ashley, Darci Kistler, Kyra Nichols among others — in the 1970s and 1980s. (At that time a singular choreographer, Balanchine, was developing dancers, although this is not the case now.)But the current blaze of female talent at City Ballet is an exceptional moment for the company. These five dancers are all scheduled to perform through City Ballet’s winter season, which opens on Tuesday; often, as on opening night, in Balanchine’s “Serenade” and “Symphony in C,” you can see them in the same work. Ballet heaven, and ballet history in the making.SARA MEARNSAGE: 28When Ms. Mearns was cast as Odette/Odile in “Swan Lake” in January 2006, she was just 18 and unknown to most ballet fans. She had joined the company two years earlier, and for the first 18 months, she said in a telephone interview, she danced little and entertained grave doubts about her career. Then, in a bold stroke, Peter Martins, the company’s ballet master in chief, gave her one of the most important roles in the ballerina canon. The beauty and breadth of Ms. Mearns’s dancing left audiences agog. Her physical eloquence, her immensely expressive eyes, the drama and authority of her musical timing have grown only fuller and richer over the last few years as she has found her way through the Balanchine and Robbins repertoire and in new work. The slow movement in “Symphony in C,” and “Serenade,” which she will dance next week, are among her greatest roles, but you can rely on the unpredictable nuance and detail of her interpretations to keep evolving and surprising. There is danger in the full-on passion and scale of her dancing (in 2009, I wrote that her Dewdrop in “The Nutcracker” was “mesmerizing, almost alarming”). You feel, in every nerve ending, the risks she is willing to take, how far she will expose herself onstage. It’s never less than thrilling.TILER PECKAGE: 26Small, dimpled, bouncy, a California girl with irrepressible energy and a batten-down-the-hatches technique, Ms. Peck doesn’t conform to the old-fashioned idea of a glamorous, remote ballerina. She grew up (in Bakersfield, Calif.) doing, as she put it, “ballettapjazz” at her mother’s dance school, focused on dance competitions, and by 11 was on Broadway in a featured role in Susan Stroman’s 2000 revival of “The Music Man.” (Ms. Peck recently reprised her song-and-dance career, to much acclaim, in “The Little Dancer,” another musical by Ms. Stroman.) But during that year, she began to take ballet classes at the School of American Ballet. “I fell in love with the Balanchine technique,” Ms. Peck said in a telephone interview. “It was so, well, difficult.” That liking for a challenge is evident in her dancing, which combines exceptional speed with incisive clarity. Although she is known for her allegro work and the kinds of Balanchine demi-character roles once brilliantly performed by Patricia McBride (Swanilda in “Coppelia,” “Donizetti Variations,” “Tarantella”), she can also demonstrate lyricism and grandeur. Perhaps the most wonderful quality of Ms. Peck’s dancing is the way she can stretch time, even within the fastest sequences. Her luscious plunges into backbend in the “Nutcracker” pas de deux, her crystalline footwork in “Tchaikovsky Pas de Deux” — these moments seem offered to us like individual jewels, brought out just for our delectation.TERESA REICHLENAGE: 30Balanchine famously told his dancers to “just do” the steps, not to interpret them — a calming injunction to subsume the self in the movement, to become the dance. (Not, as some take it to mean, a command not to think.) For those who missed the Balanchine glory days, Ms. Reichlen might best sum up this philosophy. Tall, leggy and cool, she is a kind of chameleon; while we have little sense (as we do with some other dancers) of her personality offstage, her accounts of her roles are breathtakingly compelling. In “Agon” (which she will perform next Sunday), she is all geometric clarity; in “Rubies,” she is cheerleader-glamorous and sexy; in “The Firebird,” she is, quite literally, a force of nature; in “Prodigal Son,” a ferociously predatory Siren. Ms. Reichlen said in a telephone conversation that she had thought she was too tall for City Ballet when she was a student, and was surprised to be offered a place. “I am typecast sometimes because I’m tall,” she said. “But I want to dance everything.” It looks like perhaps she can.STERLING HYLTINAGE: 29The Texas-born Ms. Hyltin has a delicate, fly-away physique, with long thin limbs and an ephemeral delicacy that has made her a natural for Aurora in “The Sleeping Beauty” and a “Nutcracker” Sugar Plum Fairy of every little girl’s dreams. But Ms. Hyltin, who said that she had wanted to dance with City Ballet from the moment she arrived at the School of American Ballet (“I never wanted to do 32 fouettés every day”) has a gift for comedy, and gravitas, too. Her performances in Balanchine’s “Symphony in Three Movements” are filled with an implacable force; she commands your attention by the sheer focus and inwardness of her dancing. “Was ‘Duo’ really this good in the 1970s?” asked Alastair Macaulay, the chief dance critic for The New York Times, writing in 2013 of her performance, with Robert Fairchild, in Balanchine’s “Duo Concertant.” Like Ms. Peck, she possesses the gift of musical anticipation; the art of seeming to occasionally make the music respond to her movement; and of revealing new accents and dynamics within a score. With Ms. Hyltin, we feel something that can often get lost in an onrush of technique and craft — she is really dancing.ASHLEY BOUDERAGE: 31When Ms. Bouder was thrown onstage at 17 in the demi-soloist role in Balanchine’s “La Source,” seasoned watchers actually gasped at her incredibly buoyant jump and insouciant confidence. (I was one of them.) She has continued to make audiences marvel at her energy and authority as she has marched up the City Ballet ranks, winning a fond reputation among ballet fans for often falling onstage. In Balanchine lore, this is considered a good thing, if mortifying; it shows the dancer is holding nothing back. That’s certainly true of Ms. Bouder, who is sometime criticized for performance overkill. (In a City Ballet video, she says that if she wasn’t a dancer, she would probably be a politician; this seems right.) But she is never less than fully herself onstage, instantly recognizable for the blazing glee of her dancing and the wit of her timing. Next week, she is in Balanchine’s “Serenade” and “Donizetti Variations,” in which she is at her best.Advertisement