AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeAlfred Schnittke’s String Trio, written in 1985, swerves from clamorous dissonance to almost unbearably poignant lyricism and back again. On a recent afternoon, three students at the Juilliard School were starting its slow second movement in a practice room high above 66th Street. Joel Sachs, a professor at the school, sat across the room on a slouchy yellow couch, following along with a score. After a few seconds, he stopped the music.“Ravenna,” he said to the violinist, Ravenna Lipchik. “I’m not sure what you’re trying to tell us in the opening.” Leaning on the last word, he asked her, “What do the slurs mean?” Mr. Sachs’s skill at teasing out the meaning — the story, the urgency — in often abstract, complex and forbidding music is one reason he has become a fixture of Juilliard and, by extension, the New York cultural scene. At 75, having first taught at the school 45 years ago, he is perhaps its reigning new-music champion, deploying its vast resources to stretch the city’s ears.The founder and director of the New Juilliard Ensemble, which has become one of New York’s widest-ranging presenters of new and recent composition from around the world, he is also the organizer of the school’s weeklong Focus! festival, which each year offers an immersion in a different topic in the history of modern music. The six-concert 2015 installment, “Nippon Gendai Ongaku” (“Japanese Contemporary Music”), opens Friday and surveys the post-1945 Japanese repertory, an area barely touched by American ensembles.“Joel is one of the key people at Juilliard who creates the right kind of environment,” Joseph W. Polisi, the school’s president since 1984, who gave Mr. Sachs the freedom to start both the festival and ensemble, said by phone. “He dares to explore, dares to experiment.”Mr. Sachs’s activities aren’t limited to public performance. In addition to his own overlapping book projects, he teaches music history at Juilliard, advises doctoral students and also, when he feels he can be useful, coaches student groups for events like Chamberfest, for which Ms. Lipchik and her colleagues were preparing the Schnittke trio. In this case, Mr. Sachs was more than useful: He knew Schnittke personally and made the composer, who died in 1998 at 63, the topic of last year’s Focus!, “Alfred Schnittke’s World.” “I always sensed we would have been friends had we spent more time together,” he said in an interview in his tiny office at Juilliard, surrounded by posters from past festivals. But their interaction wasn’t of the beers-and-TV variety: “You didn’t hang out with him. He wasn’t that kind of person. He was too intense.”With Mr. Sachs’s knowledge of the trio infused with his close understanding of its composer, he was alert to both the work’s general narrative and tiny details as he coached the students. He and the violist Jacob Shack discussed just how flat an E-flat should be, and he questioned, in another passage, whether Ms. Lipchik’s E-natural was quite high enough. Reassuring the students that they were playing another, particularly thorny section in tune, he quoted the iconoclastic composer Charles Ives, who told his score engraver, “The wrong notes are the right notes.”“Ravenna,” Mr. Sachs said, “turn off your metronome during the rubato” — in other words, stop keeping such a strict internal beat when the music’s pulse wants to bend. “And you have to follow her,” he added to the other two players. Gradually, alternating between broad suggestions and small tweaks, he coaxed the group toward an intensity so ferocious that one of the violist’s strings popped off.Modern music was central for Mr. Sachs nearly from the beginning. Growing up in New Haven, he had a talent as a pianist that was quickly spotted, and he was referred to the renowned player and pedagogue Ray Lev in New York.While her command of the classics was absolute, she also believed in advocating for the contemporary. “If you didn’t put a new piece in every concert,” Mr. Sachs recalled her teaching, “you had to take responsibility for not giving rise to the kind of environment in which a new Beethoven would appear. That never left me.”Formative experiences included his time at the elite Aspen Music Festival, where he was first exposed to Webern’s Variations for Piano — as well as to James Levine, then a young man carting around the score of Berg’s “Wozzeck” and claiming he’d conduct it someday. As an undergraduate student at Harvard, Mr. Sachs studied with the composer Walter Piston and met upstarts like Frederic Rzewski, then a graduate student.He made a solo recital debut at Wigmore Hall in London in 1963 with a program that included Webern’s Variations and Bartok’s Piano Sonata, which few were performing then. He programmed them alongside Schumann’s “Kreisleriana,” itself far from a war horse at that time, and Beethoven’s Opus 126 Bagatelles. To his surprise, the hall was nearly full.“Obviously what drew people was the unusualness of the program,” he said. The takeaway, for him, was clear: “There’s a place for performers who want to stick their neck out a little bit.”While he worked on his doctoral dissertation at Columbia — a study of the late-Classical composer Johann Nepomuk Hummel — he joined with the pianist Cheryl Seltzer to present concerts of music by Modernist composers like Webern, Schoenberg and Wolpe. These programs became codified in a standing ensemble, the Performers’ Committee for 20th-Century Music. Eventually changing its name to Continuum, the group stopped giving its signature New York composer-retrospective concerts in 2011, after 45 years, but still tours and records.In the 1970s, Mr. Sachs taught some history classes at Juilliard as an adjunct lecturer, but he found the atmosphere hardly conducive to his interests. “Peter Mennin didn’t have a music history department,” he said, with a hint of distaste, referring to the school’s president at the time. An annual contemporary-music festival tended to be thrown together at the last minute; Mr. Sachs recalled that Elgar’s hoary Cello Concerto was included at one point. After Mennin died, in 1983, and Mr. Polisi replaced him, he asked Mr. Sachs to resuscitate and revamp the festival. Renamed Focus!, the first iteration, in 1985, was devoted to the decade that followed World War II. The next installments covered the heady period between 1918 and 1933 and immigration’s effect on music. 1988 brought “Crosscurrents: Classical Music and the American Popular Tradition,” and 1989 “The ’60s Revisited.” The formation of the European Union was celebrated in 1993 with a festival of music by European composers under 50. Subsequent events wandered throughout the 20th century, moving from the Pacific Rim to Scandinavia to Italy to Poland.“What Joel and I changed was to put a focus on it, so to speak, a very specific topic,” Mr. Polisi said. “To make it not just a performance experience but an educational experience, and not just for the students but for the general public.” In 1993, after the exit of a traditionalist dean, Mr. Sachs was able to found the New Juilliard Ensemble, which specializes in music from the decade or so before each concert. “It takes either unbounded foolishness or extravagant idealism to form a new contemporary-music group in today’s cultural climate,” Edward Rothstein wrote in The New York Times, reviewing the first performance. But it has flourished.Mr. Sachs encourages those without new-music backgrounds to audition, preferring a wider range of skills and sounds. And in keeping with a more relaxed vibe at Juilliard in recent years, he said, of those students who eventually choose careers other than performance: “They might end up lawyers or doctors, but so what? They’re advocates for music.”The New Juilliard Ensemble’s programs, often striding across multiple continents and several generations of composers in a single evening, tend to have even farther-flung roots than the Focus! festivals. Mr. Sachs keeps abreast of an ever-expanding repertory through a worldwide circle of contacts. “The first thing is, one has to ask questions of everybody,” he said. “I’m always asking people what they’re doing.” For this year’s Focus!, friends and colleagues, some in Japan, generated long lists of potential composers and pieces, which Mr. Sachs winnowed through marathon YouTube listening sessions, determining the strongest works and combinations. The result, sprawling and carefully considered, will be another of his signature deep dives.“Obviously if only from the longevity of Joel’s tenure, he’s unique,” Mr. Polisi said. “I think what he has done and established as his legacy is something that will last for a very long time.”Mr. Sachs still occasionally appears as a piano soloist: Next season, he will play Brahms’s daunting Piano Concerto No. 2 with the New York Repertory Orchestra. After publishing a biography of the innovative composer Henry Cowell in 2012, he is at work on a book about music and the law in early 19th-century London and another tracing the development of what came to be called “classical music” in England.He is already planning next year’s Focus!, “Milton Babbitt’s World,” an exploration of the influential serial composer, who died in 2011. The week will include works by Brahms, whom Mr. Babbitt especially cherished, and whose name may attract some who don’t consider themselves lovers of modern music.“I’m trying to raise curiosity among anyone whose curiosity can be raised,” Mr. Sachs said.Advertisement