By DAVID CARRJAN. 14, 2015
ALBUQUERQUE — We are back here, back in the place where mayhem lurks just a few steps beyond the cul-de-sac in the vast expanse of desert. With a downtown that has some teeth punched out, hotels that house only ghosts and strip malls short on commerce, time is fungible here. Is it 2014 or 1974? And where are all the people?In this forest of billboards advertising quick-buck lawyers and tattoo removal, Walter White is nowhere in sight, having gone down in a hail of gunfire after five seasons of “Breaking Bad.” What remains is the impulse to tell the story of a fictional version of this place, of the hustlers, gangsters and losers who live like coyotes on the edge of this town.For years, there had been jokes in the writing room and on the set of “Breaking Bad” about the Saul Goodman project, the one that would take the indelible lawyer inhabited by Bob Odenkirk and wrap an entire show around him once Walter had sold his last barrel of meth.Then something funny happened. The joke came true.Sitting on the set in Albuquerque in September while filming the first season of “Better Call Saul,” which is to have its premiere on Feb. 8 on AMC, Mr. Odenkirk remembers that when the bluff had been called and the “Breaking Bad” creator Vince Gilligan and writer Peter Gould were actually writing the show, he still had his doubts.Advertisement“It was clear that Vince and Peter were setting the show in Albuquerque, and I would be away from my family for a long time,” he said in a trailer while having a quick lunch between scenes. “I was worried about what it would do to my family and worried about whether I would end up being the guy who” — um, screwed up — “the legacy of ‘Breaking Bad.’ ”Advertisement“And then I talked to my daughter, who is 13 and incredibly mature, she said, ‘It’s a big opportunity, we will be fine, and if it’s bad, really, how bad could it be?’ ”“And I said well, it won’t be bad. It’s written by Vince Gilligan and Peter Gould; the worst thing is it’s a really interesting misfire. If that’s the worst thing it is, I’d be more than happy to be part of that.”Given that the writers and actors feel that they found something authentic and remarkable in “Saul” and that the show has already been renewed for a second season, that’s a pretty good punch line for something that started as a joke.In the increasingly cluttered marketplace of television — at a time when Amazon and Netflix are winning Golden Globes, you can’t click a remote without bumping into some version of quality programming — there is a huge advantage in spinning off a storied franchise. But building on the embedded awareness of the character from “Breaking Bad” also means dealing with all the expectations that go with it. That tension informed everything about the execution of “Better Call Saul.”For one thing, it is a prequel, set six years before Saul and Walter became known associates. Mr. Odenkirk is not playing exactly the same character. Instead, he is Jimmy McGill, a knock-around guy with a law degree who cannot catch a break or a decent case. The series is the story of how a guy who struggled to stay between the lines and above the belt became Saul, a criminal lawyer who is more criminal than lawyer. In the time frame of the new show, Walter is still teaching high school chemistry, perhaps to Jesse Pinkman, somewhere off screen, and Mr. Odenkirk’s character, rather than guiding the events around him as Saul did, is lost, blown about by forces beyond his control.Then again, it is about as far from a lawyer show as you can get, long on character and less concerned with classic plot lines or courtroom procedure. Without giving away (too many) spoilers, the show opens in the future, after Walter’s downfall and Saul’s dispossession of his greasy empire. Saul is in his own version of witness protection, tucked away in the kind of job no one sees in a place where everyone goes. He is a hunted shell of the smack-talking lawyer, who finds solace in running old tapes of his once ubiquitous commercials beckoning one and all to call Saul. It is grim and scary, but the vibe is as much “X-Files” (which Mr. Gilligan used to write for) as it is “Breaking Bad.”And then the tape ends and we are back to where Saul started, as Jimmy McGill, a slip-and-fall shyster trying to walk back to more honorable pursuits by taking on public defender work. Short on real clients, he is looking after the interests of his brother, Chuck McGill (Michael McKean), a brilliant, successful lawyer who has lost his marbles and refuses to go outside. He also works hard at earning the interest of another lawyer, an icy beauty played by Rhea Seehorn, who sees right through Jimmy and still can’t stay away.She sees in Jimmy what we all do, which is a beautiful loser who trouble clings to like a halo of flies but who could talk the birds out of trees.Advertisement“I had no interest in doing some legal procedural,” Mr. Odenkirk said in between 12 hours of shooting interiors with Mr. McKean. He told the writers to “push my character into really extreme situations.”Mr. Gilligan and Mr. Gould, the co-creator of this show and a writing mainstay of “Breaking Bad,” were happy to oblige. “Jimmy is a guy who doesn’t know who he is yet,” Mr. Gilligan said by phone from Los Angeles, where he and Mr. Gould were attending the semiannual Television Critics Association conclave of journalists. “He is struggling to be more than he is, and there is a poignancy to that.”Mr. Gould said Jimmy was determined to do the right thing, unless the right thing ends up being the wrong answer. “There are lines in the sand,” he said, “but the lines end up shifting based on the circumstance.”Part of the reason they are continuing to write for Mr. Odenkirk is that they have not yet gotten to the end of what he can do. Saul was conceived as a little comic leavening for “Breaking Bad.” They decided a fast-talking consigliere would bring some funny to the proceedings and thought of Mr. Odenkirk — they were fans of his dating to “Mr. Show With Bob and David,” the 1990s sketch series on HBO. And then Mr. Odenkirk got to work, and Saul became less of a sideshow.“The more we worked with him, the more soul and depth we found,” Mr. Gilligan said. “We loved that he was funny, but there was so much range there. He crushed it so completely that we started to daydream about what else we could do.”It was still a dicey decision to take a fetish object like “Breaking Bad” and roll it backward. AMC, which produced the series along with Sony Pictures Television, said it was actually an easy call.“There has never been a more challenging time to launch a series,” said Charlie Collier, the president of AMC. “But Vince Gilligan and Peter Gould are storytellers, and when they tell you that they have more stories to tell about someone, you pay attention.”AdvertisementFor a while, the co-creators, who could write their own ticket given the success of “Breaking Bad,” tried to talk themselves out of it, but they kept returning to Saul in part because they had fallen in love with the landscape and aesthetic of Albuquerque. “I was nervous about it, and I still am,” Mr. Gilligan said. “Not everyone who takes a look will love what we did with it, but that goes with the territory.”Both Mr. Gould and Mr. Gilligan have made it clear they are making the first season of “Better Call Saul,” not the sixth season of “Breaking Bad,” and viewers should not expect to see Bryan Cranston or Aaron Paul. But we are in the same neighborhood, so it should come as no surprise that Mike Ehrmantraut, the beloved hit man played by Jonathan Banks, rears into view, his quiet fearsomeness contained for the time being by the parking garage booth where he first meets Mr. Odenkirk’s character.In “Breaking Bad,” Saul served as an odd sort of moral center, finding a thin reed of humanity in vile circumstance, all the while filling up the safe between fake Greek columns with lots of ill-gotten gains. His ability to pivot from the absurd to realpolitik is just as compelling to behold in its nascent state in “Better Call Saul.”Until recently, Mr. Odenkirk was known as a comic, writer and impresario who could pull laughs out of very unlikely places. Before that, he was an Emmy-winning writer for “Saturday Night Live,” “The Ben Stiller Show” and “The Larry Sanders Show.” But in addition to his head-turning performance in “Breaking Bad,” in the past few years, he had a well-reviewed turn in the FX series “Fargo,” and also received great notices for his film work in “Nebraska” and “The Spectacular Now.”Mr. Odenkirk credits his acting run with a “poor sense of boundaries,” nothing more. “People always tell me how honest I am and the truth is I don’t know how to be brave in that way,” he said. “I just don’t know how to play it any different.”On set, he admitted that even though he was filming the eighth episode of a 10-part season, he had no idea how the first year would end. “They offered to send me outlines, but I have enough to worry about learning the dialogue that I have for each episode and to be fully present for anything in that moment,” he said, pushing back the hair that grew to be almost its own character in “Breaking Bad” but is now much more sedate. At 52, he is playing a much younger version of his “Breaking Bad” character and has the kind of boyishness that makes it not much of a reach. There is a very un-actorly earnestness, a complete absence of vanity, to Mr. Odenkirk. Having led his own show and run a set, he requires none of the wide berth generally given to a lead actor. “Maybe I don’t have the reverence for ‘Breaking Bad’ that I should, but I love this show and I’m crazy happy to have been a part of it,” he said. “And I already know that we are never going to repeat the social and viewing phenomenon of ‘Breaking Bad.’ ”Mr. Gilligan agreed. “I would not predict for a minute that it would be as big of a hit as ‘Breaking Bad,’ but I am every bit as proud of this show,” he said.“Better Call Saul” is driven less by macabre plot points than a character-heavy look at the burdens of the human condition and the price of one man’s soul. It’s less frantic than “Breaking Bad,” relying on an anchored camera that zooms in for long hard looks. It is carefully constructed, with an emphasis on physical detail and sound that makes Jimmy’s law office in the back of a nail salon seem more like a jail cell than a place of business.It is a writerly series put out by people who scan as writers, first and foremost. “Peter and Vince are a lot more like playwrights and novelists than screenwriters, and on set, Bob is always reading three books at the same time,” Ms. Seehorn said. “There are so many nuances to the work we are doing. We know where Saul ends up, but nothing here is played on the nose. There is always something underneath what is being said and done.”AdvertisementThere will be a few surprises along the way, unpleasant for Jimmy but fun to watch. One trademark of the “Saul” writing team is rendering villains of epic proportions, and viewers might see a few familiar faces in Season 1. After all, finding compelling outlaws around here is as easy as spotting snakes in the desert.An article last Sunday about the new AMC series “Better Call Saul,” which is to have its premiere on Feb. 8, misidentified the entity of which Charlie Collier is president. It is AMC, not AMC Networks. (Josh Sapan is president and chief executive of AMC Networks, which owns and operates AMC.)A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page AR1 of the New York edition with the headline: Before They Went Bad.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.