We learned an important lesson from Monday night’s episode of “Sleepy Hollow”: We can all cross “art restorer” off our list of possible alternate careers.A serial killer from the 1700s managed to create havoc in our time via a painting that was being displayed by Sleepy Hollow’s historical society at an event attended by Ichabod Crane (Tom Mison) and his wife, Katrina (Katia Winter). The poor art restorer who was preparing the painting for display ended up hanging from the ceiling, his throat slit, and the Cranes recognized the signature killing style of a murderer from back in the day – that is, their day, the 18th century.It turns out that paintings can be used to imprison killers and that those killers can escape from said paintings centuries later under the right conditions. The plot involved tarot cards and Abigail Adams – you know, the former first lady — who in a nice casting touch was portrayed by Michelle Trachtenberg. Ms. Trachtenberg’s creep-show credentials include, of course, “Buffy the Vampire Slayer,” an extremely influential series for any current show that deals in supernatural phenomena.The homicidal painter was brought down by a barrage of bullets from the gun of Abbie Mills (Nicole Beharie), who arrived on the scene late because she had been preoccupied for most of the episode by the surprise return of Frank Irving (Orlando Jones). Whether it was Good Frank or Demonically Possessed Frank who came back remained unclear. But the series has been missing Mr. Jones, whose screen time has been scant in Season 2. Maybe his moment has come again.Practically everyone who watches this show despises Katrina and wishes Ichabod were free of her, and thus practically everyone was presumably dismayed by this episode, which had Ichabod and Katrina working together to subdue the demon painter and, by the end, seeming as if they’d found their happy place again.As for the show’s future, Fox executives left it unclear last week when they announced renewals for several other shows, and they also hinted that changes were in the works for “Sleepy Hollow” whether or not it gets a third season. It’s probably too early to see evidence of those changes yet. What would you change, or is it too late?