Season 1, Episode 12, “What the Little Bird Told Him”Spoilers and unfeeling parents lurk below.On Monday “Gotham” picked up where it left off two weeks ago, with the escaped Arkham Asylum inmate Jack Gruber running amok with a beefy henchman. Recaps of the Fox crime drama.You’ll recall that in Arkham he fashioned a mind-control kit from a pair of jumper cables. On the outside, reunited with some sort of homemade Z-pinch system, among other electroweapons, he terrorized traitorous partners and mobsters before squaring off with Gordon, who took him out with galoshes and an old cup of coffee. (Live by the spark, die by the spark, I guess. I’ll leave it to more ambitious Googlers to fact-check the electromagnetic theory at work here.)We wondered last time if Jack Gruber might end up being some other villain from the DC Comics universe — turns out he’s the Electrocutioner, real name Jack Buchinski. Wikipedia says the original iteration of the character was the unnamed brother of someone named Lester Buchinsky, so I suppose we have our man. Perhaps future versions of that breaker box suit will include protections against moisture, adroitly tossed and otherwise. Either that, or the next Electrocutioner might consider plying his trade in Phoenix. (“It’s a dry villainy …”)When “Gotham” ended its first half in November with Gordon re-assigned to Arkham, it felt like a reset. It seemed like a good plan, one that would ideally shake things up and perhaps reveal new things about the characters by recontextualizing them. At the very least, it offered a welcome change of scenery from the usual Gordon-and-Bullock-bickering-in-the-station routine, which had gotten a little stale.That lasted a week — Monday’s episode ended with Gordon back on the force, bickering with Bullock in the station. So what was the point of the Arkham adventure, exactly?The other main subplot this week surrounded the power struggle between Fish Mooney and Don Falcone, which finally came out into the open. The night’s winners included Falcone, who reasserted his primacy within Gotham City’s underworld. John Doman was great in the episode, subtly shifting from a lion in winter into a cold-blooded conqueror renewed. His strangling of Liza, and the charge he seemed to get from it, reminded me a bit of the episode late in “The Sopranos” in which Tony beat up his own driver to show everyone he’s still boss. (That might be the only time I can draw a parallel between those two shows, but there you go.)“Thank you, Fish,” Falcone said. “For the first time in a long time I feel alive. I remember who I am. I remember why I’m here.”The Penguin, the “little bird” of the episode title, also came out on top on Monday after a couple electroshock-induced hiccups. He finally played his Liza card and figures to become even closer to Falcone as a result.On the losing side we have Fish and Butch, who face an uncertain fate. It probably won’t be pleasant, whatever it is. “How dare you use my sainted mother against me,” Falcone said. “You’ll suffer for that.” Liza, the late vehicle for said sainted mother-using, definitely lost as well.Butch could be another goner, but Fish seems too central to things to lose her head at this point. Any theories about how this might go down? The character has been driven by her plot against Falcone nearly from the start of the show. If nothing else, I’m anxious to see what Jada Pinkett Smith does with her, going forward.A FEW THOUGHTS WHILE WE EXTEND OUR PINKIES• Do you have any more sympathy for Barbara after meeting her catatonic blue-blood parents? Yeah, me neither. Actually that’s not true — I am more sympathetic, just not any more interested in her continuing struggle. Gordon shouldn’t be either, not with the sultry, seemingly unaddicted Dr. Leslie “Call me Lee” Thompkins crashing his locker room.• I did laugh when Gordon tossed that coffee, short-circuiting the Electrocutioner. It was silly, but it rather knowingly undercut the show’s tendency toward monologuing villains.