The 20-year-old Dahesh Museum of Art has a new home and a permanent exhibition space for the first time in seven years after the purchase of a townhouse at 178 East 64th Street. The five-story, 1899 building, which was once a private home, is 20 feet wide and has 12-foot ceilings. The museum declined to disclose the purchase price. The rooms are perfect, Amira Zahid one of the museum’s founding trustees said, for showing the Dahesh’s collection of academic European and American art from the 19th and 20th centuries.“We have been looking for a home ever since we lost 2 Columbus Circle,’’ Ms. Zahid said of attempts to purchase the Columbus Circle building, which was designed by Edward Durell Stone to house Huntington Hartford’s Gallery of Modern Art and is now home to the Museum of Arts & Design.  Because of a steep rise in rent, the Dahesh moved out of its former headquarters at 580 Madison Avenue at 56th Street in 2007, four years before its lease expired. “Since then we have explored all our options and when we saw this building it just clicked,’’ Ms. Zahid said. The museum, named for a Lebanese collector who died in 1984, has been operating as what it calls “a museum without walls,’’ organizing traveling shows and lending works from its collections to museums around the world. It also joined forces with Syracuse University, holding exhibitions at the Art Galleries on its campus and at the university’s Palitz Gallery in the Lubin House in Manhattan. In 2011, Syracuse and the Dahesh sent a show of 19th-century Islamic ornamental works to Dubai. Ms. Zahid said the Dahesh’s new home only requires a few modest changes. “It just needs to come up to museum grade,’’ she said. When it opens, hopefully later this year, it will show off its permanent collection. “We already have exhibitions prepared and have continued collecting seriously,’’ Ms. Zahid added. “There’s a lot the public hasn’t seen and needs to see and we have serious viewers who have been waiting for us.’’ A version of this article appears in print on 01/20/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Dahesh Museum Finds New Home.