AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (TMC) STARRING SIDNEY POITIER Stanley Kramer’s “The Defiant Ones” (1958), about an uneducated black convict on a chain gang who goes on the lam with his “other half,” a white Southern bigot portrayed by Tony Curtis, above left, ushers in this tribute to Mr. Poitier, right (between them is Cara Williams). In 1964, Mr. Poitier became the first black person to win a best-actor Oscar and three years later was the nation’s top box-office draw. “In its candid presentment of racial conflict and resentment,” Bosley Crowther wrote in The New York Times, “it rips right into the subject with clawing ferocity and flails it about with merciless fury until all the viciousness in conflict is spent.” In James Clavell’s “To Sir, With Love” (1967), at 10, Mr. Poitier stars as Thackeray, an idealistic new teacher in London assigned to a school near the city’s docks, where his Cockney-accented students are ill mannered and insolent. Christian Roberts plays Denham, the arrogant teenager who incites Thackeray’s latest classroom edict: If the students want to be treated as the adults they are about to become, they must act like adults. “A nice air of gentility suffuses this pretty color film, and Mr. Poitier gives a quaint example of being proper and turning the other cheek,” Mr. Crowther wrote. And in Mr. Kramer’s “Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner” (1967), at midnight, the liberal principles of an aging couple (Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn) are tested when their daughter (Katharine Houghton) announces her engagement to a black doctor (Mr. Poitier). Mr. Crowther called the movie “a most delightfully acted and gracefully entertaining film, fashioned much in the manner of a stage drawing-room comedy, that seems to be about something much more serious and challenging than it actually is.”9:30 A.M. (CUNY) NEW YORK STATE DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING JR. MEMORIAL OBSERVANCE This two-hour commemoration, broadcast live from the Empire State Plaza Convention Center in Albany, features videos of Dr. King, right, and tributes to Maya Angelou and Ruby Dee.8 P.M. (TMC) LEE DANIELS’ THE BUTLER (2013) Inspired by the real story of Eugene Allen, Mr. Daniels follows a White House butler, Cecil Gaines (Forest Whitaker), and his wife, Gloria (Oprah Winfrey), as history unfolds. A. O. Scott, writing in The Times, called the film “a brilliantly truthful movie on a subject that is usually shrouded in wishful thinking, mythmongering and outright denial.” Robin Williams portrays Dwight D. Eisenhower; Liev Schreiber is Lyndon B. Johnson; and Alan Rickman is Ronald Reagan, with Jane Fonda as his wife, Nancy; Cuba Gooding Jr. and Lenny Kravitz are the fellow butlers who become Cecil’s close friends; and David Oyelowo (currently starring as the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in “Selma”) is the older son whose politics Cecil eschews. “ ‘The Butler’ has the historical insight and the generosity of spirit to honor the father and the son equally, and to look with skepticism at each’s point of view,” Mr. Scott added. 8:30 P.M. (BBC America) TOP GEAR: PATAGONIA SPECIAL Jeremy Clarkson, Richard Hammond and James May, each driving a V8-engine sports car — a Porsche 928 GT, a Ford Mustang Mach 1 and a Lotus Esprit — conclude their 1,600-mile race to Ushuaia, Argentina, one of the world’s southernmost cities.9 P.M. (CW) JANE THE VIRGIN Jane (Gina Rodriguez, fresh off a Golden Globe win) is forced to stay at the Marbella as a hurricane hits Miami. But there are bigger storms brewing as Season 1 resumes.9 P.M. (OWN) LIGHT GIRLS (2015) The director Bill Duke takes on beauty standards, racial self-hatred and the origins of colorism in this documentary centered on the experiences of lighter-skin women and featuring interviews with Russell Simmons, Soledad O’Brien, Diahann Carroll and India.Arie. “Dark Girls,” Mr. Duke’s 2011 precursor, directed with D. Channsin Berry, leads in at 7:30.What’s Streaming NowTHE FALL Season 2 of this BBC crime drama, written and directed by Allan Cubitt and set in Northern Ireland, finds Detective Superintendent Stella Gibson (Gillian Anderson) hot on the trail of the serial killer Paul Spector (Jamie Dornan, the coming “Fifty Shades of Grey”), who becomes even more destructive as he insinuates his way into her private life. “It’s a fine show, relying on slow-building tension,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times, rather than “gory shock value.” (netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement