By MARGALIT FOXJAN. 18, 2015
A long, long time ago — more than half a century, to be exact — there lived a young woman who journeyed to Italy from her native Japan. She went there to study the harp, an instrument on which she possessed uncommon skill.In Italy, she caught the eye of a count; they fell in love and were married. He bought her furs and jewels and golden harps, and she went to live in a palazzo on the Grand Canal in Venice, her primary residence to the end of her life.But the one thing the count could not give his bride was a long life together. He was older than she, and they were married for just five years before he died. There followed many more years of wrangling over his estate, with the widow the object of family machinations to rival anything in Machiavelli.After a decade she prevailed, and by the 1990s, Countess Yoko Nagae Ceschina, whose soft-spoken exterior belied her steely resolve, found herself in possession of almost $190 million.AdvertisementCountess Ceschina (pronounced chess-KEY-nuh), who died in Rome on Jan. 10, at 82, was ever after one of the world’s foremost patrons of classical music, if also one of the least publicly known. Working largely out of the limelight and with characteristic unfussiness — for her, couture meant blazers and turtlenecks — she acted as angel to some of the finest artists and institutions in the field, including the New York Philharmonic, for which she helped sponsor both a trailblazing trip to North Korea in 2008 and the endowed chair of Alan Gilbert, its current music director.Advertisement“She came to some of my concerts early on, and what she told me is that she enjoyed my vision and wanted to support that,” Mr. Gilbert, who holds the Yoko Nagae Ceschina chair, the orchestra’s first named chair for a music director, said in a telephone interview on Friday. “She had very developed taste, and you couldn’t put anything over on her. She would often critique the performance, and it was clear that she was very, very discerning.”Music, the countess often said, was such balm to the soul that she was willing to furnish what balm she could in return, accompanying the Philharmonic on many of its foreign tours as a kind of self-appointed den mother. Among the cadre of world-class musicians that was her accustomed orbit, she was as well known for flying across the globe at a moment’s notice to bring an ailing artist a warm coat or a bowl of miso soup as she was for helping one of them to buy a million-dollar Stradivarius.“She nurtured people and made sure that they behaved themselves — in the nicest way,” Zarin Mehta, the Philharmonic’s former president and executive director, said on Friday. “She didn’t stand for bad behavior in the sense of somebody not being polite, not performing well, not practicing.”Not surprisingly, given the countess’s deep desire for privacy, the precise magnitude of her philanthropy cannot be ascertained. (“She would be aghast if I said anything about the numbers,” Mr. Mehta said when asked about the cost of the North Korea trip.) But from the sweep and scale of her contributions over many years, it is clear that it was considerable.Countess Ceschina was also a benefactor of Carnegie Hall; the Israel Philharmonic; the International Harp Contest in Israel (she had placed sixth in the contest in 1965); the National Youth Orchestra of the United States of America; the Mariinsky Theater in St. Petersburg, Russia, for which she helped erect a new concert hall; and many other institutions.Her death was confirmed by the conductor Valery Gergiev, the Mariinsky’s artistic and general director, who recalled the countess once materializing, soup in hand, when he was sick in bed in a London hotel room.Yoko Nagae was born in the Kumamoto Prefecture, on the island of Kyushu, on April 5, 1932. According to a profile in The Wall Street Journal in 2008, her family was prosperous, if not quite at palazzo level. Her father was a businessman; her mother played the piano, as did Yoko herself.AdvertisementWhen Yoko was 8, her mother left the family, and her father jettisoned the piano. Yoko responded by making the rounds of neighbors’ houses, looking for one she might play.As Yoko grew up, the family fortunes appear to have declined. After high school, The Journal reported, she worked as a substitute music teacher to earn college tuition. She received a degree from the Tokyo National University of Fine Arts and Music; a brief early marriage to a classmate ended in divorce.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 1960, she won a scholarship for advanced harp study in Venice. At a cafe there, she met Count Renzo Ceschina, an industrialist some 25 years her senior.“She was a very proud girl, very beautiful,” the violinist Maxim Vengerov, a longtime friend, said on Friday. “He took her around and showed her upstairs, and there was a shop of fur coats for ladies. He said: ‘It’s very cold now. Choose anything you like; I own the shop.’ She said, ‘No thank you,’ and she left. And every day she would go and have coffee in this cafe, and he would come and watch her, until she surrendered.”The couple married in 1977, when the count was about 70. Soon afterward, he made a new will, leaving his entire estate to the countess.The count died in 1982. A nephew of his challenged the will in court, claiming Countess Ceschina had forged her husband’s signature. The case dragged on for 10 years before the signature was authenticated.One of Countess Ceschina’s most enduring acts of philanthropy came in 1998, when she contributed half of the $1.5 million price tag for Mr. Vengerov’s 1727 Stradivarius — “my partner for my life,” he called the violin on Friday. She had offered to foot the entire bill, Mr. Vengerov said, but he demurred.Her devotion to him had begun years before.“I used to play 120 concerts a year,” Mr. Vengerov said. “She would follow me — not to all of the concerts, but to the most important ones, which were probably about 80 or so. I would go to Chicago; she would be there. I would go to Japan; she would turn up there. Then she finally announced that she would like to be my grandmother.”And so, in effect, she became, on one occasion flying to Switzerland to bring Mr. Vengerov, ill with pneumonia in a hotel room there, an immense fur coat.Advertisement“I was 22, so I took a two-star hotel, where the washrooms were in the corridor,” he recalled. “And she stayed in the same hotel — can you believe? — and she didn’t mind.”Countess Ceschina’s most widely reported undertaking was the concert in North Korea by the Philharmonic, the first American cultural group to appear there. Arriving in Pyongyang in February 2008, the orchestra played a program of Wagner, Dvorak and Gershwin under the baton of Lorin Maazel; the performance, which the countess attended, was televised around the world.“The audience applauded for more than five minutes, and orchestra members, some of them crying, waved,” The New York Times reported. “People in the seats cheered and waved back, reluctant to let the visitors leave.”To critics of the trip, who charged that the North Korean government’s invitation to the orchestra was meant to deflect attention from its nuclear weapons program and human rights record, the countess had a simple reply:“Music has no borderlines,” she said at the time, in one of her rare interviews. “It is good if people gain some happiness by listening to good music.”The countess had no children, and information on other survivors was unavailable.As a harpist, she can be heard on several recordings, performing works by the contemporary Belgian composer Jacqueline Fontyn and others.After her husband died, Mr. Vengerov said, Countess Ceschina never played the harp again. Once, when he visited her in Venice, she took him to the basement of the palazzo, where, he recalled on Friday, 15 or 20 harps stood silent.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Yoko Nagae Ceschina, Countess and Fairy Godmother to the Arts, Dies at 82.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.