By ZACHARY WOOLFEJAN. 18, 2015
“Classical music has been losing money for people for 500 years,” an orchestra administrator tells her numbers-obsessed colleague in the new Amazon series “Mozart in the Jungle.” “It’s not a business.”As a vision of the inner workings of a major New York symphony, “Mozart” is sexed-up, druggy, lovably daffy and patently fictional. But at unexpectedly truthful, revealing moments like this, I wanted to make it required viewing for American orchestra boards, which have lately tended to hold their institutions to standards of profitability more suitable for industry than the nonprofit arts.“Mozart in the Jungle,” based on a 2005 tell-all book by the oboist Blair Tindall, is the latest original series from Amazon, which won the Golden Globe for best television comedy or musical for “Transparent” this month, and on Tuesday it announced that it had hired Woody Allen to write and direct his first television series.Worlds away from the sober dark comedy of “Transparent,” “Mozart” seems at first glance to be a fanciful exercise in magical realism. A community dance party breaks out after a rehearsal held in an abandoned lot; a parrot swoops onto a podium; a white horse appears in a country house living room. At one point the series’ namesake himself arrives, bewigged, to advise a charismatic upstart conductor, clearly inspired by the Los Angeles Philharmonic music director Gustavo Dudamel and played by Gael García Bernal, with charm and deranged gusto.AdvertisementEvery show is ridiculed for its perceived inaccuracies by whoever the denizens are of its real-world milieu. Journalists have loved to hate “The Newsroom,” those in political circles “House of Cards.”AdvertisementIt may be because of the ditsy, sometimes realistic, sometimes not tone of “Mozart” that some in music have gone after its divergences from real life.But despite — or, perhaps, because of — its García Márquez-ish surreal touches, what is most surprising about the 10-episode first season of “Mozart” is how true its depiction of the classical music industry rings. Yes, it’s highly unlikely that a conductor would be allowed to suddenly overhaul an upcoming program to substitute Mahler’s mighty Symphony No. 8. And yes, Bernadette Peters’s character, referred to as the board chair of a fictional New York symphony, fills a role closer to that of a real-life executive director.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.These details hardly distract from the substantive issues raised — often with a wink — amid the show’s larkiness, including the realities of union rules and tensions with management. Contract mandated, rigidly policed breaks are omnipresent in both the series and real life. Sick pay and pension payouts are discussed in meetings.“They’re going to try to drive a wedge between the older members of the orchestra and the younger members,” a musicians’ union representative warns, just as “they” have done in the fraught labor negotiations that keep popping up on the American orchestra landscape.Dignified and perpetually under siege, Ms. Peters accurately (and amusingly) shows the pressure on administrators to maintain artistic standards while adapting their institutions for the future, furiously raising funds and parrying the meddling of ignorant board members. A proposal, mentioned in an early episode, to conduct a concert in total darkness is no weirder than the Colorado Symphony’s recent “Classically Cannabis” events.And while a cellist in, say, the New York Philharmonic probably wouldn’t have to run off after a concert to freelance in a Broadway pit band, as the show’s Cynthia does, it’s true that players all over the country are under increasing strain to piece together enough gigs to make a living. The only really unsettlingly unrealistic aspect of the first season, as far as I could tell, was the sight of the violinist Joshua Bell playing in a tuxedo rather than his customary dark shirt and vest. And more legitimately troubling than anything music related in the show is that Rodrigo De Souza, the conductor played by Mr. García Bernal, displays a wearying parade of Latin-lover stereotypes.Despite acknowledging the many problems faced by orchestras and their players, “Mozart” is ultimately a celebration. Its critics, so used to classical music being marginalized, may well be uncomfortable with the depiction of a world in which it struggles for funds but no one disputes its centrality.This fictional New York is a music-nerd paradise, where the Williamsburg parties feature joints attached to ticking metronomes and end in shots-laden competitions between oboists and flutists. Make-believe? Of course. But that’s a concrete jungle I could get used to.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Classical Music as ‘Jungle’ Rings True.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.