By MICHAEL COOPERJAN. 18, 2015
Nestled among the zany plotlines of the Amazon series “Mozart in the Jungle” are scenes that many classical musicians will recognize of the struggles, and indignities, that they face as they try to make it in New York.But one scene — of musicians in a studio recording an over-the-top score for a low-budget film — threatens to be a bit anachronistic these days. Soundtrack recording work for American musicians has grown scarcer in recent decades, as technological changes and competition from cheaper overseas orchestras have disrupted the industry.The changed environment was evident in the making of the Amazon series: In some scenes its stars, and the real orchestra musicians who were hired to portray members of the fictionalized New York symphony that the series revolves around, mimed playing their instruments to bits of Mahler and Berlioz that were recorded for the show in Bratislava, Slovakia. Other music, including an orchestral arrangement of the rock song “Lisztomania,” was recorded in Los Angeles.But even the Los Angeles industry is under threat: session wages for studio musicians there fell to $15.5 million in 2013 from a high of nearly $50 million in 1998, according to a report released last month by the Los Angeles Alliance for a New Economy, a workers’ advocacy group. In New York, there has been a steep decline in work since the 1980s, and a number of major recording studios have closed. But musicians’ unions on both coasts have been working in recent years to get more soundtrack work for their members, in some cases by advocating for film production tax credits and in some cases by trying to shame studios that received credits but recorded music overseas.AdvertisementThe trend has been developing for years, and is traced in the 2005 book that the Amazon series is loosely based on: “Mozart in the Jungle: Sex, Drugs, and Classical Music,” a tell-all memoir by Blair Tindall that recounts her misadventures as an oboist in New York.AdvertisementMs. Tindall wrote that in the 1980s, when she began playing on soundtracks, they were important sources of income for musicians. “The money was so good, several members of the New York Philharmonic quit their contracted positions to play only recording gigs,” she wrote. But by 1991, after playing on the soundtrack of Spike Lee’s “Malcolm X,” she recalled that “jobs like this were few and far between — and rapidly becoming scarcer.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tino Gagliardi, president of Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians in New York, said in a statement that there was a “massive problem of production companies offshoring recording jobs that should go to our large pool of talented local musicians.”New York musicians and union officials point to hopeful signs of films and television shows that are choosing to record in the city — including Darren Aronofsky’s 2014 film, “Noah,” which was recorded in Manhattan and featured a full orchestra.The music in “Mozart in the Jungle” comes from various sources. In addition to the Los Angeles studio musicians and the members of the Slovak National Symphony Orchestra, some of it was previously recorded and licensed for the show and some was recorded by Roger Neill, the series’s composer, in his studio.And even if it did not feature their playing, “Mozart in the Jungle” did give work to musicians in two New York-area orchestras, the Chelsea Symphony and the New Westchester Symphony Orchestra. Their members were hired to portray members of the series’s orchestra; they mimed to a recorded soundtrack — following their ears, not their eyes, as the conductor in front of them was actually an actor.Members of the Chelsea ensemble eventually were hired to make music — at the series premiere at Alice Tully Hall.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: For Musicians, a TV Series Underscores Diminishing Role.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.