AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel McDermonLooking for something to do this weekend?The Times’s arts team is here to help.We asked our colleagues a simple question: what one thing would they recommend?It’s hard to imagine a time when chess players could inspire widespread passion à la, say, the Mets in the postseason. But as recalled in “Pawn Sacrifice,” the Bobby Fischer-Boris Spassky world championship battle of 1972 made the evening newscasts and inspired crowds of American fans. While showing Fischer at the height of his powers (with Tobey Maguire hinting at the troubled figure he later became), the film opens a window onto a precise moment in the Cold War and that’s where it shines. Stephanie Goodman, film editor(Read Neil Genzlinger’s full review or find a showtime.)The first season of FX’s darkly hilarious crime thriller “Fargo” proved an exception to the rule that translating movies into TV is usually ill advised. (See: Fox’s new sci-fi procedural “Minority Report,” among many others.) But don’t worry if you missed it — “Fargo” returns on Monday and, thanks to its anthology format, you don’t have to be caught up to enjoy Season 2. The new episodes are set in 1979 and revolve around a cascading set of homicides, most perpetrated in bumbling fashion. Kirsten Dunst, Ted Danson, Patrick Wilson and Nick Offerman are among the actors who try on Upper Midwest accents, with mixed success. Stay tuned for the cult hero Bruce Campbell, who will show up later as Ronald Reagan. Jeremy Egner, TV writer(See more about the new season or check out Season 1.)The word-drunk art book “Lists of Note: An Eclectic Collection Deserving of a Wider Audience” (Chronicle Books, $40), compiled by Shaun Usher, is a feast and an eyeful from beginning to end. Yes, this is a book of lists, dozens and dozens of them, but nearly every one is a surprise and a keeper. Mr. Usher presents a 1692 record of the Salem “witches” not far from Susan Sontag’s rules for parenting. There’s Mark Twain’s huge inventory of the meals he wants to eat when he returns to America (No. 2: “Fried oysters; stewed oysters. Frogs”) and Sid Vicious’s list of “What Makes Nancy So Great.” Whenever possible, the editor reprints original documents. This book will make you feel, as Edmund Wilson typed in his long 1927 list of terms for drunkenness, “jingled,” “piffed” and “lit up like the Commonwealth.” Dwight Garner, book critic(Find a copy for purchase or in a library.)Ten years ago, more than 300 people vanished without a trace from a Tennessee town that housed a research facility. Where did they go? What work was being done at the research facility? These are the questions explored in “Limetown,” a creepy new podcast that takes the format of “Serial” and other radio documentaries and directs it toward a fictional and possibly otherworldly story. Though “Limetown” debuted in August, only two episodes have aired thus far. These months of encroaching night are the perfect time to catch up: The third episode is coming on Monday. Gilbert Cruz, TV editor(Cue it up here.)Advertisement