By DAVE ITZKOFFJAN. 18, 2015
Seated at the head of the oblong table where he will preside over his new Comedy Central series, “The Nightly Show,” Larry Wilmore was moderating a vigorous, sometimes sincere, sometimes acerbic panel discussion about the attack on the French newspaper Charlie Hebdo.Sally Kohn, who contributes to CNN and The Daily Beast, said that society reacted differently to mass shootings depending on who had committed them. “When white people commit crime in the United States,” she said, “nobody says, ‘Gosh, what’s wrong with white people?’ ”Mr. Wilmore replied: “Actually, we say it. But nobody listens.”This debate, held last Tuesday night on a newly constructed set at a Midtown Manhattan studio, was a dry run not meant for broadcast. It was seen by an audience of Comedy Central executives and “Nightly Show” writers and producers, including Jon Stewart, anchor of “The Daily Show,” who sat in the front row.When “The Nightly Show With Larry Wilmore” makes its debut after “The Daily Show” on Monday night, many more people will be watching, closely attuned to what its host says and does. These viewers will be watching for how this show distinguishes itself from its highly regarded predecessor, “The Colbert Report,” whose singularly arch M.C., Stephen Colbert, will succeed David Letterman at CBS in September.AdvertisementThey will also be listening carefully to the 53-year-old Mr. Wilmore, the former “senior black correspondent” of “The Daily Show” and a rare nonwhite star in the constellation of late-night television, to hear what might differentiate his outsider voice in a crowded field of news satire.AdvertisementMr. Wilmore knows he does not have the luxury to experiment behind closed doors, and he will be figuring out on his feet what works in front of an audience over the next several weeks.“I’m not doing a show where I’m setting up comics to do jokes,” Mr. Wilmore said in an interview earlier that day. “What’s driving this is, we’re finding things out, we’re making discoveries.”But the benefit of topical humor, he said with a laugh, is that “it’s urgent and it’s disposable, simultaneously.”He added, “A couple days later, nobody cares.”Having known since May that Mr. Stewart had chosen him to take over Mr. Colbert’s time slot (and having given up his nascent producing role on the ABC sitcom “black-ish” to do it), Mr. Wilmore said he wanted his show to look at “events in the world from the perspective of the underdog,” while being “provocative and absurd, all those things rolled into one.”This blueprint has yielded a show that at its outset will have one segment of Mr. Wilmore’s jokes and riffs about current events (à la “The Daily Show” and “Weekend Update”), followed by two segments of panel discussions led by the host, with a new group of guests each night.On a board in his personal office at the production center that was home to “The Colbert Report,” Mr. Wilmore pointed to a tentative roster of guests that included Hollywood actors, prominent journalists and experienced political aides.For his debut show, Mr. Wilmore will test his mettle with Senator Cory Booker, the rapper Talib Kweli and the comedian Bill Burr. Among the guests planned for coming episodes are David Remnick, editor of The New Yorker, and the author Ilyasah Shabazz, a daughter of Malcolm X.Advertisement“I’m trying not to book too many guests ahead of time,” he said, “because a lot of it is driven by news, timeliness and content.”“That’s a little scary,” he said.For his test shows, Mr. Wilmore focused on a single topic with multiple facets, like the Charlie Hebdo attacks or the rape accusations against Bill Cosby. At a meeting with his writers on Tuesday afternoon, Mr. Wilmore led a conversation about Wednesday’s planned show on the subject of hacking.The writers’ room was populated with some late-night TV stalwarts, including the new show’s executive producer Rory Albanese, a veteran of “The Daily Show,” as well as more than a dozen men and women of varying ethnicities, who do not necessarily possess traditional industry résumés.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Wilmore and his staff brainstormed possible routines for the new show’s contributors: one for Shenaz Treasury, a reporter and Bollywood actress, about the sexual harassment she experienced online; another for Mike Yard, a stand-up comedian, who would explain that he had gone so far off the electronic grid that he was performing only for Amish audiences.Mr. Wilmore also had a more straightforward conversation with Cord Jefferson, a former Gawker editor who has written for the Starz comedy “Survivor’s Remorse,” about the recent hacking of United States Central Command’s Twitter and YouTube accounts, asking if this was a sufficiently newsworthy topic for “The Nightly Show” to cover.“I’m not just taking positions because they’re funny,” Mr. Wilmore explained. ”What’s funny is generated from how I actually feel about something.”Sometimes, Mr. Wilmore added, “I’m agnostic about something, and I don’t mind that either. It’s important for me to tell the writers, ‘Guys, I ain’t mad about that.’ ”Mr. Wilmore, who wrote for the 1990s sketch series “In Living Color” and helped create the sitcoms “The PJs” and “The Bernie Mac Show,” has a showcase for his pointed commentary on race and class in the opening monologue of “The Nightly Show.”And it is hard to imagine current late-night hosts having the same latitude to crack wise about subjects like Lassana Bathily, the Malian-born Muslim employee at a kosher market in Paris who protected customers when the store was attacked by a gunman, yet who was handcuffed by police officers who mistook him for an assailant. (“The brother?” Mr. Wilmore said in disbelief. “Even in France?”)AdvertisementMichele Ganeless, the Comedy Central president, said she hoped “The Nightly Show” would help fulfill “a desire to have more viewpoints represented” on the network and a need “to have different people from the comedy community come on and have a platform to give their point of view.” (The panel at Tuesday’s test show featured Ms. Kohn; Ms. Treasury; the comedian Seaton Smith; and Billy Kimball, a television writer and programming executive at Fusion.)Ms. Ganeless said the series would need time to determine its true shape.“The show is not going to look the same on Day 1 as it will on Day 10 or on Day 100,” she said. “It will continue to evolve.”For his part, Mr. Wilmore said it was exciting enough that a channel was giving this opportunity to someone who might otherwise be invisible — if not for his race, then for his age.At this point in his life, Mr. Wilmore said, “it’s like, ‘Fifty McFifty, you be quiet over there. We’ll start caring when you get in your 60s.’ ”Knowing this about the entertainment industry, Mr. Wilmore said, gave him a certain sense of bulletproofing.“I’m going to tell you how I feel,” he said.Laughing, he added: “What, am I going to get fired? Well, we had a good run. At least we got to talk some trash for a while.”A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Something New to Follow Your Moment of Zen.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.