By BRIAN SEIBERTJAN. 18, 2015
Peace, love and respect are excellent values for a theatrical production to promote, especially one directed at children. But it takes more than good intentions to make a good show, and Illstyle and Peace Productions’ “IMpossible IZZpossible,” which played over the weekend at BAM Fisher as part of the BAM Kids series, is an incoherent jumble.After the performance on Saturday afternoon, Brandon Albright, the Philadelphia-based company’s affable founder, director and choreographer, explained that the production was about the difficult process of achieving your dreams. Yet the show, a disconnected suite of mediocre hip-hop routines riddled with baffling elements, seemed less about that process than still involved in it, and at an early, inchoate stage.The chief distinction of the choreography lies in its effort to mix hip-hop styles with steps from tap, ballet and West African dance. Considering the cultural connections between hip-hop and African dance, it’s not surprising that they would blend well, but hybrids are often ungainly, and it’s a relief to see one as smooth as this. Alas, the awkwardness averted there crops up just about everywhere else.The routines are all out of shape, truncated where they should be developed further, extended way past where they should end. The performers’ impressive specialty steps — the flips, the windmills, the head spins and backspins — are sprinkled indiscriminately, losing the force they might have had. Even the dancers’ smiles are clumsy. At first I thought their bizarrely clownish grins were some comment on falsity or cultural assimilation; then I decided they were actually a misguided effort to play to the children.The show is a string of unrealized ideas. Spiritual striving is expressed not through dance but through slow-motion walking toward a video backdrop of heavenly clouds. A snatch of Michael Jackson’s “Thriller” teases with a hint of nostalgic pleasure; what follows instead are performers in fright masks doing power moves in front of images of war and of the twin towers burning. Hip-hop dance can successfully address such heavy subject matter, but not like this.For all its positivity, Saturday’s performance was low on energy, as if the cast were saving up for the big final number, a pull-out-all-the-stops display with a score sampling from the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I Have a Dream” speech. Mr. Albright’s dream is not impossible to achieve, but it will take more work and thought.A version of this review appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Hybridized Hip-Hop, Playing to the Kids.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.