AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Anthony TommasiniPARIS — As the residents here continue to cope with the aftermath of the recent terrorist attacks, the performing arts institutions of this city clearly feel the need to make rallying artistic statements. So it was on Thursday night when the Paris National Opera opened a revival of its boldly contemporary 2006 production of Mozart’s “Don Giovanni” by the Austrian film director and screenwriter Michael Haneke.Before the performance at the Opéra Bastille began, Stéphane Lissner, the director of the company, appeared onstage with the chorus to say that in tribute to the victims and as an expression of democracy, the chorus and the orchestra, conducted by Alain Altinoglu, would perform “Va, pensiero” from Verdi’s “Nabucco.” In that opera, a biblical drama, this uplifting music is sung by a group of Israelites suffering under Babylonian Captivity who long for their homeland. At least their thoughts can fly (“Va, pensiero”) on golden wings, they sing. The performance conveyed the music’s sadness and calm determination and won a prolonged standing ovation.After a break, Mr. Altinoglu returned to the pit to begin “Don Giovanni.” Mr. Haneke came to wide attention in 2012 when his film “Amour” was nominated for five Academy Awards and won the Oscar for best foreign language film. This much-debated “Don Giovanni,” Mr. Haneke’s debut in opera, stands out in a field in which contemporary takes on this complex Mozart masterpiece are commonplace.Mr. Haneke presents Giovanni as a self-made executive of a corporate enterprise. The entire opera is set in its headquarters, depicted vividly in Christoph Kanter’s set: We see the spacious floor of a modern office building, with a curved wall of windows offering spectacular views of apartment complexes and skyscrapers. Don Giovanni was the charismatic bass-baritone Erwin Schrott, a signature role for him. A born actor, he sang with verve and looked in his element, dressed in a well-tailored suit, exuding entitlement. In the first scene, when Donna Anna (the vocally gleaming and regal soprano Tatiana Lisnic) is first seen fleeing from the lecherous Giovanni, they come bursting out of an office where, clearly, the boss had cornered her.Her father, the Commendatore (the solid bass Liang Li), who seems to be the patron of the enterprise, comes rushing out, no weapon in hand, to defend his daughter. He struggles futilely with Giovanni, who impulsively grabs a knife and stabs the old man. So this is no duel of honor but a murder. Leporello, sung by the feisty, husky-toned bass Adrian Sâmpetrean, is no bungling servant to Giovanni, but a secondary-level corporate officer and personal assistant who tries to stand up for himself but can go only so far. After all, he wants to advance.Mr. Haneke comes up with inspired touches. When Giovanni hosts an office party, mainly as a staging operation to seduce the nubile Zerlina (the charming soprano Serena Malfi), he arrives with what looks like a group of college students he invited. They are awe-struck to be in these exclusive suites, until Giovanni nuzzles one young woman and strips her naked in no time. The shocked guests suddenly realize that their host is monstrous.Musically, the recitative exchanges are given full dramatic flair. Serious lines are sung in ominous, almost whispered ways, especially by Mr. Schrott’s wily Giovanni. While effective, this approach slows the pacing. Combined with Mr. Altinoglu’s often restrained tempos, the overall performance, for all its intensity, sometimes dragged.Still, at his best Mr. Altinoglu conducted a spacious, dark and textured performance. And the singers gave their all. The soprano Marie-Adeline Henry was a vulnerable, tragic Donna Elvira who sang with power and raw emotion but sometimes sounded rough and strained. The tenor Stefan Pop, on this night, was a tight-voiced Don Ottavio, though you liked the basic earnestness he brought to the character. The baritone Alexandre Duhamel was a hardy Masetto, Zerlina’s beloved.When the ghostly Commendatore appears at Giovanni’s dinner to exact justice and condemn his murderer to hellish punishment, Mr. Li’s voice is heard from a distance through loudspeakers. He is brought out in a wheelchair, his abdomen bloody. People dressed to look, perhaps, like the nighttime cleaning crew surround Giovanni, lift him up and push him to his death through one of those gleaming picture windows we have been looking at throughout the opera: a fitting end to a corporate bully.The Paris National Opera’s “Don Giovanni” runs through Feb. 14 at the Opéra Bastille in Paris; operadeparis.fr. Advertisement