AdvertisementSupported byAn AppraisalBy Jon CaramanicaHip-hop’s past is littered with secret histories, scenes and stories and sounds that never got their full hearing, remembered only by a few. Thanks to the Internet, though, secret histories aren’t so secret anymore. Those stories are now rescued, amplified and recontextualized by a new wave of agents who are fluent in the past, and who use it to build a more creative future.ASAP Yams, who died Sunday at 26, was one such person. Born Steven Rodriguez, he was an owner of ASAP Worldwide records, and the creative force behind the rise of the Harlem rapper ASAP Rocky, one of hip-hop’s most promising young stars.But Yams had influence well beyond his immediate circle. Before he was an executive, he was a crucial modern-day tastemaker thanks to his Internet presence. His blog RNT — the full title can’t be printed — was an early warning system for emerging hip-hop that was both stylish and rugged, from all corners of the country. Yams was a bridge: between the Internet and the streets, between regions, between generations.His taste was virtually impeccable, the right combination of fealty to the genre’s history and brash, forward-looking disruption. He helped set the blueprint for contemporary polyglot hip-hop taste, taking cues from the traditions of New York, Los Angeles, the Midwest and the South. It’s a blend that now feels commonplace, but even four years ago qualified as radical.In the past, that archivist role might have fallen to a record collector or a D.J. But the Internet allowed Yams to become a living, breathing repository of all of the genre’s best ideas and sounds. And it also gave him a platform to do more substantial things.Yams had his eye on a bigger goal: taking a shot at making the history himself. He used his blog to help start the career of ASAP Rocky, a longtime friend and collaborator. Rocky’s sound was purposefully hybrid, as conscious of Houston and Memphis and Los Angeles as New York. For many, that was sacrilege. For Yams, it was the way forward.I spent time with Yams in 2012, just before the release of Rocky’s debut, “Long.Live.ASAP” (Polo Grounds/RCA), as part of a series on behind-the-scenes forces in the music industry. Unlike other people I spoke with, Yams played a role that was misty; he was, he said with characteristic cheek, a “spirit guide.”At that time, New York hip-hop was, for all intents and purposes, stagnant, in thrall to its younger self and looking backward, not forward. Yams rightly understood that was quicksand to be avoided.“People can say anything they want about Rocky, talking about, ‘Oh, he sounds like he’s from here, he sounds like he’s from there,’ ” Yams told me. “I don’t care what nobody says. People don’t know what New York rap sounds like in 2012, ‘cause it’s been so messed up for the past five years.”Yams set about to fix that. He was a genuine New York character, covered in tattoos, and with Hennessy and Newports always at the ready. On Twitter, he was uproarious, an effortless comedian keenly attuned to the foibles of those inside hip-hop and those on the outside looking in. And he lived hard — Blackout Boyz was the name of one of his side crews, and their logo was a collection of Xanax tablets. (Last summer he spent time in rehab.)His long con of making hip-hop in the image of his taste set worked. “Long.Live.ASAP” debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard album chart and went on to be a modest success — one single was certified double platinum, another one gold.But Yams’s influence is likely to be measured in other ways. He helped shape the taste of a generation, be it the rappers and producers he was working with through ASAP Worldwide or his own fledgling Yamborghini Records imprint, or the thousands of readers who hung on his every word and recommendation. History doesn’t mean much if there’s no one there to remember it, retell it and use it as a steppingstone to new heights.Advertisement