AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick LymanWARSAW — Tadeusz Konwicki, whose alternately grim, surreal and acidly ironic novels and films made him one of Poland’s most important cultural figures, died on Jan. 7 at his home in central Warsaw. He was 88. His death was reported by Polish news media. Mr. Konwicki’s most acclaimed novel, “A Minor Apocalypse,” is widely considered among the most important works of post-World War II Eastern European literature and remains required reading for all Polish high school students.Like the author himself, Mr. Konwicki’s frequently self-referential work journeyed from Stalinist-era social realism through disillusionment with Communism, ostracism from the party and an increasingly bitter and gloomy worldview.Often experimental in structure, mixing diary entries with intensely lyrical passages, Mr. Konwicki’s work was not always political, though his anti-Soviet novels, published underground, are among his most esteemed works.“A Minor Apocalypse,” published in 1979, is about a despairing writer, also named Konwicki, who is asked by opposition political leaders to set himself on fire outside the country’s Community Party headquarters. The novel follows the author through what is to be the final day of his life, wandering around Warsaw, encountering a weird assortment of people and unexpectedly falling in love.The nightmarish society the novel portrays is dysfunctional and collapsing. Security officials are constantly demanding to see people’s identity documents. Party members are spirited away to mental hospitals. The city’s main bridge has collapsed and no one even tries to remove the rubble from the streets.Mr. Konwicki’s work was frequently haunted by memories of his turbulent youth in a small town near Vilnius, now the capital of Lithuania, and of his years as a partisan fighting the Nazis and then the Soviets before embracing Communism.“Konwicki’s books and films reflect the history of Poland, a history full of defeat, despair and betrayal,” said Janusz Glowacki, a prominent Polish screenwriter and novelist who was a close friend of Mr. Konwicki’s. “He wrote about the most crucial topics in a manner far from moralization. Ironically, his pessimism inspired a sentiment of community and hope.”Even his novels aimed at young audiences, like “The Hole in the Sky” (1959), had a sardonic edge. The story is ostensibly about the world of children in prewar Vilnius, but it is really about its main character’s idealism being crushed when his friends mock him, mirroring Mr. Konwicki’s own sense of betrayal by his Communist peers.Mr. Konwicki was also highly regarded for his film work, both as a director — his “Last Day of Summer” (1958), shot with a skeleton crew and seen as a precursor of the French New Wave, won the Grand Prix at the International Festival of Documentary and Short Feature Films in Venice — and as an influence on the work of other major Polish filmmakers.It was Mr. Konwicki, for instance, who suggested a short story about the tragic final days of the Warsaw Uprising as a possible subject for the filmmaker Andrzej Wajda, resulting in “Kanal,” widely considered a masterpiece of Polish cinema.As general editor of the Penguin Books’ series “Writers From the Other Europe,” Philip Roth published English translations of two of Mr. Konwicki’s novels: “The Dreambook of Our Time” (1963), about the wartime generation’s postwar experiences, and “The Polish Complex” (1977), an especially acidic story about people reliving the past in their memories while waiting in a long line to buy Russian jewelry.“I am an ardent admirer of Tadeusz Konwicki,” Mr. Roth wrote in an email. “Years ago, we had the opportunity to meet here in America and happily fell into each other’s arms like old friends.”Only three years old when his father died, and with a persistently ailing mother, Mr. Konwicki was raised by his extended family. He was forced to leave high school with the outbreak of World War II, when the Nazis forbade Poles to attend school. (The Soviets later did the same.) He finished his class work clandestinely.Conscripted into a Nazi labor force, he worked clearing a forest and then escaped, joining the partisans. After the war, he studied in Krakow and then in Warsaw but never graduated from college. He became a reporter and critic, writing mainly about film, and began to write short stories and novels.Mr. Konwicki was a member of the Polish United Workers’ Party from 1953 to 1966, but by the late ’50s he had become disillusioned with the Communist regime. His books were officially released and widely read when he was in favor with the government authorities, but by the late 1960s and early ’70s, when he was not, they were available only in clandestine editions.His wife of 50 years, Danuta Lenica, the daughter of a prominent painter, was a graphic designer who worked on some of Mr. Konwicki’s books. She died in 1999. Mr. Konwicki is survived by a daughter, Maria Konwicka. A second daughter, Anna Wesolowska, died in 2008.In his last years, Mr. Konwicki declared himself finished with writing, and rarely gave interviews. “He was in his element when he talked to people,” said Joanna Szczepkowska, an actress who worked with him frequently and often met him near his apartment at the Café Blikle, Warsaw’s most famous cafe, where Mr. Konwicki spent many hours.“At the end,” she said in an interview with the Polish News Agency, “when all of his friends had passed, he felt very lonely, both as a human being and as a writer.”His books, she said, had lost their importance to him.“I write above all for the reader, with the intention of giving pleasure, amusing, stunning or destroying,” Mr. Konwicki explained in a book-length interview called “Half a Century of Purgation,” published underground. “It is impossible to write without another person.”Advertisement