Season 6, Episode 1: Fate’s Right Hand
Pour yourself a few fingers of good Kentucky bourbon, sit back, and let’s get started on recapping the sixth and final season of “Justified.” But first, let’s toast the late Dewey Crowe, the dumbest criminal who ever thought he was smart. (And yes, partake, even if it’s before noon, because, as Raylan Givens, the main character, says, “It tastes like a warm summer day.”)All the main characters are back: Raylan, our lanky and laconic lawman; his nemesis, the bank robber Boyd Crowder; Ava Crowder, his girlfriend turned informant; and even Winona, Raylan’s ex-wife, who is waiting in Florida with their infant daughter. Best of all, Dewey Crowe, the hapless criminal with the Nazi tattoos on his neck, is back — at least for a while.There is a palpable sense in this episode that everything is in decline. Characters are clearly showing their age, closer, in fact, to the age that Elmore Leonard imagined them in his stories. Raylan, who is played by the 46-year-old Timothy Olyphant, is turning gray beneath the ever-present cowboy hat. And Ava (Joelle Carter) looks especially tired. Her frown lines have deepened, and she never seems to smile, no matter what Boyd (Walton Goggins) tries to do for her.“I was just trying to make you smile,” he says to her before they talk of leaving dying Harlan, a place he says is turning them into ghosts.We’ll hear and see more of that talk of decline: People are worn out and spent. They live, after all, in eastern Kentucky, the played-out coal country that The Upshot found was the hardest place to live in the United States.We even get a sense of how the series might conclude, at the end of the episode when Raylan visits Art Mullen (Nick Searcy), his former boss and mentor, to drink a little bourbon and chat. Last season, Art was severely wounded, and he is still recuperating. He counsels Raylan that he could just kill Boyd, but he’d lose his star and see his infant daughter only from behind prison glass. Or Boyd could kill him. “Sometimes it just doesn’t go your way,” Art says. The theme of loss becomes even more obvious when someone does show a little joy, as when Raylan’s new boss, Rachel Brooks (Erica Tazel), says to him: “You seem happy. You never seem happy.”That’s not to say the episode doesn’t have its moments of cheer. And that cheer is provided, however temporarily, by Dewey Crowe (Damon Herriman). His sudden and brutal death in a series in which people are killed in creative ways in every episode is all the more shocking because Dewey has been reliably providing the comic relief for the past five seasons.His death tells us a couple of things. The show’s writers have shown no fear of killing off characters, but never one as enduring and, yes, lovable, as Dewey Crow. (Ever notice how everyone always seems to run his name together as one word: DeweyCrowe?) Makes you think they’d have no trouble with Boyd’s meeting his end. Maybe Raylan? I also wonder if it suggests that the show has shifted its outlook on crime in eastern Kentucky. Will our deputy United States marshal have less to do with the folks living down in the hollers and the backwoods? Will he be facing off against sophisticates rather than half-wits like Dewey Crowe?The theme of loss also returns in a big way in that death scene. Poor Dewey returns to Boyd, angry about being the patsy once again. He begins ranting (crying, really) about how tired he is and how he wishes things could be the way they were (like in Season 1, when they were anti-Semitic racists robbing banks and blowing stuff up). “I never thought it would be this hard,” Boyd concedes. He then shows Dewey an old photo on the wall of coal miners. One is his grandfather, he says, and can Dewey see the hope in his eyes? Dewey looks, and Boyd shoots him in the head.To the end, Dewey is being tricked. That’s a constant of the series, if it is of any consolation. Boyd puts him on his bank-robbing crew after Raylan hits one of Boyd’s henchmen in the face with a coal shovel. Did anyone not see this coming? But the duffel bag that Dewey is told to transport contains only laundry, not drugs and not money.That sets us up for the central mystery of this episode. With the marshals distracted, Boyd and his men rob a bank with precision, busting open safe deposit boxes. But only ledgers and papers are inside, not money, leaving Boyd’s crew – and us – to wonder what that is all about. Ledgers are like road maps to all kinds of skulduggery, and you have to figure that Boyd is clever enough to discover that. But again, the past story of Boyd is that there are always people who are thinking just a bit faster than he is.A few other things:Bourbon is important in “Justified.” Characters are defined by their drink, and real Kentuckians tend to drink bourbon in this show. Not only it is extolled as sunshine in that Mexican bar as this week’s story begins, but it shows up again as Raylan and Art reconnect. It looks like Blanton’s Straight From the Barrel, but I couldn’t tell for sure because the director artfully obscured the distinctive running-horse stopper. Both Blanton and Van Winkle, a brand frequently mentioned in previous episodes, are made by the Buffalo Trace Distillery in Kentucky.The photo Boyd and Dewey look at right before Dewey’s demise can be found in the Library of Congress collection. But little is known about it — not where it was taken and of whom. It is probably from around 1910.The site the director uses for the Manchester Federal Correctional Institution, where Dewey was held, looks nothing like the real place. The medium-security prison, with a nearby minimum-security camp, has a very distinctive A-frame entryway, giving it the appearance of a particularly ugly highway rest stop. One with a chain-link fence and razor wire.The big question is who will survive to the end. It isn’t clear that Raylan will. Or Ava. In the final, chilling scene of this episode, Boyd watches Ava sleep, and you have to figure the same thoughts of distrust that motivated his killing of Dewey are running through his head. Whom do you think Graham Yost, the showrunner, will leave standing at the end?And whom do you miss most from earlier seasons? For me, it’s Wendy Crowe, played by Alicia Witt, a talented actress who somehow hasn’t had the career she deserves. Or maybe Mags Bennet, played by Margo Martindale. (Of course, you can always catch Ms. Martindale in “The Americans,” also on FX.)Finally, why would anyone want to buy land at top dollar in Harlan County, Ky.?See you next week, and you bring the Pappy Van Winkle’s.