When the Mariinsky Ballet brought Alexei Ratmansky’s “Cinderella” to the Brooklyn Academy of Music last weekend for its New York premiere, its arrival seemed like a homecoming. The drop curtain, painted with the silhouette of a jagged skyline that could be Manhattan or Downtown Brooklyn, rose to reveal a pair of three-story scaffolds recalling New York’s fire escapes. Two black columns punctuated the stage. The set was edgy and urban — no place for pumpkins.In 2002, when Mr. Ratmansky recreated the ballet to Prokofiev’s score for the Mariinksy Ballet in St. Petersburg, Ilya Utkin and Yevgeny Monakhov designed sets that  reinforced a choreography that Mr. Ratmanksy updated with catchy, witty, sometimes iconoclastic movements. The passages captured the spirit of Prokofiev’s asymmetrical, often dissonant, modernist score. Called the “hope” of ballet, the dancer-turned-choreographer transported the fairy tale from the dreamy realm of misty castles in faraway places and times into the here and now. New Yorkers felt right at home.But the ballet and sets were not delivered straight up into the present as though by a time machine: time here is nuanced and complex. In an interview at the New York Public Library in October, Mr. Ratmansky, now artist in residence at the American Ballet Theater, recalled his days as a dancer, when he exercised each morning at the barre in routines with a long history: “This is a codified system that emerged for the last three centuries, originating during Louis XIV. You sense the bodies, the coordination of all the generations before you. There are these harmonical rules that you want to follow.”For all the contemporary urban imagery, including slinky, sometimes vampy costumes cast in a fruit bowl of colors by Elena Markovskaya, Mr. Ratmansky frequently brought the ballet back to its classical roots, as in the pas de deux in the ball scene. Given the choreographers deep respect for the history of ballet, the set designers evoked the interior of the palace in a huge backdrop with a perspectival line drawing straight out of the Enlightenment, when architects embodied universal mathematical principles in measured, classically ordered buildings. The set amplified the deep traditions of classical dance. As Jennifer Homans observed in her book on the history of ballet, “Apollo’s Angels,” the discipline demanded “a linear and geometrical organization of the body.”With sets whose references spanned centuries, the scenery seemed to visualize Mr. Ratmansky’s balletic intentions, updating the ballet while making an explicit  nod to its classical fundamentals.“Cinderella” will be performed Tuesday evening at the Brooklyn Academy of Music; bam.org.