The springtime Broadway production of the new play “The Heart of Robin Hood” has been postponed, its producers announced on Tuesday. The decision appears to have come down to ticket sales: The show, an athletic, spectacle-driven reimagining of the Robin Hood story, is selling well for its current Toronto production, but two New York group sales agents said that seats for the Broadway run haven’t been snatched up in droves. The two sales agents spoke on condition of anonymity to describe confidential sales information.The show’s producer, David Mirvish, said in a statement on Tuesday that the Toronto run will be extended four weeks, through March 29. The Broadway performances had been scheduled to begin on March 11.“In light of the great reception we are getting from audiences and the media in Toronto, we have decided not to rush in to New York this season,” Mr. Mirvish said. The statement did not provide details about when “The Heart of Robin Hood” would arrive on Broadway.Starring Tony Award winner Gabriel Ebert (“Matilda the Musical) and Tony nominee Euan Morton (“Taboo”), the play opened in Toronto last week to several positive reviews – and at least one that questioned the show’s appeal. “Not quite a musical, not quite a spectacle, not quite a spoof – it will certainly be interesting to see if this light-hearted lark finds a large enough cohort to thrive on Broadway,” the critic for the mass-circulation Toronto Globe and Mail wrote. The play was written by David Farr and features original music by the Connecticut-based band Parsonsfield.The Broadway run was to have been limited to five months at the Marquis Theater, a fairly standard length of time for a non-musical play on Broadway. But Mr. Mirvish, in his statement, put a spin on the postponement by saying that “The Heart of Robin Hood” would “be better served by a venue where we had the potential to play longer than our limited run.”Mr. Mirvish was working on the Broadway production with a longtime ally in New York, Barry Weissler, a veteran, Tony-winning theater producer. Mr. Weissler was traveling on Tuesday and not immediately available for comment.