AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck4:30 P.M. (Starz Cinema) LAUREL CANYON (2003) Jane (Frances McDormand, above), an aging, hard-partying Los Angeles record producer, opens her California dwelling to her snobbish son (Christian Bale) and his fiancée (Kate Beckinsale), both Harvard Medical School graduates. Alessandro Nivola plays the lead singer of the rock band whose album is being overseen by Jane, who has a history of sleeping with the musicians she produces. This situation is no exception, and soon the entire family is led into temptation. “Having set up its domestic conflicts, the movie doesn’t know exactly where to go or how far, but when the inevitable emotional explosions erupt, the mutual recriminations carry a sharp sting,” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times about this film, written and directed by Lisa Cholodenko, who said she was partly inspired by Joni Mitchell’s album “Ladies of the Canyon.”8 P.M. (Fox) MASTERCHEF JUNIOR After a mystery-box challenge intended to give them a shock, the 12 remaining child cooks must prepare restaurant-quality dishes using ingredients that get better with age before confronting what is being billed as the most dangerous protein in the show’s history.8 P.M. (NBC) PARKS AND RECREATION Leslie (Amy Poehler) and her team try to make their case that the Newport land should be turned into a national park, leading Ron (Nick Offerman) and his supporters to bring a celebrity onboard.8 P.M. (TMC) STAR OF THE MONTH: ROBERT REDFORD Mr. Redford plays an admirer of complicated women in “Out of Africa” (1985), starring Meryl Streep as the Danish writer Karen Blixen, whose pen name became Isak Dinesen, and Mr. Redford as Denys Finch Hatton, the love of her life; “The Way We Were” (1973), at 11, with Barbra Streisand as a fiery liberal fighting for the survival of her marriage to a preppy writer (Mr. Redford) in the McCarthy era; and “The Great Gatsby” (1974), at 1:15 a.m., with Mr. Redford as the 1920s tycoon Jay Gatsby, mixed up in the tangled life of his former love, Daisy Buchanan (Mia Farrow).9 P.M. (ABC, Al Jazeera America, Bloomberg, CBS, Centric, CNN, C-Span, C-Span2, Fox, Fox Business, Fox News, MSNBC, NBC, 13, 49) STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS President Obama is expected to call on Congress to raise taxes and fees on the wealthiest citizens and largest financial firms to help cover cuts for the middle class. His agenda may also touch on paid leave for employees of federal agencies after the birth or adoption of a child and on legislation to bolster cybersecurity across the United States government and private industry. Senator Joni Ernst of Iowa is to give the Republican response.9 P.M. (Teen Nick) OPEN HEART After being arrested, Dylan Blake (Karis Cameron), a rebellious 16-year-old, is ordered to do community service at Open Heart Memorial Hospital, where her grandparents are board members, her mother and sister are doctors — and her father went missing. Most people think it’s simply a case of abandonment in this new mystery series. But Dylan senses foul play. Cristine Prosperi and Justin Kelly star as her partners in crime solving.10 P.M. (Esquire) THE SHORT GAME Eight of the nation’s best 7- and 8-year-old golfers try to overcome the competition — and pressure from their parents — as they swing their way into the U.S. Kids Golf World Championship in this new series. Season 2 of “Friday Night Tykes,” set among the teams of the Texas Youth Football Association, leads in at 9. What’s Streaming NowALMOST FAMOUS (2000) The director Cameron Crowe looks back on his career as a teenage music journalist in this coming-of-age story about his fictionalized alter ego, William Miller (Patrick Fugit), a 15-year-old from San Diego who makes a fairy tale ascent from nerdy schoolboy to Rolling Stone reporter. Frances McDormand plays William’s protective mother, a college professor; Zooey Deschanel, his rebellious older sister; Philip Seymour Hoffman, the critic Lester Bangs; Billy Crudup, Russell Hammond, the lead guitarist of the band Stillwater, to whom William is especially drawn; and Kate Hudson (above), Penny Lane, the ringleader of a troupe of groupies who call themselves the Band-Aids. “We don’t have intercourse,” she says. “We inspire the music.” Mr. Crowe “may be the least cynical director working in Hollywood today,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “Of course, rock ’n’ roll is not always about being nice.” (netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement