By BEN RATLIFFOCT. 9, 2015
Kurt Vile and Adam Granduciel came from the same circle of musicians in Philadelphia in the mid-aughts. They’ve played in each other’s groups; they’ve rubbed off on each other aesthetically.What each is up to now — Mr. Vile with his deceivingly knockabout band the Violators, and Mr. Granduciel as the auteur of grand panoramic moods in the War on Drugs — isn’t the step after roots-rock. (That was Wilco.) It might be the step after that: still full of strumminess, backbeats and mumbles, still classicist in its debt to American FM rock radio between 1970 and 1985, but a little more abstracted and indirect and blurry, less invested in the clarity of beginnings and ends.Both bands were in town this week (and continue touring through the month), and here there could be a dry story about comparative numbers. Two sold-out nights at Webster Hall, which Mr. Vile achieved on Tuesday and Wednesday, equals about half of a full house at Radio City Music Hall, which the War on Drugs did achieve on Thursday. The War on Drugs’ most recent album, “Lost in the Dream,” released last year by Secretly Canadian, climbed 14 spots higher on the Billboard charts (as of now) than Mr. Vile’s current album, “B’lieve I’m Goin Down …,” which Matador released two weeks ago.Really, though: Mr. Vile’s music makes sense in a club — it’s got custom-frayed edges — whereas the sound of the War on Drugs has grown silky and intricately arranged, fit for Radio City. There are other considerations, including the fact that “Lost in the Dream” has been out there for a year and a half, and came with an engaging story — told in deep and gnarly detail by various online music publications — of Mr. Granduciel experiencing panic attacks and paranoia as he made his masterpiece. But the bands seem to occupy a similar space in American indie-rock culture. Generally speaking, it’s all relative.Perhaps that’s the larger point and the problem. These bands have clear differences, but they share an affect. One song is often like another, and also like the songs of their consensual heroes: Tom Petty, Fleetwood Mac, Neil Young, Bob Dylan. Their music suggests an indistinction of time, style, identity, even corporeality. The narrator of “Pretty Pimpin,” which Mr. Vile played early in Wednesday night’s set, can’t tell who he’s seeing in the mirror, or what day it is. “Then I proceeded to brush some stranger’s teeth,” he sang. “But they were my teeth, and I was weightless.”AdvertisementEach concert had plenty of surface detail: digital guitar pedals produced sounds that were watery, overdriven or strobing. (Mr. Granduciel wrote and recorded most of “Lost in the Dream” on his own, but his six-piece touring band includes multiple keyboards as well as baritone saxophone and valve trombone, played by the valued sideman Jon Natchez.)AdvertisementBut surfaces are extremes, end places. Mr. Vile and Mr. Granduciel’s real passion is for middles, between states. Both seem potentially spacey and rambling in person, yet musically they’re in tight control: They are staying put. Neither band’s work sounds like a terminus for indie-rock. Both sound like long layovers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.No matter where you might be in the procession of the waveform across the screen, or in the time elapsed on your iPhone or CD player, or in the pacing of their shows, you’re always in the middle. The drums start a new rhythm and remain lashed to it. (A favorite for the War on Drugs, as heard on Thursday in “Red Eyes” and “Baby Missiles,” is the swift, square beat you will remember from Don Henley’s “The Boys of Summer”; Mr. Vile likes his backbeats to breathe a little more.) Strummed or fingerpicked, the songs settle on cycles of a small number of chords: standard vocabulary, not many surprises, not much harmonic motion.The singers use the talky middle of their range, delivering bunched-up phrasing at slanted angles in generalized American drawls. Mr. Granduciel does this more carefully and radically, suggesting Bob Dylan in the 1980s. Why not Bob Dylan in the ’60s? Because that’s been done. Also because ’80s Dylan — like ’80s Henley — is another middle state.The songs linger and repeat, lightly messing with your expectations. In works like Mr. Vile’s “Wheelhouse,” there are atmospheric washes behind the two-chord repetition and the rambling lyrics, but you barely register them. This isn’t minimalism, where passing details matter a lot, and the drive and duration become bigger than themselves, indicative of a larger idea. There’s something more indeterminate going on here. It’s curious. It’s enervating, too.A Critic’s Notebook article on Saturday about performances by bands led by Kurt Vile and Adam Granduciel, using information from a publicist, referred incorrectly to Mr. Vile’s shows at Webster Hall. Both were sold out; they were not “nearly” two sellouts.A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Bands Standing Their Middle Ground.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.