AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RatliffKim Fowley, the Los Angeles rock ’n’ roll record producer, songwriter, publisher, promoter, singer, and Svengali — most famously for the Runaways, the mid-’70s girl group — died on Thursday at his home in Hollywood. He was 75.The cause was bladder cancer, his wife, Kara Wright Fowley, said.Mr. Fowley did not look down on traditions or trendlets, making hundreds of quick, cheap records in doo-wop, surf, psychedelia, country, glam, punk, metal and New Orleans hip-hop. He was outrageous and distinctive: 6-foot-5, narrow-hipped, square-jawed with a dead-eyed stare, perverse and well-spoken, often in makeup or face-paint. In later years, he walked with a cane because of vertigo. He prided himself on having worked with his heroes, including Gene Vincent, John Lennon and the disc jockey Alan Freed, for whom he served in the late 1950s as an assistant and promotion man. But he remains more famous as a kind of connoisseur, muse and talent scout of disposable art, a rogue conscience at the ground level of West Coast pop culture.“He was the iron man of music, indefatigable,” said the writer and pop historian Harvey Kubernik.His chart successes as producer or songwriter, either in the United States or in Britain, included, in the early ’60s, “Alley Oop” by the Hollywood Argyles, “Popsicles and Icicles” by the Murmaids and “Nut Rocker” by B. Bumble and the Stingers; and in 1976, the hard-rock teensploitation anthem “Cherry Bomb,” by the Runaways. The story of that group’s genesis, and Mr. Fowley’s role as instigator and sometimes tormentor of the band, which included Joan Jett, Lita Ford and Cherie Currie, is told in “The Runaways,” the 2010 movie adapted from the memoir by Ms. Currie, the band’s lead singer, with Michael Shannon playing Mr. Fowley and Kristen Stewart as Joan Jett.After a long estrangement, Mr. Fowley and Ms. Currie became friends again in 2008.“Thank you for starting my career when I was just a child,” Ms. Currie wrote in tribute last week on her Facebook page. “You are a genius ... you are loved.” Kim Vincent Fowley was born on July 21, 1939, in Los Angeles, the son of two B-movie actors: Shelby Payne, who played a cigarette girl in “The Big Sleep,” and Douglas Fowley, best known for his role in “Singin’ in the Rain” as the irascible film director Roscoe Dexter. In “Lord of Garbage,” (2012) the first part of a three-volume memoir dictated over the phone during his illness, he described a sickly and lonely childhood, contracting polio twice and growing up in foster care.After high school he spent a year on and off in the National Guard and the Air Force, and by the late 1950s had gravitated toward the music industry, as a reporter for Dig magazine and a factotum at a record label run by American International Pictures, the low-budget-film studio. He was also briefly an employee of Motown’s West Coast office.“By ’59,” he wrote, “I wasn’t an actor like my parents, but I became an actor in life. I used theatrical illusion to reinvent myself for whoever I was trying to get something from, whether it be an audience, a band or a song.”As a consequence or symptom of his work habits, he did not form many emotional attachments. “In terms of having any relationship with a human: none,” he wrote in his memoir.“There’s no wiring here that supports intimacy or trust,” he added. But during his final stretch he fell in love with Kara Wright, a catalog-development manager at Peermusic, Mr. Fowley’s publisher. They married in October. Mr. Fowley got himself to the right places early. He produced Paul Revere and the Raiders’s third single (“Like, Long Hair”), toured Britain in 1964 as publicist for the American singer P. J. Proby; he was in the studio with the Mothers of Invention for their first album, “Freak Out!”; he helped stage the love-ins in Los Angeles parks in the summer of 1967. (Mr. Fowley said he didn’t take drugs himself, but he made a serio-comic record in 1965 called “The Trip,” prefiguring the Doors by rapping over a two-chord instrumental about LSD visions: “A world of frogs! And green fountains! And flyin’ dogs!”) He played a role, as producer or promoter, in the mid-’70s glam-rock scene at Rodney Bingenheimer’s English Disco, in the first stirrings of Los Angeles punk around the Germs at the Whiskey a Go Go nightclub, and among the bands in the mid-’80s Sunset Strip metal clubs.He had songwriting credits on albums by the Byrds, Kiss, Warren Zevon, Alice Cooper, Helen Reddy and — much more recently — Ariel Pink, on the 2014 record “Pom Pom.” Also in his final years, he finished his autobiography (two more volumes, “The Trip” and “Planet Pain,” are forthcoming from Kicks Books); recorded radio shows for Sirius XM; and appeared briefly in Beyoncé’s video for “Haunted,” in a wheelchair, with a pinstripe suit and painted face.“I’m an enabler, a mentor, a catalyst,” Mr. Fowley said in an interview with Uncut magazine. “I’m so empty that I don’t have distractions. If somebody has substance or has developed something, I have the time for them.”Advertisement