AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Mike Hale“Justified” returns to FX on Tuesday night for a final season in the hamlets and hollers of southeastern Kentucky. It’s a show about guns, for one thing, and it’s a safe bet that the 13 episodes will build toward several O.K. Corral-style shootouts, and that these will be tense, compact and well choreographed. But it’s also a show about families, how they can be broken up or bound together by hard times and hard places, and how people try to build new ones from the materials at hand — wary lovers, weary colleagues, deceitful friends, honorable enemies. The writers’ main job in Season 6 will be to provide a final reckoning for the show’s hill-country Cain and Abel, the deputy United States marshal Raylan Givens and the rapacious local crime boss Boyd Crowder. Will one slay the other? A particularly nice thing about “Justified” is that you could see it going either way.That makes the show sound heavier than it is. Originally derived from the crime fiction of Elmore Leonard, and with Mr. Leonard credited as an executive producer until his death in 2013, “Justified” has always been known for the wry humor it brings to its Southern Gothic stories and settings. The humor, snappy pace and droll dialogue, and a wide gallery of comic knaves and miscreants have always provided pleasure, even when the show lays on the Appalachian atmosphere a little too thickly. Less brutal and over the top than “Banshee,” another rural thriller, and less formulaic and laconic than “Longmire,” another gun-happy neo-western, “Justified” has been true to its Elmore Leonard roots — the mysteries and vendettas in each season are complicated and circular, involving multiple clans and criminal syndicates, and they’re really just a framing device for a comedy of morals and manners in a mostly unmannered milieu.At the center of it are Raylan (Timothy Olyphant) and Boyd (Walton Goggins), the former coal-miner buddies and local (anti) heroes who — with their snake-hipped, runway-model slouches, their artisanally messy hair and their highly tailored wardrobes — are the unlikeliest pair of beatnik fashion plates ever to wrestle for the soul of a poor, crime-ridden county.Mr. Goggins has the secondary role, but he’s the show’s live wire, giving Boyd the singular intensity — guarded and wide-eyed at the same time — that he brought to the dirty cop Shane Vendrell in “The Shield.” It’s no small task making Boyd credible — he’s a fantasy figure, a cracker savant and magic hillbilly who quotes Jefferson and Keynes — but Mr. Goggins continually manages to put across his mock-poetic, Dixie-Elizabethan dialogue: “While I will not deny my culpability in his end, the tempter bears as much guilt as the tempted.” (The show occasionally acknowledges its own joke. In Season 4, a Northern gangster weary of listening to Boyd’s circumlocutions snapped, “I’m gonna need Google Translate on my phone if I’m going to keep talking to you.”)Mr. Olyphant is the star, and at first he seemed small and a little uninspiring as Raylan, the shoot-first, anti-authoritarian sex symbol descended from both Gary Cooper and James Dean. But what makes him right for the part is his ability to combine the gun-toting swagger with a sharp, quiet, sad-eyed humor. Much of the fun of the show through the seasons has been in the office humor among Raylan and his surrogate family at the Marshals Service — his fatherly boss, Art (the wonderful Nick Searcy), and the by-the-book agents Tim (Jacob Pitts) and Rachel (Erica Tazel). Season 6 begins (spoilers ahead if you haven’t seen Season 5) with Art recuperating after being shot, Rachel running the Lexington office and Raylan pursuing his best opportunity yet to bring down Boyd — using Ava (Joelle Carter), Raylan’s former girlfriend and Boyd’s current fiancée, as a confidential informant. The air is ominous, even funereal: “The end is coming,” Boyd says, referring to his dreams of establishing a Harlan County criminal operation free of outside control but also, of course, to the looming confrontation with Raylan. Art puts it more directly, telling Raylan that as he sees it, one or the other is going to have to die.It’s a dilemma. Raylan is the champion, the defender of law and order, and the wisecracking, disarming good guy, but Boyd is the more compelling character, the one who stayed and tried to build something — in some ways, he’s the show’s real hero. You suspect that the producers will find another way out. It’s notable that through five seasons, “Justified” has killed off several casts’ worth of colorful, endearing supporting players but has kept its core intact, not disposing of any central characters to jolt the ratings or provide a cliffhanger. Here’s hoping its aim stays true to the end.Advertisement