AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy David AllenLOS ANGELES — Henryk Gorecki’s Fourth Symphony has given me a bad rash of modernist guilt. It’s simple, often brutally tedious. Its ending is trite. But in Saturday’s immaculate, hefty, energetic Los Angeles Philharmonic performance conducted by Andrey Boreyko at Walt Disney Hall here, I really quite liked it. Gorecki, who died in 2010 at 76, is best known for his luminous Third Symphony, the “Symphony of Sorrowful Songs.” With its disastrous premiere in France in 1977, the work, and its distinctive Polish melancholy and cathartic harmonic accessibility, remained fairly obscure until the advent of British commercial classical radio. In 1992, a recording by the conductor David Zinman, the soprano Dawn Upshaw and the London Sinfonietta went the analogue equivalent of viral. According to Nonesuch Records, which released the recording, the work has sold over one million copies.The Fourth is very different, and less easily belittled as populist. The piece was completed from the short score by Gorecki’s son, Mikolaj, and first performed by the London Philharmonic Orchestra last April. I heard the American premiere run’s second performance.Perhaps it’s too easy to hear the work as a summation of Gorecki’s style. The Varèse-like modernism of the First Symphony (1959) remains forgotten, but Gorecki seems to unite savage violence and radiant lyricism through techniques and memories familiar from earlier work, from the gigantic gnarls of the Second Symphony (1972) to the directness of the Harpsichord Concerto (1980) and his three string quartets.Gorecki’s central idea is a notation of the name of the Polish composer and exile Alexandre Tansman, particularly the A’s and E’s — hence Gorecki’s subtitle, “Tansman Episodes.” In a dramatic start, the orchestra thwacks out a theme of five chords of thirds, curtailing them each time with the thump of three bass drums. Into that roaring, fortississimo A minor, Gorecki eventually smashes a dissonance on organ and piano. It’s previewed in the theme’s fourth block, but with a menacing registration on this hall’s organ — christened Hurricane Mama by the composer Terry Riley — it felt startlingly unexpected.For the first movement, that crash is basically it. Parts of the theme are torn off. There are a few pauses. For a brief moment, everyone detonates the collision into a unison A minor. But sets of bars are otherwise just repeated ad infinitum (or ad nauseam). The second movement is gentler, a baleful pair of clarinets invoking a chorale, tuned percussion slowly perfuming a ritual, the strings moving in four parts. A scherzo of sorts is crunchier, folky brass lumbering mechanically in a restless frenzy. And there’s a long, triolike section in which a solo piano is slowly, impassionedly joined by a cello, a violin and a piccolo.A disfigured dance erupts from the scherzo, oompah brass propelling this last movement along as the strings slip around chromatically. Tansman’s theme returns on the piano, tormented, and the horror-show chords hammer away again. Only in the final seconds is Gorecki’s conceit revealed. After a long roll on those three bass drums, a stab of A major, deafeningly loud, resolves all the symphony’s tension. And then it’s gone.Perhaps, given Gorecki’s piety, it’s all a metaphor for life, death and redemption, or a jocular surprise, like the mess that ends Ives’s Second. But Gorecki’s Third ends with the incandescent glow of A major chords. In all that A minor snarling, was Gorecki wrestling with the Third’s legacy, and his ambivalence about the prominence it brought?Tansman was also featured on Mr. Boreyko’s program, with his “Stèle in Memoriam Igor Stravinsky” (1973), a dusky, clangorous work that evokes Stravinsky but isn’t beholden to him. Between the two came Sibelius’s Violin Concerto, Nikolaj Znaider’s impassioned, aristocratic mastery burning like a blue inferno, an ice field set alight.Advertisement