By JON PARELESOCT. 9, 2015
“I’m obsessed with performing,” Ricky Martin told the crowd, more than once, at Madison Square Garden on Thursday night. His first Garden show in eight years was also a stop on the “One World” international tour that Mr. Martin has been on since last fall, punctuated by the February release of his 10th studio album, “A Quién Quiera Escuchar” (“For Those Who Want to Listen”).Mr. Martin got his start as a member of the Puerto Rican boy band Menudo and, at 43, is still an exultantly boyish trouper — a song-and-dance man who keeps his music up-to-date for Latin pop radio, and who smiles his way through electronic beats, hard rock, lovelorn ballads and carnival-ready Caribbean rhythms. He’s the kind of performer who can make a fully choreographed workout look like nonstop fun. “Tonight is about love,” he declared early on, then added unity, equality, freedom and “being yourself” to the list.In 2010 Mr. Martin told interviewers that he is a “fortunate homosexual man.” Onstage, he was welcomed as an all-around sex symbol. He drew loud female shrieks as he shimmied through “Shake Your Bon-Bon.” He sang his English-language hits about irresistible femmes fatales: “Livin’ La Vida Loca,” which had him perched on the hood of a Mustang surrounded by dancers doing 1960s moves, and “She Bangs,” roughed up with rock guitar. Mr. Martin continued to celebrate seize-the-moment lust in recent songs like the disco-revival “Mr. Put It Down” and “Adrenalina,” a single from the concert’s opening act, the reggaetón rapper and singer Wisin, that features Mr. Martin’s vocals. When Mr. Martin got to a string of ballads about heartache, high voices loudly sang along with his torchy baritone.Mr. Martin, like many of his listeners, took being bilingual for granted throughout the concert, often singing in Spanish but speaking to the audience in English. One of his 2015 Latin-radio hits, “Adiós,” was trilingual, with some lyrics in French.His music thrives when it, too, mixes cultures with skillful ease. The final stretch of the concert was an accelerating string of pan-American dance tunes, new and old, among them the cumbia-reggaetón-salsa hybrid of the 2015 “La Mordidita” (“The Nibble”) and the samba-meets-merengue beat of the 1998 “Por Arriba, Por Abajo” (“Upward, Downward”). Mr. Martin announced, to waves of screams, “This is the moment where you have to allow yourself to be free,” and stoked a full-arena dance competition to shout “I don’t care” and wave arms upward and downward.Then he came back for an encore with even more dancing: “Pégate,” strongly rooted in Afro-Caribbean traditions, and “Copa de Vida”/”Cup of Life,” a soccer anthem aimed worldwide — a measure of Mr. Martin’s unifying ambitions. “It doesn’t matter if you have rhythm or not,” he urged. “Just do it!”A version of this review appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Shaking Cultures and Hips      .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.