By ZACHARY WOOLFEJAN. 19, 2015
I wonder if an orchestra had ever played works by Fanny and Felix Mendelssohn on the same program before Ivan Fischer and his Budapest Festival Orchestra did so on Sunday afternoon at Avery Fisher Hall.Felix, of course, is a staple of the concert repertory, particularly in the form of his Violin Concerto, played on Sunday with Isabelle Faust as the soloist. If classical music lovers know his sister Fanny it is largely as Felix’s lifelong amanuensis. When she died, in 1847, he despaired, and suffered a fatal series of strokes months later.But she was an exceptional pianist, conductor and composer in her own right, producing particularly strong art songs and works for solo piano. That’s another reason — other than sexism, that is — for the Mendelssohns not to be featured together orchestrally: She simply didn’t write much for orchestra.Mr. Fischer got around this problem by conducting sensitive arrangements (by the composer Sandor Balogh) of three of her songs. Fragrant and melodically rich, they were good matches for this orchestra, which is particularly gifted at conveying atmosphere, as in the nocturnal glow of “Die Mainacht” and the rippling delicacy of “Gondellied.” Her voice fresh and, occasionally, somehow endearingly unsteady, the young soprano Anna Lucia Richter was a responsive soloist.AdvertisementThe orchestra was well suited to both the passionate and gentle moods of Felix Mendelssohn’s evergreen Violin Concerto, though Ms. Faust’s silky modesty often felt excessively reticent. She toned down not just the explosively intense passages, which seemed like a good way of curbing the self-indulgence into which this work can fall, but also the sweetness of the Andante, which passed unobtrusively.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brahms’s Symphony No. 3, a descendant of the early-Romantic Mendelssohns, followed the intermission. As David Allen noted recently in The New York Times, there have been two main strands in Brahms conducting: one restrained and straightforward, the other interventionist in design and flexible in tempo.Mr. Fischer is of this second school, and here he displayed a malleable pulse, amply yet sensibly using driven accelerandos and aching rubatos. With its bristling violins set against mellow winds and brasses, this orchestra sounds wonderful in Brahms, showing off sleek ferocity in the outer movements and an exquisite bloom to its sound in the Andante.AdvertisementThe concert ended with a charming encore: “Morgengruss,” one of Fanny Mendelssohn’s six “Gartenlieder” (“Garden Songs”) for a cappella choir, sung by the members of the orchestra as they gathered around Mr. Fischer’s podium.The Budapest Festival Orchestra plays Brahms’s Symphony No. 1 and other works on Wednesday at Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center; lcgreatperformers.org, 212-721-6500.A version of this review appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Showcasing a Brother, and Giving a Sister Her Due.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.