It is short, just 56 pages long, and much of it consists of complicated mathematical musings written out in longhand. But it has never been seen before in public, and it provides an exciting insight into how Alan Turing, its author, formulated his theories about mathematical notation and computer science, according to Bonhams auction house. The manuscript, written in a simple notebook bought at a stationery store,  dates from World War II. This was at a crucial point in Turing’s career, when he and other code breakers were consumed with cracking Germany’s notorious Enigma code in Bletchley Park, England. In it Turing, considered a forefather of computer science, wrestles with questions about mathematical notation and phraseology, analyzing and referring to the work of mathematicians and thinkers including Giuseppe Peano, René Descartes and Louis François Antoine Arbogast.  The work is to be auctioned off in New York by Bonhams on April 13. “Its mathematical content gives an extraordinary insight into the working mind of one of the greatest luminaries of the 20th century,” Cassandra Hatton, a senior specialist in fine books and manuscripts at Bonhams, said in a news release. The document languished in obscurity for years, and has a peculiar history. After Turing’s death in 1954 – he is said to have killed himself as a consequence of the hormone treatment he was forced to take as an alternative to prison after being convicted of homosexuality, then a crime – he left his literary estate to a close friend, the mathematician Robin Gandy. Gandy gave the papers to King’s College, Cambridge, in 1977. But he held back the notebook, because of what else it contained: a private journal in which he recorded his dreams and discussed intimately personal matters, including his own homosexuality. “It seems a suitable disguise to write in between these thoughts of Alan’s on notation, but possibly a little sinister;  a dead father figure, some of whose thoughts I most completely inherited,” Gandy wrote at the beginning of the journal. According to material supplied by Bonhams, the notebook was not seen by anyone – except a Jungian analyst who had treated both Gandy and Turing, instructing them both to keep dream diaries – until Gandy’s death, in 1995. It then passed into the hands of one of Gandy’s executors and was acquired by the current, anonymous owner.
The timing of the auction is possibly meant to capitalize on the  release of the film “The Imitation Game,” starring Benedict Cumberbatch, about Turing’s career as a Bletchley code breaker. In its news release, the auction house quoted the Turing scholar Andrew Hodges as saying: “Alan Turing was parsimonious with his words and everything from his pen has special value. This notebook shines extra light on how, even when he was enmeshed in great world events, he remained committed to free-thinking work in pure mathematics.” 