New plays by Caryl Churchill and Wallace Shawn, a new musical, “wonder.land,” by the Blur frontman Damon Albarn and the playwright Moira Buffini, and an updated version of the 15th-century English drama “Everyman,” starring Chiwetel Ejiofor, are among the highlights of next season’s programming at London’s National Theater.The new season was announced on Wednesday by the theater’s artistic director designate, Rufus Norris, and its executive director designate Tessa Ross. They will succeed the current artistic director Nicholas Hytner and executive director Nick Starr on April 1.“The work we make over the coming years will strive to be as open, as diverse, as collaborative and as national as possible,” Mr. Norris and Ms. Ross said in a statement.Mr. Norris has been an associate director at the National since 2011. He will direct “Everyman,” an adaptation by the poet Carol Ann Duffy,which opens on April 22, as well as “wonder.land,” a contemporary take on Lewis Carroll’s “Alice in Wonderland” that will have its premiere at the Manchester International Festival on July 2, before coming to the National in November.“Wonder.land,” which has a 12-year-old girl in the central role, will mark the second collaboration between Mr. Albarn and Mr. Norris, after the 2011 “Dr. Dee,” also created for the Manchester festival.The collaboration with that festival signals a new focus on relationships with regional partners. These include the Bristol Old Vic, which will bring its staging of “Jane Eyre,” directed by Sally Cookson, to the National in January 2016. The Royal Exchange Theater of Manchester will bring “Husbands and Sons,” an adaptation by Ben Power of three D.H. Lawrence short stories, directed by Marianne Elliott and featuring Anne-Marie Duff.In addition to Ms. Churchill’s new play, “Here We Go,” which will open in December, her 1976 “Light Shining in Buckinghamshire” will be revived, as will pieces by Stephen Adly Guirgis, Timberlake Wertenbaker and August Wilson.Other new plays include Mr. Shawn’s “Evening at the Talk House,” Patrick Marber’s “The Red Lion,” Alice Birch’s “We Want You to Watch,” and Duncan MacMillan’s “People, Places and Things.”A version of this article appears in print on 01/22/2015, on page C4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: National Theater Announces Fall Season.