By KATHRYN SHATTUCKJAN. 21, 2015
12:30 P.M. (Sundance) (500) DAYS OF SUMMER (2009) Tom Hansen (Joseph Gordon-Levitt) is an “unapologetic believer in true love, soul mates and other touchstones of greeting card mythology (and romantic comedy ideology),” A. O. Scott wrote in his review of this film in The New York Times. Summer Finn (Zooey Deschanel), Mr. Scott said, is “skeptical of such notions and refuses to promise commitment or even consistency, but she does seem to want more and more of Tom’s company, and this leads him to believe that her carefully maintained barriers to intimacy are beginning to fall.” That pretty much sums up this Marc Webb movie.1:25 P.M. (FX Movie Channel) JOHN AND MARY (1969) Dustin Hoffman and Mia Farrow portray New Yorkers who meet in a singles bar, grow infatuated while debating the finer points of Jean-Luc Godard, and spend the night together. Then they wonder if perhaps they’d like to get to know each other, starting with their names. Olympia Dukakis plays John’s mother; Tyne Daly is Mary’s roommate. This Peter Yates drama, set to a score by Quincy Jones, “seems quite right on its outside,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times. “It was shot in Manhattan (at Friday’s, on Riverside Drive, in Murray Hill) and it is paced by the latest cinematic clichés — sudden cuts to flashbacks and fantasies, usually designed as comic punctuation marks to present pretensions. If you look at it closely, however, you see the structure of an old Fred MacMurray-Claudette Colbert comedy, run backward.”9 P.M. (NBC) LAW & ORDER: SPECIAL VICITIMS UNIT After a fight breaks out at the wedding of his estranged father (Armand Assante) and younger bride (Katty Velasquez), Detective Amaro (Danny Pino) must choose between his badge and his honor as he becomes a witness in a case that threatens to tear apart his family by revealing long-held secrets.9 P.M. (Cooking) EXTRA VIRGIN The actress Debi Mazar and her musician husband, Gabriele Corcos, are asked to cook at the James Beard House in Manhattan.Advertisement9 P.M. (Fox) EMPIRE The Lyons visit Philadelphia and get a glimpse of how life might have been if Lucious (Terrence Howard) hadn’t achieved success. Meanwhile, he promotes the relationship between Hakeem (Bryshere Gray) and the hip-hop star Tiana (Serayah McNeill). But then another woman comes along. Naomi Campbell guest stars.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (13, 49) SUNKEN SHIP RESCUE “Nova” follows more than 500 divers and engineers as they try to secure, raise and salvage the Costa Concordia — a ship the length of three football fields and weighing 45,000 tons — which ran aground and capsized off the coast of Italy in January 2012, killing 32 people.Advertisement10 P.M. (Bravo) BEST NEW RESTAURANT The chef and restaurateur Tom Colicchio; Maggie Nemser, the chief executive and editor in chief of BlackboardEats.com; and Jeffrey Zurofsky, a founder and partner of Wichcraft, visit 16 restaurants in New York, Los Angeles, Miami and Austin, Tex., chosen by editors of Bon Appétit magazine as well as Mr. Colicchio and Gordon Ramsay — among the show’s executive producers. They evaluate each establishment on food, décor, hospitality and concept through pressure tests and hidden-camera challenges. The winner of each episode moves to the semifinals and opens a pop-up location. The finale will pit the remaining two competitors against each other during a dinner service at Mr. Colicchio’s Riverpark restaurant in New York, with the winner receiving the title, an editorial feature in Bon Appétit, a spot at the Vegas Uncork’d food festival and $100,000.10 P.M. (Discovery Life) THE MISTRESS Sarah J. Symonds, the author of “Having an Affair? A Handbook for the ‘Other Woman,’ ” and a former mistress, helps women escape extramarital liaisons.What’s Streaming NowHIGH MAINTENANCE The married team of Katja Blichfeld and Ben Sinclair are behind this web series, which follows a marijuana bike delivery man as he serves a cross section of Brooklyn and Manhattan. Three new episodes — this time to buy — are streaming now; three more will be added on Feb. 5. Season 1 can be viewed free. (vimeo.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page C8 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.