PUCCINI: ‘Turandot’
 Joan Sutherland, soprano; Luciano Pavarotti, tenor; Montserrat Caballé, soprano; Zubin Mehta, conductor; London Philharmonic Orchestra
(Decca 478 7815; two CDs)
Full disclosure: I am no audiophile. I’m still catching up with Blu-ray as a video technology. But now Decca has issued some classic opera recordings from its catalog remastered from the original tapes in what is called Blu-ray Pure Audio. I’m loath to apply the word “pure” to anything. Still, listening to this reissue of the landmark 1972 recording of Puccini’s “Turandot,” with the dynamic Zubin Mehta conducting the London Philharmonic Orchestra and a dream cast headed by Joan Sutherland and Luciano Pavarotti, I have to say the sound quality is clean, vivid and strikingly detailed. Ms. Sutherland, the reigning bel canto soprano of her day, was tempted into the studio to sing Turandot, a vocally weighty role she never performed in a house. Her voice is gleaming and penetrating, and Mr. Mehta draws surprising intensity from an artist who could be stolid. Mr. Pavarotti is in his prime as Calaf. With the sumptuous Montserrat Caballé as Liù, Nicolai Ghiaurov as Timur and, of all people, Peter Pears as the old emperor, this is quite the cast. (Anthony Tommasini)Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.MUSIC BY TORU TAKEMITSU, CLAUDE DEBUSSY AND SOFIA GUBAIDULINA
 Tre Voci (Kim Kashkashian, violist; Marina Piccinini, flutist; Sivan Magen, harpist)
(ECM)
 Debussy’s polyglot Sonata for Flute, Viola and Harp is the seed that inspired this stellar collaboration of three musicians at the top of their game: the Grammy Award-winning violist Kim Kashkashian, the flutist Marina Piccinini and the harpist Sivan Magen. Their recording of Debussy’s dazzling, inventive sonata is full of sonic pleasures, as are the two new pieces, the pensive, poetic “And Then I Knew ’Twas Wind” by Toru Takemitsu and Sofia Gubaidulina’s Eastern reverie “Garten von Freuden und Traurigkeiten.” (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)WAGNER: ‘Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg’
Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, baritone; Catarina Ligendza, soprano; Plácido Domingo, tenor; Eugen Jochum, conductor; Chorus and Orchestra of the Deutschen Oper Berlin
(Deutsche Grammophon BOO1JJX7K6; four CDs)
With Wagner’s “Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg” back at the Metropolitan Opera this season, I’ve been listening again to a favorite recording, and this may be a minority choice, given the rich options available. I’ve always loved the 1976 recording led by the eminent German conductor Eugen Jochum, with Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau as Hans Sachs. In an opera house, Mr. Fischer-Dieskau’s voice might have lacked some heft for the role. And this recording came past his prime. Still, he brings affecting wisdom, richness and subtlety to his performance. Catarina Ligendza is a sweet-voiced, endearing Eva; Plácido Domingo, making an early foray into Wagner, is a youthful and unusually Latinate Walther. Mr. Jochum ideally balances the score’s lightness, tenderness and intensity. (Tommasini)  J.S. BACH: Italian Concerto, French Overture, Aria variata
 Vladimir Ashkenazy, pianist.
(Decca)
 During his concert career, the pianist Vladimir Ashkenazy, now 77, was not known for his Bach interpretations. But in his retirement from the stage he continues to engage with Bach’s music and this absorbing new recording features a brilliant Italian Concerto and a colorful reading of the French Overture. Best of all, perhaps, is the playful Aria variata, a youthful work foreshadowing Bach’s mastery of the variations form. (Fonseca-Wollheim)MENDELSSOHN: ‘Songs Without Words’ and other piano works
Javier Perianes, pianist
(Harmonia Mundi HMC 902195)
Most pianists — students, teachers and touring virtuosos included — have nothing but praise for Mendelssohn’s large body of piano works. Yet, these pieces seem to turn up with less and less frequency in concerts. So this beautiful new recording by the elegant young Spanish pianist Javier Perianes is especially welcome. He plays 15 pieces from the 48 miniatures Mendelssohn called “Songs Without Words,” published in eight volumes. He organizes his choices sensitively, placing groups of them in between accounts of other works, including the stormy “Variations sérieuses” and, a favorite of mine, the Rondo Capriccioso, here given a sparkling, brilliant performance. (Tommasini)‘THROUGH TIME’: Music by Villa Lobos, Jean Françaix, Mozart, Vivaldi and Elgar
 Rui Lopes, bassoonist; English Chamber Orchestra
(Solo)
 The richly gifted bassoonist Rui Lopes presents a deliciously varied and entertaining sample of his art in this recording of concertos by Mozart and Vivaldi and works for bassoon and string orchestra: Villa-Lobos’s rustic “Ciranda das Sete Notas,” Jean Françaix’s bubbling “Divertissement” and Elgar’s “Romance” in a luscious arrangement by Mr. Lopes. (Fonseca-Wollheim)SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)