By ALASTAIR MACAULAYOCT. 9, 2015
More often than not, premiere nights at New York City Ballet used to be gifts to cynics and pessimists; I have been among them. That era has passed. Thursday night brought the company’s fifth new work this season, the world premiere of Kim Brandstrup’s “Jeux” (“Games”), to Debussy’s exceptional 1913 score of that name. Like the other four, this one will reward further viewings.Well-made, musical, imaginative, “Jeux” turns games into theater. And its central role is further proof that Sara Mearns is our most dramatically remarkable ballerina today, with urgent qualities of need and pathos.The games onstage keep changing, as does the music. What begins as blind man’s buff acquires a touch of soccer before turning into a group waltz sequence, while the relationships turn into diverse facets of romantic love — with elements of role-playing and deceit, as well as conventional courtship. Stage lighting alters, too: from an exposed bulb hanging at the start to eclipselike effects later. Costumes are modern urban wear — black, gray, white — with knee-length dresses for the women and suits for the men.Ms. Mearns begins with the blindfold round her eyes, feeling her way in unknown terrain amid the throng, while Amar Ramasar (implicitly her boyfriend) tracks her steps. But in due course she sees him dancing with Sterling Hyltin, and, after expressions of heartbreak, she commences a new relationship with Adrian Danchig-Waring (who has arrived with a soccer ball). The ballet ends with her blindfolding him and starting anew. City Ballet’s orchestra, conducted by Daniel Capps, rises sensuously to the score’s many beauties.AdvertisementThis was presented, after the sole intermission, as the second half of an evening that began with the four new ballets that had their premieres last week: Myles Thatcher’s “Polaris,” Robert Binet’s “The Blue of Distance,” Troy Schumacher’s “Common Ground” and Justin Peck’s “New Blood.” Like two of them – “Polaris” and “The Blue of Distance” – “Jeux” features an outsider figure (Tiler Peck in “Polaris,” Harrison Ball in “The Blue”), who beholds the other dancers from a distance and sometimes joins them.Here the isolated figure is Ms. Mearns. The ballet’s suggestion of her numb anguish provides the most choreographically striking imagery. It is Mr. Danchig-Waring who keeps her from falling, and the various off-balance positions in which he holds and turns her are both arresting and moving. Yet Ms. Mearns, though she can see at this point in the tale, is too blinded by other emotions to see him; she’s like Shakespeare’s Gloucester, who says “I stumbled when I saw.”AdvertisementWhereas the four earlier ballets are the creations of men in their 20s (let’s discuss the absence of female choreographers another time), Mr. Brandstrup — who is Danish and based in London — has more than 30 years’ experience making dances. And whereas the four others push the envelope of 21st-century choreography — with unequal numbers of men and women, aspects of bisexual partnering, and unusual conjunctions of movement and music — his “Jeux” is for even numbers of men and women, hierarchically divided into two lead couples and five corps couples, intelligently responsive to its music but never surprising in timing or phrasing.It’s odd that Mr. Brandstrup chooses to avoid all same-sex coupling with this particular Debussy score — for it was with its 1913 premiere that Nijinsky’s choreography broke new ground by depicting the sexual ambiguities of a sustained trio for one man and two women. Despite its sensitivity to the music’s many changes of color and tempo, this new “Jeux” is a bit too orthodox to release all the undercurrents of the extraordinary score; its dramas progress more slowly than their accompaniment and come closer to sentimentality. Only Ms. Mearns’s role has poignancy and depth.Tiler Peck and New York City Ballet dancers in Myles Thatcher’s “Polaris,” with music by William Walton, costumes designed by Zuhair Murad and lighting by Mark Stanley.The four other new ballets all revealed further layers on a second viewing. The oxymoron is Mr. Peck’s “New Blood,” a piece I find showily shallow, albeit brilliantly intricate and excitingly dynamic; Humberto Leon’s vampire-lite makeup and costumes heighten my objections. (It’s unusually tricky to identify who’s who. Eventually, for example, you can recognize Meagan Mann by her vivid dancing, but not by her facial and upper-body beauty, which in other ballets is radiant.) Still, the sheer danciness of phrase upon phrase proves terrific; the performers seem both ignited and released, not just in off-balance audacity but also (as often in Peck choreography) in rich upper-body fullness of texture.The richest phrases in Mr. Schumacher’s “Common Ground” occur in solos for Anthony Huxley and Russell Janzen; otherwise its style is built from abruptly short phrases, with single steps passing around the ensemble like wildfire. The most exceptional moment of drama comes when Teresa Reichlen, with suddenly regal authority, extends a sweeping gesture ahead of her while Joseph Gordon, as if yielding to her dominion, arches gorgeously back under her arm. All seven dancers – Ashley Laracey, Alexa Maxwell and Mr. Ramasar are the others — become not only new people in this work but also different with each return to the stage.The five works continue in repertory through Oct. 17 at the David H. Koch Theater; nycballet­.comA version of this review appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Love Is Blindfolded, Then Heartbroken.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.