Since Talking Heads broke up in the early ’90s, David Byrne’s eclectic projects have focused on everything from visual art and musical theater to bicycles and gentrification. His latest obsession? Color guard. Rooted in the military tradition of marching with flags, rifles and sabers, color guard has become a popular American high school sport, an offshoot of the marching band known for high-spinning props and elaborate choreography set to musical collages. This summer, Mr. Byrne will present “Contemporary Color” in Toronto and Brooklyn, pairing 10 teenage color guard teams from Canada and the United States with musicians including Kelis, St. Vincent, Devonté Hynes and Nelly Furtado. The composer Nico Muhly will collaborate with Ira Glass, the host of “This American Life,” on one piece, while Mr. Byrne will also contribute an original number. A co-commission of the Brooklyn Academy of Music and Toronto’s Luminato Festival, the show will premiere at the Air Canada Center on June 22 and 23. The show will come to Barclays Center in Brooklyn on June 27 and 28, in the Academy’s first partnership with its neighboring arena. (Tickets go on sale Jan. 28 at BAM.org.)In an interview, Mr. Byrne said he was first introduced to color guard when a team asked to license his music for a competition. When he received video of the performance from the world championships in Dayton, Ohio, he was hooked. “I’d never seen anything like it,” Mr. Byrne said. “Because it was in an arena, I could tell that this was a hugely popular thing, but completely unknown to 98 percent of New Yorkers.”It was “wildly creative in a vernacular way,” he added, “an under-the-radar art form.” To add his own spin, Mr. Byrne decided the choreography would be served well by live music. He approached artists with a certain “bigness,” he said, to match the passion of the teams, although most of the musicians he asked to participate were unfamiliar with the sport. “I had to send them lots of YouTube links, pictures, descriptions,” he said. Mr. Byrne was equally unknown to the high school troupes he scouted. “I’m a little old to be in their world,” he said. 