PARIS — The French novelist Michel Houellebecq, whose best-selling novel “Submission” imagines a Muslim becoming president of France, has made his first public remarks since jihadists killed 12 in an attack on the satirical weekly Charlie Hebdo — the same day of his book’s release in France.Mr. Houellebecq had suspended all book promotion after his friend Bernard Maris, an economist, was killed in the attack on Jan. 7.But speaking on a book tour in Germany, where “Submission” has also become a best seller, Mr. Houellebecq (pronounced WELL-beck) said that the start of the promotion of the book in France had been “very difficult,” according to a report in the Paris daily Libération.“I had to repeat constantly that I hadn’t written an Islamophobic book,” he said, appearing in front of a sold-out audience of 600 at a literary festival in Cologne on Monday. “Now, after what happened, it’s going to be even more difficult because I have to explain that, one, I didn’t write an Islamophobic book; and two, one has the right to write an Islamophobic book.”The novelist added that the mass demonstration in Paris on Jan. 11, in which 1.5 million people took to the streets in an outpouring of solidarity, showed less of “a desire for national unity than something simpler: The fact that the French are massively attached to the freedom of expression,” Libération reported.“To become a hero, you don’t have to act heroically,” he added, according to the newspaper. “Sometimes it’s enough to be pigheaded. The cartoonists of Charlie Hebdo were pigheaded.”A work of satire, “Submission” imagines a fictional Islamist finding broad popular consensus to defeat Marine Le Pen, who is the real-life leader of the right-wing National Front party in France. After becoming president of France, the  fictional Islamist institutes Shariah law, and many French people eagerly convert to Islam to get by.Responding to a question during his appearance in Cologne, Mr. Houellebecq rebutted the idea that his book would lend support to Ms. Le Pen. “First of all, I don’t give a damn,” he said. “And then I don’t really think so. I have never seen anyone change his intentions after reading a novel.”Some reviewers have read the book as a dark commentary on France’s collaborationist tendencies, an interpretation that the novelist confirmed in an interview published in the Paris weekly Les Inrockuptibles, conducted two days before the Charlie Hebdo attack.In the same interview, Mr. Houellebecq was asked if he still believed that Islam was the world’s “stupidest religion,” as he had said in 2001, provoking an outcry and a lawsuit that he later won. “No,” the novelist said. “One has the right to change one’s mind.”