AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Stephen Totilo“the fire is roaring” — so states the mobile game I’ve been obsessed with lately, the one with barely any graphics, but with the hint of some very bad things to come. I recently paid 99 cents for A Dark Room, which was first released for cellphones about a year ago, and have played it, my phone tells me, for 262 minutes. I initially mistook it for a mindless diversion, one meant to please me, not peck at my conscience. Instead, I discovered one of the rarest things in the brash, frenetic medium of video games: a quiet, minimalist production that says more by saying less. It’s refreshing. With any luck, it’ll inspire more games to shut up. Video games are usually loud, flashy and obvious. Characters chatter about who they are. Little cellphone games uncork loud celebrations when you reach new levels. They overexplain and leave little to mystery. But A Dark Room feels like an obscure poem, one that makes you work to figure out the game. It’s all understatement, blooming slowly without visual flourish or aural onslaught. At its start, A Dark Room is, strangely, little more than a black screen with an adding machine and some vague, uncapitalized phrases: “the fire is dead. the room is cold. awake. head throbbing. vision blurry. the room is freezing.” A blue line cuts across the top of the screen. The words above it are “light fire.” Tap it, and the screen brightens white. We’re told that a stranger, an unnamed woman, is in a corner of the room.The woman will build things for you: huts that attract villagers; traps that catch animals; tanneries that make leather from killed beasts. Inventory is kept, and the screen becomes a list of words and numbers. You can tap little squares that contain plus and minus symbols to assign villagers to tasks. Each job is part of an economy that will generate more wood, leather, fur. You can play the game just by watching the numbers tick up — more wood, more game, a new hut or trading post. In this first part of the game, A Dark Room is like other video games — the web browser time-sink Cookie Clicker, the silly fake-money-making game Make It Rain. These games, without complex graphics, dramatic story lines and booming soundtracks, baldly offer only the appeal of clicking on something to get something. Start playing one of these games and they’re hard to stop. Perhaps the appeal of many of the fancier games is, at base, little more than this. We’re just chickens pecking for feed. But for A Dark Room, that appeal is just a setup for something uglier. As I played, I attracted 20 people to my mysterious village. They regularly collected wood. Soon, the game showed these words: “make them work. day and night.” Then it showed this phrase: “they are slaves.” The moment’s power is in its quiet surprise. Have we been playing a game about slavery? Are we slave masters? Did we make this happen? Can we undo it?It seems you can’t, not the first time around. But it’s hard to stop playing this game, even as your actions are part of something evil. After that first slavery moment, A Dark Room transforms. The poetrylike phrases become a little more like prose. And the game begins to display primitive graphics: a map entirely illustrated by capital letters, punctuation marks and typographical symbols. Now the player can explore, fight or just stare and try to figure out what a C or an I is, ponder why an O can be turned into a P and slowly deduce what a #### represents. The map invites the pleasures of decoding. The search for meaning is irresistible. Clarity about our identity and true role in this virtual world comes slowly and only in hints. The action of the game is distracting, as often happens. But then we visit a ruined city. “nothing but downcast eyes,” the game reports. “the people here were broken a long time ago.” And you’ll wonder again, before the game transforms one last time: Did I do that? Was it me? Refreshingly, we have a video game that doesn’t answer our questions. In the months since its release, the creators, Michael Townsend and Amir Rajan, have separately released new games, Gridland and The Ensign. Good news: both enchanting games also underexplain.Stephen Totilo is the editor in chief of the video game site Kotaku.com. Advertisement