By ZACHARY WOOLFEJAN. 20, 2015
Nate Wooley’s new work “For Kenneth Gaburo” is a setting of a sentence by Mr. Gaburo (1926-93), a searching composer, conductor, pianist and language theorist. But its presentation of the words is extreme, to say the least.Abstractions of text in music aren’t new. Listening to the premiere of “For Kenneth Gaburo” on Monday evening at the Wild Project in the East Village, I thought of Morton Feldman’s glacial “Three Voices” (1982), in which long passages repeat and deconstruct, to the point of wordlessness, the opening of Frank O’Hara’s poem “wind”: “Who’d have thought/that snow falls.”In “For Kenneth Gaburo,” not even that much of Mr. Gaburo’s sentence — “The creative act consists not only in the stipulation and formation of concrete structures, but in responsible maintenance of them” — is audible. And Mr. Wooley isn’t a singer, but a trumpeter, one of the most innovative and intriguing on the current scene.His work, presented as part of Avant Media’s new Tangents series, is his latest in a series of investigations into using the mouth and throat positions that form phonetic sounds as the starting point for his playing. He has come to use a notation system that combines phonetic symbols, numerals representing pitch and valve combinations and a means of indicating note durations through number of breaths.AdvertisementThat these “phonetic” mouth positions, often of long duration, are physically unsustainable is the point. Mr. Wooley is fascinated by failure, by the sounds that emerge as he loses control.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Because of the exertion required by these techniques, his earlier solo experiments, which he called “Syllable” pieces, were limited in scope. Perhaps with an eye to the “responsible maintenance” suggested by Mr. Gaburo, “For Kenneth Gaburo” buttresses Mr. Wooley with electronic sounds intended to echo and surround his live playing, making longer works possible.AdvertisementWhat does his “playing” of Mr. Gaburo’s text sound like? Through an alternately dense and austere thicket of electronic drones and pulsating beats and clangs, Mr. Wooley’s notes start as breaths and form soft, keening tones. Held past the point of comfort, they twist into other tones, then break into a guttural roar or an earthy yet unearthly gurgle. Notes waver, falter and collapse, while the drones and beats go on, inexorably. The insistence of the electronic sounds, coupled with the bodily failures at the core of the live element, creates a tension that’s strangely mournful.I wasn’t always persuaded by the electronics, which sometimes swamped Mr. Wooley’s subtlety, and I’ve preferred his more unadulterated solo works. But he is always stimulating.His pieces cast an uncanny spell in performance, with an astonishing knack for bending time. “For Kenneth Gaburo” began at 8:12 p.m., and when the final spotlight dimmed, I could have sworn perhaps 20 minutes had passed. I checked my phone: It was 9.Avant Media’s Avant Music Festival will run from Feb. 27 through March 7 at the Wild Project, 195 East Third Street, East Village; avantmedia.org. A version of this review appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Limits of a Mouth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.