By JAMES R. OESTREICHJAN. 20, 2015
Poor Pergolesi.Alliteration can be cheap and easy, but Morningside Opera and Siren Baroque pretty much invited it. “Pergolesi: Power Games,” they called their presentation at the Alchemical Theater Laboratory on West 14th Street over the weekend, adding the slogan “Pain. Pleasure. Pergolesi.”Pain, surely, would apply to the first half, a staging of Pergolesi’s 1736 oratorio Stabat Mater, which relates the agonies suffered by Jesus’ mother at the foot of the cross. Pleasure would just as surely follow in a production of the composer’s delightful comic intermezzo, “La Serva Padrona” (“The Maid as Mistress”).But the point of the exercise was to show pain and pleasure intermingled. The concept arose from the observation that in the Stabat Mater, “some of the music clashes inexplicably with the text,” as Annie Holt, the executive artistic director of Morningside Opera, and Amber Youell, a singer in the Stabat Mater, wrote in a production note.“Cheerful, almost comic melodies and jaunty accompaniments,” they add, “set words like ‘he mourns and suffers while his mother watches the anguish of the dying son.’ ”But the production, as seen on Friday evening, merely amplified the inexplicability. The two singers, the soprano (Brett Umlauf) and the mezzo-soprano (Ms. Youell), first appeared scantily clad in short chemises, then gradually added items of period clothing, cavorting about erotically, only to strip them off again.AdvertisementTheir performances were remarkable, especially Ms. Umlauf’s, singing the aria “She saw her sweet son dying” while being roughly strapped into a black leather corset. But none of this frippery enhanced the music or the text.AdvertisementThis production, from 2012, was paired with a new, updated staging of “La Serva Padrona,” which, in keeping with the overall concept, had to tilt the balance the other way, from pleasure toward pain. So Serpina, the chirpy maid scheming to win the hand of the her master, Uberto, is transformed into a dominatrix (yes, clad in a black leather corset, and wielding a whip), with Uberto her paying client. Almost needless to say, much rewriting was required in a libretto now laden with crudities and trendy references to social media.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This score, too, calls for only two singers. Brittany Palmer (Serpina) and Michael Shaw (Uberto) got the job done, though with less distinction than the Stabat Mater duo.Members of the female instrumental ensemble Siren Baroque made up the orchestra for both works: a harpsichordist (Kelly Savage) and a string trio. The string players had occasional tuning problems and sounded a bit scrawny at times, in part, no doubt, because they were meant to be four, their violist having come down with the flu.Call the whole thing, perhaps, “Pergolesi Pirated.” But unlike, say, Stravinsky’s reuse of Pergolesi’s music in the brilliant ballet score “Pulcinella,” which helped cement his immortality, this production mostly just threw more dirt on his grave.A version of this review appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: Mixing Shades of Gray Into a Chirpy Comedy and a Mother’s Anguish.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.