By MIKE HALEJAN. 20, 2015
How can you tell when a werewolf show is meant for young viewers? In “Wolfblood,” a charming series from the BBC’s children’s division, there’s one obvious sign: When the human-wolf hybrids change back into human form, they’re fully clothed. Where do their jackets and sneakers go when they’re running around in the woods? They don’t seem to care, so apparently we shouldn’t, either.The three seasons of “Wolfblood” — a fourth hasn’t been announced — were shown here by Disney Channel to little notice, but all three can now be streamed on Netflix, and a Season 3 DVD set was released on Tuesday by Cinedigm. “Teen Wolf” fans pining for that show’s summer return on MTV, or “Buffy the Vampire Slayer” acolytes may want to check it out, or introduce it to their own children. Allow for the lower budgets and younger target audience, and “Wolfblood” is thoroughly appealing.The show uses teenage werewolfery as the usual metaphor — for puberty, rebellion, feeling like an outsider, being embarrassed by your family — but in a decidedly homespun way. The heroine, Maddy (Aimee Kelly), is a spunky middle school student (when the show begins) who’s just short of the age when she’ll begin “wolfing out” at the full moon. She’s old enough, though, that she has the duty of standing guard over her parents when they wolf out: scolding them, growling at them and shooing them back into the basement.Lycanthropy, in “Wolfblood,” isn’t an affliction transmitted by a bite but an inherited condition, kind of like superior athletic ability. It still needs to be kept secret, though, and that — along with teenage crushes — is what drives the show’s plot. Maddy, her human pals and the hunky new kid, Rhydian (Bobby Lockwood), who’s also a wolfblood, spend the first two seasons ingeniously thwarting threats to the wolfbloods’ peaceful anonymity.Ms. Kelly, an energetic and engaging actress whose portrayal of the fiery busybody Maddy was at the center of the show, left after Season 2, but “Wolfblood” (a British Academy nominee for best children’s show in both of those seasons) didn’t suffer. Her co-stars took on expanded roles, and the story opened up to include a possibly sinister corporation (shades of the Initiative in “Buffy”) investigating extra-human phenomena. Here’s to a fourth season of wolfing out.A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: Whoa, Girl, What Big Teeth You Have!.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.