By ALESSANDRA STANLEYJAN. 20, 2015
One thing is pretty certain about Larry Wilmore’s new show on Comedy Central. Viewers will want to hear what he has to say on Tuesday night.Because on the debut of “The Nightly Show With Larry Wilmore” on Monday, his comments about “Selma”; Ferguson, Mo.; race relations; and also life in general were funny, unexpected and provocative.Mr. Wilmore made fun of the outrage over the paucity of Oscar nominations for “Selma,” a biographical movie about the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.; he was irreverent about the Rev. Al Sharpton and Oprah Winfrey; and he carved out a joke from the controversy over the death of Eric Garner, the Staten Island man who was killed when the police used a chokehold on him.Noting that China and the United States recently agreed to curb greenhouse gas emissions, Mr. Wilmore said with mock gravity that if the world doesn’t figure out a way to deal with climate change, “it won’t just be black people saying ‘I can’t breathe.’ ” When some in the studio audience murmured, Mr. Wilmore snapped back: “Oh, too soon? Yeah I choked him, thank you very much.”AdvertisementOpening nights can be treacherous for comedy shows — expectations can be too high and jitters can derail the jokes. Mr. Wilmore’s debut wasn’t perfect, but he made it perfectly clear that as a replacement for Stephen Colbert, who takes over for David Letterman in September, he is witty and appealing in his own quite different way.AdvertisementMr. Wilmore, 53, isn’t young, but he has dimples and a disarming way of laughing at his own jokes and those of others.Most of all, his contrariness stands out on a network where many stars are white, male and sensitive about it. Put it this way: Jon Stewart is less likely to make that kind of joke about Mr. Garner; Mr. Colbert would have said such things only in character as a loopy, right-wing cable news anchor. Mr. Wilmore uses humor to point a finger at racist attitudes in the culture, but he also pokes fun at racial pieties. In some ways, he seems closer in spirit to Bill Maher than to Mr. Stewart.That’s also because he had a panel of guests who seemed chosen to clash and confound: Senator Cory A. Booker of New Jersey; the rapper and activist Talib Kweli; Shenaz Treasury, a Bollywood actress and now a contributor to the show; and Bill Burr, the pugnacious comedian with a Boston accent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The discussion about the film “Selma” and the protests in Ferguson went in all directions but mostly at the expense of Mr. Booker, who tried to be diplomatic. When he sought to stand up for the protesters and also the police, Mr. Kweli set him straight, saying, “In activist movements you have what’s called solidarity, and you realize what we are fighting for, so you don’t go to a rally to beat cancer and say, well you know, all diseases matter.” Mr. Wilmore smiled and interjected wryly, “All diseases do kind of matter.”As host of his own program, Mr. Wilmore was able to show his range much more than he did as a correspondent on “The Daily Show With Jon Stewart,” where he was cast, with obvious irony, as the fake news show’s “senior black correspondent.” Mr. Wilmore could be amusing doing facetious reports, but the pose was limiting and oddly out of date — it seemed like a joke from “Saturday Night Live” in its early seasons.Cable news networks like CNN and MSNBC have a lot more diversity on air and off than “The Daily Show” or “The Colbert Report”; for years, the almost all-white, all-male teams of writers who would show up onstage in black tie for Emmy Awards looked like the stag line at a debutante ball in 1959.Mr. Wilmore will talk about all kinds of subjects — he has a broad spectrum of interests, including magic. He said he would address the sexual abuse charges against Bill Cosby on Tuesday’s show. But he let his audience know on Monday that he would chime in on race whenever necessary, with his own sly brand of humor.In his opening remarks, Mr. Wilmore said how excited he was to have his own show. “I feel like there’s so much to talk about, you know, oh, especially if I had the show a year ago.” He paused and sighed. “Man, all the good bad race stuff happened already.”He’ll rightly prove himself wrong on future episodes of “The Nightly Show.”A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Setting His Place at the Head of the Table.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.