AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasWhen the organizers of the 2015 Fall for Dance Festival set eyes on the list of MacArthur winners last month, they must have erupted in a happy roar. One name on the list was Michelle Dorrance, the 36-year-old tap choreographer and dancer. Her “Myelination,” a new work commissioned by the festival, capped its fourth program, presented at City Center on Thursday night.The idea of myelination, or the formation of a myelin sheath around a nerve fiber — it’s what allows a nerve impulse to move faster — is apparent throughout this effervescent, twitchy piece. The work, with a cast of 12, vocalists and live music composed by Gregory Richardson and Donovan Dorrance (the choreographer’s brother), began in front of the curtain as Emma Portner, Byron Tittle and Ms. Dorrance set the beat as a six-legged creature.As a prologue, it was playful, strange, militaristic, cool — an apt setup for a dance that showcases a bit of everything: from graceful, gliding swoops to one-armed balances that pull hip-hop back to tap. Ms. Portner, beguiling as she contorts her frame into odd angles, balances on her toes and pirouettes. Throughout, Ms. Dorrance, a brilliant conductor, pushes the boundaries of tap while exposing its true nature: that it is music. She juxtaposes quick duets and then, in fast gusts, pulls all of her instruments — the dancers — together in rows, bringing the stage to life with unison footwork. It’s a rush, and not a cheap one; Ms. Dorrance has choreographed a glittering closer that needs to have a second life after the festival. Please, someone, make that happen.The program began with the United States premiere of Surupa Sen’s “Shivashtakam (An Ode to Shiva)” by the treasured ensemble Nrityagram, which specializes in Odissi dance. Here, Ms. Sen and Bijayini Satpathy draw inspiration from a poem about Shiva. There are few dancers as sensitive and sensual as these two: Ms. Satpathy, with her glossy radiance, molds her body into sculptural silhouettes and melts out of them; Ms. Sen, a more mystical presence, moves with a complex suppleness. Their symmetry is heady.Was Hans van Manen’s “Solo,” set to Bach, programmed on a different planet? Dancers from the San Francisco Ballet — Gennadi Nedvigin, Joseph Walsh and Hansuke Yamamoto — performed this three-for-one solo with pep, yet it remained cloyingly hollow. The choreographer Stephen Petronio’s austere “Locomotor,” which explores travel, offered some relief as his dancers, including the guest Melissa Toogood, swooped forward and backward with such speed that, at times, their dashes offstage left behind the sensation of brushwork. There is great polish to this piece, but somewhere in the middle, you start to question its sustainability. “Locomotor” comes together in the end by resorting to force; its quieter moments falter.The program’s finest moments were full of female power and elegance: the crisp, acute dancing of Ms. Toogood; the incandescence of Ms. Sen and Ms. Satpathy; and, above all, the grit and intelligence of Ms. Dorrance. They are a cross-section of beloved women working in dance, and it was nothing but pleasure to spend an evening with them.The Fall for Dance Festival continues through Sunday at City Center, Manhattan; 212-581-1212, nycitycenter­.org.Advertisement