Simon Axler, the fictional performer played by Al Pacino in “The Humbling,” is living a perpetual actor’s nightmare. In this dark comedy adapted from the 2009 Philip Roth novel, Axler finds his memory and stamina are failing him. He fears that his opportunities are drying up and that audiences no longer recognize him. He struggles with his sanity and fails at his attempt to commit suicide.None of this would seem to describe Mr. Pacino, 74, whose acting career spans “The Godfather,” “Scarface” and “Scent of a Woman,” and who has lately enjoyed a theatrical resurgence in Broadway productions of “The Merchant of Venice” and “Glengarry Glen Ross.” Yet for him and the director Barry Levinson, whose films include “Rain Man” and “Good Morning, Vietnam,” making “The Humbling” (due Friday in theaters and video on demand) was sometimes its own act of self-debasement. This years-long, on-and-off process was a reminder to them of what age and accomplishments mean in modern-day Hollywood. (In short: not much.)Mr. Pacino and Mr. Levinson spoke Wednesday about why they nonetheless keep at their craft and how themes of “The Humbling” resonate in their work. These are excerpts from that conversation.“The Humbling” deals with a character who is despairing because he’s growing older and believes he’s no longer proficient at the things that defined him. Are these feelings you’ve experienced yourselves?Al Pacino Oh, yeah. What film is this again? [Laughter] There are professions where there are certain tools you depend on. With the actor it’s the memory, and also it’s the stamina. You can’t coast in some of these Shakespearean roles. They’re uncoastable. You can imagine the kind of panic that sets in when you realize you can’t get through this.The current movie “Birdman” also deals with an actor who fears he’s lost his passion for his work. Were you concerned about the possible overlap with your film?Barry Levinson  I think it only comes up now because there’s so few movies that are really about human beings. Therefore, if you do one, it’s already, like, “Well, why?” There’s two films this year about an actor. You wouldn’t ask that question if I made a superhero movie, of which there are 40 this year. But guess what? In real life, there are more actors than superheroes.A preview of the film.Did you talk with Philip Roth about how you wanted to pursue this film?Pacino He seemed very cordial about it all. I don’t know how he felt about the movie. I mentioned how, from a book to a movie, it’s a process. There are going to be changes and it will be different than the book. It simply has to be, because it’s going into another medium. I wish I was that articulate when I talked to him.This film took nearly four years to come together, and was filmed intermittently over a period of months. Why was it so challenging to execute?Levinson  It’s a long time when you make a movie that’s that cheap. It’s $2 million and you go, all right, now we have to do this and this, just to make a little movie. [At $200 million] it’s, let’s get on with this thing, because we’ve got to pay off the loan.Pacino You went and did a couple of weeks. Then you were away for a month or two. Then you’d come back and do another five or six days. Barry had it to play with. He didn’t say, “Al, don’t come back.” [Laughs] I was waiting for that phone call.Is it difficult for you to leave your character behind during these periods?Pacino  When I was younger, I carried the roles with me more, in my life. It was a matter of learning how to separate them. That comes with time. But I remember when I did “Dog Day [Afternoon],” we had to go back and do a reshoot. And I just couldn’t do it. I kept trying, but that guy left me. Sidney [Lumet] had mentioned that he saw that character leave my body.The protagonist of “The Humbling” rediscovers himself, in part, through stage acting. Al, you’ve been doing a lot more New York theater of late – is this true for you too?Pacino Since I came from the theater, that was the medium I’ve always felt most comfortable in. There’s kind of a freedom in it that I haven’t found anywhere else, because you’re out there.Levinson  You’re one of the few that will go back and forth all the time.Pacino And I’m coming back [to Broadway] with something else. I feel it. It’s this recurring nightmare. [Laughs] If I were living here, I’d be doing even more.Is a crisis of confidence like the one your character experiences unimaginable to you?Pacino It’s got to be really confounding when you no longer have that appetite, I would imagine. I know about Philip Roth saying that he doesn’t write anymore and he feels good about it. There’s a kind of relief in that. But to be an actor that doesn’t want to do it anymore?Levinson  I’ve spoken to some people who say, “I don’t know how I can do it. I have to put myself out there. I don’t know if I need to get wounded, beaten up.”Pacino You don’t want to get that phone call from a friend who says, “Ah, what do they know?”So you don’t see yourselves ever retiring from your professions?Levinson  You mean, just walking away?Pacino I can dream about it, and wish for it. But there’s a certain practicality. As they say, you gotta eat. When I’m not doing a movie and I walk on the street and I see they’re making a movie, I just walk the other way. Like, “Oh, poor people. I know what you’re going through. I’m just so happy I don’t have to be in that setup.”Levinson  But you know what happens? Another story idea comes along. Another character that excites you. All of a sudden, off you go.Pacino It’s a little different for a director, because I’ve done both. When I was with Brian De Palma [on “Scarface”], we were at the Fontainebleau in Miami Beach. I was this at little café overlooking the beach, and I can see way out and there was this group, maybe 100 people, all looking out to the ocean. I stood up on the table to see, because I thought maybe some whale got washed ashore. And there, right at the surf, was De Palma doing this [paces back and forth] and looking around. And everybody was there, looking at him: Where is he going to put the camera? And I thought, Oh, boy, I don’t want to do that.A version of this article appears in print on 01/24/2015, on page C5 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Staying Hungry, Even When Full.