AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8:25 A.M. (Encore) BLUE JASMINE (2013) Cate Blanchett won an Oscar for her role as Jasmine French, a Park Avenue matron fallen on hard times after her husband, Hal (Alec Baldwin), lands in prison for bilking his clients out of millions, leaving her with little more than her pearls, white Chanel jacket, Hermès bag and monogrammed Louis Vuitton luggage. Destitute, in a manner of speaking, Jasmine flies first-class to San Francisco to begin life anew with her sister, Ginger (Sally Hawkins), whose scrappy existence and brutish men (Andrew Dice Clay and Bobby Cannavale) Jasmine can barely stomach without self-medicating with vodka and Xanax. Then she meets a diplomatic type (Peter Sarsgaard) with an appreciation for her decorating talents and designer threads and starts to see light at the end of her dark tunnel. With intimations of Ruth Madoff and Blanche DuBois, this shattered woman is “brilliantly brought to quivering life by Ms. Blanchett,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times, in Woody Allen’s “most sustained, satisfying and resonant film since ‘Match Point.’ ”4:30 P.M. (Sundance) BROKEBACK MOUNTAIN (2005) Two cowboys (Heath Ledger and Jake Gyllenhaal) maintain a secret romance in Ang Lee’s adaptation of the Annie Proulx short story, which raked in Oscars for Mr. Lee (best director), Larry McMurtry and Diana Ossana (best adapted screenplay), and Gustavo Santaolalla (best original score). Michelle Williams and Anne Hathaway play the women in these ranch hands’ lives. Writing in The Times, Stephen Holden said that Mr. Ledger’s performance was “as good as the best of Marlon Brando and Sean Penn.”8:30 P.M. (13) METROFOCUS Tom Finkelpearl, New York City’s commissioner of cultural affairs, addresses the benefits of the new municipal identification card, which provides free access to many arts and cultural institutions. Ai-jen Poo, a 2014 MacArthur “genius grant” winner, talks about the mission of her National Domestic Workers Alliance. And Richard Cohen, a political columnist for The Washington Post, discusses his new book, “Israel: Is It Good for the Jews?”8:30 P.M. (CBS) MOM An unexpected death changes life in the Plunkett household.9 P.M. (CNN) MORGAN SPURLOCK INSIDE MAN Season 3 begins as Mr. Spurlock tries to stay in control of his life with the power of artificial intelligence and travels from Japan to California in search of robots that can make autonomous decisions.9 P.M. (ESPN) X GAMES ASPEN 2015 Early events in this extreme-sports competition include the men’s snowboard superpipe and the snowmobile speed and style categories.10 P.M. (BBC America) MILLION DOLLAR CRITIC It’s said that a positive review from Giles Coren, a restaurant critic for The Times of London, is worth $1 million in business. In each episode of this new series, Mr. Coren, with the help of his researcher, Julia Pileggi, and advice from local residents, travels to a North American city to sample meals from five restaurants — and then sings the praises of just one. The final season of “Kitchen Nightmares,” in which Gordon Ramsay tries to rescue the Mayfair, a seafront restaurant in Fuengirola sitting almost empty on the bustling Costa del Sol of Spain, leads in at 9.10 P.M. (Sundance) BABYLON Police units scramble to respond to a bomb threat at a convention center, where Richard (James Nesbitt) learns that a journalist has an even more explosive story involving the chief of police, forcing Liz (Brit Marling) to test her public relations mettle.10 P.M. (IFC) PORTLANDIA After discovering the medicinal properties of raw milk, Brendan (Fred Armisen) and Michelle (Carrie Brownstein) storm the office of a doctor (Ed Begley Jr.) to expose lies promoted by the Food and Drug Administration.What’s Streaming NowSOMEONE LIKE YOU After losing his fiancée, Liang Luo Han (Kirsten Ren), and his eyesight in an accident, Fang Zhan Cheng (Kingone Wang) becomes enamored with his nurse (Ms. Ren again), who sounds exactly like his dead love in this new Taiwanese series. But his romance is complicated by his stepsister (Katie Chen) and the woman (Nita Lei) who received Luo Han’s heart, both of whom have fallen for him. (dramafever.com)Advertisement