By DULCIE LEIMBACHJAN. 21, 2015
John Bayley, an Oxford don and literary critic who found an international readership with his memoir “Elegy for Iris,” a moving account of his life with the novelist Iris Murdoch, his wife, after she was struck by Alzheimer’s disease, died on Jan. 12 at his home in Lanzarote, in the Canary Islands. He was 89.Robert Weil, who edited five of Mr. Bayley’s books, reported the death on Wednesday. He said the cause was heart insufficiency.As a critic and author, Mr. Bayley was acclaimed for his dissections of Goethe and Pushkin as well as of Jane Austen, Thomas Hardy and Henry James. Reviewing Mr. Bayley’s essay collection “The Power of Delight” in The New York Times Book Review in 2005, the scholar James Shapiro wrote that Mr. Bayley had managed “to break down the barrier between common readers and daunting writers.”“It seems effortless, though it can’t be, and he does it better than anyone I have ever read,” Professor Shapiro wrote. “He does this first of all by humanizing writers through just the right anecdote or conceit.”AdvertisementWhen Mr. Bayley began composing “Elegy for Iris,” Ms. Murdoch was one of the world’s most admired and productive novelists (and a philosopher as well). She had written 26 novels, including “Under the Net” and “The Sea, the Sea,” and had won a Booker Prize.AdvertisementBut by then her health had deteriorated to such an extent that her speech was incoherent and she could not feed herself.“Elegy,” a New York Times best seller in 1999, portrays a devoted husband patiently coming to terms with a disease that tested his resolve to care for his wife in their Oxford home, no matter how debilitated she became. The ordeals were many and painful, but Mr. Bayley would look for compensations.“A snooze then,” he wrote in the book, drawing from a diary he kept. “Iris will sleep deeply. Later we listen to carols and Christmas music. And I have the illusion, which fortunate Alzheimer’s partners must feel at such times, that life is just the same, has never changed.”The book was commissioned by Mr. Weil, who said he had been overwhelmed by accounts of Mr. Bayley’s selfless caring for his wife. She died in 1999 at 79. (A film adaptation, “Iris,” was released in 2001 starring Hugh Bonneville and Kate Winslet as the couple when they were young and Jim Broadbent and Judi Dench in their later years.)The book was as much a celebration of love and marriage as it was a chronicle of deterioration. Writing in The New York Times Book Review, the novelist Mary Gordon found “greatness” in “Elegy for Iris” and “heroic love” in Mr. Bayley’s caretaking.“He chronicles, with a quiet relish, the pleasures of a successful and enjoyable marriage,” she wrote, “in which two singular souls found a happiness as luminous as any we have heard of in the annals of marriage (a genre not noted for appealing models). For John Bayley and Iris Murdoch, marriage was much concerned with the preservation of individual solitude.”Mr. Bayley could be aphoristic on that very theme. “To feel oneself held and cherished and accompanied, and yet to be alone,” he wrote. “To be closely and physically entwined, and yet feel solitude’s friendly presence, as warm and undesolating as contiguity itself.”AdvertisementAt another point, he wrote, “Inside marriage, one ceases to be observant because observation has become so automatic, its object at once absorbing and taken for granted.”Mr. Bayley followed “Elegy” with two more memoirs: “Iris and Her Friends: A Memoir of Memory and Desire” (1999), about the final progression of Ms. Murdoch’s illness; and “Widower’s House: A Study in Bereavement, or How Margot and Mella Forced Me to Flee My Home” (2001), about his life after her death.“Elegy for Iris” was not universally embraced. Some critics accused Mr. Bayley of invading Ms. Murdoch’s privacy and admonished him for publishing the book while she was still alive, when she was incapable of understanding what her husband had written or of responding to it.As Ms. Murdoch sank deeper into Alzheimer’s, losing memory and understanding and the ability to eat at all, he abruptly decided that she must go to a nursing home. He wrote in “Iris and Her Friends”:“Heart had quietly taken itself off. And courage, and will. I could go on doing all the things I had to do, but none of them seemed to help us anymore.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.John Oliver Bayley was born on March 27, 1925, the youngest of three boys in a British military family in Lahore, India (now Pakistan). In “Iris and Her Friends” he wrote of his loneliness growing up on the English coast, coping with a stutter, feeling ignored by his older, sportier brothers. He was educated at Eton and Oxford and served in the Grenadier Guards during World War II, winding up in postwar Germany.He became a fellow of New College at Oxford in 1955, teaching English. At the time, Ms. Murdoch, who was six years his senior, was teaching philosophy at St. Anne’s College, Oxford. They married in 1956. He joined the faculty of St. Catherine’s College, Oxford, in 1973.Among his other books are “Tolstoy and the Novel” and “Shakespeare and Tragedy.” He also wrote a novel, “The Red Hat,” and was a frequent contributor to The Times Book Review and The New York Review of Books, among other publications.Besides the one in the Canary Islands, Mr. Bayley also had a home in Oxford and an apartment in London.In 2000, he married Audi Villers, who, 17 years his junior, had been a friend of his and Ms. Murdoch’s. She survives him, as does a brother, Michael.AdvertisementIn an interview with The Guardian in 2001, he admitted that he and his new wife discussed Ms. Murdoch “incessantly.”“I didn’t believe in blessed spirits,” he wrote, “but I believed that Iris was with me once more, joining us and making us three in the warm breath of the night,” he wrote.His memories of her, in both interviews and his memoirs, were vividly detailed. In one anecdote from “Elegy for Iris,” he wrote of their last swim together at a favorite spot along a small river in Oxford, she in “her shabby old one-piece swimsuit.”“She was an awkward and anxious figure,” he wrote, “her socks trailing round her ankles. She was obstinate about not taking these off, and I gave up the struggle. A pleasure barge chugged slowly past, an elegant girl in a bikini sunning herself on the deck, a young man in white shorts at the steering wheel.”He added, “We must have presented a comic spectacle — an elderly man struggling to remove the garments from an old lady, still with white skin and incongruously fair hair.”He went on: “Once in the water, Iris cheered up a bit. It was almost too warm, hardly refreshing. But its old brown slow-flowing deliciousness remained, and we smiled happily at each other as we paddled quietly to and fro. Water lily leaves, with an occasional fat yellow flower, rocked gently at the passage of a pleasure boat. Small bright blue dragonflies hovered motionless above them. The water was deep, and cooler as we moved out from the bank, but we did not go out far. Looking down, I could see her muddy feet, still in their socks, moving in the brown depths.”Sam Roberts and Jack Kadden contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page B19 of the New York edition with the headline: John Bayley, Oxford Don Who Wrote of His Wife, Iris Murdoch, Dies at 89.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.