By ALASTAIR MACAULAYJAN. 21, 2015
As the curtain rises on George Balanchine’s “Serenade,” we’re plunged into a drama about selflessness. Seventeen young women are all facing front, all dressed alike, all slowly going through a ritual that strikingly resembles that of religious devotees. In what follows — as we watch loners; connections between individuals; kernel-like groups of three, four and five; and suggestions of love, loss, consolation and transcendence — we constantly see how lives are absorbed in something larger than private concerns.Dramatic interplay between self and selflessness occurs in many Balanchine ballets. On Tuesday night, New York City Ballet opened its six-week season at the David H. Koch Theater with three of his ultimate classics: “Serenade” (1934 ), “Agon” (1957) and “Symphony in C” (1947). The central dances of “Agon,” tense and dense, abound with radical style and peculiar incidents; but the opening and closing sections show that even the most singular of these performers is actually part of a large team. We enter the hive only to find it contains more than one queen bee.Each of the four movements of the grandly imperial “Symphony in C” features a very different ballerina; the structurally startling event is how, in the finale, the ballet brings these dissimilar divas side by side to dance the same steps. In each of these three works, the women are dressed identically; likewise the men. The collective matters more than the star, and the fascination of the pattern that includes them all matters most.Yet the human is never reduced to the status of a cog in a machine. Rather the opposite: Balanchine style and choreography maximize each dancer’s energy. His are realms in which each person makes intense claims upon life.AdvertisementOn Tuesday night, that proved truest in “Serenade.” City Ballet’s orchestra played the accompanying score — Tchaikovsky’s “Serenade for Strings” (1880) — with gleaming beauty of tone. The female corps de ballet was fleet, charged, windblown. In the leading roles, Sterling Hyltin, Erica Pereira and Teresa Reichlen were all excellent and often more.Ms. Hyltin — petite, but with a physical amplitude that makes her register powerfully throughout the theater — has become one of the most affecting presences in City Ballet’s roster. In “Serenade,” she currently dances the role of the ballet’s heroine, the one around whom its rushing series of pure-dance incidents acquires the strongest sense of narrative. She has vulnerability, along with ardor, delicacy but also sweep. On Tuesday, she was at her most touchingly impetuous; the successive strokes of fate that came her way were incidental to the brightness with which she seized on every step. Ms. Pereira, a dancer who has so often been lightweight and underpowered, was dancing with a stretched incisiveness that may yet make her a valuable artist.The tall and grand Ms. Reichlen — who too often in 2014 seemed to be holding back — delivered the hugest and most strikingly off-balance images of the ballet. In one moment alone did I want more from her (the fault belongs to her coaches). In the ballet’s final Elegy, she, holding the same full-force arabesque, is rotated twice by the man kneeling at her feet (Ask la Cour); then she extends her front arm and upper body upward. Surely that stretch should rear higher, as if invoking the heavens? Those of us who saw Maria Calegari here can never forget the heroic drama she made of this.AdvertisementIn “Agon” and “Symphony in C,” the dancers looked awake, interesting, but not fully urgent. Whereas the conductor Clotilde Otranto gave life and breath to “Serenade,” here the music (by Stravinsky in “Agon” and Bizet in “Symphony”) gave no special propulsion to the dancers.Maria Kowroski and Amar Ramasar, in “Agon,” gave what were almost marvelous performances. But the terrific blaze with which they opened the long pas de deux was not quite maintained. Andrew Veyette, leading that ballet’s first pas de trois, never lacks force; what’s sometimes missing here is elegance of spirit. Megan LeCrone, leading the second pas de trois, is an unresolved artist: alternately edgy and polite, flamboyant and guarded, but never radiant.The four ballerinas of “Symphony in C” all supplied reasons to look forward to this season. Ashley Bouder (first movement), sparkling and dashing, and Sara Mearns (second), a naturally dramatic and glamorous artist brilliantly attuned to the many layers of the music, are both now in their high summers. Brittany Pollack, making her debut in the notoriously hard fourth movement, displayed true brilliance.Lauren Lovette, leading the third movement, can often seem the loveliest woman in the company; her upper body style is intensely affecting, so that the turn of her head, the angle of her eyes and shoulders can all make immense impressions. And yet it’s still not clear she is a Balanchine ballerina. In a fast, light role such as this, her technique lacks bite or thrust; her manner is winsomely charming, even passive, as if she believes her prime task is just to be sweetly pretty.At corps and demi-soloist level, there was much to admire — above all, in the alert, happy beauty of Meagan Mann and Claire Kretzschmar as the first movement’s lieutenants. The company is in good shape — though the dancing of both Chase Finlay (first movement) had its obvious blurs and that of Gonzalo Garcia (third movement) was bland. But the company’s admirers had been hungry to greet its return to repertory; and on Tuesday only “Serenade” fully realized their — my — hopes.The latest in the company’s strange series of art installations is the work of Dustin Yellin. Only one of his items in the Koch Theater, however, shows rewardingly charming fantasy: a brass-hued curio at orchestra-level. But the upstairs foyer is dominated by glass cases containing humanlike figures. The quest for any one exhibit worth contemplating proves a wild-goose chase.New York City Ballet’s winter season continues through March 1 at the David H. Koch Theater; nycballet.com. A version of this review appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: With Each Star Turn, a Feeling of a Collective Force Begins to Brew.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.