By VIVIEN SCHWEITZERJAN. 21, 2015
Since her “retirement,” the mezzo-soprano Marilyn Horne has been a mentor to young singers, offering guidance at festivals and workshops including “The Song Continues” at Carnegie Hall, a series of master classes that culminates in a public performance.On Saturday evening at Zankel Hall, the baritone Edward Parks proved the most polished and emotionally satisfying performer. His interpretation of selections from Schubert’s “Schwanengesang” was arresting throughout, notable for the depth and nuance with which he rendered the songs, communicating the intimacy of “Das Fischermädchen” (“The Fisher Maiden”) and the intensity of “Der Atlas.” The warmth and shadings of his voice were aptly mirrored by his excellent pianist, Keun-A Lee.The tenor Russell Thomas was to appear, but instead replaced an indisposed tenor in a New York Philharmonic performance, a switch made with Ms. Horne’s blessing. (Institutions must help one another, she said when explaining the substitution of the bass DeAndre Simmons.) Mr. Simmons used his elegant voice to fine effect in dramatically charged interpretations of Brahms’s “Vier Ernste Gesänge.”There were a few rough edges in the soprano Alison King’s performance of four songs by Pauline Viardot, but she infused the selections with plenty of character, as in a flirtatiously rendered “Havanaise” and a passionate “Scène d’Hermione,” in which she vividly conveyed the anguish of the jilted heroine.The program opened with a gracious performance of Schoenberg’s “Vier Lieder,” by the mezzo-soprano Cecelia Hall. Vividly accompanied by Renate Rohlfing, she sang with even greater fluidity and sensuality in Ravel’s “Cinq Mélodies Populaires Grecques.”“The Song Continues” also features a veteran singer each year. After offering a few anecdotes, including a depiction of the time Ms. Horne gave her an impromptu voice lesson on the corner of 65th Street and Broadway, the mezzo-soprano Susan Graham joined the ever-excellent Brian Zeger for selections including a sensual interpretation of Poulenc’s “Chemins de l’Amour.”A music review on Thursday about a concert culminating “The Song Continues” mini-festival, at Carnegie Hall, referred incorrectly to one of the performers, Susan Graham. She is a mezzo-soprano, not a soprano.A version of this review appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Celebrating the Art of Song.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.