By ALESSANDRA STANLEYJAN. 21, 2015
An annoying and offensive detective, Everett Backstrom (Rainn Wilson), is called to a wet, wooded campus crime scene where a student has been found dead, a possible suicide. “I’m a rich white senator’s pretty-boy son, I get up before the dawn in the pouring rain, and I hang myself from a bridge,” Backstrom asks aloud, puffing on a fat cigar. “Why?”“Backstrom,” a Fox series that begins Thursday, allows its hero to use this Socratic method a lot, one of his many irritating habits. So it’s only fair to pose the question: “I’m a Fox executive in search of a standout drama, yet I chose a pallid knockoff of the hit medical series ‘House,’ and worse yet, it’s an American adaptation of Swedish mystery novels. Why?”There must be a reason, but the show is so underwhelming that not many people will want to stick around to puzzle it out. At a time when so many excellent, imaginative crime shows abound, it’s almost insulting that Fox would squander energy, talent and money on this one.It certainly makes little sense to cast Mr. Wilson as a crime-fighting version of Dr. House, because Mr. Wilson, who was ideally suited to the role of workplace boor and petty tyrant on “The Office,” is a little too repellent here: He plays an overbearing, insulting bully without the underlay of sardonic wit and seductive charm that Hugh Laurie brought to his role as a brilliant doctor on “House.”AdvertisementFox may have thought it was getting a leg up by adapting the crime novels of Leif GW Persson before they were turned into a Swedish television series. But there may well be a good reason Swedish television has so far held back. Nordic noir has more than its share of depressed, unprepossessing detectives — the gloomy hero of “Wallander,” a Swedish series adapted by the British, is but one of many.AdvertisementIt would have probably been more interesting to shake expectations more boldly and make the unpleasant, annoying detective a woman.Rainn Wilson plays a surly detective in this new Fox series.Television has presented so many difficult or damaged heroes, but difficult women still have a ways to go. There have been ambitious loners like the one Helen Mirren played on “Prime Suspect” and Gillian Anderson plays on “The Fall.” Holly Hunter was a promiscuous, alcoholic detective on “Saving Grace,” and the heroine investigator of “The Bridge” was on the autism spectrum in both the Scandinavian version and the American adaptation.But the more ordinary aggravating heroines are a lot harder to find on television than in real life. Desk Sgt. Trudy Platt (Amy Morton) isn’t one of the lead characters of “Chicago P.D.” (NBC), but she is a sarcastic, mildly corrupt despot, and she stands out more than many of the show’s stars.We are long past the point of proving that a woman in law enforcement can be as good as a man; it’s more fun to explore how she can also be as bad.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Instead, Fox comes up with an out-of-shape, ill-mannered misanthrope who enjoys making sexist and racist remarks to his subordinates in the Special Crimes Unit of the Portland, Ore., police, and solves crimes by insulting suspects and making huge deductive leaps based less on observation than obstinacy — he follows his biases. Somehow, however, his colleagues, including the detective played by Dennis Haysbert (“24”), put up with his perversity. The women in the squad are just as patient, even Nadia Paquet (Beatrice Rosen), a French cybersavant and a civilian employee of the force who flirts with Backstrom over drinks and chess in his apartment.Backstrom, of course, has a mitigating back story — he lets it be known that he is the son of a seemingly perfect father who was abusive to him as a boy. He doesn’t hide his soft side very well, either. He allows a young, impudent gay man, a petty criminal and informant (Thomas Dekker), to live in his apartment.The most interesting thing about Backstrom is that he is not physically brave — when confronting an armed killer intent on escape, he is more jelly-kneed than most television cops.There isn’t much else. The detective is a self-loathing slob with a bad attitude and poor health, but a good mind. The crimes he solves are formulaic and predictable. The real mystery is why Fox wanted to broadcast “Backstrom.”And that may never be solved.BackstromFox, Thursday nights at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time.Produced by 20th Century Fox Television and Far Field Productions. Created by Hart Hanson, based on the novels by Leif G. W. Persson; Mr. Hanson, Kevin Hooks, Mr. Persson, Niclas Salomonsson and Mark Mylod (pilot only), executive producers.WITH: Rainn Wilson (Detective Lt. Everett Backstrom), Genevieve Angelson (Detective Nicole Gravely), Dennis Haysbert (Detective Sgt. John Almond), Kristoffer Polaha (Sgt. Peter Niedermayer), Page Kennedy (Officer Frank Moto), Beatrice Rosen (Nadia Paquet) and Thomas Dekker (Gregory Valentine).A version of this review appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Caustic Detective on the Beat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.