By MICHAEL COOPERJAN. 21, 2015
The composer and conductor Esa-Pekka Salonen will begin a three-year stint as composer in residence, and the bass-baritone Eric Owens will be named artist in residence. A Rachmaninoff festival will feature the pianist Daniil Trifonov, a Messiaen week will explore the legacy of the French composer and organist, and the NY Phil Biennial of new music will live up to its name by returning two years after it made its debut.The New York Philharmonic’s 2015-16 season, announced on Wednesday, will feature the mix of time-tested classics and innovative programs that have become hallmarks of the orchestra under Alan Gilbert, who will enter his seventh season as its music director.“There’s just so much great music to play, and one of the things I want to be able to do is provide New York with the possibility to hear these pieces played by the New York Philharmonic across a span of years,” Mr. Gilbert said in an interview. “It is a journey. There’s no endpoint, actually, as we continue to explore and try to find new things in even music that we’ve played a lot.”The season opens Sept. 24 with Mr. Gilbert conducting Beethoven’s Symphony No. 7 and Grieg’s Piano Concerto, featuring the pianist Lang Lang, at a gala concert to be broadcast nationally on “Live From Lincoln Center” on PBS stations.AdvertisementMahler, who was once the orchestra’s music director, will be featured prominently in the coming season: Mr. Gilbert will conduct “Das Lied von der Erde” with the baritone Thomas Hampson and Mahler’s Symphony No. 5; Semyon Bychkov will conduct his Symphony No. 6; Bernard Haitink will conduct his Symphony No. 9; and Mr. Owens will sing selections from “Des Knaben Wunderhorn.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Owens, who sang the role of Alberich in the Metropolitan Opera’s “Ring” cycle and is increasingly sought out as a Wotan, will fill that role when he sings the last scene of Wagner’s “Die Walküre” in a program with songs by Richard Strauss. He will also be the curator and host of “In Their Footsteps: Great African-American Singers and Their Legacy.” And in a different vein, he will perform Albert Hague’s “You’re a Mean One, Mr. Grinch,” based on Dr. Seuss’s “How the Grinch Stole Christmas!” at a holiday performance.AdvertisementThe Philharmonic will continue to explore film music, which has been popular with audiences, with its third season of the Art of the Score series in September. The music of “On the Waterfront,” by the orchestra’s former music director, Leonard Bernstein, will be performed live at a screening of the complete film, as will “The Godfather,” with its score by Nino Rota.Mr. Salonen, best known in the United States for his long tenure at the music director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic — and for starring last year in an iPad commercial that was shared widely online — will be featured in a number of roles. Mr. Gilbert will lead the New York premieres of Mr. Salonen’s “L.A. Variations” and “Karawane,” a humorous work based on Hugo Ball’s Dadaist poem, and the world premiere of a new Salonen work that will be played during the Biennial festival.As a conductor, Mr. Salonen will conduct Messiaen’s “Turangalîla Symphony” in March during the Philharmonic’s Messiaen Week. The week will also feature an unusual concert at the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s Temple of Dendur: Mr. Gilbert will put down his baton and play the violin in a performance of Messiaen’s “Quartet for the End of Time” that will also feature the Philharmonic’s principal cello, Carter Brey; its principal clarinet, Anthony McGill; and the pianist Inon Barnatan.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Philharmonic Outlines 2015-16 Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.