AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HeymanEach year, the classical music listings site Bachtrack.com publishes statistics based on more than 20,000 performances, including major orchestral concerts and chamber music recitals. The results offer a glimpse into the changing dynamics of classical music — from the declining age of top conductors to the sudden popularity of certain composers.Since 2010, the world’s most-performed composer has alternated between Beethoven and Mozart; Bach typically comes in third. Beyond this venerable trio, however, the pecking order of composers becomes more variable depending on the year. In 2014, for instance, Maurice Ravel and Antonin Dvorak broke into the Top 10 for the very first time.Mark Pullinger, the classical and opera editor of the London-based Bachtrack, said that not only are Dvorak’s last three symphonies enjoying a peak popularity — his Symphony No. 9 was among the most-performed works in 2014 — but that string quartets have also been exploring his repertoire with a new vigor. In Ravel’s case, Mr. Pullinger said, many of his works are beloved by pianists who build recitals around pieces like “Gaspard de la nuit” or “Alborada del gracioso.”But it is not only the vagaries of taste that influence the standing of certain composers. The Bachtrack figures show that an anniversary tied to a composer’s birth or death is actually the greatest source of diversity in the Top 10 list. In 2014, for the 150th anniversary of his birth, Richard Strauss broke into the Top 10 for the first time at position No. 6. In 2013, the 20th-century British composer Benjamin Britten (born 1913) moved into the fourth position with over 1,600 performances — more than either Schubert or Brahms.Bachtrack also publishes an annual list of the world’s busiest conductors. Over the past five years, the average age of this group has dropped by over a decade, to 50 from 62. Mr. Pullinger said the decline corresponded to a “changing of the guard” among the world’s top conductors, as many older marquee names like Charles Dutoit and Herbert Blomstedt have cut down on their commitments. That has offered a chance for conductors in their 30s — like Gustavo Dudamel, Yannick Nézet-Séguin and Andris Nelsons — “to cement their positions as the next generation of conductors to watch,” Mr. Pullinger said. “They are much in demand by orchestras around the globe.” Advertisement