CaDance Festival
Various venues.
Jan. 30-Feb. 15.
Audiences are invited to partake in a small brunch and then roam with dancers through the city’s grand estates for “4 x 4: the fellowship of the dance,” one piece in this lively festival. The event, staged by Korzo, one of Amsterdam’s leading dance houses, assembles a wide array of contemporary Dutch dance groups, including the Nederlands Dans Theater (which will perform a new piece by Marcus Goecke), and the choreographer Joeri Dubbe. International works include a hip-hop take on “Swan Lake” by the Korean choreographer Ahn Soo-young.Mark Bradford: Tears of a Tree
Rockbund Art Museum.
Jan. 31-May 3.
Shanghai’s blend of Chinese, colonial and late-capitalist cultural influences inspired several new artworks by the MacArthur “genius” grant winner Mark Bradford, each of which will stretch across 40 feet of exhibition space in this show. His collage paintings, which incorporate disparate materials like rope and crumpled paper, often focus on the legacy of colonialism. In addition to the new works, the exhibition also includes some hanging sculptures by Mr. Bradford, who is based in Los Angeles.Painter and Painting: A Mehmet Guleryuz Retrospective
Istanbul Modern.
Through June 28.
The Turkish artist Mehmet Guleryuz (born 1938) began his career as an actor — staging protest pieces and performance interventions in France — before turning his attention to painting, drawing and installation work. This show brings together pieces from across Mr. Guleryuz’s long career, juxtaposing his writings with his visual artworks, which range from nostalgic maritime scenes to Pop Art sculptures.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Strings
Opernhaus Zürich.
Through June 19.
The Romanian choreographer Edward Clug — whose past works include a “Romeo and Juliet” set to music by Radiohead — has created “Chamber Minds,” a pared-down new piece, for this triple bill. The two other works showing are “Das Siebte Blau” (The Seventh Blue), a modern dance piece by Christian Spuck; and “Workwithinwork,” a ballet by William Forsythe set to a frenetically paced violin score. Future Generation Art Prize Exhibitions
PinchukArtCentre.
Through April 4.
The Colombian Carlos Motta and the Angolan Nástio Mosquito, two of the art world’s fastest rising stars, were awarded the Future Generation Art Prize at a ceremony in Kiev in December by a panel of prominent judges including the Colombian visual artist Doris Salcedo and the Belgian choreographer Jan Fabre. Their art works (which include a replica of a sex toy by Mr. Motta and video installations by Mr. Mosquito) are showing here alongside works by the other nominees. The museum is also displaying work by several prominent “patrons” of the art prize including the British artist Damien Hirst. Conflict, Time, Photography
Tate Modern.
Through March 15.
This exhibition explores various artistic responses to war; with some of the photographs taken in the immediate aftermath of a strike, while others record the legacy of war decades later. Artists include the French photographer Emeric Lhuisset, whose work here focuses on Sardasht Osman, a Kurdish student who was kidnapped in 2010 from his university campus in Erbil, Iraq, and killed. In 2011, Mr. Lhuisset printed unfixed photographs of Mr. Osman and pasted them around his campus so that as the sun rose the photographs faded to black. 
Rubens and His Legacy: Van Dyck to Cézanne 
Royal Academy of Arts.
Through April 10.
Constable’s landscapes, Watteau’s oils and Eugène Delacroix’s hunting scenes all figure in this exhibition, which explores the influence of the Flemish painter Peter Paul Rubens. The show sets work by Rubens (like his circa 1617 painting of Pan pursuing the nymph Syrinx, which he painted jointly with Jan Brueghel the Elder) alongside later artists, showing his influence on subject matter and technique. As part of the exhibition, the contemporary British artist Jenny Saville has created a “personal response” to the show, choosing works by major modern and contemporary artists, including de Kooning, Bacon and Picasso as well as some new works of her own created specially for the display. Simon Starling: “Bowls, Plates” and “El Eco”
Luis Barragán House and Studio and Museo Experimental El Eco.
Through March 8 and 15.
The Turner Prize winner artist Simon Starling created several site-specific works for this two-part show. For the Luis Barragán House, a Unesco World Heritage Site, Mr. Starling made a series of daguerreotypes inspired by the building’s sleek mid-century design. For El Eco, the artist created a film inspired in part by the museum’s founder, Mathias Goeritz (1915-1990), an eccentric German who opened the museum in the early 1950s to create a home for radical art in Central America. The exhibition at El Eco includes pieces of a multipart artwork that fuses motifs from Moore’s life with images from Noh, the Japanese theater tradition. Die Fledermaus
New National Theater.
Jan. 29-Feb. 8.
Strauss’s effervescent send-up of Viennese high society is considered a high point of the operetta genre. This production, directed by Heinz Zednik, features the baritone Adrian Eröd as Eisenstein, a well-to-do man who stops in at a party on the night he is due to be incarcerated. The production appears during a particularly busy stretch for Tokyo’s leading opera house: a production of “Der Fliegende Holländer” plays through the end of the month and the ballet “La Bayadère” runs from Feb. 17 to 22.