By KATHRYN SHATTUCKJAN. 23, 2015
5:30 P.M. (FX Movie Channel) THE GIRL WITH THE DRAGON TATTOO (2011) Daniel Craig stars as a crusading Swedish journalist hired by a wealthy industrialist (Christopher Plummer) to investigate the disappearance of his niece 40 years earlier in this adaptation of the Stieg Larsson novel, directed by David Fincher. Rooney Mara, in an Oscar-nominated performance, is Lisbeth Salander, the vulnerable yet ruthlessly competent computer hacker who helps him solve the mystery. “She is a marvelous pop-culture character, stranger and more complex than the average superhero and more intriguing than the usual boy wizards and vampire brides,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times about Lisbeth, first played by Noomi Rapace in the 2010 Swedish adaptation. “It has been her fate, unfortunately, to make her furious, uninspiring way through a series of plodding and ungainly stories.” And “despite the slick intensity of Mr. Fincher’s style, his movie is not immune to the same lumbering proceduralism,” Mr. Scott said, while acknowledging that “Mr. Fincher’s impressive skill is evident.”6:05 P.M. (Starz Cinema) WAKING LIFE (2001) This treatise on perception from the director Richard Linklater superimposes animation on live-action video for what Stephen Holden, writing in The Times, called “a witty, cosmic wow of a movie.” Julie Delpy and Ethan Hawke, from Mr. Linklater’s “Before Sunrise” trilogy, are among the host of characters pontificating on the trials and tribulations of human consciousness to Wiley Wiggins, the protagonist facing an identity crisis. The film “leaves you buoyed and a little awe-struck at the crazy quilt of human experience,” Mr. Holden added. “It feels like a hearty cinematic slice of America’s dream life as it really is.”9 P.M. (13) RICKY JAY: DECEPTIVE PRACTICE “American Masters” explores the sleight of hand of Mr. Jay, a Brooklyn-born conjurer who began working as an apprentice for his magician grandfather at 4 before making his way onto television at 7 and, as an adult, onto “The Dinah Shore Show,” where he won a bet playing three-card monte against Steve Martin. Eventually, Mr. Jay would write books on magic and act in the films “Boogie Nights” and “Magnolia” and the HBO series “Deadwood.” Here, he talks about mentors, including Charlie Miller and Dai Vernon, while collaborators like David Mamet explain why Mr. Jay is one of the world’s masters of magic. Dick Cavett narrates this 29th season opener. At 10, Audra McDonald hosts “The Richard Tucker Opera Gala: A New Century,” a “Live From Lincoln Center” presentation honoring Michael Fabiano, the 2014 Richard Tucker Award winner, and featuring performances by Joseph Calleja, Angela Meade, Zeljko Lucic, Ildar Abdrazakov and Pretty Yende.9 P.M. (TLC) LOVE, LUST OR RUN Stacy London, the style maven behind the defunct series “What Not to Wear,” returns to TLC armed with advice — this time for women who seem to have no idea how their fashion choices are affecting their lives. At the beginning of each episode, strangers on the street are asked to rate a woman’s style as “love,” “lust” or “run.” Then the women strip off their hair extensions, overdone makeup and outlandish clothes to create a blank slate on which Ms. London can work her transformative magic before returning to the street for another assessment. The series begins with Ms. London’s makeunder of Tanika, who wants to trade in her mesh tops and thigh-high boots for attire her 9-year-old daughter can be proud of. At 9:30, Ms. London turns her attention to Mika, a mohawk-wearing metal-head in search of a look that’s a little less aggressive. A marathon featuring each episode of “What Not to Wear: Stacy’s Top 10” leads in, starting at 11 a.m.What’s Streaming NowBLANK ON BLANK In “Elliott Smith on Freaks,” the singer-songwriter — who struggled with depression and addiction, and died in 2003 from what some believed to have been self-inflicted stab wounds to the chest — speaks with the journalist Barney Hoskyns about freaks, dependents (as he calls addicts) and chaos. The 1998 interview, animated for this PBS Digital Studios series, was recorded just a few weeks after Mr. Smith performed his Oscar-nominated song, “Miss Misery,” from the film “Good Will Hunting,” at the Academy Awards ceremony. (blankonblank.org)A version of this schedule appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page C24 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.