AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel GraeberNote: With the snowstorm forcing cancellations across the city on Monday, we advise that you check with venues before setting out to events scheduled for Monday or Tuesday.Thalia Kids’ Book Club: 40th Anniversary of ‘Tuck Everlasting’In 1975, Natalie Babbitt published “Tuck Everlasting,” about a family whose members have become immortal by drinking from a secret woodland spring.You might think that this magical water had also found its way into the novel’s ink: Never out of print, the book has won literary prizes and been adapted into two movies and a musical intended for Broadway. Now Macmillan Children’s Publishing Group has issued a 40th-anniversary edition, which Symphony Space will celebrate on Sunday.Ms. Babbitt, however, proposes a less mystical reason for the book’s popularity. “It’s about death, and the essentialness of that,” she said in a telephone interview from her home in Hamden, Conn. “It’s something that we all have to recognize, but it’s usually not talked about.”Especially not around children, at least not in the ’70s. One mother told her she was horrified, Ms. Babbitt said. “In Texas, a father socked a principal in the nose for having such a book in the school library,” she recalled.Critics and young readers, however, were enthusiastic, and children attending Sunday’s event, part of the Thalia Kids’ Book Club series, can try a writing exercise based on the novel and meet Ms. Babbitt, 82, who will answer questions and sign copies. Gregory Maguire, author of the novel “Wicked,” who wrote the introduction to the new edition of “Tuck Everlasting,” will interview her about its origins, which she traces to her daughter, Lucy, about 7 at the time.“I caught her crying over the fact that she’d have to die someday,” said Ms. Babbitt, who had already written a number of acclaimed children’s novels. “So I thought I’d write a story.” Her late-1800s heroine, Winnie Foster, not quite 11, accidentally discovers the truth about the Tucks, who try to convince Winnie that the water that they unknowingly drank brings misery, not joy. (On Sunday, Ms. Babbitt’s husband, Samuel Fisher Babbitt, will read the part in which Angus Tuck, the patriarch, explains this.)Winnie’s reactions, however, are complicated by the intrusions of a huckster who’s learned the secret and by her growing attachment to the Tucks’ younger son, Jesse, who suggests that she drink from the spring when she reaches his age — 17 — so they can be together forever. The epilogue reveals her choice.“The thing I really wanted to say was not so much, ‘Hey, you’re going to die,' ” Ms. Babbitt said, “but that there’s a pattern and that we’re all part of it.”(At 1 p.m., Leonard Nimoy Thalia Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street; 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.) LAUREL GRAEBERFor Children‘All Aboard With Thomas & Friends’ (Friday through Sunday) In winter, the New York Botanical Garden becomes as much a train station as a plant-filled paradise. While the Holiday Train Show has closed, the garden is still offering “All Aboard With Thomas & Friends,” a mini-performance featuring Thomas the Tank Engine and Driver Sam, of storybook and television fame. Children can help the characters as they decorate the train station for a big surprise party and pose for photos with Thomas at the end of the singalong show, which closes this weekend. Friday at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m., Saturday and Sunday at 11 a.m. and 1:30 and 3:30 p.m., Ross Hall, Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx; 718-817-8777, nybg.org. Advance purchase is recommended for “All Aboard” shows; those buying online must choose the tickets that specify mini-performances and reserve a time.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’  (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; until 4 p.m. on Fridays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Click, Clack, Moo’ (Sunday) These dairy workers need a union. But they’re not farm employees — they’re cows. Theatreworks/USA is reviving its very funny musical adaptation of Doreen Cronin’s picture book about the members of a herd who take to typing up their workplace grievances (hence the title). With a book by Billy Aronson, who’s updated the story so that the cows now use a laptop; music by Brad Alexander; and lyrics by Kevin del Aguila, the show is recommended for theater (and milk) fans 4 and older. (Also on Feb. 1.) At 11 a.m., Kaye Playhouse, Hunter College, 68th Street, between Lexington and Park Avenues, 212-772-4448, theatreworksusa.org.Come Join the Band! Concert (Sunday) The creators of this enterprise aren’t kidding: Come Join the Band!, an after-school program for ages 4 through 18, helps students learn musical instruments by, yes, playing in a group with experienced adult mentors. Developed by Stephen Jacobs of the Dirty Sock Funtime Band, the program will show off its talents at this free show, which will pair students with members of Mr. Jacobs’s band, the Blue Man Group and others. Audience members will be encouraged to perform, too, and help write an original song. At 1 p.m., Drom, 85 Avenue A, between Fifth and Sixth Streets, East Village, 646-373-3146, comejointheband.com.Concert With Betsy Blachly and Henry Chapin (Sunday) Folk singing has never gone out of style, and Betsy Blachly and Henry Chapin, married performers, celebrate the American vein of this tradition. Following the example set by Pete Seeger, they’ll offer both songs and stories at this concert, a benefit for Yaldaynu Preschool. At 11 a.m. (doors open at 10:45), Ansche Chesed Synagogue, 251 West 100th Street, Manhattan, 212-866-4993.EcoCruises: Winter Seals and Waterbirds of New York Harbor (Sunday) A lot of tourists visit New York in the winter, but some of the most interesting won’t be found in the crowds at Times Square. These two-hour cruises from New York City Audubon focus on birds that migrate to this region at this time of year, like many ducks and geese. They also visit the harbor seals that can be found around Governors, Hoffman and Swinburne Islands. (Seal behavior researchers will take part in several of the tours.) An Audubon naturalist narrates the adventures, which include complimentary hot tea and cocoa and are conducted via New York Water Taxi. Warm clothing and binoculars are recommended, as is advance purchase. (Through March 8.) Sundays at noon (except Feb. 1), Pier 16, South Street Seaport, 89 South Street, near Fulton Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-742-1969, nywatertaxi.com/tours/audubon-winter.‘Everything About a Family (Almost)’ (Saturday and Sunday) It’s a pretty inexhaustible topic, but Tada! Youth Theater has captured much of the fun and frustrations of family life in this one-hour musical, which had its premiere in 2009. Now the show is being revived by the troupe, whose young members developed the plotline themselves and selected the songs from submissions by professional composers and lyricists. The humorous conceit is an adolescent given — wanting a different family — but the results, set at a couple of different reunions, are often unexpectedly poignant. (Through Feb. 16.) At 2 and 4 p.m., Tada! Theater, 15 West 28th Street, Manhattan; 212-252-1619, Ext. 5, tadatheater.com.‘Fancy Nancy the Musical’  (Saturday and Sunday) One of the arts’ youngest divas has returned to the McGinn/Cazale Theater. This musical from Vital Theater Company, revived through Jan. 31, focuses on a little girl who wants everything to be fancy — especially herself. Based on the book series written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, the production explores the predicament that ensues when Nancy finds out that she hasn’t been cast as the glamorous mermaid she’d hoped to be in the coming dance show. With a book by Susan DiLallo, a score by Danny Abosch, and lyrics by both, the musical humorously follows Nancy’s attempts to cope with a most unfancy role: that of a tree. At 1:30 p.m., 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month; Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.Inventgenuity Festival (Saturday and Sunday) This urban Woodstock for budding young scientists, engineers, artists and dreamers has returned for its sixth year. Geared to children from second grade through high school, the two-day festival, to which admission is free, is inspired by Beam Camp, a New Hampshire summer program in applied arts and technology, and sponsored by Beam Center, a Brooklyn workshop program devoted to the same. With the guidance of adult mentors, young participants can take part in a project devoted to this year’s theme, “Balance”: They’ll construct a 20-foot-tall spinning sculpture designed by Brett Van Aalsburg. They can also participate in drop-in activities and sign up for workshops (these have a materials fee) in crafts and engineering. From 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., the Invisible Dog Art Center, 51 Bergen Street, near Smith Street, third floor, Cobble Hill, 347-470-6747, beamcenter.org/festival. Advance registration is required.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one will sprout indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which is reviving Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor will now star in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Weekdays, except Mondays, at 10:30 a.m. and noon (with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.); weekends at 1 p.m. (The 10:30 shows on Tuesday and Thursday are sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.Kids ‘N Comedy: ‘New Beginnings’ Show (Sunday) The class clown gets applause, not detention, at this series, in which tween and teenage comics perform stand-up. Here they offer a show focusing on the new year and all those resolutions — the ones everyone is already breaking. The material is recommended for children 9 and older, but there’s no need to worry about appropriateness (profanity is banned) or knock-knock jokes (this crew is sophisticated). Reservations required. At 1 p.m., Gotham Comedy Club, 208 West 23rd Street, Chelsea, 212-877-6115, kidsncomedy.com.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.‘Lionboy’ (Friday through Sunday) Charlie Ashanti may not be a superhero, but he does have one extraordinary power: He can talk to cats. The hero of “Lionboy,” adapted by Marcelo Dos Santos from the science-fiction trilogy by the mother-daughter team known as Zizou Corder, Charlie is out to rescue his parents, who’ve been taken by the evil organization known as the Corporacy. The first family show from the British company Complicite, “Lionboy” uses shadow puppetry, acrobatics and African instruments to tell Charlie’s tale. (Through Feb. 1.) Fridays at 7 p.m.; Saturdays at 2 and 7 p.m.; Sundays at noon; New Victory Theater, 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan; 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.MAD Family Day (Saturday) No one’s angry or crazy here — MAD stands for the Museum of Arts and Design, which will invite children to investigate its exhibition “New Territories: Laboratories for Design, Craft and Art in Latin America.” Then they can take part in workshops connected to the show, which will include weaving baskets and creating light fixtures from recycled water bottles. Among the other highlights are meeting a designer in the artist studios and watching short films from the New York International Children’s Film Festival. From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., 2 Columbus Circle, Manhattan, 212-299-7777, madmuseum.org.La MaMa Kids: ‘Seucy and Boto: Stories of the Amazon Jungle’ (Saturday) La MaMa, the downtown theater famous for cultivating cutting-edge adults, has in recent years been turning its attention to cutting-edge kids, too. This series for families, which presents interactive workshops and performances, kicks off a new season with “Seucy and Boto,” created by Federico Restrepo and Denise Greber. Presented by the company Loco7, this Latin American tale features music, body puppets and oversize marionettes in an adventure that pits a little girl and her half-boy, half-dolphin sidekick against a tree-eating monster. At 11 a.m., 74 East Fourth Street, East Village, 212-475- 7710, lamama.org.Mil’s Trills Winter Bash (Sunday) Not many ensembles are built around an electric ukulele, but that instrument is the specialty of Amelia Robinson, founder of the children’s music series Mil’s Trills. For this annual celebration, she invites a host of performing guests. Audience members will get involved, too: Families are encouraged to bring drums, shakers and all kinds of instruments for jamming and dancing. At 11 a.m., ShapeShifter Lab, 18 Whitwell Place, near Carroll Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, milstrills.com.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.Moona Luna (Saturday) When Sandra Velasquez, lead singer of the Latin band Pistolera, gave birth to her daughter, she also had a brainchild: Why not apply the group’s talents to children’s music? The result is Moona Luna, an ensemble that offers snappy Latin tunes with bilingual lyrics. At this concert, part of the Just Kidding series at Symphony Space, the band will include tunes from its second album, “Vamos, Let’s Go!” At 11 a.m., Leonard Nimoy Thalia Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.New Year’s Celebration: Oshogatsu (Sunday) American New Year’s celebrations are now over, but many Asian ones are just beginning. Local children can enjoy them all in the fifth CelebrAsia NYC: New Year’s Festivities for Families, a three-month festival. The fun kicks off this weekend with Japan Society’s Oshogatsu, which will include taiko drumming (young people can take part in a practice session at 2 or 3 p.m.), lion dancing, rice pounding, kite making, top spinning and other traditional games. From 2 to 4 p.m., 333 East 47th Street, Manhattan, 212-715-1258, japansociety.org.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through May 9.) Saturdays at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, 13thstreetrep.org.‘Somebody Come and Play: 45 Years of “Sesame Street” Helping Kids Grow Smarter, Stronger, and Kinder’ (Friday, Saturday, and Monday through Thursday) Sesame Street now has an additional address: the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts. This free show showcases more than 250 artifacts related to the beloved preschool public television series “Sesame Street,” including set designs, original sketches for characters, scripts, storyboards, animation cels, Claymation models, videos and, of course, over 20 Muppets, among them Elmo, Zoe and Bert and Ernie. A children’s area includes “Sesame Street” books and activities. (Through Jan. 31.) Daily, except Sundays, from noon to 6 p.m.; to 8 p.m. on Mondays and Thursdays; 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, Lincoln Center, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/lpa.‘Taste of the World — Kids Kitchen’ (Saturday and Sunday) All travelers need to take time to eat, even if they’re zooming through space in zero gravity. This new segment of The New York Times Travel Show (the show is free to those 18 and under) will offer children a chance to investigate international — and perhaps interstellar — cuisine. The events will include children’s cooking classes with professional chefs and organizations like Spoons Across America; demonstrations by Green Bronx Machine, an urban farming educational program in the Bronx; and, each day at 2 p.m., experiments in food science with Bill Yosses, former executive pastry chef at the White House. His guests will include Steve Howell, a NASA scientist (Saturday only) and science officers from the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum. Saturday from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, 655 West 34th Street, Manhattan, nyttravelshow.com/general-information/family-fun-zone.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 10:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Through Feb. 19, the museum features the exhibit “A-Maze N’ Shabbat,” whose activities include a challah-braiding workshop and a life-size maze that teaches about the Jewish sabbath. Hours: Mondays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; until 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Danny Weinkauf Family Concert (Sunday) Danny Weinkauf plays bass and writes music for They Might Be Giants, but he’s something of a giant on his own, too. With his group the Red Pants Band, he recorded “No School Today,” an album that won a Parents’ Choice Award last year. This weekend he and the band will perform at the Jewish Museum, playing songs from his entire career. At 2 p.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org.Winter Jam: N.Y.C.’s Ultimate Snow Day (Saturday) In case you’ve been forgetting what’s fun about snow, this annual festival from the city’s Department of Parks & Recreation will remind you. The free event, to be held this year in Central Park, will provide lessons and demonstrations in skiing and snowboarding, as well as opportunities to snowshoe, cross-country ski and sled. (Some activities require signed waivers and an accompanying adult if the participant is under 18.) The weather need not cooperate: Gore Mountain, one of the sponsors, will contribute plenty of artificial snow. Equipment will be supplied, too, though revelers may take their own. From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., Central Park Bandshell, midpark at 72nd Street, 212-360-8216, nycgovparks.org. (Waiting lines for some events may close early.) LAUREL GRAEBERAdvertisement