By MEGHAN RICE and JOSHUA BARONEJAN. 22, 2015
Note: With the snowstorm forcing cancellations across the city on Monday — including the postponement of a Tuesday night event at the Museum of Jewish Heritage to mark International Holocaust Remembrance Day — we advise that you check with venues before setting out to events scheduled for Monday or Tuesday.Around TownMuseums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and other diseases? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out diseases. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Grolier Club: ‘One Hundred Books Famous in Children’s Literature’ (through Feb. 7) Early editions of children’s literary classics printed from 1600 to 2000 — including “Robinson Crusoe,” “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland” and “Tom Sawyer” — are on display along with more than 50 artifacts. Tuesday through Saturday from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., 47 East 60th Street, Manhattan, 212-838-6690, grolierclub.org; free.Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum: ‘Masters of Disguise: The World of Camouflage’ (through Feb. 24) The art of camouflage in nature and its appropriation by hunters and the armed forces are explored in this exhibition, which uses digital images, artifacts and interactive elements to showcase how color, shade and shapes can be used to deceive the eye. Daily, from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.AdvertisementMake It: 3D Modeling with TinkerCAD (Sunday) The New York Hall of Science is giving children a chance to learn computer-aided design. Participants will work with a free, Internet-based program called TinkerCAD to translate their ideas into 3-D models. The event is recommended for children ages 9 and older. At 1:30 p.m., Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, 47-01 111th Street, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.AdvertisementMuseum of Chinese in America: ‘MOCACitizen: Letter From #UndocuAsians’ (Thursday) The experiences of undocumented American-Asian youths will be read by members of the group Raise (Revolutionizing Asian American Immigrant Stories on the East Coast). The event will be followed by a discussion on immigration and immigration policies. From 7 to 8:30 p.m., 215 Centre Street, between Howard and Grand Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-619-4785, mocanyc.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Chinese American: Exclusion/Inclusion’ (through April 19) In his review for The New York Times, Edward Rothstein called it a “vigorous and imaginative new exhibition,” that includes a look at “how Chinese-American identity came to be, how immigration and discrimination were followed by recrimination and conflict, and how, finally, a people’s trials give way to celebration.” Friday, Tuesday through Thursday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Saturday from 3 to 6 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Public Library for the Performing Arts: ‘Emily Dickinson: Musician and Poet’ (through March 6) Emily Dickinson’s poems and letters as well as the library’s collection of her work provide the backdrop for this exhibition, which focuses on the musical side of her writing. Dickinson’s musical identity encompassed piano performances, the collection of sheet music and concert outings, and those experiences are detailed here. Friday, Saturday, Tuesday and Wednesday from noon to 6 p.m.; Monday and Thursday from noon to 8 p.m.; 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/lpa; free.New York Transit Museum Annex: Holiday Train Show (through Feb. 22) This free annual treat for model train enthusiasts, featuring vintage Lionel trains, is on display in Grand Central Terminal. Weekdays from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; at Grand Central Terminal, near the Station Master’s Office; mta.info/mta/museum.Thunderbird American Indian Dancers (Saturday) New York’s oldest Native American dance company will perform a series of intertribal dances, which will be lead by Louis Mofsie, a Brooklyn native who is also a member of the Hopi and Winnebago tribes. Most of the troupe’s performances involve audience participation, so expect to take part in the lively stories the dancers tell. At 7 p.m., National Museum of the American Indian, 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.GardensBrooklyn Botanic Garden: ‘Patience, Paper, Pen and Brush’ (through Tuesday) This garden has served as inspiration for the illustrator Dick Rauh, a fellow of the Brooklyn Botanic Garden Florilegium Society. Now his drawings, paintings and chapbooks (which contain plant illustrations and poems) are on display at the garden’s Steinhardt Conservatory Gallery. Friday through Sunday and Tuesday from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., 990 Washington Avenue, at Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, 718-623-7200, bbg.org.EventsInternational Holocaust Remembrance Day Events (Tuesday and Wednesday) For its observation of the 70th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz on Tuesday, the Center for Jewish History will show footage from the anniversary ceremony at Auschwitz-Birkenau starting at 4 p.m. Afterward, it will host a conversation with Holocaust survivors and a reception with refreshments and music. The event is free, but reservations are required. 15 West 16th Street, near Fifth Avenue, 212-294-8301, cjh.org. Later on Tuesday, at 6 p.m., attendees will be transported to the Museum of Jewish Heritage, 36 Battery Place, Lower Manhattan, for a free remembrance program, “Stories of Regeneration From the Second Generation,” in which children of Holocaust survivors will speak of their experiences growing up. More details: 646-437-4200, mjhnyc.org. On Wednesday at 7 p.m., the museum will screen “Above and Beyond,” Roberta Grossman’s documentary about a group of Jewish-American World War II veterans who smuggled planes out of the United States and then flew them for Israel during its War of Independence in 1948. Among those featured in the film are Danny Shapira, a test pilot; George Lichter, a former United States Army Air Force pilot who became Israel’s chief flight instructor; and Leon Frankel, a bomber pilot and recipient of the Navy Cross. “Above and Beyond” also includes interviews with the surviving pilots, scholars and politicians.AdvertisementJ.P. Morgan Tournament of Champions (Friday) This annual contest at Grand Central Terminal’s Vanderbilt Hall, where the world’s top-ranked professional squash players have been competing for the past week, will conclude on Friday with the men’s and women’s finals. Ticket information and a schedule are at tocsquash.com.New York Boat Show (through Sunday) This annual event is celebrating its 110th anniversary this year. There will be kayaks, sailboats and yachts, as well as an array of marine technologies and accessories on display. The highlight on Friday will be the celebration of the New York City Fire Department’s 150th anniversary. Friday from noon to 9 p.m., Saturday from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m., Sunday from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, 655 West 34th Street, Manhattan, 212-216-2000, nyboatshow.com.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Songbook: Broadway’s Future (Monday) Rodgers and Hammerstein, Bock and Harnick, Kander and Ebb — who will be the next lyricists to join the canon of Broadway writing? The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts hosts a free concert in which Broadway vocalists will sing new music by the notable lyricists of today. At 6 p.m., 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, Lincoln Center, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/lpa.Sound Off Ice Skating (Sunday) Despite the groups of skaters, the ice skating rink at South Street Seaport may seem a lot quieter than you’d expect. But that’s because skaters will have wireless headphones sets, through which they can tune into one of two music channels and adjust the volume to their content. The music will come from DJ Headtrip, who will be performing a live set. At 5 p.m., South Street Seaport, Fulton and Front Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-732-7678, southstreetseaport.com.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesdays) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotes (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a round of drinks, and there are chances to win drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videology.info.Spoken WordArtists in Conversation in Brooklyn: Miranda July and Misty Copeland (Monday and Wednesday) The week begins with a free discussion with the American Theater Ballet dancer Misty Copeland, whose 2014 memoir, “Life in Motion: An Unlikely Ballerina,” is being released in paperback. Bedford Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation and Greenlight Bookstore host the event, which will include a book signing. Monday at 7 p.m., Billie Holiday Theater, 1368 Fulton Street, at Marcy Avenue, Bedford-Stuyvesant. On Wednesday, Ms. July, a filmmaker and artist, will discuss her debut novel, “The First Bad Man,” with Lena Dunham, the star and creator of “Girls” who recently released a memoir, “Not That Kind of Girl.” Wednesday at 8 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene. More details: 718-636-4100, bam.org.Defending New York: Henrik Lundqvist, Mike Richter and Eddie Giacomin (Monday) Steiner Sports brings together two former goaltenders from the New York Rangers, Mike Richter and Eddie Giacomin, as well as the team’s current goalie, Henrik Lundqvist. The players will talk about what motivates them, what they are most proud of and what their lives are like off the ice. At 6:30 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org.Dinaw Mengestu  (Saturday, Tuesday and Wednesday) Several events this week will feature this acclaimed Ethiopian writer, whose novels include 2007’s “All Our Names.” On Saturday he will visit the Bernie Wohl Center to kick off Goddard Riverside’s Big Read. The event will highlight his Ethiopian culture and feature stagings of scenes from “The Beautiful Things That Heaven Bears.” On Tuesday, Mr. Mengestu will visit BAMcafé as part of its Eat, Drink and Be Literary series to discuss his works, answer questions and sign books. On Wednesday, he will return to the Bernie Wohl Center for a discussion of “The Beautiful Things That Heaven Bears.” On Saturday and Wednesday at 7 p.m., the Bernie Wohl Center, 647 Columbus Avenue, at West 92nd Street, 212-873-6600, goddard.org. Tuesday at 6:30 p.m., BAMcafé, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org.David Shields With Richard Nash (Tuesday) Mr. Shields, a writer and professor, and Caleb Powell, a stay at home dad, spent four days in a cabin to debate art and the merits of their life choices. That experience is the basis of their book, “I Think You’re Totally Wrong: A Quarrel.” At this event, Mr. Shields will discuss the book and other matters with Richard Nash, an independent publisher. At 7 p.m., Community Bookstore, 143 Seventh Avenue, between Carroll Street and Garfield Place, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-783-3075, communitybookstore.net.AdvertisementElizabeth Wurtzel (Wednesday) Ms. Wurtzel, most famous for her memoir “Prozac Nation,” celebrates the release of her latest work, “Creatocracy,” a book-length essay in which she traces the birth of Hollywood to the principles behind the Constitution. In conversation with Ms. Wurtzel will be David Samuels, author of “Only Love Can Break Your Heart.” At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.Walking Tours‘Edgar Allan Poe’s Greenwich Village’ (Saturday) On the heels of Edgar Allan Poe’s 206th birthday, Boroughs of the Dead hosts a walking tour that will visit three of Poe’s homes in Greenwich Village, places he frequented to write and where he first read “The Raven” in public. The 90-minute tour begins at 7 p.m. at Poe House, 85 West Third Street, between Thompson and Sullivan Streets, 646-932-0680, boroughsofthedead.com.Flatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.NYC Discovery Walking Tours: The Customs House and Titanic History Tour (Saturday and Sunday) Stops on this indoor tour include the Customs House in Lower Manhattan, which once anchored New York’s steamship district and sites and memorials associated with the Titanic. The tour takes place on Saturday at 3:45 p.m. and Sunday at 2:45 p.m., and the meeting place will be provided with reservations, which can be made at 212-465-3331.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org. MEGHAN RICE AND JOSHUA BARONEInformation on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. A version of this schedule appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page C35 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.