AdvertisementSupported by Museums and galleries are in Manhattan unless otherwise noted. Full reviews of recent art shows: nytimes.com/art. A searchable guide to these and many other art shows is at nytimes.com/events.Museums  American Folk Art Museum: ‘A Shared Legacy: Folk Art in America’  (through March 8) Drawn from a private collection, this beguiling show presents more than 60 choice objects including paintings, drawings, sculptures, furniture, painted chests and knickknacks made between 1800 and 1920. Altogether they embody a paradox for modern viewers: They evoke a world and a way of life that modernity has eclipsed, and yet they feel as vivid as anything you might desire in the art of today. 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 66th Street, 212-595-9533, folkartmuseum.org. (Ken Johnson)★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Killer Heels: The Art of the High-Heeled Shoe’ (through March 1) Whether you view extra-high heels with lust or horror, as objects of empowerment or objectification, this in-depth survey of elevating footwear from past and present, East and West, is a model of the curatorial craft. It examines its subject from several fruitful angles, including unflattering ones, interspersed with excellent labels, relevant objects of art and especially design, clips from famous films and videos both didactic and artistic. Its main flaw: dim lighting dictated by fragile materials means that some shoes are most visible in the catalog. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Roberta Smith)★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Judith Scott — Bound and Unbound’  (through March 29) Judith Scott’s mesmerizing sculptures sit like large, unopened bundles, contents mysterious, in the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art at the Brooklyn Museum. In a few, solid forms can be made out under wrappings of yarn, string and fabric strips; others suggest gift-wrapped boulders. You can call them abstract and stop there, or go further and connect them to art history, specifically the history of fiber art, or go further and consider them in the light of Ms. Scott’s history: She was born in 1943 with Down syndrome, started making art only in her early 40s and kept making it until her death at 61. However approached, the work is complex and brilliant. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Holland Cotter)★ Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum (continuing) The stately doors of the 1902 Andrew Carnegie mansion, home to the Cooper Hewitt, are open again after an overhaul and expansion of the premises. Historic house and modern museum have always made an awkward fit, a standoff between preservation and innovation, and the problem remains, but the renovation has brought a wide-open new gallery space, a cafe and a raft of be-your-own-designer digital enhancements. Best of all, more of the museum’s vast permanent collection is now on view, including an Op Art weaving, miniature spiral staircases, ballistic face masks and a dainty enameled 18th-century version of a Swiss knife. Like design itself, this institution is built on tumult and friction, and you feel it. 2 East 91st Street, at Fifth Avenue, 212-849-8400, cooperhewitt.org. (Cotter)★ Frick Collection: ‘Masterpieces From the Scottish National Gallery’ (through Feb. 1) As it did last year with masterworks from the Mauritshuis, the Frick has welcomed 10 paintings from the Scottish National Gallery, in Edinburgh, home to a renowned collection of fine art from the Renaissance to the end of the 19th century. It’s a quieter sort of exhibition, exemplified by the under-the-radar entrance of Sargent’s “Lady Agnew of Lochnaw.” It’s also a rangier show, one that isn’t as identifiably Scottish as the Mauritshuis works were Dutch — even considering the commanding Sir Henry Raeburn portrait of a kilted Macdonell clan chief. 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, 212-288-0700, frick.org. (Karen Rosenberg)★ Guggenheim Museum: ‘V. S. Gaitonde: Painting as Process, Painting as Life’ (through Feb. 11) Many Western abstract painters in the early 20th century were deeply influenced by Asian art and philosophy, though no one dismissed them as Orientalists. By contrast, if Asian artists showed signs of absorbing Western models, their work was disdained as derivative. When you visit this survey of work by Vasudeo Santu Gaitonde (1924-2001), keep that paradox in mind just long enough to see how its biases operate. Then give yourself over to some of the most magnetic abstract painting of any kind in the city right now, by a South Asian Indian modernist who looked westward, eastward, homeward and inward to create an intensely personalized version of transculturalism, one that has given him mythic stature in his own country and pushed him to the top of the auction charts. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. (Cotter)★ Jewish Museum: ‘From the Margins: Lee Krasner and Norman Lewis, 1945-1952’ (through Feb. 1) Inspired by a pairing in the museum’s 2008 show “Action/Abstraction: Pollock, de Kooning and American Art, 1940-1976,” this exhibition orchestrates a profound and sensitive conversation between Krasner and Lewis — one that takes into account their shared visual language as well as different cultural backgrounds (as a Jewish woman and an African-American man). It also suggests that both artists have long been hidden in plain sight: Krasner as the spouse of an art celebrity, Lewis as a black artist whose paintings were more formal than political. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)★ Jewish Museum: ‘Helena Rubinstein: Beauty Is Power’ (through March 22) The first museum show devoted to the life and art collection of the cosmetics magnate Helena Rubinstein is a master class in modernism-as-marketing — one that comes with a strong female perspective on 20th-century visual culture. It shows us how Rubinstein adapted Cubism, Surrealism and other avant-garde art and design movements for her personal brand, highlighting new and different standards of beauty and exhorting women to control their own images through makeup and grooming. Mixing biography, business, art, fashion and décor, it recreates rooms from Rubinstein’s salons and reassembles parts of her diverse collection, which included African, pre-Columbian and Oceanic artworks. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Bartholomeus Spranger: Splendor and Eroticism in Imperial Prague’  (through Feb. 1) This show is intriguing as much for the story it tells of an eventful and extraordinarily fortunate career as for the works on view, which range from pictures of standard Christian subjects to extravagantly theatrical images of pagan sex and revelry. Working in Prague for the Holy Roman emperor Rudolf II, Bartholomeus Spranger (1546-1611) painted and drew Mannerist-style allegories involving nude and nearly nude gods and goddesses athletically entwined in anatomically improbable positions. His images were copied by expert engravers and disseminated in immense quantities throughout Europe. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Ken Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Cubism: The Leonard A. Lauder Collection’  (through Feb. 16) This no-strings-attached gift of 81 Cubist works more than lives up to expectations. Concentrating on the four horsemen of the Cubist apocalypse (Braque, Gris, Léger and Picasso), it outlines the style’s heady transformation of art while giving the museum a foundation in modernism commensurate with its holdings in other eras. It’s a stunning show and thrilling event. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Madame Cézanne’  (through March 15) Cézanne’s paintings of his wife, Hortense Fiquet, have long stonewalled would-be psychologists, offering few indications of intimacy or interior life. (The poet Rainer Maria Rilke, enthusing over “Madame Cézanne in a Red Armchair,” focused on the work’s color scheme and called the chair “a personality in its own right.”) But assembled at the Met, and supported by more tender and informal graphite sketches, these portraits are more forthcoming. They suggest that numbing familiarity was actually, for Cézanne, a form of intimacy; that he could connect with portrait subjects only when they were as reliable a presence in his life as Mont Sainte-Victoire. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Making Pottery Art: The Robert A. Ellison Jr. Collection of French Ceramics (ca. 1880-1910)’  (through March 15) Nearly all the 40 works in this show — from a collection recently donated to the museum — are in a traditional form of vases, bowls and platters. They represent a marvelous variety of styles and influences, including Art Nouveau, Arts and Crafts, classic Chinese traditions and European folk art. What they share is a love for processes and materials and a candid way with the human touch. Most intriguing of all is a curiously clunky small vase by Paul Gauguin, who might have been the George Ohr of European ceramics if he’d stuck with it. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Reimagining Modernism: 1900-1950’ (continuing) One of the greatest encyclopedic museums in the world fulfills its mission a little more with an ambitious reinstallation of works of early European modernism with their American counterparts for the first time in nearly 30 years. Objects of design and paintings by a few self-taught artists further the integration. It is quite a sight, with interesting rotations and fine-tunings to come. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Thomas Hart Benton’s “America Today” Mural Rediscovered’ (through April 19) The prickly American Regionalist Thomas Hart Benton had his share of detractors. But even they would probably acknowledge that his early mural “America Today” is the best of its kind, a raucous, cartwheeling, wide-angle look at 1920s America that set the standard for the Works Progress Administration’s mural program and has remained a New York City treasure. Now installed at the Met in a reconstruction of its original setting (a boardroom at the New School for Social Research), it captivates with period details (from the cut of a flapper gown to the mechanics of a blast furnace) and timely signs of socioeconomic and environmental distress (exhausted coal miners and hands reaching for coffee and bread). 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Warriors and Mothers: Epic Mbembe Art’ (through Sept. 7) If a dozen masterpiece Renaissance sculptures, done in an unknown and wildly unorthodox style, suddenly turned up in the Italian countryside, the find would make the news. You’ll encounter the equivalent of such a discovery in this show of spectacular weather-worn, wood-carved figures, some dating to before the 17th century, that were made by the Mbeme in southeastern Nigeria and taken to Paris by an African dealer in the early 1970s. They caused a sensation among collectors and scholars at the time, and you can see why. But the effort to find more of them proved fruitless. The examples at the Met, which include the original dozen, represent all the fully intact stand-alone Mbembe figures known to exist. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)MoMA PS 1: ‘Bob and Roberta Smith: Art Amnesty’ (through March 8) Bob and Roberta Smith is the cognomen of a British artist who specializes in humorously mocking art institutions and the conventional attitudes they tend to promulgate. The ostensible idea of this show is to give people an opportunity to officially retire from making art and to ceremonially discard works of art they own but no longer want. Unloaded works are displayed along with jazzy signs painted by Mr. Smith on all kinds of surfaces. One proclaims, “Joseph Beuys conclusive proof not everyone is an artist.” 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Johnson)MoMA PS1: ‘Samara Golden: The Flat Side of the Knife’ (through Aug. 30) Standing at a railing where you look into the museum’s two-story-tall Duplex Gallery, you behold a confoundingly complicated interior architecture with furniture, stairways, musical instruments, wheelchairs and many other domestic items rendered in silvery, foil-clad foam board. The gallery’s floor is covered by a grid of large mirrors so that everything is doubled. What you think is up may really be down and what you take to be real might be a virtual reflection of the real. 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Johnson)Museum of Arts and Design: ‘What Would Mrs. Webb Do? A Founder’s Vision’  (through Feb. 8) Paying tribute to museum founder Aileen Osborn Webb (1892-1979), a well-connected philanthropist, patron of the arts and, in the museum’s new parlance, a “maker,” this collection show rich in mid-century objects also brings to life Mrs. Webb’s craft-related activities and organizations beyond the museum. (She had founded the American Craft Council in 1939 and, before that, organized cooperatives of craftspeople up the Hudson in Putnam County during the Depression.) With her vision of a museum connected to various networks and marketplaces, Mrs. Webb affirmed craft — or “making,” or whatever you call it — as a deeply social activity and a source of economic self-empowerment. 2 Columbus Circle, Manhattan, 212-299-7777, madmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘The Forever Now: Contemporary Painting in an Atemporal World’ (through April 5) Despite being predictable and market-oriented in its choice of 17 artists, this museum’s first painting survey in decades is well worth seeing. About half the artists are exceptional and the rest are represented by their best work. Based on the premise that all historical painting styles are equally available today, the exhibition has been smartly installed to juxtapose different approaches: figurative and abstract, digital and handmade, spare and opulent. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Henri Matisse: The Cut-Outs’ (through Feb. 10) A popular image of the elderly Matisse is of a serene, bespectacled pasha propped up in bed and surrounded by doves and flowers. But in the years around 1940, he must have felt he was living a nightmare. He and his wife of more than four decades separated. He underwent debilitating surgery for cancer. During World War II, he fled south to Nice, only to have that city threatened with bombardment. Through everything, he worked on. It is this Matisse — the invalid, insomniac, night-worker and waking dreamer — we meet in the marvelous, victory-lap show that has arrived in New York from London, trailing light, praise and lines around the block. 212-708-9400, moma.org; admission is by timed tickets. (Cotter)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Jean Dubuffet: Soul of the Underground’ (through April 5) “Look at what lies at your feet!” Jean Dubuffet wrote in a 1957 essay. “A crack in the ground, sparkling gravel, a tuft of grass, some crushed debris, offer equally worthy subjects for your applause and admiration.” In MoMA’s stimulating show, drawn entirely from its collection, we can see how Dubuffet’s earthbound gaze nourished his reinvention of the painted surface. On view are several canvases smeared with a mixture of oil, putty, sand and gravel, some of them with incised drawings that seem to equate painting with plowing. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Rosenberg)Museum of Modern Art: ‘The Paris of Toulouse-Lautrec: Prints and Posters’ (through March 22) In his printed works, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec chronicled and publicized the music halls, theaters, circuses, operas and cafes of Paris with terrific verve, sly wit and surprising subtlety. This enthralling show presents approximately 100 examples drawn from the museum’s permanent collection. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Johnson)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Sturtevant: Double Trouble’  (through Feb. 22) Among the first things you see in MoMA’s taut, feisty retrospective of the American artist Elaine Sturtevant is work by far better known figures: Joseph Beuys, Jasper Johns, Marcel Duchamp. In each case, however, the pieces are by Ms. Sturtevant herself, who spent much of a long career adopting and adapting the art and styles of others to create a body of work entirely her own, one which raises questions about the value of art, about the hows and whys of producing it, and about the degrees to which quasi-replication can be an exercise in flattery, parody, objectivity, originality and love. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Cotter)★ National Museum of the American Indian: ‘For a Love of His People: The Photography of Horace Poolaw’ (through Feb. 15) Horace Poolaw (1906-84) was born in a Kiowa community in Oklahoma on the cusp of dramatic changes in both Native American and mainstream American life. He started photographing in his teens and caught those changes as they happened in his portraits of family and neighbors. In one, dated around 1944, his son Jerry, home from the Navy, poses in both an enlisted man’s uniform and an eagle-feather warrior headdress. Political commentary is built into the images, though over all his approach is closer to appreciation, fullhearted without nostalgia. And first and last, this is the work of an artist who, like any artist, is out to make the very best pictures he can. 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, americanindian.si.edu. (Cotter)★ Neue Galerie: ‘Egon Schiele: Portraits’ (through April 20) Of the approximately 125 items in this terrific show, there are only 11 oil paintings, which is a good thing. Except for a large picture of his wife, Edith, in a colorful striped dress, Schiele’s works on canvas are dark and turgid. But his drawings are nimble and nuanced. Working on paper with pencil, charcoal, ink, gouache, watercolor and crayons, he portrayed himself and others with infectious avidity. There’s hardly a single sheet here that doesn’t warrant close looking for its virtuoso draftsmanship and psychological acuity. 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street, 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org. (Johnson)★ New Museum: ‘Chris Ofili: Night and Day’ (through Feb. 1) This intoxicating midcareer survey presents six distinct bodies of paintings and drawings, as well as a few sculptures, tracing a remarkable development. It reveals an artist restlessly pushing his art to new extremes of decorativeness and harshness, darkness and threat, funky extravagance and suavity. Painting itself undergoes several transmutations. Race, religion, pop culture and nature are touched on. Color triumphs in several forms. The art is never shortchanged. 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Smith)★ New-York Historical Society: ‘Freedom Journey 1965: Photographs of the Selma to Montgomery March by Stephen Somerstein’ (through April 19) Almost 50 years ago, the picture editor of a campus newspaper at City College of New York assigned himself a breaking story: coverage of what promised to be a massive march in Alabama, led by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., to demand free-and-clear voting rights for African-Americans. On short notice the editor, Stephen Somerstein, grabbed his cameras, climbed on a bus, and headed south. The 55 pictures of black leaders and everyday people in this show, installed in a hallway and small gallery, are some that he shot that day. The image of Dr. King’s head seen in monumental silhouette that has become a virtual logo of the film “Selma” is based on a Somerstein original. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org. (Cotter)New-York Historical Society: Annie Leibovitz: ‘Pilgrimage’  (through Feb. 22) No living celebrities are portrayed in “Pilgrimage,” but lots of celebrated figures from the past are indirectly represented, from Thomas Jefferson and Emily Dickinson to Eleanor Roosevelt and Robert Smithson. In the spring of 2009, Ms. Leibovitz set out on a two-year journey that took her to about two dozen historic sites in the United States and Britain. Most of these were house museums dedicated to famous individuals, where she photographed the rooms they inhabited and objects they owned and used. Though often poetically atmospheric, these pictures are disappointingly less lively than her portraits of famous entertainers. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org. (Johnson)★ Rubin Museum of Art: ‘The All-Knowing Buddha: A Secret Guide’ (through April 13) This show presents 54 paintings that illustrate step-by-step instructions for followers of Tibetan Buddhism. Delicately painted on 10-by-10-inch paper sheets, most of the pages depict a monk having fabulous visions in a verdant landscape. Thought to have been commissioned by a Mongolian patron and executed by unidentified artists in a Chinese workshop sometime in the 18th century, it is a fascinating and remarkably thorough manual for seekers of higher consciousness. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org. (Johnson)Rubin Museum of Art: ‘Francesco Clemente: Inspired by India’ (through Feb. 2) The first Clemente retrospective in New York in more than a decade ties the peripatetic Italian-born painter to a single country. At just 20 works or so, it’s not exactly comprehensive. It is, however, thoroughly immersive. The installation, in the Rubin’s skylit top-floor galleries, evokes the structure of an Indian temple with a combination of large and small spaces; it has an open central area of paintings, intimate nooks for sculpture and a “sanctum” of watercolors. This finely articulated sense of place is the most novel aspect of an exhibition that otherwise, like many previous Clemente exhibitions, seems to coast on his cosmopolitan charms. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)Galleries: Chelsea‘Disturbing Innocence’ (through Jan. 31) At the start of this entertaining and provocative exhibition organized by the painter Eric Fischl, you encounter ominous images of suburban homes in photographs by James Casebere and Gregory Crewdson, paintings by Peter Drake and a sculpture by Roy Lichtenstein. Moving into the main part of the exhibition you discover what goes on behind closed doors: a riot of polymorphous perversity in the form of paintings, photographs and sculptures, by more than 50 artists, representing children, dolls, mannequins, robots and toys. Flag Art Foundation, 545 West 25th Street, 212-206-0220, flagartfoundation.org. (Johnson)Galleries: SoHo★ Laura Poitras: ‘9/11 Trilogy’ (through Feb. 15) Ms. Poitras is the filmmaker who made “Citizenfour,” the documentary about Edward J. Snowden that was released last fall. Along with three shorter pieces, this exhibition presents two absorbing feature-length documentaries that she made before she became involved with Mr. Snowden. Each portrays an individual at the intersection of historical events in the Middle East: a Sunni medical doctor who lives in Baghdad in “My Country, My Country” (2006) and a former bodyguard for Osama bin Laden working as a taxi driver in Yemen in “The Oath” (2010). Artists Space, 38 Greene Street, at Grand Street, SoHo, 212-226-3970, artistsspace.org. (Johnson)David Weiss: ‘Works, 1968-1979’ (through Feb. 22) This Swiss artist (1946-2012) is best known for the sly, jokey photographs, sculptures and videos he made with Peter Fischli under the name Fischli/Weiss. Before Fischli/Weiss started in 1979, however, Mr. Weiss published artists’ books. Included in this exhibition are more than 60 comics, abstractions and psychedelic landscapes peppered with anthropomorphic insects, plants and animals. What’s really on display here, though, is an ethos: call it post-’60s exhaustion or countercultural ennui. After this, Mr. Weiss and Mr. Fischli would make the work they’re known for, couched in photographic irony and humor rather than hand-drawn hippie existentialism. Swiss Institute Contemporary Art, 18 Wooster Street, near Grand Street, SoHo, 212-925-2035, swissinstitute.net. (Martha Schwendener)Galleries: Other★ ‘The Memphis Group’ (through Jan. 31) Postmodernism may mean different things to different people, but certainly one of its most memorable manifestations was that of the Memphis Group, the Milan-based designer collective started by Ettore Sottsass in 1981. Featuring playfully eccentric bookcases, tables, chairs, vases, lamps and other domestic items mostly by Mr. Sottsass and including works by six other group members, this exhilarating exhibition is a must for students of 20th-century design. Koenig &amp; Clinton, 459 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-334-9255, koenigandclinton.com. (Johnson)Tyson Reeder: ‘New Paintings’ (through Feb. 15) Mr. Reeder helped to found the Dark Fair, an art fair (or meta-art fair) where works were viewed in near darkness, and another art fair in a Polish beer hall and bowling alley in Milwaukee. For his current exhibition, Mr. Reeder’s subjects are suitably informal. Paintings feature pastel beach landscapes, a hippie-era van decorated with a palm tree and a glowing sun, and the interior of a shoe store selling flip flops and sneakers. Lurking in the jokiness, however, is a soft spot for art history, with references harking back to artists like Renoir, Monet, Matisse and Bonnard, who celebrated “le bonheur de vivre” (the joy of life), as a famous Matisse painting described it. Canada, 333 Broome Street, between Bowery and Chrystie Street, Lower East Side, 212-925-4631, canadanewyork.com. (Schwendener)‘Through the Valley: New Paintings by Devin Powers’ (through Feb. 1) This artist’s latest paintings are an exuberant fusion of drawing, painting and chiseling that forms a surprisingly improvisatory, mongrel process. At their best, the swirling, prismatic patterns give each color its own compartment while corralling a profusion of references to different cultures and artifacts, and processes rituals within their irregular borders. Lesley Heller Workspace, 54 Orchard Street, near Grand Street, Lower East Side, 212-410-6120, lesleyheller.com. (Smith)Entang Wiharso (through Feb. 8) One of Indonesia’s most prominent contemporary artists, Mr. Wiharso represented his country in the Venice Biennale of 2013. He has been included in other biennials and museum exhibitions from Tokyo to Rome. This gaudy exhibition reveals an artist of extraordinary industry and canny versatility. In near mural-scale paintings and in sculptures cast in aluminum, brass and resin, he mixes traditional Indonesian styles with Pop and Surrealism, creating allegories of psychic stress in a global economy. Marc Straus, 299 Grand Street, Lower East Side, 212-510-7646, marcstraus.com. (Johnson)Public Art‘Archeo’ (through March) Shortening the word archaeology, this exhibition focuses on technology and obsolescence. Marianne Vitale’s sculptures made from steel components of railroad switches known as frogs are one highlight; Jessica Jackson Hutchins’s neo-hippie assemblages with found ceramics and a hand-woven hammock another. Across the bar from the Standard Hotel, Josh Kline takes the most activist stance, with smoothies made from prescription drugs and consumer products, while a mural by the veteran artist Ed Ruscha — a new commission separate from “Archeo” — announces “Honey, I Twisted Through More Damn Traffic Today,” perhaps capturing the ethos of the tourist-clogged High Line. At the High Line, enter at Washington and Gansevoort Streets, art.thehighline.org. (Schwendener)Out of Town★ Dia:Beacon: ‘Carl Andre: Sculpture as Place, 1958-2010’ (through March 9) Minimalism was the late 20th century’s great hope for a heroic American art on the Abstract Expressionism model. Carl Andre was one of Minimalism’s founders. This career survey of his low-to-the-ground modular sculptures looks terrific in Dia’s sonorous, sunlight-washed spaces. It also poses the question of how such monument-minded art can feel so modest, intimate — even delicate. The real treat here is the chance to see dozens of manuscript pages of Mr. Andre’s 1960s poems, which he referred to as “typewriter drawings.” Carefully shaped on the page in lines and blocks, they are evidence of a sculptor-to-be at work. 3 Beekman Street, Beacon, N.Y., 845-440-0100, diaart.org. (Cotter)★ National Museum of African Art: ‘Conversations: African and African American Artists in Dialogue’  (through early 2016) For its 50th anniversary, this museum has brilliantly thread together work from two sources: its own holdings in African material and the Camille O. and William H. Cosby Jr. collection of African-American art. The Cosby collection, weighted toward canonical figures like Romare Bearden and Charles White, will bring in the crowds, but it is the curators and museum itself, which is in a period of renaissance, that have made the show rise well above predictability. Smithsonian Institution, 950 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, 202-633-4600, africa.si.edu. (Cotter)Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts: ‘Peter Blume: Nature and Metamorphosis’ (through April 5) Though not well-known today, Blume (1906-92) was a famous American artist during the 1930s and ’40s. For many years his painting “The Eternal City” (1934-37) was one of the most memorable artworks displayed in the permanent collection galleries of the Museum of Modern Art. A weird, technically dazzling mix of Magic and Social Realism that envisioned Rome under the Fascist reign of Mussolini, it’s among the highlights of this exhibition of more than 150 works dating from 1924 to 1990. 128 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, 215-972-7600, pafa.org. (Johnson)Last Chance★ Morgan Library & Museum: ‘Cy Twombly: Treatise on the Veil’ (closes on Sunday) At 33 feet across, one of this painter’s largest canvases has commandeered one of the city’s best public galleries. There, it hangs in glory (give or take some wainscoting), in the company of several related collages, its brushy gray surface and white crayon lines exemplifying his uncanny ability to make drawing big while keeping it intimate. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org. (Smith)‘The Thing and the Thing-in-Itself’ (closes on Saturday) This spare, thought-provoking exhibition’s title derives from a distinction posited by Immanuel Kant. That is, a thing can be known by a human being only from his or her unique perspective. What the thing is in and of itself, independent of any perceiver’s view of it, isn’t fully knowable. Demonstrating this idea are things by Marcel Duchamp, René Magritte, Ad Reinhardt, Piero Manzoni, Joseph Kosuth and Yoko Ono. Andrea Rosen, 525 West 24th Street, 212-627-6000, andrearosengallery.com. (Johnson)Sun Xun: ‘The Time Vivarium’ (closes on Saturday) Born in 1980, Sun Xun was raised in Fuxin, one of the rapidly developing cities bordering North Korea. But he grew up with a warped view of history. In school, he learned an official version of China’s past. But at home, his father, whose family had been adversely affected by Mao Zedong’s Cultural Revolution told him everything he’d learned was a lie. Paintings and animations made during a residency in the gallery in December reflect this simultaneous fascination with and distrust of history. They’re also filled with references spanning thousands of years, from Han dynasty calligraphy to Song Dynasty painting and recent Socialist Realism. New York’s American Museum of Natural History inspired the title, “The Time Vivarium,” and Mr. Sun is currently included in an exhibition across the park, “Ink Art: Past as Present in Contemporary China,” at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Sean Kelly Gallery, 475 10th Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-239-1181, skny.com. (Schwendener)Advertisement