AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerIt’s entirely possible that the world already has enough television costume dramas set in a time when men (and the occasional woman) dressed in animal skins and quested after some elusive throne or castle or land mass. “The Last Kingdom,” which begins Saturday on BBC America, could persuade you otherwise, but it sure isn’t in a hurry to do so.The series has a sprawling cast and high production values, yet it starts off rather generically — bearded men playing with swords, battling over territory.“I already have ‘Game of Thrones’ and ‘Vikings’ episodes I haven’t gotten to,” you might find yourself saying. “Why do I need this thing?”Hang around until Episode 3, though, and substantive themes begin to take shape that give this series a distinctive personality.The show opens in the year 866 in the medieval kingdom of Northumbria. It’s before England has jelled into the country we know, and a Danish armada is headed in. A young boy who will become known as Uhtred watches as his father (Matthew Macfadyen) tries unsuccessfully to defend his piece of Northumbria, called Bebbanburg. The boy is taken captive by the invaders, then raised with relative benevolence by Earl Ragnar (Peter Gantzler).That relationship, too, is interrupted by violence, and by the end of the first episode, Uhtred (now played by Alexander Dreymon) is a grown man who is rootless and conflicted. And one of the show’s main areas of interest has been established: identity. Born Saxon and Christian but raised Danish and (in the Christian view) pagan, Uhtred has to decide who he is, whom he serves and what he wants. And his personal struggles mirror the bigger question that emerges by Episode 3: Is there a broader identity that can bind assorted free-standing kingdoms together into England, and will that entity have enough moxie to cast out the Danes?The invaders swallow up so much territory that eventually only Wessex — the last kingdom of the title — remains. And the series doesn’t really hit its stride until, in the third episode, Alfred (David Dawson) becomes king there. He has big ideas.“All that remains of England is Wessex,” he tells Uhtred, who has found his way to Wessex. “The birth of an England, the idea of a single kingdom called England, has to begin here. There is nowhere else.”Mr. Dawson gives the show’s most attention-getting performance as Alfred, who also embodies another theme of the series: exploring the moment when, at least in that part of the world, the ability to write was beginning to lead humanity to view itself differently. Few characters in the series can read or write, but Alfred can, and it has helped him to conceptualize people and events in relation to their long-term importance.“When a man dies,” he explains, “if nothing is written, he is soon forgotten.”Like many shows in this genre, “The Last Kingdom” is male-centric. In the early going, at least, there is really only one female character of substance, Brida (Emily Cox), who was also captured by the Danes as a child. She has grown up alongside Uhtred and as an adult is his comrade both in arms and in bed. She is outspoken and fearless. One challenge for the writers of this show, which is based on Bernard Cornwell’s historical novels, is to find enough for her to do.The other is to stay focused on the big themes — the symbiosis between religious faith and warfare is another — and not get caught up in the Gore Olympics that preoccupy some shows in this genre. There are bigger questions to be explored here than how many ways can be found to impale someone on a sword.Advertisement