JAN. 22, 2015
Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Note: With the snowstorm forcing cancellations around the city on Monday, we advise that, before setting out, you confirm that scheduled performances are still taking on Monday or Tuesday. ★ Auntsforcamera  (through Feb. 15) The New Museum hosts this exhibition of nine video works dispersed throughout the building, a project of the protean dance entity Aunts. The entries deal with everything from dancing with drones to mastering the original Harlem Shake. Grab a map and find your way among the monitors and screens, or take an artist-led tour, offered on selected days. Tours are free with a submission to Karl Scholz’s interactive experiment “#auntsforcamera.” Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Fridays through Sundays from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., Thursdays from 11 a.m. to 9 p.m., New Museum, 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Siobhan Burke)Sarah Blush and Ali Perkins (Friday) In the 19th century, the painter Paul Cézanne bragged, “I will astonish Paris with an apple!” He did so by painting hundreds of them, from every angle, in extraordinary detail. In their dance theater work “Still Life With Apples” (also the title of a Cézanne work), the director and writer Sarah Blush and the choreographer and actor Ali Perkins apply similar scrutiny to romance and human relationships, based on true stories. At 10 p.m., Dixon Place, 161 Chrystie Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-0736, dixonplace.org. (Brian Schaefer)AdvertisementNai-Ni Chen Dance Company (Sunday) Babies born between Feb. 19, 2015, and Feb. 7, 2016, will be born into the Year of the Sheep (also, Goat). They will be clever and polite, have an affinity for the arts, but may also be shy and indecisive. This troupe, which combines Western modern dance with Asian styles and aesthetics, presents its annual Lunar New Year Celebration featuring acrobats, dragons, traditional music and a nod to the nomadic sheep-herding tribes of China. (This program will be repeated on Feb. 7 at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center.) At 3 p.m., Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement★ Company XIV (through Jan. 31) “Nutcracker Rouge,” Austin McCormick’s baroque-burlesque take on the Christmas classic, is a saucy fusion of dance, theater, circus and song that takes place in the company’s intimate and opulent new home in NoHo. Cocktails and coquetry abound for those 21 and older. Friday, Sunday and Thursday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 10 p.m., XIV, 428 Lafayette Street, between Astor Place and East Fourth Street, 212-677-1444, companyxiv.com; many performances are sold out. (Schaefer)Cora Dance (Thursday through Jan. 31) Out of 10 companies participating in the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s professional development program, Cora Dance was one of four chosen to present its work on the Fisher stage. “Stories” features choreography by the company’s founder, Shannon Hummel, who is interested in the spectrum of human emotion and big existential questions. Which means that of the catalog of stories presented here, some will be contemplative, angsty and internal, others more joyful. At 7:30 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schaefer)★ Dancers Responding to AIDS (Monday) This program was founded in the frightening chaos of 1991 to support those devastated by the disease. Now part of Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS, the organization produces several performances a year to raise money for health services, always with an all-star cast well worth the price of admission. This year’s “Dance From the Heart,” a benefit concert that started in 2005, features principal dancers from New York City Ballet, American Ballet Theater, Cedar Lake Contemporary Ballet and other companies. At 7:30 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-840-0770 Ext. 229, dradance.org. (Schaefer)★ Moriah Evans (through Feb. 1) In “Social Dance 1-8: Index,” Ms. Evans moves five dancers across space and time through a system of repeating and transforming choreographic units. The culmination of a creative residency at Issue Project Room, the work seeks to illuminate how we build relationships both onstage and off. Thursdays through Sundays at 8 p.m., Issue Project Room, 22 Boerum Place, at Livingston Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-330-0313, issueprojectroom.org; sold out. (Burke)FLICFest (through Jan. 31) Established five years ago by Jeramy Zimmerman of CatScratch Theater, this festival gives artists a chance to exceed the time limit imposed by most choreography showcases. (The “FLIC” of the title stands for Feature-Length Independent Choreography.) Each night features back-to-back shows by different artists (at 7:30 and 9 p.m.), and among this week’s highlights are the United States premiere of Mana Hashimoto’s “Stories of the Blind; Light, Shadow and Wind” (Friday and Thursday at 9 p.m.) and the world premiere of John Zullo’s “The Architecture of Proximity” (Saturday and Thursday at 7:30 p.m.). Thursdays through Saturdays at 7:30 and 9 p.m., Irondale Center, 85 South Oxford Street, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, 866-811-4111, irondale.org/FLICfest.html. (Burke)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fresh Tracks (Thursday through Jan. 31) This signature development program, which has been nurturing new artists since 1965, returns with its annual showcase to introduce a new class of fellows: Briana Brown-Tipley and Hilary Brown (known as Same As Sister), Nico Brown, He Jin Jang, Niall Jones, Julie Mayo and Lindsay Reuter. Thematically, all seem to be turning inward to mine the depths of self; in describing their own work, all seem to approach movement from a cerebral, analytical and almost academic perspective. At 7:30 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Schaefer)Fridays at Noon (Friday) Remy Charlip, who died in 2012, was a successful illustrator of whimsical children’s books, but he is best known by dance fans as an inventive choreographer and founding member of the Merce Cunningham Dance Company. In the tribute “Remy Charlip — I Love You,” friends and contemporaries present some of his work, including his beloved Air Mail dances in which, over 40 years, he sent drawings of body positions to friends who would then transform this blueprint into a dance. At noon, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org; sold out, but there will be a waiting list. (Schaefer)★ Raja Feather Kelly and Tzveta Kassabova (Thursday through Jan. 31) The captivating performers Raja Feather Kelly and Tzveta Kassabova pair up for a self-produced evening of four works as part of Danspace Project’s Dance: Access program. Each performs a solo then together they present two duets: “Be Still, My Heart” and “Super We” (also the evening’s title), which plays with the function and meaning of rhythm. This duo manages to make quick sputters across the floor and quiet moments in a chair equally compelling. At 8 p.m., St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement★ Mariinsky Ballet (through Sunday) This St. Petersburg company gave birth to many of the world’s great ballets, and ballet greats: Nijinsky. Balanchine. Nureyev. Baryshnikov. Known as the Kirov in Soviet times, this troupe has reclaimed its earlier identity and arrives for a rare appearance in the United States with a program that not only celebrates its storied past but also makes a contemporary statement. The company concludes its run of “Swan Lake,” based on the original Petipa-Ivanov choreography, on Friday, and then performs “Chopin: Dances for Piano,” featuring works by Michel Fokine, Jerome Robbins and Benjamin Millepied, on Saturday and Sunday. Friday and Saturday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schaefer)Mari Meade Dance Collective and Project 44 (through Saturday) Two emerging dance companies join forces for a program of new works at St. Mark’s Church. In “Brood III and the Interloper,” Mari Meade constructs a hierarchical society only to disrupt it with an outsider’s arrival. Gierre Godley, the artistic director of the all-male Project 44, examines other kinds of social structures in “Black Dolphin,” an ensemble piece inspired in part by the National Geographic documentary “Russia’s Toughest Prisons.” At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)★ New York City Ballet (through March 1) The company’s winter season continues on Friday with “Hear the Dance: Russia,” a mixed bill that includes Jerome Robbins’s “The Cage” and highlights the influence of Russian composers within the company’s repertoire. Balanchine fans can get their fix in two “All Balanchine” programs: on Saturday evening and Sunday afternoon in the “Classic Combination” program of “Serenade,” “Agon” and “Symphony in C” or on Saturday afternoon and Wednesday evening in a program featuring “Donizetti Variations,” “La Valse” and the stately “Chaconne.” The next stop on the company’s “Hear the Dance” musicology tour is Germany or, rather, one German: J.S. Bach (on Thursday, Jan. 31 and Feb. 5 and 7). Balanchine’s masterpiece “Concerto Barocco” provides a lovely platform for two female principal dancers, but the true stars are the company’s excellent corps members. This is paired with Robbins’s “The Goldberg Variations,” a handsome marathon set to Bach’s 90-minute score, played by solo piano. Tuesdays through Thursdays at 7:30 p.m., Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m., Sundays at 3 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Burke and Schaefer)★ Robyn Orlin & Compagnie Jant-Bi (Saturday, Sunday, and Thursday through Feb. 1) The South African choreographer Robyn Orlin likes to be a thorn, poking audiences with her blunt take on contemporary African issues through a blend of theater, storytelling, song and dance. She was last stateside in 2011, and has returned with the United States premiere of “At the same time we were pointing a finger at you, we realized we were pointing three at ourselves...,” which examines the taboo of the body. It is being presented in collaboration with Compagnie Jant-Bi, the powerful and mesmerizing all-male Senegalese troupe. Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday and Feb. 1 at 3 p.m., Thursday and next Friday at 7:30 p.m., Alexander Kasser Theater, Montclair State University, 1 Normal Avenue, Montclair, 973-655-5112, peakperfs.org. (Schaefer)Parsons Dance Company (through Feb. 1) These powerhouse dancers, directed by David Parsons, return to the Joyce Theater in works by Trey McIntyre, Robert Battle and a former company member, Natalie Lomonte, a participant in the company’s new choreographic initiative, GenerationNOW. Mr. Parsons’s own brand of lithe athleticism will also be on display in the New York premiere of his “Whirlaway,” to music by the jazz musician Allen Toussaint, and his wildly popular solo “Caught,” in which strobe lights create the illusion of a dancer unhindered by gravity. Thursdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., Sundays, Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., with matinees on Saturdays and Sundays at 2 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)A version of this schedule appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page C23 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Dance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.