JAN. 22, 2015
Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Note: With the snowstorm forcing cancellations at the Metropolitan Opera, Carnegie Hall and other sites on Monday, we advise that you check with concert halls before setting out to classical music performances scheduled for Monday or Tuesday. Opera‘La Bohème’ (Saturday) The Metropolitan Opera’s run of Puccini’s classic opera continues with the delicate, detailed soprano Kristine Opolais as Mimi, Jean-François Borras as Rodolfo and the wonderful baritone Mariusz Kwiecien as Marcello. Marina Rebeka, lately appearing at the Met in Verdi’s “La Traviata,” is Musetta. Riccardo Frizza conducts. At 1 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)‘Les Contes d’Hoffmann’ (Tuesday) The headstrong, talented tenor Vittorio Grigolo is on better behavior here — singing with relative restraint, skipping the showboating — than in his last few appearances at the Metropolitan Opera. He is joined in Bartlett Sher’s scattered production of Offenbach’s late masterpiece by Erin Morley (a remarkably nuanced Olympia) and Kate Lindsey (a silver-toned, elegant Nicklausse), as well as by Hibla Gerzmava, Christine Rice and Thomas Hampson, who is underpowered as the four villains. (This cast performs through Feb. 5. The opera returns from Feb. 28 through March 21 with different singers and the conductor James Levine.) At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)Advertisement★ ‘Iolanta’ and ‘Bluebeard’s Castle’  (Monday and Thursday) Anna Netrebko brings Tchaikovsky’s lush fairy tale “Iolanta” to the Metropolitan Opera for the first time, singing the title role of a princess whose blindness is cured by love. The slightly surreal production is directed by Mariusz Trelinski with references to film noir, and as in “Eugene Onegin,” Ms. Netrebko is conducted by the Russian master Valery Gergiev. He also leads the second half of the evening, Bartok’s “Bluebeard’s Castle,” whose mysterious central couple (sung by Nadja Michael and Mikhail Petrenko) arrive at a less happy ending. Monday at 8 p.m., Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)Advertisement‘The Merry Widow’ (Friday and Wednesday) Given the creative team and cast that the Metropolitan Opera lined up for its new production of this Lehar operetta, it looked most promising. But the production by the director and choreographer Susan Stroman, a five-time Tony Award-winner in her Met debut, though colorful and full of lively dancing, feels tentative and timid. Renée Fleming sounds lovely as the widow Hanna, who is left a fortune by her banker husband; Nathan Gunn is debonair as Count Danilo, Hanna’s former flame who falls for her again; and Kelli O’Hara, a queen of Broadway, in her Met debut, brings a sweet voice and sass to the ingénue role of Valencienne. But the Met is far too big a house for this intimate operetta: the spoken dialogue (written by Jeremy Sams for this production) has to be amplified. Over all, the performances seem a little constrained and underpowered. Paul Nadler conducts. (This cast performs through Jan. 31. The opera returns on April 24 with a new cast.) At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)★ ‘La Traviata’ (Saturday) This is the last time this season to witness the rising star soprano Sonya Yoncheva’s remarkably detailed, poignant portrayal of Violetta in Willy Decker’s starkly effective production of Verdi’s classic at the Metropolitan Opera. She is joined by a strong cast, including Francesco Demuro as Alfredo and Aleksei Markov as Germont; Marco Armiliato conducts. At 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)Classical Music★ Jonathan Biss (Saturday) This pianist is still presenting his free online course on Beethoven’s piano sonatas, and his traversal of the same works in concert continues in this thoughtful program. Two of those sonatas — Op. 2, No. 1, and Op. 101 — sandwich Schoenberg’s Six Little Piano Pieces (Op. 19), Berg’s lone Sonata and Schumann’s “Waldszenen.” At 8 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (David Allen)Sarah Cahill (Thursday) In honor of the composer Terry Riley’s 80th birthday, this poetic pianist hosts a “piano party” that will feature solo works written in Mr. Riley’s honor by Samuel Carl Adams, Evan Ziporyn, Pauline Oliveros and other composers. Some of the birthday honoree’s own compositions will be performed as well. At 7:30 p.m., Le Poisson Rouge, 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich Village, 212-505-3474, lepoissonrouge.com. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center  (Sunday and Thursday) There are plenty of chamber music riches on offer next week. On Sunday, the Amphion String Quartet performs a program of Haydn’s Quartet in C “The Bird,” Janacek’s Quartet No. 2 “Intimate Letters” and Grieg’s Quartet in G minor. On Thursday, the violist Richard O’Neill, the clarinetist Romie de Guise-Langlois, the pianist Gloria Chien and other musicians offer a program of recent works by contemporary composers including Bruno Mantovani, Philippe Hersant and Carlos Sanchez-Gutierrez. Sunday at 5 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-671-4050, lincolncenter.org. Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Kaplan Penthouse, Lincoln Center, 165 West 65th Street, 212-721-6500, lincolncenter.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Miranda Cuckson (Sunday) This fiercely virtuosic violinist presents a recital of works by Mario Davidovsky and Donald Martino for solo violin and electronics that is presented by the essential contemporary-music series Counter)induction. At 3 p.m., Spectrum NYC, 121 Ludlow Street, Lower East Side, 650-400-5100, spectrumnyc.com. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Focus! Festival  (Friday, and Monday through Thursday) This annual Juilliard School festival, organized by Joel Sachs, is an opportunity to focus, as it were, on a particular place and time, and this year, the theme is “Nippon Gendai Ongaku: Japanese Music Since 1945.” It opens with a program of works for chamber orchestra by Toshio Hosokawa, Akira Nishimura, Somei Satoh and others, and continues with four chamber-music events and a closing concert (next Friday) by the Juilliard Orchestra, conducted by Tadaaki Otaka, that features a tribute to Toru Takemitsu. All concerts are free, but tickets are required. At 8 p.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, Lincoln Center, 155 West 65th Street, 212-799-5000, events.juilliard.edu. (Woolfe)★ Paul Huang and Jessica Xylina Osborne (Sunday) Lincoln Center’s popular Sunday Morning Coffee Concerts series offers rewarding, mostly younger artists in 60-minute programs starting at 11 a.m. in the intimate Walter Reade Theater. The next one presents Mr. Huang, an exciting and thoughtful 22-year-old violinist, with the pianist Jessica Xylina Osborne, in works by Janacek, Sibelius, Sarasate and Grieg. After the performance the audience can meet the artists in the reception room, with complimentary coffee and muffins. At 11 a.m., Walter Reade Theater, Lincoln Center, 165 West 65th Street, 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org. (Tommasini)AdvertisementThe Knights  (Wednesday) This vibrant orchestral collective teams up with one of its favorite collaborators, the banjo virtuoso Béla Fleck. Their program features Mr. Fleck in his own banjo concerto alongside works by John Adams, Rossini arrangements and the Knights’ collaborative composition “the ground beneath our feet.” At 7:30 p.m., Michael Schimmel Center for the Arts, Pace University, 3 Spruce Street, between Park Row and Gold Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-346-1715, schimmel.pace.edu. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Gidon Kremer and Daniil Trifonov (Friday) Duos have rarely been as starry as this since Gidon Kremer was playing with Martha Argerich. Each plays a solo work: For Mr. Trifonov, it will be Mozart’s K. 397 Fantasia while Mr. Kremer takes on Mieczyslaw Weinberg’s Solo Violin Sonata No. 3. Together they’ll perform a work from each composer, as well as Schubert’s Fantasy in C (D. 934). At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Mariinsky Orchestra (Tuesday and Wednesday) Valery Gergiev’s conducting is as variable as his schedule is busy, but in two concerts at Carnegie Hall this week he and his orchestra stick to what they do best. On Tuesday, Shostakovich’s gigantic Fourth Symphony follows Prokofiev’s popular Third Piano Concerto (with the hotshot youngster Behzod Abduraimov). On Wednesday, Rodion Shchedrin’s cheeky Concerto for Orchestra, “Naughty Limericks,” prefaces Tchaikovsky’s wrongly maligned Second Piano Concerto (this time with Denis Matsuev at the keyboard) and Prokofiev’s Fifth Symphony. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)New York Philharmonic (Friday, Saturday, and Wednesday through Jan. 31) There are two more chances (on Friday and Saturday) to see the Chinese conductor Long Yu in his guest appearance with the Philharmonic, performing Tchaikovsky’s Violin Concerto with the acclaimed violinist Maxim Vengerov and Shostakovich’s Fifth Symphony. Then on Wednesday (and continuing through Jan. 31) the dynamic American conductor David Robertson joins the Philharmonic in a program offering Rachmaninoff’s Vocalise, Stravinsky’s “The Song of the Nightingale,” Bartok’s “The Miraculous Mandarin” Suite and, with the superb pianist Emanuel Ax, Chopin’s Piano Concerto No. 2. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Wednesday and Thursday at 7:30 p.m., next Friday at 11 a.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Tommasini)★ Alexandre Tharaud  (Tuesday) This superb French pianist’s imaginative, richly colored interpretations of Couperin and Rameau have proved delightful in recent years. Here he offers Couperin’s “Pièces de Clavecin,” short character pieces. The program also includes Mozart’s “Alla Turca” Piano Sonata in A (K. 331), Schubert’s 16 German Dances (D. 783) and Beethoven’s Piano Sonata No. 31 in A flat. At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)A version of this schedule appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page C22 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.