AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent jazz performances: nytimes.com/jazz. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Note: With the snowstorm forcing cancellations around the city on Monday, we advise that you check with jazz clubs before setting out to concerts scheduled for Monday or Tuesday nights. Charles Altura (Friday) Mr. Altura, an emerging guitarist with quicksilver technique and valiant sideman credits — perhaps you’ve heard him with the fusion godheads Chick Corea and Stanley Clarke, or with his contemporary Ambrose Akinmusire — steps forward with his own music. He’ll have an expert assist from the pianist Fabian Almazan, the bassist Joshua Crumbly and the drummer Kendrick Scott. At 8 and 10 p.m., the Jazz Gallery, 1160 Broadway, fifth floor, at West 27th Street, 646-494-3625, jazzgallery.org (Nate Chinen)Marc Cary’s Harlem Homecoming (Friday and Saturday) Mr. Cary approaches the piano trio tradition from a predominantly rhythmic standpoint, but with ample harmonic sophistication and a frame of reference that runs from Betty Carter to Erykah Badu. His Focus Trio, with Rashaan Carter on bass and Sameer Gupta on drums, will form the gravitational center of this engagement, augmented by a spate of guests. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Ginny’s Supper Club, 310 Lenox Avenue, near 125th Street, Harlem, 212-421-3821, ginnyssupperclub.com. (Chinen)Mario Castro Quintet/Strings  (Saturday) Mario Castro, an ambitious young tenor saxophonist originally from Puerto Rico, has expressed more than a passing interest in the possibilities of chamber-jazz. In this engagement he’ll augment his core ensemble — the trumpeter Josh Shpak, the pianist KyuMin Shim, the bassist John Benitez and the drummer Jonathan Pinson — with a flexible string quartet. At 8 and 10 p.m., the Jazz Gallery, 1160 Broadway, fifth floor, at West 27th Street, 646-494-3625, jazzgallery.org. (Chinen)★ Jimmy Cobb’s Mob  (Friday through Sunday) Last year the great drummer Jimmy Cobb released “The Original Mob,” a reunion with several former protégés, including the guitarist Peter Bernstein. Recorded at Smoke, it’s a bracing hard-bop case study that should give some idea of what will unfold this weekend, in an engagement loosely timed around Mr. Cobb’s 86th birthday, with a band featuring Mr. Bernstein, Richard Wyands on piano, and either Peter Washington or David Wong on bass. At 7, 9 and 10:30 p.m., Smoke, 2751 Broadway, at 106th Street, 212-864-6662, smokejazz.com. (Chinen)★ Dan Weiss Trio  (Saturday) Recently the drummer and composer Dan Weiss has been drawn to a large-canvas scrawl, on his excellent “Fourteen” and a forthcoming follow-up album. But he hasn’t stopped working with trios like this one, with the pianist Jacob Sacks and the bassist Mark Formanek. At 9 and 10:30 p.m., Cornelia Street Café, 29 Cornelia Street, Greenwich Village, 212-989-9319, corneliastreetcafe.com. (Chinen)Dena DeRose (Friday and Saturday) A crisp pianist and an effortless singer, Ms. DeRose draws partly from her most recent release, “We Won’t Forget You: An Homage to Shirley Horn,” with most of the album’s cast: Jeremy Pelt on trumpet, Martin Wind on bass and Matt Wilson on drums. At 8:30 and 11 p.m., Birdland, 315 West 44th Street, Clinton, 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com. (Chinen)Philip Dizack Quintet  (Thursday) A young trumpeter of power and precision, Philip Dizack released his second album, “Single Soul,” last year. He appears here with the guitarist Gilad Hekselman, the pianist Sam Harris and the bassist Matt Penman, with a drummer to be named later. At 8 and 10 p.m., Jazz Gallery, 290 Hudson Street, at Spring Street, South Village, 212-242-1063, jazzgallery.org. (Chinen)Harris Eisenstadt and Canada Day (Friday and Saturday) A venturesome drummer and composer, Mr. Eisenstadt walks the line between free-form exploration and meticulous composition with Canada Day, with the trumpeter Nate Wooley, the saxophonist Matt Bauder, the vibraphonist Chris Dingman and the bassist Pascal Niggenkemper. The band plays each night at 8 p.m., followed by another group: on Friday it’s the Vinnie Sperrazza Trio (for which there’s a separate listing); on Saturday it will be the Jeff Davis Quartet. At IBeam, 168 Seventh Street, Gowanus, Brooklyn, ibeambrooklyn.com. (Chinen)★ Evolving Music Series (Friday through next Friday) This off-season series from the organizers of the Vision Festival, bearing the poignant title “BlackLivesMatter,” will accommodate a range of avant-garde approaches through the month’s end. Highlights include the bassist William Parker in a duo with the pianist Cooper-Moore, Friday at 8 p.m.; the pianist Connie Crothers with the drummer Warren Smith, Saturday at 9:30 p.m.; the trumpeter Nate Wooley with his quintet, Tuesday at 9:30 p.m.; and the Tony Malaby TubaCello Quartet, Thursday at 9:30 p.m. At Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, Lower East Side, 212-260-4080, artsforart.org. (Chinen)Carlos Henriquez (Friday through Sunday) Mr. Henriquez, a bassist best recognized for his steadfast work with Wynton Marsalis and the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra, steps forward as a bandleader this weekend, propelling a group with Sean Jones on trumpet, Felipe Lamoglia on saxophones, Robert Rodriguez on piano, Bobby Allende on congas and Ali Jackson on drums. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-258-9595, jazz.org. (Chinen)★ Fred Hersch  (through Sunday) The solo recital is a reliably magical format for Mr. Hersch, a jazz pianist of flowing erudition — and he has made the Village Vanguard his most prominent platform for it, on record and in person. At 8:30 and 10:30 p.m., Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, West Village, 212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com. (Chinen)Vijay Iyer at the Stone  (through Sunday) The furiously productive pianist Vijay Iyer has another fine trio album, “Break Stuff,” coming next month, but he’s exploring other avenues during his residency at the Stone. He’ll present two expanded versions of his trio on Friday, including one that adds Graham Haynes on cornet, Rafiq Bhatia on guitar and Mat Maneri on viola, among others; lead a sextet at 8 p.m. Saturday, followed at 10 p.m. by “Open Cityscapes,” featuring a range of musicians and the writer Teju Cole; and play two distinct sets on Sunday with the trumpeter Wadada Leo Smith. At the Stone, Avenue C and Second Street, East Village, thestonenyc.com. (Chinen)Pat Martino Organ Trio/Larry Coryell-Vic Juris Duo (through Sunday) This guitar-centric double bill concerns several players with experience in both the swinging jazz mainstream and a funkier lane. Mr. Martino, who got his big break in organ combos, leads his current trio, with the Hammond B-3 organist Pat Bianchi and the drummer Carmen Intorre; Mr. Coryell, a jazz-rock pioneer, will engage in duologue with his fellow guitarist Mr. Juris. At 8 and 10:30 p.m., Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, West Village, 212-475-8592, bluenote.net. (Chinen)Mostly Other People Do the Killing  (Wednesday) Last year this puckish outfit raised some hackles with “Blue,” a concept album that involved the painstaking recreation of Miles Davis’s “Kind of Blue.” The uproar has subsided a bit, and the trumpeter Peter Evans has decamped — but there’s still plenty of fight left in the band, now a quartet with Jon Irabagon on saxophones, Ron Stabinsky on piano, Moppa Elliott on bass and Kevin Shea on drums. At 8:30 p.m., Cornelia Street Café, 29 Cornelia Street, Greenwich Village, 212-989-9319, corneliastreetcafe.com. (Chinen)NeTTwork  (through Sunday) This new trio suggests an alliance of soulful post-bop specialists, with Cyrus Chestnut on piano, Charnett Moffett on bass and Victor Lewis on drums. At 7:30 and 10 p.m., with an 11:45 p.m. set on Friday and Saturday, Jazz Standard, 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-576-2232, jazzstandard.net. (Chinen)‘Northern Spy Presents’ at Sugarcube  (Saturday) The Brooklyn avant-garde label Northern Spy presents two bands in a free showcase at Sugarcube, the pop-up space at South Street Seaport: first, at 7 p.m., comes Haunted House, led by the guitarist Loren Connors; then Marc Ribot’s Ceramic Dog performs at 8 p.m., with Mr. Ribot on guitar, Shahzad Ismaily on bass and Ches Smith on drums. At Sugarcube, Fulton and Front Streets, Lower Manhattan, sugarcube.nyc. (Chinen)Jean-Michel Pilc/Gilad Hekselman/Petros Klampanis  (Saturday) Mr. Pilc, a pianist, Mr. Hekselman, a guitarist, and Mr. Klampanis, a bassist, share a capacity for quick-reflex articulacy, along with a strong foundation in the post-bop language. They’ll play three roughly half-hour sets as a trio, taking turns in the leader’s chair, starting at 7:30 p.m. At ShapeShifter Lab, 18 Whitwell Place, Park Slope, Brooklyn, shapeshifterlab.com. (Chinen)★ Chris Potter Underground Orchestra  (Tuesday through Jan. 31) “Imaginary Cities,” just out on ECM, is the vaulting new album by the saxophonist Chris Potter, featuring a beefed-up version of Underground, his flagship band. The additions include Scott Colley on acoustic bass, Steve Nelson on marimba and vibraphone, and a string quartet made up of seasoned improvisers like the violinist Mark Feldman — all of whom rejoin him for this engagement. At 7:30 and 10 p.m., with an 11:45 p.m. set next Friday and Saturday, Jazz Standard, 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-576-2232, jazzstandard.net. (Chinen)Wallace Roney Quintet  (Wednesday) A post-bop trumpeter fond of harmonic tension and rhythmic aggression, Wallace Roney has never had a problem connecting with his elders. He’s now in his mid-50s, but that still places him a generation or so behind his potent rhythm team in this band: the bassist Ron Carter, 77, and the drummer Lenny White, 65. (Rounding out the band are the tenor saxophonist Ben Solomon and the pianist Kevin Hays.) At 8 and 10:30 p.m., Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, 212-475-8592, bluenote.net. (Chinen)Pharoah Sanders (Thursday through Feb. 1) The tenor saxophonist Pharoah Sanders, one of the most significant survivors of 1960s free jazz, has never stopped imbuing his performances with the tone of a spiritual quest. He’ll lead a quartet with William Henderson on piano, Nat Reeves on bass and Joe Farnsworth on drums. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-258-9595, jazz.org. (Chinen)Christian Scott  (Thursday through Feb. 1) The declarative mode comes easily to Mr. Scott, a fiendishly gifted young trumpeter born and raised in New Orleans. His current band, appearing next week with a new book of music, includes Braxton Cook on alto saxophone, Elena Pinderhughes on flute, Warren Wolf on vibraphone, Lawrence Fields on piano, Kris Funn on bass and Corey Fonville and Joe Dyson on drums. (Mr. Scott’s wife, Isadora Mendez-Scott, will join as a guest vocalist.) At 8 and 10:30 p.m., Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, 212-475-8592, bluenote.net. (Chinen)Mark Sherman Quartet  (Friday and Saturday) The vibraphonist Mark Sherman favors an assertive strain of postbop, crisp and clear. He has enlisted some of the best possible partners for that style: the pianist Kenny Barron, the bassist Ray Drummond and the drummer Carl Allen. At 8 and 10 p.m., Jazz at Kitano, 66 Park Avenue, at 38th Street, 212-885-7119, kitano.com. (Chinen)Vinnie Sperrazza Trio  (Friday, Tuesday and Wednesday) Vinnie Sperrazza is a drummer grounded in mainstream jazz traditions, though he moves freely within and around them. He’s celebrating the release of “Play Cy Coleman,” his second album with the pianist Jacob Sacks and the bassist Masa Kamaguchi, stocked with tunes like “The Best Is Yet to Come.” Friday at 9:30 p.m., IBeam, 168 Seventh Street, Brooklyn, ibeambrooklyn.com. Tuesday at 8:30 p.m., Korzo, 667 Fifth Avenue, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-499-1199, korzorestaurant.com. Wednesday at 8:30 p.m., Seeds, 617 Vanderbilt Avenue, Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, seedsbrooklyn.org. (Chinen)Colin Stranahan’s Pacemaker  (Friday) An alert and sensitive drummer, Mr. Stranahan has been making strides as a bandleader and composer — notably with Pacemaker, which in this one-nighter will feature the prominent saxophonist Mark Turner alongside André Matos on guitar, Pete Rende on piano and Thomas Morgan on bass. At 9 and 10:30 p.m., Cornelia Street Café, 29 Cornelia Street, Greenwich Village, 212-989-9319, corneliastreetcafe.com. (Chinen)★ Vanguard Jazz Orchestra  (Tuesday through Feb. 1) Typically this big band holds court only on Monday nights, but next week it will celebrate its 49th anniversary, drawing from a repertory fortified by some of the smartest composer-arrangers ever to ply the form. (Case in point: Its current album, “OverTime: The Music of Bob Brookmeyer,” which is nominated for a Grammy Award.) The long run is welcome, because it presents the musicians with a chance to really settle in — and also for the simple reason that hearing this band, in this room, is one of the irreducible New York pleasures. At 8:30 and 10:30 p.m., Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, West Village, 212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com. (Chinen)David Virelles Nosotros  (Friday and Saturday) Mr. Virelles, a serious young pianist, has made it his mission to interrogate the folkloric root systems of Afro-Cuban life, often in partnership with Román Díaz. This week he’s doing just that in a four-night residency at Seeds, working on Saturday with Mr. Díaz, and on Friday with Eric McPherson. At 9 p.m., 617 Vanderbilt Avenue, at St. Marks Avenue, Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, seedsbrooklyn.org. (Chinen)Advertisement