AdvertisementSupported byCritic's NotebookBy Stephen HoldenWhen Lincoln Center’s American Songbook series began in 1999, it was a nostalgic program showcasing popular standards by the likes of Irving Berlin, the Gershwins and Cole Porter. While keeping one foot in the past, it has since become a progressive, increasingly multicultural program devoted to the new as much as to the old — the kind of program that can give you Richard Rodgers or rap, or even a concert sung entirely in Spanish.Now, as it enters its 16th season, the series has its most adventurous musical offerings yet. They are a reflection of what might be called “the real New York City,” a place of continual cultural collision and assimilation.On the highbrow end, the Jan. 31 program, “Reich and Sondheim: In Conversation and Performance,” will bring together onstage for the first time these mutually admiring titans from Broadway and classical music.Stephen Sondheim has long acknowledged the influence of Steve Reich’s shimmering minimalism on his score for “Sunday in the Park With George.” Mr. Reich’s pieces will be his most pop-oriented and include music inspired by Radiohead and a two-piano arrangement of Mr. Sondheim’s “Finishing the Hat.”The previous evening, the character actor and singer John C. Reilly will perform with folk musicians including Becky Stark, the lead singer of the Los Angeles group Lavender Diamond, and the singer-songwriter Tom Brosseau.On Feb. 7, the passionate 69-year-old singer Danny Rivera, who has been called the Tony Bennett of Puerto Rico, and Nelson González, a master of the Cuban tres guitar, will perform songs from their album, “Obsesión,” a collection of traditional boleros. It is the series’ first ever concert with songs sung entirely in Spanish.The rapper and activist Talib Kweli will also be the series’ first hip-hop artist to give a raw, stripped-down rap show. Eight years ago, Mos Def (a.k.a Yasiin Bey) appeared there with a big band in a concert that disappointed critics. This will be unornamented old-school rap, some of which may address events in Ferguson, Mo.These four concerts only suggest the range of the series. In recent years, the common notion of a popular standard that once applied to the pre-rock American music created for Broadway and Hollywood has evolved to include Motown, Billy Joel, Joni Mitchell, Paul Simon, Carole King and Bruce Springsteen. With rock’s elders entering their 70s, they are the musical establishment, and the work that preceded, though exquisitely constructed, sounds increasingly quaint. That said, the tradition of the well-made song isn’t about to crumble. The urge to sing is as primal as the impulse to dance.With their ears to the ground, the American Songbook’s curators Jon Nakagawa and Charles Cermele spend four nights a week searching out new voices in a city teeming with ambitious young talent. A majority of American Songbook concerts take place in the Appel Room, the performing space on the fifth floor of the Time Warner Center at Columbus Circle. Its floor-to-ceiling view across Central Park South to the Fifth Avenue skyline makes it one of the glamorous performing spaces in Manhattan. With its comfortable seating and balanced acoustics, it is a music hall ideally suited to audiences intimidated by the noise and late hours of nightclubs where there is often only standing room. Concerts rarely last more than 90 minutes, and even at the more spirited events, the atmosphere is more polite than raucous. Though hard numbers were unavailable, the series organizers say that attendance has grown steadily over the years, a claim seemingly supported by anecdotal evidence.The series has an impressive track record of showcasing significant new talents and recognizing emerging stylistic hybrids of theater music, folk and pop. It has given early recognition to Gabriel Kahane and Sufjan Stevens, two of the leading exponents of a refined chamber folk-pop music with classical roots. Other new talents it has presented at pivotal turning points in their careers include Nellie McKay, Stew, St. Vincent, Norm Lewis and Matt Alber. On Thursday, Mr. Lewis, who recently played Porgy in “The Gershwins’ Porgy and Bess,” will bring back his show, “Who Am I?,” one of last season’s most successful concerts; it will be taped by PBS for broadcast on “Live From Lincoln Center.”This year’s series began on Wednesday with a free concert at the David Rubenstein Atrium featuring the gifted young singer, songwriter and actress Grace McLean and her band, Them Apples. Ms. McLean writes breezy, whip-smart love songs that refresh a subject that you may think has been exhausted.The 16-concert leg at the Appel Room begins on Wednesday with a performance by the pop-gospel phenomenon Billy Porter, who won a Tony Award for his portrayal of a drag queen in “Kinky Boots.” It concludes Feb. 28 with a concert by Barbara Cook, the beloved doyenne of theater singers.After a break, it returns to the smaller Kaplan Penthouse for seven concerts, concluding March 27-28, with two evenings featuring Allison Williams of “Girls.” Ms. Williams played Peter in the recent NBC production “Peter Pan Live!” These concerts in a more intimate space, where there is cabaret seating and wine is served, will extend the series’ commitment to live streaming, which began last season and proved very popular.For the American Songbook series, a major turning point came in 2002 with a concert of “69 Love Songs,” the magnum opus of the downtown singer-songwriter Stephin Merritt at Alice Tully Hall. It has since widened its focus from indie rock to encompass country music, Americana, Latin American pop and jazz, while making sure not to tread on the toes of Wynton Marsalis’s Jazz at Lincoln Center program.An artistic coup was the appearance in 2013 of the phenomenal jazz singer Cécile McLorin Salvant, one of handful of jazz performers to extend and even broaden the tradition of Sarah Vaughan and Betty Carter without diluting it. On Feb. 11, Meshell Ndegeocello will pay homage to Nina Simone. And in recognition of Billie Holiday’s centennial, the downtown cult figure Joey Arias will perform his tribute in which he channels the sound of Lady Day on Feb. 25.There are things that the American Songbook series isn’t equipped to do. The modest size of the room and its acoustic design can’t comfortably accommodate thunderous guitar-based rock, and the series’s nonprofit status precludes the appearance of high-priced big-name pop stars.For all its increased diversity, American Songbook retains a special relationship with Broadway. A high point was a 2012 show by Lin-Manuel Miranda, the brilliant composer of “In the Heights.” This season, the generational turnover in musical theater is recognized by the young composer and performer Shaina Taub, a recent winner of a Jonathan Larson grant, and a concert, Feb. 4, of Judy Kuhn singing music composed by three generations of the Richard Rodgers dynasty.As I’ve gazed out the windows of the Appel Room during many memorable concerts, a Rodgers and Hammerstein song title has frequently come to mind, “Some Enchanted Evening.”Expanding the CanonThe American Songbook is no longer just the standards of Berlin, Porter and Gershwin. Increasingly songs from rock, pop, R&B folk and hip-hop, as well as newer show tunes, are finding a place there. Here critics and editors at The Times suggest songs that could further expand the notion of the songbook. Add your suggestions in the comments.AND SO IT GOES by Billy JoelANOTHER WINTER IN A SUMMER TOWN by Scott Frankel and Michael Korie (from “Grey Gardens”)THE BLOWER’S DAUGHTER by Damien RiceBROADWAY HERE I COME by Joe IconisBROKEN BICYCLES by Tom WaitsDOWN HERE BELOW by Abbey LincolnEMPIRE STATE OF MIND by Shawn Carter and others (recording by Jay Z and Alicia Keys)THE END OF THE WORLD by Matt AlberFIFTY PERCENT by Billy Goldenberg and Marilyn and Alan Bergman (from “Ballroom”)GRATEFUL by John Bucchino (recording by Brian Stokes Mitchell)HEART’S DESIRE by Dave Frishberg and Alan Broadbent (recording by Carol Sloane)HOW GLORY GOES by Adam Guettel (from “Floyd Collins”; recording by Audra McDonald)IF THE STARS WERE MINE by Melody GardotI MISS THE MOUNTAINS by Tom Kitt and Brian Yorkey (from “Next to Normal”)IT ALL FADES AWAY by Jason Robert Brown (from “The Bridges of Madison County”)I THINK IT’S GOING TO RAIN TODAY by Randy NewmanTHE LIES OF HANDSOME MEN by Francesca Blumenthal (recording by Blossom Dearie)JUST MY IMAGINATION (RUNNING AWAY WITH ME) by Norman Whitfield and Barrett Strong (recording by the Temptations)MIDNIGHT RADIO by Stephen Trask (from “Hedwig and the Angry Inch”)NOT A DAY GOES BY by Stephen Sondheim (from “Merrily We Roll Along”; recording by Carly Simon)THE ROSE by Amanda McBroomSAIL AWAY by Randy NewmanSTAY by Mikky Ekko and Justin ParkerTAKE IT WITH ME by Tom Waits (recording by Jubilant Sykes)THE TAXI RIDE by Jane Siberry Compiled by Stephen Holden, Ben Brantley and Scott HellerAdvertisement