By BEN BRANTLEY and ANTHONY TOMMASINISEPT. 30, 2015
When the Metropolitan Opera announced it would forgo the traditional darkening makeup for the title character in its new production of Verdi’s “Otello,” it set off the latest in an ongoing series of debates about the depiction of race in theatrical settings. In an email exchange, two critics for The New York Times — Ben Brantley, whose specialty is theater, and Anthony Tommasini, whose area is classical music — discussed the “Otello” staging, the uses of blackface, casting trends and more. Here are excerpts from their conversation.ANTHONY TOMMASINI Colorblind casting has taken hold over the last couple of decades, both in the theater and opera worlds. Today, if a production of Shakespeare’s “Romeo and Juliet” (or Gounod’s “Roméo et Juliette” in the opera house) starred a black Romeo and a white Juliet, it would simply be a nonissue.Things become complicated, though, when racial identities are part of the story, as in “Otello.” Getting rid of Otello’s blackface was long overdue. The historical stigma of that makeup protocol is just too loaded and painful. Yet race is still an element in the tensions and resentments that drive the work. Otello sings that Desdemona has fallen in love with him despite his darkness. And the twisted Iago is driven, at least in part, by racial hatred, though the Met’s English subtitles eliminated his references to Otello as “dark” and “thick-lipped.”BEN BRANTLEY Seeing “Otello,” I tried to imagine how I would have responded if I hadn’t known the story before. Would I have felt something was missing without the makeup? And no, I don’t suppose I would have.AdvertisementWhat I did miss, in the production’s first half, was any sense of what set Otello apart. Aleksandrs Antonenko, in the role, tended to blend into the crowd in the early scenes. Even a red scarf, anything, to set him apart might have helped relieve that black-and-gray canvas, and something to indicate that he had come from a culture different from the one he now inhabits.AdvertisementOne small point, and I noticed this only because we were going to have this discussion: Whether by natural complexion or grease paint, Mr. Antonenko did seem a shade darker than, certainly, his wife and his lieutenant.TOMMASINI I also thought Mr. Antonenko looked just a little darker in skin tone. And I know this is a sensitive issue, but I have to say I don’t see how it’s offensive, when you have a character who is supposed to have a particular ethnic or racial background, to suggest that quality with a touch of makeup. Blackface is an entirely different thing.BRANTLEY Yes, and at this moment in history, it seems as though blackface, even as an intentional device, is essentially forbidden, even though someone like Branden Jacobs-Jenkins, an African-American playwright, has used blackface, whiteface and red in plays like “Neighbors” and “An Octoroon” to call attention to the idea of race as a socially imposed or manipulated mask. The most obvious example of a white performer in blackface in recent decades is Kate Valk in the Wooster Group’s production of “The Emperor Jones,” in which the disparity between the actress and the role was used to underscore the notion of O’Neill’s character as an unreal construct — and at the same time, to emphasize the very real sense of alienation within the character. I wonder, though, how well that production would be received if it were first being staged now.TOMMASINI Opera audiences grant singers much more leeway, in general, over their appearance, whether it’s an Italian soprano portraying Puccini’s Japanese Madama Butterfly or a black American bass-baritone as the title character in “The Marriage of Figaro.” The drama comes from the music.I had a kind of revelation about this issue in 2012 at the Glimmerglass Festival in Cooperstown, N.Y. That summer the festival had in residence a large group of black singers from the Cape Town Opera in South Africa. So a production of Kurt Weill’s musical “Lost in the Stars” carefully tried to present singers who had the racial appearances of the characters they were portraying. Whereas, with a mixed-race production of “The Music Man,” the audience was invited to disregard the race of the characters completely.BRANTLEY These days, with many revivals of musicals, I grant the same leeway that I do with opera: We’re inhabiting a universe with its own rules and language, and it’s how you speak this self-contained language that counts. When you have a linguist as proficient as Audra McDonald, she could play Guinevere in “Camelot,” or Maria in “The Sound of Music” or Lizzie in “110 in the Shade” (as she did), and the fact that she’s African-American wouldn’t register. She owns that particular alternative universe by the power of her voice and the emotions she transmits through it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.TOMMASINI I once wrote a piece suggesting that maybe the time had come for the Gershwin estate to ease its stipulation that “Porgy and Bess” be performed with an all-black cast. I realize, of course, there are very few operas about black people, so maybe “Porgy” should be the province of black artists. And it would go against the content of the story to have a white Bess. Still, if “Porgy” is an opera — and it is a very great, complex and sophisticated opera — then maybe a white soprano who is otherwise ideal for the role should be given a chance to perform it.BRANTLEY Ideally, yes, if we accept the premise that opera is all about the voice, not the surface appearance of the singers, any opera, including “Porgy,” should be cast according to vocal talent. (By the way, the other “genre” for which I think this holds true to some extent is the Shakespeare canon, with one glaring exception, that being — guess what — “Othello.”)AdvertisementTOMMASINI Again, opera is the exception here, because we opera fans have for so long been used to our own special kind of theatrical reality. My very first “Aida” was Leontyne Price. And to see this magnificent black artist portraying that role was as wonderful as hearing her magnificent soprano voice sing it. Yet my first-ever Mimi in “La Bohème,” when I was a kid, was Renata Tebaldi, who did not look like a shy, consumptive seamstress. But I will never, ever forget that performance.BRANTLEY I think the great gift of opera for its listeners is the way it reorients your senses. Love looks not with the eyes, to borrow from Shakespeare, but with … the ears. And hearing becomes the sense that leads all others.TOMMASINI We should probably mention something else that’s in the news: The decision by the New York Gilbert & Sullivan Players to pass on presenting its revival of “The Mikado,” after it drew some criticism over the way its mostly non-Asian cast planned to portray the stereotyped Japanese characters. The company promises to come up with an imaginative staging that does not use elements that could be perceived as offensive. Do you think that these sensitivities are less in play when a work is a satire with farcical elements?BRANTLEY I do think that sensitivity and farce are not mutually exclusive, though it sounds as if they should be. That aside, I do understand the reactions against doing a traditional “Mikado,” if only because yellowface — like blackface — has such toxic associations with our own cultural history at this point. What “political correctness,” in its most positive sense, means for me is correcting, or rectifying, past abuses of stereotypes. It’s a balancing process that calls out for some extremes in making those corrections. It is the time we live in. We may — oh, may it happen — reach a moment where such abuses are so long behind us, that we’ll feel a bit more comfortable when something like “The Mikado” is staged.A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Scrubbing Race,  but a Debate Simmers  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.