By GIA KOURLASOCT. 9, 2015
During her career at New York City Ballet, Jennie Somogyi, a dancer prized for her steely strength and lush musicality, has sustained just three injuries, but they’ve been whoppers. By now, she knows what it means when she hears the dreaded pop of a tendon. The most recent one occurred during the Russian dance in a 2013 performance of “Swan Lake” and affected the same tendon, in her left foot, that she had torn years before.The first time, in 2004, her doctors removed half of the tendon to fix it and told her that it would be impossible to repair if she hurt it again. Flash forward to 2013: “I’m in my bikini top from ‘Russian,’ ” Ms. Somogyi (pronounced sum-OH-gee) said, “and I’m lying on the ground thinking, well, this was my last show.” (A year before, she tore her Achilles’ tendon in her right foot.)Dancing wasn’t the primary problem; Ms. Somogyi, 38, wasn’t sure if she would be able to walk normally again. At first doctors recommended a tendon transfer: taking her flexor hallucis longus tendon and putting it in the place of the posterior tibial tendon. “I would have been limited in general,” she recalled during an interview at the David H. Koch Theater. “The way they described it to me was I wouldn’t have function of my little toes. So I would not have control of part of my foot. I was just like, no. I’m too young.”But with the help of a donor tendon and a year and a half of rehabilitation, Ms. Somogyi was able not only to walk but also to return — however gingerly — to City Ballet, starting last spring in a cool, stark pas de deux from Balanchine’s “Episodes.” She added his “Liebeslieder Walzer,” a ballet she never thought she’d be able to dance again, to her repertory for the fall season. On Sunday, it will be her farewell performance.Advertisement“What a perfect way to end: You’re a person, you become this spirit and then you go back to being a person,” she said of the two-act ballet set to Brahms waltzes, which Balanchine described as real people dancing in the first act, their souls dancing in the second.AdvertisementMs. Somogyi’s history with the company is extensive: She entered the City Ballet-affiliated School of American Ballet at 9; the following year she was cast as Marie in “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker.” In 1994, she joined the corps de ballet and in 2000 became a principal.Of her injuries Peter Martins, the ballet master in chief of City Ballet, said: “She had the real big ones. But, listen, she came back. That tells you a lot about her.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.During her arduous recovery from her 2013 injury, Ms. Somogyi, who lives in New Jersey near the Delaware River with her husband, a police officer, and their 7-year-old daughter, fell into a deep depression. “I couldn’t get up the steps,” she said. “I’m trying to go to bed, and it takes a half-hour for me to go up on my butt, and I’m bawling the whole time, because I’m like, I can’t do this again! Just the whole process. The crutches. The boots. Not being able to drive. Not being able to take care of my kid.”She was weighing every option she could think of and wondered if a donor tendon might be a viable solution. She learned of a Baltimore surgeon, Dr. Mark S. Myerson, who agreed it was possible. She said he told her, “You won’t be able to do what you do, but if you would like to teach or something, I don’t see why we can’t get this to be somewhat functioning.”Ms. Somogyi was sold. “As close to normal as I can get, I will take.”While her donor tendon has made it possible for her to retire on her own terms, it has also created a strange sensation in her body. “It feels like I have somebody else’s foot,” she said. “I keep asking people, ‘How does it look?’ Because I can’t feel things the way I would normally. It’s kind of interesting, because I’ve always been a natural. With my other injuries, I had to figure out ways around them, but this has put the most limits on my body — it just doesn’t have the power.”Last spring, she didn’t know if she would return at all. “I was doing barre,” Ms. Somogyi said, “but I was like, there’s just no way I can get onstage with this.”By chance she ran into Lisa Jackson, a ballet master for the company, who persuaded her to try “Episodes” in the studio; there is no jumping. “I honestly felt like this was ridiculous, but I had to find out one way or another,” Ms. Somogyi said. After the second rehearsal, Ms. Jackson and the ballet master Albert Evans told her that she had to dance it.The drive to return for a final season was inspired by her daughter, Madelyn, who was insistent about seeing Ms. Somogyi onstage again. “I wanted this to be a good ending for her, too,” she said. “She’ll remember the show. It won’t be like, ‘Mommy came home on crutches and sat on the sofa.’ It will be her last memory of what I did.”A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Finally Taking  Her Last Steps Back.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.