AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe CoscarelliIn the 2007 satirical rock ’n’ roll biopic “Walk Hard: The Dewey Cox Story,” John C. Reilly plays a Johnny Cash-Ray Charles-Bob Dylan hybrid, hamming it up on parody songs like “There’s a Change A’ Happening (I Can Feel It).” But the film, written by Jake Kasdan and Judd Apatow, stirred a real musical awakening in its star, introducing Mr. Reilly, 49, to serious players like Jack White (who cameoed as Elvis) and allowing him to spend more time singing, a passion since childhood.What followed, however, was not the typical “actor moonlighting in a rock band” vanity project. Instead, John Reilly and Friends, as he calls his subtle close-harmony folk project, aims to protect American roots songs, spirituals and country standards from extinction through his celebrity while working to “shine a light” on his collaborators, Mr. Reilly said, most notably the singer-songwriters Tom Brosseau and Becky Stark.The group, which released two vinyl singles through Mr. White’s Third Man Records in 2011, performed at the Newport Folk Festival last year and plays Lincoln Center’s American Songbook series next Friday. The performance is part of a two-week tour, another accomplishment owed in large part to the name recognition that Mr. Reilly provides. “In the beginning, people would be coming to the shows just because they knew me from a movie or thought it was going to be a stand-up comedy night,” Mr. Reilly said in a video chat from a hotel in India while there to shoot a film. “After the first couple of shows, I thought: ‘Maybe this is stupid. I don’t need to be any more famous — I have a perfectly good career as an actor, so why am I putting myself out there like this?’ ” Among the most famous “that guy” character actors in the country, Mr. Reilly is recognizable for roles like Reed Rothchild, the porn star turned magician in “Boogie Nights,” and to a younger generation as the absurdist second fiddle to Will Ferrell in “Step Brothers” and “Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby.” “But then I just had this epiphany,” said Mr. Reilly, in rumpled blue pajamas with a clump of bedhead crowning his soft, familiar face. “This music is beautiful, and so many people come up to me after the shows and say, ‘My soul feels nourished, and I wouldn’t have come to a show like this if I didn’t see your name.’ ” Raised in Chicago on traditional Irish music and old standards from a player piano, Mr. Reilly performed in musicals from a young age but didn’t learn guitar until college. Because of his Midwestern roots, he was initially drawn to blues music. “I realized that I’m too optimistic to play the blues,” he said. “I was really more suited to play the kind of music that came before the blues.” By the time of “Walk Hard,” he had already met Ms. Stark, best known for her work with the band Lavender Diamond, when she performed in a children’s group at his son’s birthday party. “She’s just one of these magical people — you always find yourself running into her at the exact right moment, like a tree gnome or a woodland sprite,” Mr. Reilly said. “I had been looking for people to play close-harmony music with and wasn’t quite finding people who were as into it as I was.” Soon after, at Largo, the influential Los Angeles club, he was introduced to Mr. Brosseau, whose high-pitched twang he recognized as a necessary ingredient in recreating the sound of groups like the Everly Brothers and the Carter Family. “I remember looking out and seeing John in the audience,” said Mr. Brosseau, who recognized Mr. Reilly from “Days of Thunder,” a racecar film he had watched as a teenager in North Dakota. “That happens in Los Angeles.”By 2009, the three of them were playing gigs, often joined by Sebastian Steinberg, another Largo regular, on double bass. Room permitting, they prefer to use a single microphone, their voices blending seamlessly. “The beauty and power of harmony is something we all really believe in,” Ms. Stark said. But with the injection of some of Mr. Reilly’s comedic chops, she added, the performances become a kind of “old-time revue” verging on vaudeville. Mr. Reilly likened it to a hootenanny. Scheduling complications have kept the group’s recorded output light — it has yet to cut a full-length album and may opt to release live recordings instead, Mr. Reilly said — but its members are in a constant dialogue, unearthing forgotten compositions from an era before recorded music. “One of my jobs in this band is to dig through the annals of folk music and shed light on these great songwriters who have come before us,” said Mr. Brosseau, who recalled Mr. Reilly’s sending him a physical copy of a Delmore Brothers record from the 1930s by FedEx.Mr. Reilly said that because of the Internet and digital archives, “we’re in a golden age of discovery.” “There’s never been a better time to keep old music alive,” he said. But instead of just collecting, the musicians turn around and share it all with audiences that, thanks to his connections, have included the likes of Joaquin Phoenix and Tilda Swinton. “I feel like in some ways we’re going to the beach and getting shells and selling them at the shows,” said Mr. Reilly, who often tells the crowds, “The beach is right there — you can find these songs as easily as we can.” Advertisement