AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Gia KourlasFor its second program of the winter season, “Hear the Dance: Russia,” New York City Ballet offers four works set to the music of Rachmaninoff, Stravinsky, Tchaikovsky and Glazunov. Alas, music alone, no matter how sumptuous, doesn’t make a ballet. Despite the promise of debuts by several dancers on Wednesday night, Jerome Robbins’s “The Cage” and George Balanchine’s “Cortège Hongrois” eclipsed two other ballets with little effort. Most draining was Peter Martins’s “Symphonic Dances,” in which Rachmaninoff’s swirling score provides a sonic landscape for a cast of 26. New to this ballet, created in 1994, are its sprightly leads, Sterling Hyltin and Andrew Veyette, performing alongside four soloist couples and 16 members of the corps de ballet. In two pas de deux, Mr. Martins seems to want to penetrate the underlying darkness of the Russian music, but his direction remains unfulfilled: What does the man really want? Is it really the woman or his fantasy of her? With Mr. Martins’s taxing repetitiveness of steps — it often feels like a countdown — the effect of, say, a jump that springs into the air with a turned-in knee or brisk, windmill arms is hopelessly squandered. Still, Ms. Hyltin is lovely, notably for the lush way she uses her shoulders, and Mr. Veyette, unflagging, seeks her out with a haunted urgency. Along with Robbins’s severe and scintillating 1951 work “The Cage,” in which female insects destroy their male prey, is his “Andantino” from 1981. That short pas de deux, set to Tchaikovsky, pairs Tiler Peck and Gonzalo Garcia in a flavorless, romantic ballet that serves only to show her rigor and his raggedness. In “The Cage,” the dancers have more to bite into, especially Lauren Lovette as the Novice and Savannah Lowery as the Queen. Both made fine debuts, especially Ms. Lowery, thrilling in her fierce and frenzied solo. (She’d make a terrifying Myrtha, the Queen of the Wilis, in “Giselle.”) At first, the startlingly tiny frame of Ms. Lovette, a saucer-eyed waif in a cropped black wig, accentuates her vulnerability. Quickly, her primal side takes over; she kills her first victim (Sean Suozzi), crushing his head between her thighs. When the second Intruder (Craig Hall) arrives, her lust is stirred, but not for long. Her nimble transformation back into a feral creature is brisk, dauntingly so. The program concludes with “Cortège Hongrois,” or “courtly parade in the Hungarian style,” to Glazunov. Not many dancers get as flamboyant a retirement present as Melissa Hayden did when Balanchine choreographed it for her in 1973. This work, which adapts music and choreography from Petipa’s 1898 ballet “Raymonda,” splits between vibrant character dancing and crystalline classical ballet. It’s not exactly spectacular, but it is a spectacle. Georgina Pazcoguin, dancing with Ask la Cour in the czardas section, gradually shifts from subdued fervor to searing speed in a vivid debut, and Sara Mearns, opposite Tyler Angle, returns to Ms. Hayden’s part in what could be termed glittering devotion; her phrasing caresses every note. When she ended her variation, clapping her hands and resting one behind her head and the other on her waist, the rest of the ballet seemed an afterthought. New York City Ballet’s winter season continues through March 1 at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; nycballet.com. Advertisement