By MARTHA SCHWENDENERJAN. 22, 2015
One of the blockbusters of Western art history, Théodore Géricault’s “The Raft of the Medusa” (1818-19), took as its impetus the true story of sailors left to die at sea, drifting on a raft off the coast of Senegal. Caroline Bergvall’s “Drift,” an installation of prints, sound works and a digital, algorithmic collage, was inspired by a similar tale, only set in the present day. In 2011, African migrants trying to reach the island of Lampedusa in the Mediterranean were left to drift at sea despite being sighted by officials; more than 60 people died.“Drift” is also the title of a book of poetry, prose and images that Ms. Bergvall published last year, which was based on the 2011 account. That title also refers to shifts in languages that occur over time, specifically lost gothic characters in English like the thorn, which fell out of use in the late Middle Ages, done in by the printing press. The book and the prints here also include bits and reconfigurations of Old Norse epics and seafaring poetry, and the title has personal significance: Ms. Bergvall, who is half Norwegian and half French, has lived in several countries.The best things here are the sound works, with their poetic incantations, and some of the prints. A monitor displaying scrambled text from the report on the African boat looks too much like a graphic design project. But ultimately Ms. Bergvall’s paradoxically minimal installation is packed so full of references it’s easy to get lost; unlike Géricault’s epic painting, which critiqued everything from the slave trade to the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy, “Drift” leaves us in a sea of disparate, seemingly disconnected sources and allusions.Callicoon Fine Arts 49 Delancey Street, near Eldridge Street Lower East Side Through Feb. 15 A version of this review appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page C28 of the New York edition with the headline: Caroline Bergvall: ‘Drift’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.