By NEIL GENZLINGERJAN. 22, 2015
Abraham Lincoln probably never envisioned the Internet, but he wouldn’t have been surprised by the tenor of the average Internet comment board. Among the documents that make up  “Lincoln Speaks: Words That Transformed a Nation,” an engrossing new exhibition at the Morgan Library & Museum, is a letter not by Lincoln but to him, from a disgruntled Louisianian who signed himself “Pete Muggins.”Muggins managed to write, in November 1860, a letter that remains unprintable in a family newspaper 155 years later. Suffice it to say that it uses a stronger version of the phrase “gol darn” or variations thereof almost exclusively, so much so that it never does convey what specifically Muggins is so upset about. Presumably Lincoln’s mere election as president opened the virulent floodgates; at this point the guy hadn’t even been sworn in yet.The Muggins letter is atypical of the exhibition; most of the more than 80 pieces are letters, notes, speeches and such by Lincoln himself. But it’s illuminating simply for the contrast. The country in that contentious period was no doubt full of Mugginses sputtering incoherent rage. Lincoln’s writings as presented here stand out for their calmness, clarity and common sense.Whether writing a letter of condolence to a young woman on the death of her father or his conciliatory second Inaugural Address, Lincoln put his faith in the power of words used precisely, of positions delineated rationally, no ranting or hyperbole needed. That wasn’t necessarily the norm when he entered public life. There was a lot of bombast in the air back then; grand-sounding but inflammatory writing and speechifying were in fashion, including among abolitionists like William Lloyd Garrison.AdvertisementLincoln’s more measured approach was essential; looking at this exhibition, you might well wonder what the country’s future would have been had a more blustery leader — Theodore Roosevelt, for instance, or several of today’s possible presidential contenders — filled the office in the 1860s. The country certainly didn’t need someone throwing kerosene on the fire.But reasoned and restrained doesn’t mean wimpy or unvarying. Lincoln may have been famous for one particular piece of headwear, but this exhibition seeks to show him wearing a variety of hats, as it were: the persuader; the pragmatist; the advice giver; the wartime administrator; the amateur poet; the maker of difficult, even harsh decisions. In one document he upholds a slave trader’s death sentence. In another, responding to reports that black soldiers captured by the South were being killed or sold into slavery, he decrees that “for every soldier of the United States killed in violation of the laws of war, a rebel soldier shall be executed.”A few of the hats Lincoln wore are so odd that you’re left wishing for a bit more elaboration. In a letter in August 1863 to Maj. Gen. Stephen A. Hurlbut, Lincoln tells of personally testing two Spencer repeater carbines, a firearm that the general sought for military use, and finding them wanting. Was the commander in chief always so hands-on? We can only guess.AdvertisementThe exhibition has nine sections. Some are obvious choices — “The Politician,” “National Leader,” “Healing a Nation.” The most intriguing, although it leaves you wanting more, might be “Sources of Lincoln’s Language,” which notes Lincoln’s literary influences (one of his Shakespeare volumes is on display, opened to “Macbeth”) and his use of devices like repetition and rhythm. And, coming full circle, the final two sections, “Lincoln in the Eyes of the World” and “A Man for All Time,” explore how Lincoln’s words and deeds have influenced others. A particular gem here is Walt Whitman’s handwritten copy of his poem “O Captain! My Captain!”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A short film features comments from Lincoln scholars as well as Bill Clinton and Tony Kushner, who wrote the screenplay for Steven Spielberg’s “Lincoln.” This, though, is primarily an exhibition to be read. Handwriting from the 19th century sometimes is indecipherable to the modern eye, but Lincoln’s is perfectly legible. A strong pair of reading glasses helps, however; ideas don’t fade, but ink does.The exhibition was organized by the Morgan and the Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History, with Declan Kiely of the Morgan and Sandra M. Trenholm, director of the Gilder Lehrman Collection, as curators. It includes 55 items from Gilder Lehrman; the rest are from the Morgan and other sources, including the Library of Congress, which lent a precious grammar book used by the young Lincoln.For Lincoln admirers, simply being in the same room with so many artifacts he touched will be a delight. And if they give the exhibition the time it requires, they will certainly come away with a fuller appreciation of the man. Yes, some big-ticket items are here, like a printed copy of the second Inaugural Address (in blue, we’re told, because he was still alive at the time of the printing; once he was assassinated, copies of the address were printed in black). But the strength of this exhibition is in the details, the 19th-century equivalent of emails or Post-it notes, dashed off to keep the Army functioning or to buck up a discouraged constituent.What is curiously missing in an exhibition called “Lincoln Speaks” is any sense of what it was like to, in fact, hear him speak. Some of the materials on display are of course addresses, and scholars have noted that what makes his writing so clear and forceful is that it often seems as if it were written to be spoken even if it wasn’t a speech.Lincoln’s contemporaries have left us descriptions of how he sounded. He had, it is said, a somewhat shrill voice that took a little getting used to, but once he was underway, after a few minutes he hit a comfort zone and so did his listeners. A 10th section — “Hearing Lincoln,” perhaps, or “Lincoln the Orator” — would have been a nice touch.“Lincoln Speaks: Words That Transformed a Nation” continues through June 7 at the Morgan Library & Museum, 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street; 212-685-0008; themorgan.org. A version of this review appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page C34 of the New York edition with the headline: Amid Swords of Civil War, a President With a Pen.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.