AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Jon Pareles“Let ’er buck” is the slogan of the Pendleton Round-Up in Oregon, founded in 1910 and now one of the world’s largest rodeos. Perhaps that brought out a contrarian side in the songwriter and composer Sufjan Stevens. His latest commission from the Brooklyn Academy of Music is “Round-Up,” a wordless, arty documentary with its score performed live for six nights at the BAM Harvey Theater, ending on Sunday. “Round-Up” was filmed in slow motion — 300 frames a second — and the music doesn’t buck; it’s steady and meditative, treating the rodeo as a ritual.The music is performed by Mr. Stevens, on keyboards and electronics, and Yarn/Wire, a contemporary chamber group of two pianists and two percussionists. Although one segment had a beat on drum and rattle, vaguely suggesting Native American music (the rodeo includes a Native American parade in traditional costumes) the score avoided Oregon’s local color for what might be BAM’s local color: minimalist contemplation. It was full of glimmering sounds — bowed vibraphone, pretty piano chords — with, now and then, something staticky or sprockety from Mr. Stevens’s electronics. For each segment — concentrating on one rodeo event, intercutting various competitors and performers — Mr. Stevens chose a strategy and stuck to it: a certain texture, a certain beat, perhaps with chromatic meanderings, perhaps not. Calf roping got running, Bachian counterpoint, while a segment with a lone calf had Yarn/Wire singing a cappella harmonies. The rodeo footage was filmed by Aaron and Alex Craig, brothers whose partnership, We Are Films, has made commercials, documentaries and indie-rock videos. They shot close-ups at the Pendleton Round-Up, sometimes filling the screen with just an animal’s torso or part of a face. What was split-second action in real time becomes a leisurely study of human and animal, skill and wildness, persistence and brawn; the bull-riding and calf-roping sequences might please Eadweard Muybridge with their anatomical detail. The bull-riding section had the most dramatic music: dark, swelling minor chords building to cymbal crashes. The images were also telling; the bulls were waves of ominous muscle. For Mr. Stevens, “Round-Up” is the companion piece and inverse to a previous multimedia commission by the Brooklyn Academy of Music, “BQE”; rural instead of urban, West Coast instead of East Coast. What they have in common, mostly, is hula hoops, which were onstage in “BQE”; in “Round-Up,” the camera lingers over hula hoop performances at the rodeo, twirled (very slowly) by women with lots of tinsel. It was, in the end, a pleasant but not revelatory performance. Perhaps it was the pianos-and-percussion lineup, but far too much of the music was secondhand Steve Reich, with its unswerving plink. As credits rolled at the end, Mr. Stevens played acoustic guitar and sang, which is what he does on most of his albums. The words were about “wild horses” and “wild forces” — a hint of what the film and its score might have reckoned with more directly. Advertisement