
Antiques By                     
EVE M. KAHN

JAN. 22, 2015
A forgotten camera said to have been used by the Trappist monk and writer Thomas Merton will appear in public for the first time on Feb. 2 in a Merton centennial exhibition at Columbia University’s Rare Book & Manuscript Library. Merton, who died in 1968, at 53, had taken vows at a Kentucky monastery that decreed he could own few possessions. With borrowed camera equipment, he took about 1,800 photos, creating meditative abstract compositions out of rocks, leaves, wagon wheels and barn siding.The camera, made by the Swiss company Alpa, arrived at Columbia a few weeks ago. The university bought it along with boxfuls of photos and documents related to Merton and his biographer John Howard Griffin, to add to the library’s extensive Merton files. (Griffin’s biographer, Roberto Bonazzi, sold the material to Columbia for an undisclosed price.)During an exhibition preview, Jennifer B. Lee, a curator at the library, pulled the black camera out of a leather case that smelled of tobacco smoke and incense. It was apparently never used again after Merton’s death. Griffin, who had lent the Alpa to Merton, received it back a few weeks after Merton was killed in Bangkok in a freak accident. (He was electrocuted when a defective fan fell on him.)Merton had left a roll of film inside, with 18 shots. Griffin removed it for developing, handling it “more carefully than I have ever done anything in my life,” he later wrote. When he printed the first image, he wrote, “I looked through Tom’s eyes on a scene viewed from some high place, downward past an edge of building and a foreground of shore across a broad body of water from which reflected sunlight glinted back.”AdvertisementColumbia is displaying Merton’s photos, correspondence and sketches as well as portraits of him carrying cameras. “I suppose I will run out of money,” he wrote in 1940 to his mentor Mark Van Doren, upon announcing his desire to join a monastery. In a typewritten draft of his best-selling 1948 autobiography, he scribbled a description of his war-torn hometown in southern France: “I was born into a world which was the image of hell.”The Thomas Merton Center at Bellarmine University in Louisville, Ky., near the abbey where Merton lived, owns a handful of other objects that he used, including a coffee mug and a Canon camera he used in Asia. Paul M. Pearson, the center’s director, is writing a book about Merton’s photography. (It is due in a year or so from Paulist Press.) As for Merton’s old Canon, he said, “the monks carried on using it until a few years ago when they went digital.”SALVAGING HISTORYUrban Archaeology, a chain of stores founded in the 1970s specializing in vintage building parts and new fixtures, is exiting the antiques business to focus on reproductions. In late March, Guernsey’s auction house will offer thousands of pieces of architectural salvage (with estimates up to six figures each) in a sale at Urban Archaeology’s TriBeCa flagship on Franklin Street.Gil Shapiro, 70, a founder of the store, gave a tour of the dusty merchandise. He listed sites where his teams had rescued each component and named celebrity buyers, like Daryl Hannah, John Gotti, Paul Simon and Ian Schrager.Advertisement“Don’t impale yourself,” he warned, as he maneuvered past chunks of skyscrapers, boutiques, churches, hotels, libraries, factories, restaurants, armories, bridges, airports, train stations, banks and theaters. The architects and artisans represented are as prominent as Louis Sullivan, Stanford White, Samuel Yellin and Edgar Brandt.“Try not to kill us,” he teased some workmen who were hauling around palm-tree-shaped Cuban mahogany columns taken from a Park Avenue triplex.He also drove to his New Jersey warehouse, where barrels and teetering stacks contained mysterious metal wings and hemispheres that had not yet been organized. A stone medieval knight was posted near the front door.In sorting through inventory, Mr. Shapiro said, “it’s fun reliving my past.” He added, “It’s good to know what I have.”Mr. Shapiro has already auctioned some pieces through Christie’s in New York, including a set of stadium seats designed by Marcel Breuer that brought $8,750. Mr. Shapiro and his wife, Judith Stockman, are hanging on to one batch of architectural antiques. An assortment of garden statuary, folk art and remnants from ice cream parlors, saloons and dentist offices will be stashed at a warehouse and their Long Island country home.“ ‘When I die you can sell,’ that’s what I tell my wife,” Mr. Shapiro said.A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page C32 of the New York edition with the headline: A Monk’s Interests Captured on Camera.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »