AdvertisementSupported byOpera ReviewBy George LoomisBERLIN — For reasons difficult to fathom, Weber’s “Der Freischütz” has rarely caught on outside Germany. In the United States, opera companies have all but given up on it. Perhaps its rustic tale of a young huntsman lured by the promise of supernatural intervention is a bit too folksy for widespread consumption. It’s hard to think that the fault lies with the music of an opera from 1822, which, in addition to its alluring tunefulness, strides boldly toward Romanticism as it characterizes the story’s otherworldly dimension with striking harmonic colors, most famously in the Wolf’s Glen scene. The kernel of much of Wagner can be found right there. If all it took to win “Der Freischütz” a wider audience were to rid the stage of storybook forests, quaint bürgerliche houses and country dress, and to omit much of the dialogue, the director Michael Thalheimer’s new production for the Berlin State Opera might have something going for it besides excellent music. Indeed, the shooting contest of the opening scene is arresting, with spectators clustered together to watch the young huntsman, Max, and his sinister rival, Kaspar, all of them surrounded by darkness. It looked as though the production might really make something of the opera’s mysteries.But the stage’s darkness loses its capacity to heighten the drama once one realizes that it is the result of Mr. Thalheimer’s decision to set the entire opera in a tunnel (designed by Olaf Altmann and lighted by Olaf Freese). It looks like a cave but is symmetrical, ending in a circular opening just big enough for characters to enter and exit. Some spectators were reminded of the Deutsche Oper Berlin’s late 1980s production of Wagner’s “Ring,” modeled on the Metro stations in Washington.There is no visual relief. Characters come and go, often as if they were searching for something. Sometimes they find blood and smear it on themselves, as when Agatha, who is engaged to Max, has forebodings about the future. Max must prove himself as a marksman if he is to win her father’s consent to their marriage. Even the Wolf’s Glen scene, when Max succumbs to the lure of the devil and magic bullets are cast for his use in the crucial shooting contest, lacks a new visual dimension (other than some barely discernible writhing women) to represent the supernatural events.Mr. Thalheimer — who is best known as a theater director in Berlin and Hamburg but has also staged operas in Berlin, Basel and Flanders — also unhelpfully expands the opera’s personification of the devil, known as Samiel (a speaking role). Here he is a frequent malevolent presence who becomes tiresome as he silently hovers around characters while they sing. Other directors have profitably done just the opposite: restricting Samiel to one who is heard and not seen, so that his booming voice in the Wolf’s Glen scene becomes more threatening and mysterious. Also, by inflating Samiel, Mr. Thalheimer in the process diminishes Kaspar — who sold his soul to Samiel and schemes to preserve it by having Max take his place. Samiel even corrupts the happy ending by insinuating himself between Max and his beloved Agatha at final curtain.Mr. Thalheimer’s direction of the principals is also idiosyncratic. Characters rarely interact with one another. Max is depicted in a state of permanent dejection motivated, presumably, by his fear of losing Agatha: At least Max’s downcast state accords generally with the sentiment of his aria, “Such die Water.” Max is an incipient heldentenor role, and Burkhard Fritz, heading an outstanding cast, brings both vocal weight and lyrical grace to the music.Agatha is no happy camper, either, particularly when aimlessly traversing the tunnel in her wedding dress, sometimes with her arms oddly stretched, birdlike, behind her. Fortunately, this happens when she is not singing. In Agatha’s own big aria, “Leise, leise” the soprano Dorothea Röschmann was superb on opening night Sunday, particularly in the final vivace section, sung with uninhibited passion yet also flawless accuracy. In the soubrette role of Ännchen, the soprano Anna Prohaska sang with exquisite delicacy. The main loser in Mr. Thalheimer’s approach is Falk Struckmann, who, in part because of Samiel’s expanded presence, seemed prevented from developing Kaspar into a real villain — a waste of the bass-baritone’s talents, as those who have seen his Scarpia or Iago will know. At least he sang his challenging revenge aria excitingly. Completing the cast were the baritone Roman Trekel, authoritative as the local prince Ottokar; the bass Jan Martinik as a wise Hermit; the bass Victor von Halem, in sonorous voice as Agatha’s father, Kuno; and the baritone Maximilian Krummen, vocally robust as the rich peasant Kilian.The opera began with a powerful reading of the famous overture by the conductor Sebastian Weigle and the State Opera’s fine orchestra. The very first note, a unison C, conveyed a sense of portent as it began pianissimo and grew forebodingly louder. Thereafter, in an impressive performance, Mr. Weigle was ever on the lookout for expressive gestures in the music, sometimes setting tempos slower than usual. The printed program noted that the dialogue was performed in a new version by Mr. Thalheimer, which proved to be drastically pruned from the original with a few additional lines for Samiel. This puts the focus squarely on the musical numbers, but character motivations and plot details are sacrificed. At the premiere at the Schiller Theater — which remains the company’s temporary home as renovations to its Unter den Linden theater continue — Mr. Thalheimer received scattered boos during curtain calls, and countervailing calls of “bravo” were largely absent. Der Freischütz.  Directed by Michael Thalheimer. Schiller Theater, Berlin. Through Feb. 8. Advertisement