By KATHRYN SHATTUCKJAN. 24, 2015
8 P.M. (TCM) THE ESSENTIALS: RAGS TO RICHES Robert Osborne and Drew Barrymore explain why Michael Apted’s “Coal Miner’s Daughter” (1980), starring Sissy Spacek in an Oscar-winning portrayal of the country legend Loretta Lynn — a role for which she did all the singing — is required viewing. A “gentle touch” gives “this movie its distinctive sweetness,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times, adding that the film “risks understating its story to make Loretta Lynn’s biography part of a larger fabric, and the gamble pays off.”NOON (13) RICHARD HEFFNER’S OPEN MIND Lan Samantha Chang, the director of the Iowa Writers’ Workshop, discusses some of the issues facing aspiring artists.7 P.M. (VH1) VH1 STORYTELLERS Ed Sheeran performs some of his hits and shares personal anecdotes live from Whelan’s in Dublin, where he first saw Damien Rice, the artist he says made him want to pursue music.8 P.M. (Bravo) HITCH (2005) Close your eyes and pucker up. Will Smith plays Alex Hitchens, a smooth-talking New York love doctor who teaches social misfits how to get their way with women who are better-looking than they are — until, of course, he finds one (Eva Mendes) immune to his techniques. Kevin James is the chubby accountant who hires Hitch to help him persuade a beautiful heiress (Amber Valletta) to look his way and receives a man-to-man lesson in the art of seduction. Writing in The Times, A. O. Scott called this film from Andy Tennant “as soft and sweet as a marshmallow and about as interesting,” adding that Mr. Smith and Ms. Mendes were “utterly charming” and that Mr. James was “a fine comic sidekick.”Advertisement8 P.M. (FXX) PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN: THE CURSE OF THE BLACK PEARL (2003) Johnny Depp stars as Capt. Jack Sparrow, the grooviest swashbuckler on the bounding main — a portrayal supposedly inspired by Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones — in this swaggering action adventure. Orlando Bloom is the blacksmith Will Turner, Sparrow’s unlikely ally. And Keira Knightley is the damsel in distress and the love of Will’s life. The film, directed by Gore Verbinski, “raises one of the most overlooked and important cinematic questions of our time: Can a movie maintain the dramatic integrity of a theme park ride?” Elvis Mitchell wrote in The Times. “In this case the answer is — sure.” In “The Tourist” (2010), at 9 on the FX Movie Channel, Mr. Depp tries on normal as a Wisconsin math teacher on a train in Italy who bumbles into Angelina Jolie as a mystery woman who combines lock-picking skills with off-the-shoulder gowns and intrigue. That leads to dinner, followed by bullets and boat chases on the canals of Venice. “Stargazing is the only reason bonbons like ‘The Tourist’ are made, dreams of box-office bonanzas aside,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. Still, “there’s definitely some amusement” in watching Ms. Jolie’s character come to the rescue of Mr. Depp’s.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (CUNY) THE JACKIE ROBINSON STORY (1950) Alfred E. Green chronicles the life of Robinson, who moved from the Negro leagues to the Brooklyn Dodgers, breaking the color barrier in modern Major League Baseball. “The simple story of Mr. Robinson’s trailblazing career is re-enacted with manifest fidelity and conspicuous dramatic restraint,” Bosley Crowther wrote in The Times. “And Mr. Robinson, doing that rare thing of playing himself in the picture’s leading role, displays a calm assurance and composure.” Ruby Dee portrays Robinson’s wife, Rae.10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS Maureen Maher explores the relationship between Forrest Hayes, a Google executive who died of a heroin overdose on his yacht in 2013, and Alix Tichelman, the woman charged with killing him.Advertisement11:30 P.M. (NBC) SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE Blake Shelton hosts and performs.What’s Streaming NowDAYS OF GRAY (2013) In Ani Simon-Kennedy’s silent coming-of-age tale, filmed in Iceland and featuring a score by the band Hjaltalin, a boy (David Laufdal Arnarsson) in a post-apocalyptic world without language befriends an outsider (Dilja Valsdottir) and must decide whether to continue living in a society of fear and isolation or choose his own path. (vyerfilms.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.