By ALASTAIR MACAULAYJAN. 23, 2015
Thursday was the 111th birthday of George Balanchine, the most revelatory, influential and protean ballet master in history. New York City Ballet, the company he founded with Lincoln Kirstein in 1948, celebrated the occasion by bringing three Balanchine ballets back to the repertory: “Donizetti Variations” (1960), “La Valse” (1951) and “Chaconne” (1976).“Donizetti Variations” brought laughing effervescence and “La Valse” a morbid spectrum of Romantic agony, while “Chaconne” demonstrated the transcendence of life and love after death. Their compositional complexity springs continual surprises. Even after all these years, we do and we don’t know Balanchine.Daniel Capps conducted the scores, whose dates of composition reached from 1774 to 1920, with equal flair at the David H. Koch Theater. Thursday’s interpreters were a mixture of the familiar and the new. Ashley Bouder and Joaquin De Luz, both jaunty and swaggering, are a proven and illustrious lead couple in the high-voltage coloratura of “Donizetti”: They dazzled with explosive attack, fluent speed and scintillating brightness. Sterling Hyltin was making her debut as the elegantly passionate, doom-hungry young heroine of “La Valse”; she touched boldly on facets of self-destructive dark sophistication new to her. (It’s to be hoped these will only increase with successive performances.)And my sense of Balanchine’s mastery deepened most from watching Maria Kowroski in “Chaconne.” This is a ballet she’s danced often before; her spectacularly long limbs, naturally colossal grandeur, physical loveliness and quiet persona all suit it, but her technical limitations have seldom made her seem free within its baroque virtuosity. Here, helped by the luxurious partnering of Tyler Angle, she was more profoundly married to her music than I have ever seen her; and what she revealed was the endless variety of Balanchine’s mastery of dynamics. Here the marcato stresses within a phrase, here the staccato end of a step, here the legato current, with the three elements often variously combined: all marvelously fresh.AdvertisementBalanchine’s celebrated musicality is too often allowed to pass as if he simply had a hotline to all his composers. Really it involved complex decisions, starting with his choice of music. Though the score for “Donizetti Variations” is fairly straightforward — it’s the ballet from Donizetti’s final opera, “Dom Sébastien” (1843) — the program’s other two pieces are composites. In “La Valse,” Balanchine not only dares to preface Ravel’s 1920 “La Valse” with his 1911 “Valses Nobles et Sentimentales,” but he also completely ignores the composer’s “Valse” scenario. (If you want to see Ravel’s intentions beautifully realized, watch Frederick Ashton’s 1958 “La Valse,” which was praised by Poulenc; a 2013 Royal Ballet performance is on DVD.)AdvertisementAnd in “Chaconne,” Balanchine yokes dances from two different sections of Gluck’s 1774 “Orphée et Euridice.” (City Ballet’s program uses the Italian title, “Orfeo ed Euridice”; but that implies this score is from Gluck’s original italophone 1762 version of the opera. Only for his francophone Paris revision did he compose his finest ballet music.) The opening dances are from the second-act Elysian fields (Champs Élysées), in which the musician Orpheus rediscovers his wife amid the dead; but the final dances are a selection from the third-act finale, in which the couple are reunited in life even after he has lost her a second time.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Balanchine’s effect in both cases is to take us on a journey. In his Ravel creation, the opening “Valses Nobles et Sentimentales” establishes the characters and mood but keeps the horror in reserve for “La Valse.” In his Gluck compilation, we move from the life of the dead to life after death; it’s a resurrection in which the secular becomes sublime.Another aspect of Balanchine’s pervasive sense of drama is his use of gesture, one of his most distinguishing features. You have only to look at the three women (Marika Anderson, Gretchen Smith, Lydia Wellington), who, presiding like the Fates, do much to establish the darkly sophisticated atmosphere of “La Valse” to see how many things Balanchine knew how to do with arms, elbows, hands.These three no sooner flourish gestures than they break the arms’ lines with jagged elbows and wrists; and the games of hands, wrists, elbows, arms that go on seem both to sum up high society (debonair gossip and social commentary) and to subvert it. When those hands frame the women’s faces, touch them, and then tip them onto a skewed angle, the drama has moved into the surreal.Later, lighting suddenly reveals the three mystery women as they stand in a bizarre tableau, each screening her eyes with one barrierlike arm while the other arm points vertically; they’re a triple signpost to nowhere. One man alone (Zachary Catazaro, making his debut here on Thursday, was well cast for his Romantic presence and upper-body fullness) sees them, with horrified fascination; he might be Macbeth finding the three weird sisters on the heath.Balanchine remains the most instructive of choreographers. When most choreographers bring on a supporting ensemble, you soon know the mathematical permutations that lie ahead. Nine dancers? Three trios, natch; sometimes six plus three. Yet as “Donizetti Variations” proceeds, you’re in continual suspense: just how many trio, duet or solo combinations can these nine (six women, three men) contain? At one point, all expectations are confounded when four of the six women re-enter. The effect is to keep us on tenterhooks: how will the other two return? This was the first work I ever saw City Ballet dance (36 years ago this month, with Mikhail Baryshnikov making his debut opposite Patricia McBride), but I testify that one element of my response is still “What will happen next?”New York City Ballet season runs through March 1, with this program in repertory through Feb. 28 at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. A version of this review appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: Balanchine as Shape-Shifter, Concealing Surprises in Familiarity.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.