By GIA KOURLASJAN. 23, 2015
The Mariinsky Ballet’s production of “Swan Lake” is a strange bird. There have been frosty Odettes, tawdry Odiles, uncharismatic Siegfrieds and a frequently irritating Joker. Yet the luminosity of the staging, a 1950 revision of the celebrated 1895 version choreographed by Marius Petipa and Lev Ivanov, manages to shine in its sets, lighting and costumes. To see swans — they’re not real, but they look it — glide across the lake at the start of the second scene is heart-stopping. (Even the third time around.) The swan maidens, this time real women, are bewilderingly gorgeous as they skim across the stage or frame it, poised like statues.Toward the end of its “Swan Lake” run at the Howard Gilman Opera House of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, the Mariinsky finally did something wise: It made room, on Thursday evening, for a new generation, with its shrewd pairing of Oxana Skorik and Xander Parish. Ulyana Lopatkina’s magnificently seasoned Odette-Odile on Jan. 16 was a marvel; Ms. Skorik, just 25 and a first soloist with the company, and Mr. Parish, 28 and a second soloist, gave the ballet a different charge: of youth, resiliency, sensuality. Just as both are raw, both have the goods.Mr. Parish, who left the Royal Ballet for the Mariinsky in 2010, not only has the debonair looks of a prince, but the manners as well. Tall, with a courtly attention to partnering and long legs that cut the stage in half in grand jetés — turns aren’t his friend — he gives Prince Siegfried a conscience and a soul. The only male role model in the Prince’s life seems to be his drowsy tutor; his mother wants him to marry so desperately that it hardly matters to whom. He’s equally sheltered and conflicted, which Mr. Parish reveals in sighs that send shudders through his body. Quickly, he pulls himself back together. That’s the Prince’s job.As Odette, Ms. Skorik makes her first appearance taking delicate sideways steps on point as her arms wind their way around her. Her flexibility is astonishing, protracted by her artful use of allongé, or balletic stretch, which works in tandem with her natural gifts: a supple back, long arms that add miles to her height and otherworldly, albeit unforced, extension.AdvertisementMs. Skorik, originally from Ukraine, was sent to Perm to study ballet as a young girl; it was, by all accounts, a rough upbringing. Her story is preserved on film in David Kinsella’s 2008 documentary, “A Beautiful Tragedy.” She knows about darkness.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While she was a glittering Odile, Ms. Skorik, strangely, was even sexier as Odette. At first, the slow movements of her arms floating behind her back, twisting like heavy wings, as if the air were thick, made it seem that she had just awakened. By turns fearful and fearless, she used her pliability to show how Odette is a creature from another world: a princess-turned-swan, but, above all, a woman.Of the Prince’s friends, the boyish Ernest Latypov impressed with his airy leaps, and Nadezhda Batoeva with her silky ease. She was a replacement for Anastasia Nikitina, who had suffered an injury during a performance the previous week. In that program, Mr. Parish, playing the Prince’s friend, gave a glimpse of his confident charm.AdvertisementIt’s impossible to predict what kind of dancers Ms. Skorik and Mr. Parish will become, but it’s clear that they’re learning as they go. From the Mariinsky, the performance was refreshing and more: a privilege to witness.The Mariinsky Ballet performs through Sunday at Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene; 718-636-4100, bam.org. A version of this review appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: Young Performers Spreading Their Wings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.