AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Neil GenzlingerThe best pirate series introduced in 2014 that wasn’t canceled returns Saturday night, its gnarly men still gnarly, its brothel still doing a booming business, and its allegiances and morality still ever-shifting.It’s the Starz series “Black Sails,” which seems to have a charmed life just like some of its characters — it was renewed for a third season months ago even though the 10-episode Season 2 is only just now beginning. That’s history repeating itself: Season 2 was already ordered before Season 1 had begun. The viewing public, it seems, likes its 18th-century pirates rough and its 18th-century prostitutes naked.Another pirate show set in the same general time period, NBC’s “Crossbones,” took a more cerebral approach last year — without, of course, the nudity. Despite intriguing work by an A-list star, John Malkovich, in the lead role of Blackbeard, it didn’t last. Starz, though, knows the formula for these costume-heavy action dramas from experience with shows like “Spartacus” and “Camelot.” And that formula is executed with particular skill in “Black Sails,” thanks to some strong performances and an exploration of the consequences of greed that could have come out of modern-day Wall Street.Season 1 ended badly for Captain Flint (Toby Stephens), a pirate fending off internal dissent while chasing a big payday: a ship supposedly jammed with riches. His crew was staging a mutiny even as his ship was under hostile fire, and he seemed headed for a watery grave.Season 2, though, doesn’t open on Flint; instead we meet Capt. Ned Low (Tadhg Murphy), who makes an initial impression that jumps him to the top of the show’s ruthlessness scale. He is soon on New Providence Island, pirate capital of the world, butting heads with Eleanor Guthrie (Hannah New), the no-nonsense entrepreneur who spent Season 1 proving that she is as tough as any man in this very manly world, including her father.Eleanor is one of several strong female characters in “Black Sails,” a must now for these types of shows to fend off accusations of sexism, since when garments come off they almost always come off the actresses, not the actors. Eleanor is an especially interesting female lead because she embodies half of the tug of war that makes up the core of the show: whether the goal of the outlaw life is merely to accumulate ill-gotten gains or to eventually get out of the thievery business and become legitimate.Charles Vane (Zach McGowan), yet another grizzled pirate captain, perfectly embodied the greedy half of those dueling world views when he said, in Episode 7 last season, “No man is rich who could have a lot more by doing less,” something that belongs on a T-shirt for sale in the present-day financial district.But Eleanor and other characters want more than just black-market wealth. It’s a dynamic out of “The Godfather,” where the Corleones tried to take the family business into the mainstream. “Black Sails” may be full of pirates and prostitutes, but it’s really about striving for respect, whether from an unruly crew or from polite society.Advertisement