By STEPHEN HOLDENOCT. 9, 2015
Lisa Howard belongs to the tradition of lusty Broadway belters, of which Ethel Merman reigns supreme as the embodiment of a roof-raising vocal assertiveness that is a law unto itself. You might say that the voice decrees the law and that those who won’t obey had better watch out. There is a whole subculture of fans who bow before such power.Ms. Howard, who won acclaim for her portrayal of the zaftig older sister of the bride in the Broadway musical “It Shoulda Been You,” makes a sound that cuts through steel. Her showstopping performance of “Jenny’s Blues,” a song from that production, at Feinstein’s/54 Below on Thursday evening brought down the house, as it did on the Tony Awards broadcast in June.In this humorous proclamation of unleashed appetite that might give the most ardent admirer pause, she demanded, “Give me a man/Who’s more than talk/And when I give him back he won’t be able to walk.”Within the more-is-more school of singing, there is considerable latitude for forceful self-expression. The more sensitive approach allows for a certain amount of pleading and sobbing. Ms. Howard’s singing on Thursday was colder and more aggressive. The set included an obligatory Merman tribute, “I Got the Sun in the Morning,” from “Annie Get Your Gun.”AdvertisementThe evening’s commanding tone was established by the “I Want” medley, in which she and her musicians, Lawrence Yurman on piano and Mary Ann McSweeney on bass, ran through a string of show tunes, including “Much More,” “Before the Parade Passes By” and “Don’t Rain on My Parade.”Thankfully, there’s more to Ms. Howard than vocal heft. Under the surface, there is a streak of gentleness that revealed itself in an appealing, little-known ballad, “Stay Five,” by Michael Shaieb and Stephen Tomac. The song, addressed to a child, revealed a big heart under a big voice that softened to express a maternal tenderness.AdvertisementLisa Howard performs through Saturday at Feinstein’s/54 Below, Manhattan; 646-476-3551, 54below­.com.A version of this review appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Unleashing a Voice That Must Be Obeyed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.