By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMJAN. 23, 2015
A debut and a comeback were on offer at Thursday’s New York Philharmonic concert at Avery Fisher Hall. A majority of the vocal, near-capacity audience was clearly there for the comeback: After an absence of almost nine years resulting partly from a shoulder injury, the Siberian-born star violinist Maxim Vengerov was returning to this stage with one of his signature pieces, Tchaikovsky’s Violin Concerto. He received a hero’s welcome. There were bravos and smattered applause between movements and a protracted ovation at the end of the piece. Isolated whoops of the weak-kneed kind usually reserved for rock stars greeted his announcement of an encore. After the intermission, clusters of seats remained empty.That was a shame. For while Mr. Vengerov delivered an engrossing account of the Tchaikovsky, enlivened by the glossy, warm sound of his 1727 Ex-Kreutzer Stradivarius, the orchestra only truly woke up in the second half for a commanding performance of Shostakovich’s Symphony No. 5 that was especially memorable for the exquisite solos.The conductor, making his subscription debut, was Long Yu, a towering figure in the Chinese music world, where he heads an impressive number of institutions, including the China Philharmonic Orchestra, the Guangzhou Symphony Orchestra, the Beijing Music Festival and the Shanghai Symphony Orchestra. It’s in that last capacity that he has become a close partner with the New York Philharmonic. The two orchestras recently embarked on a partnership that centers on the creation of the Shanghai Orchestra Academy, an educational venture for aspiring orchestral musicians that offers coaching, workshops and mock auditions. On Wednesday, the New York Philharmonic announced plans to deepen that relationship in the coming season.On Thursday, Mr. Yu proved himself a conductor with a knack for both sumptuous lyrical passages and punchy fortissimos. Pugnacity is a characteristic he has displayed previously in New York: In 2012, he fought off a man who attacked him on Columbus Avenue and went on to conduct the New York Philharmonic in a Chinese New Year’s Concert the following night with a black eye.In the opening two movements of the Shostakovich, there were moments of stellar music-making, but they often came across as episodic. There could have been more storytelling in the shaping of the transitions and more character in the tauntingly chirpy theme that gets passed around different instruments, falters and then regroups. Mr. Yu’s direction was always assured, and he allowed the individual solos the breathing room to unfold, but it wasn’t always clear what they stood for. Was the lovely flute solo in the first movement intended as hopeful, mystical or escapist? There was much more narrative tension in the final movement, where Mr. Yu offered a tight and dramatic reading.It was a stark contrast to the orchestra’s playing in the concerto, which was off-kilter much of the way through. There did not seem to be a comfortable dynamic between Mr. Vengerov, playing with assured ease and a relatively straightforward tempo, and Mr. Yu. In the slow movement, Mr. Vengerov’s playing was wonderfully hushed and melancholic, the orchestra almost uniformly too loud. His encore, a beautifully inward, sorrowful Sarabande from Bach’s Partita No. 2 for solo violin, was offered as a gift to the grateful public.The New York Philharmonic repeats the program on Saturday at Avery Fisher Hall; nyphil.org. A version of this review appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Euphorically Embracing a Long-Missing Soloist.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.