The HBO comedy by Lena Dunham.Season 4, Episode 3: “Female Author”Outrage magnet that it is, “Girls” happened to air an episode with a glib police brutality subplot, complete, of course, with a stop-and-frisk joke, in the wake of nationwide unrest over the state of law enforcement. (In the show’s defense, yes, the episode was written and filmed many months ago.) But we’ll get to that! Back with me, Joe Coscarelli, on this butt-baring Skype chat of a recap is Lydia Polgreen. Joe: Before we discuss the New York Police Department and the specifics of the new duos — Hannah-Elijah, Jessa-Adam, Marnie-Desi — that dominated this episode, I want to zoom out and think about the show’s structure. “Girls” has always had plenty of sitcom in its DNA, but these friends aren’t confined to unrealistically large apartments and their favorite coffee shop (sorry, Ray). So, three-plus seasons in, with Hannah (Lena Dunham) at grad school in Iowa, we’re seeing the show stretch these increasingly inconvenient (and, at this stage in their lives, unrealistic) relationships into new configurations for the sake of freshness. That, I’d imagine, is how we ended up with Jessa (Jemima Kirke) and Adam (Adam Driver) in the same A.A. meetings, as well as Elijah on an unexplained, indefinite vacation in Iowa City (the actor Andrew Rannells was bumped up to a series regular this season). And while Elijah’s shtick — back-to-college social butterfly/party photographer (circa 2006) — was funny, it’s the Adam and Jessa pairing that was a revelation. Jemima Kirke, who would sweat charisma if she would deign to sweat at all, has always been underused, and linking her with the show’s other atomic fireball, Adam Driver, makes a stupid amount of sense. Their characters’ chemistry feels dangerous — in a good way for the viewer, if not Hannah — and I think the episode underlined that tension when Adam pushed her away after her recklessness led to their arrest. The drama Marnie (Allison Williams) is stoking with her old hookup buddy Ray (Alex Karpovsky) and love object Desi (Ebon Moss-Bachrach) is less interesting to me, but Marnie usually is. And Shosh’s interview at Ann Taylor Loft, although hilarious, feels like a retread of Hannah’s professional foibles in years past. (And can we get Shoshanna, played by Zosia Mamet, a real friend or what?)Lydia: I definitely noticed the white-hot chemistry between Adam and Jessa. And recovery is the one thing that Adam seems to take drop-dead seriously, so a hookup between them — a no-no in Alcoholics Anonymous — gives the show runners lots of will-they-or-won’t-they suspense to string us along as Adam agonizes. A braver choice, in my opinion, is to explore a deeper friendship between these two. The best moment in this episode, which I thought was the weakest so far this season, was when Jessa told Adam that she needed a friend. I want to see what the show does with this pairing. At the risk of boring our readers, I’m afraid to say that I share your lack of interest in the Marnie-Desi story line. Marnie’s definition of what makes for a relationship — “He puts his hand on my butt when we are in line at Starbucks” — makes her sound like a middle-schooler.  And their music: Oy. Totally eighth grade. I’ll leave it to you, the pop music reporter, to place it in its proper context, but to me it sounds like garbage. Though the street scene between the two of them was truly groundbreaking in one respect: I am pretty sure it marked the first time people who actually live in New York used those tables and chairs in the middle of Broadway. And more important, Desi revealed himself to be truly despicable in this episode. When he responded to Marnie’s paean to monogamy with, “I think that is a very culturally specific statement,” I thought, ew. Definitely a spot-on portrayal of a guy we all know, who lives on Easy Street, having his cake and eating it too, as Ray put it. Joe: If anything, Desi’s many beaded man-bracelets should have been a dead giveaway about the content of his character. And I’m with you on Marnie’s music — it’s just awful, but so plain and middle-of-the-road that it’s hard to tell if the show is making fun of it or not. (My one indication that we’re supposed to hate it: Lena Dunham telling Allison Williams in this interview: “You are actually an amazing singer, and what you do on ‘Girls’ is acting.”)Then again, while there aren’t many situations more awkward than sitting with an artist while they play you their music, the industry folks seemed  into it? Oof.Lydia: Out west, Hannah’s struggles continue. She is “pre-writing” rather than actually writing, she tells a distracted and suddenly bottomless Jessa over Skype. Later, at a “poet party,” as she and Elijah call it, she goes on a rant to her writing workshop classmates. Jeffrey, the “rich, whiny white guy,” she says, “thinks he is Updike.” Burn! Chester she calls a “tragically hip gaysian,” describing a story of his as “a wink-eye emoji followed by a poop emoji.” Double burn. Another classmate, played by the Persian-American actor Desiree Akhavan, is described as “the first and foremost expert on the third world.” But she saves the best-worst for last: D. August (Ato Essandoh), the soulful black writer. She calls out the worshipful praise everyone has for his writing, but then criticizes him for not being authentically represented by his work. It is a pretty rich accusation from someone who rankled in the last episode at the suggestion that her work was too autobiographical. Realizing from the stunned silence that she has gone too far for the politically correct confines of the writers workshop, she awkwardly excuses herself. “I think it’s better that you guys check in on all this without me,” she says. No kidding. I thought it was a pretty gutsy scene, and it confirmed my suspicion that Lena Dunham is up to something smart, sophisticated and fearless with this story line. She is not afraid to tackle race and privilege in a non-precious way that poses real risks. Joe: I was also surprised to find myself enjoying Hannah’s un-P.C. rant. It felt like legitimately daring and sharp writing, the kind the show is perhaps more associated with in theory than it actually pulls off. The bit also pushed past the overly self-referential response to critics that we saw last week. If Hannah is going to go Larry David, she might as well go all the way. Less successful for me was the arrest scene after Jessa urinates in the street in broad daylight. Of course, Adam’s protective male side came out — he’s always been a chivalrous caveman — but Jessa calling out the “fuzz,” “po’ po’” and “pigs” out for “abuse” just felt tone deaf, regardless of when the script  was conceived. I’m just not sure it taught us anything about the characters and their worldviews that we didn’t already know. That said, I’m pinning my hopes for the rest of the season on Jessa and Adam’s detonating a bomb in the middle of that friend group, and Hannah returning to sort out to wreckage. Fingers crossed.