By KATHRYN SHATTUCKJAN. 25, 2015
9 P.M. (History) SONS OF LIBERTY This fictionalized prequel to the American Revolution follows hunkier, more youthful versions of the founding fathers — Sam Adams (Ben Barnes), John Hancock (Rafe Spall), John Adams (Henry Thomas), Dr. Joseph Warren (Ryan Eggold) and Paul Revere (Michael Raymond-James) — as they lead the revolt against the British crown. “ 'Sons of Liberty’ is fun and engaging, a better option than a much more ambitious, highfalutin series on AMC last year, ‘Turn,’ which followed a ring of spies working for Gen. George Washington and which was far too elliptical and unwelcoming,” Alessandra Stanley wrote in The New York Times about this three-night mini-series. And while it may not be history exactly, “it’s a well-made dramatization that brings history to life.”10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Denis R. McDonough, the White House chief of staff, makes the rounds of the morning news shows on the heels of President Obama’s State of the Union address. Other guests include Gov. John Kasich, Republican of Ohio, on Fox; Senators John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, on “Face the Nation,” at 10:30 on CBS; and Mike Huckabee, the Republican former governor of Arkansas, and the former N.B.A. All-Star Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, on “Meet the Press,” at 10:30 on NBC.8 P.M. (TBS, TNT) THE 21ST ANNUAL SCREEN ACTORS GUILD AWARDS Performers honor their peers in movies and television in this ceremony, broadcast live from the Shrine Exposition Center in Los Angeles. “Birdman,” “Boyhood,” “The Grand Budapest Hotel,” “The Imitation Game” and “The Theory of Everything” will compete for outstanding performance by a cast in a motion picture. Steve Carell, Benedict Cumberbatch, Jake Gyllenhaal, Michael Keaton and Eddie Redmayne are in the running for best actor; Jennifer Aniston, Felicity Jones, Julianne Moore, Rosamund Pike and Reese Witherspoon are nominees for best actress. And Debbie Reynolds will receive the lifetime achievement award. Red carpet coverage leads in at 6 on E!8 P.M. (NBC, Telemundo) THE 63RD ANNUAL MISS UNIVERSE PAGEANT Gabriela Isler of Venezuela will crown her successor as 88 women from around the world compete in the categories of swimsuit, evening gown and interview at Florida International University in Miami. Natalie Morales and Thomas Roberts host, and Gavin DeGraw, Nick Jonas and Prince Royce perform.Advertisement9 P.M. (13, 49) DOWNTON ABBEY Lord Merton (Douglas Reith) makes an unexpected proposal to Isobel (Penelope Wilton), while Lady Mary (Michelle Dockery) delivers some surprising news of her own to Lord Gillingham (Tom Cullen). Lady Edith (Laura Carmichael), meanwhile, finds her access to Marigold blocked amid news involving the missing Michael Gregson. Thomas (Rob James-Collier) returns to Downton looking the worse for wear. And the police narrow in on suspects in the death of Mr. Green. In “Grantchester,” at 10, Sidney (James Norton) and Geordie (Robson Green) must break a code of silence when the engagement party of Amanda (Morven Christie) results in murder.9 P.M. (HBO) GIRLS With only one class a week, Hannah (Lena Dunham) finds herself doing a lot of nothing while Elijah (Andrew Rannells) becomes the center of the social scene at the University of Iowa. Ray (Alex Karpovsky), meanwhile, enlightens Marnie (Allison Williams) about the true intentions of Desi (Ebon Moss-Bachrach). Shoshanna (Zosia Mamet) aces — and then blows — a job interview. And Adam (Adam Driver) becomes ensnared in the tangled web of Jessa (Jemima Kirke).AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowSAVING LIVES Josh Leyva and David Alvarez play two overly confident but rather innocent college friends and lifeguards who hit on girls, pick fights with surfers and whistle while holding down their slice of the beach. New episodes of this original comedy series from Flama, Univision’s English-language online network, will be presented each week. (theflama.com, hulu.com/latino)A version of this schedule appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.