JAN. 23, 2015
These are not your history professor’s founding fathers. With their chiseled jawlines and devil-may-care gazes, History’s “Sons of Liberty” — John Hancock (Rafe Spall), John Adams (Henry Thomas), Paul Revere (Michael Raymond-James) and Joseph Warren (Ryan Eggold) — skew more Versace model than early American revolutionary. Then there’s Sam Adams, the Harvard-educated statesman, master of propaganda and Boston Tea Party champion. In real life Adams was a stout 50-something in the 1770s; here he’s played by Ben Barnes, 33, a dashing London-born actor.Filmed near Bucharest, with the Romanian countryside standing in for the colonies, “Sons of Liberty,” a three-part mini-series beginning Sunday, is “historical fiction, not a documentary,” its producers say.“What the writers wanted was the spirit of revolution,” Mr. Barnes said of the creative license taken with his character. “And certainly he was a very spirited and motivated man, defaulting on collecting taxes on people’s behalf in a Robin Hood way.”Mr. Barnes is no stranger to such heroes, having swashbuckled as Prince Caspian in the “Chronicles of Narnia” movies and in “Seventh Son,” opening in theaters Feb. 6, as Thomas Ward, a fighter of supernatural evil. “All the best stories, no matter how simple at their core, present you with almost unanswerable questions about how you choose to live your life and why,” he told Kathryn Shattuck by phone from his home in Los Angeles. These are excerpts from their conversation.AdvertisementQ. You’re familiar with this slice of American history from the British perspective, but did anything during filming surprise you?A. I had no idea that Sam Adams, John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, George Washington, Paul Revere, Thomas Jefferson and John Hancock had literally been in the same room at one point, plotting how best to go about achieving their goals. I think you assume they’re from slightly different eras if you are like me and don’t know any better.Next month you’ll be seen in “Seventh Son.” More swordplay?Yes, Jeff Bridges plays this fantastically grizzly, grumpy but also quite broken fighter of evil, and Julianne Moore is this beautifully dramatic and saucy witch. It’s about the battles within every individual between goodness and evil, and the debate between destiny and free will.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.How did you get into acting?I think late puberty is to blame. I was always the youngest in my year group, so there were literally boys shaving full beards off before my voice had broken. I used to be very competitive in sports, but when everybody else grew up and out, I got dropped from teams very quickly. So I veered toward music.AdvertisementYou appeared on the West End in “Bugsy Malone” and “The History Boys” as a teenager. Was it inevitable that you’d become an adult actor?I remember writing a letter to my parents at age 16, saying that I needed to go to drama school because I could think of no other way that I could have a happy life. I’m sure it was very dramatic. They were very sympathetic but still maintained that they wouldn’t support me until I went to university.What’s next?I’m most excited about an Ami Mann film I did with Katherine Heigl called “Jackie & Ryan.” I play a train-hopping folk-blues busker from the South. I worked very hard on the music side of things.Anything you’d like to do but haven’t?If somebody offered me the chance to sing on Broadway, I would leap at it.A version of this interview appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page AR2 of the New York edition with the headline: From Valiant Prince to Smoldering Rebel .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.