By BEN RATLIFFJAN. 23, 2015
Jeremy PeltTales, Musings and Other ReveriesThe jazz trumpeter Jeremy Pelt keeps looking for new lineups, textures and challenges. On “Tales, Musings and Other Reveries” (Highnote), he’s got all of that: a new band, including the pianist Simona Premazzi and the bassist Ben Allison, and two drummers, Billy Drummond and Victor Lewis. Score another one for double-drummer bands. Here, when both are playing with individual detail, they make instant tension and creative discrepancy; when they lock in together, they remind you of music’s most basic ritual purpose. The material here is all of interest — Wayne Shorter’s rarely covered “Vonetta”; Jimmy Van Heusen and Sammy Cahn’s ballad “I Only Miss Her When I Think Of Her,” with Mr. Pelt’s melodic tracings; and originals like the stop-and-start “Harlem Thoroughfare” and the three-way conversation among trumpet and both drummers on “Ruminations on Eric Garner.” But it’s the curiosity and energy that make the record sing.Remmy ValenzuelaMi Vida en VidaThe singer and virtuosic accordionist Remmy Valenzuela, still only 23, built his reputation independently within Mexico before signing to Fonovisa/Universal in 2013. The major label has been catching up with the demand, releasing a new album last summer (“De Alumno a Maestro”) and then “Mi Vida en Vida,” a 20-track bonanza of studio and live songs, some previously released. Mr. Valenzuela goes broad: He plays bleeding-heart rancheras; rugged, tuba-driven banda; and beach-pop songs like “Chicas en Tanguita,” perhaps best described as reggae-macarena. But it’s the live tracks on “Mi Vida” that really pop, including the crime-narrative title track and the lovesick “Se Va Muriendo Mi Alma,” full of tricky accordion fills and gnashing vocal harmony.Jason NelsonJesus RevealedThe Maryland singer and songwriter Jason Nelson has one of the more rich and delicate voices in gospel, and a few of his songs — especially on “Shifting the Atmosphere,” from 2012 — have had a depth in word and sound beyond gospel’s functional rhetoric. His new record, “Jesus Revealed” (RCA Inspiration), isn’t quite in that league; it’s more supporting and encouraging than reframing. Still, because it’s less exceptional, it’s easier to hear it as a report on mainstream gospel aesthetics, musicianship and sense of pacing. The music is aesthetically conservative, but there’s more to it than that. These songs — like the ballad “I Am” and the up-tempo stomp “I Can Run” — build from unpromising beginnings, becoming more passionate and more complex, nearly changing colors. If you have a three-minute ear, you might not be rewarded; sometimes three minutes of these songs can go by before they disclose their riches.Allegra LevyLonely CityThe core of the young jazz singer Allegra Levy, at the moment, lies in negative or desperate statements, in songs she’s written like “Anxiety,” “I Don’t Want to Be in Love,” and “I’m Not Okay,” from her album “Lonely City” (Steeplechase). She’s got a good thing going: fresh and gloomy, light-voiced and grim-tempered. She’s not out to clobber you with speed or skill or projection — she hangs back but arrives at the notes responsibly, without a big show, incorporating careful 1950s cool but authentic modern cynicism, too. The band — including the saxophonist Adam Kolker and guitarist Steve Cardenas — and John McNeil’s arrangements make the songs complex and exotic, pushing them far beyond the ordinary.NovellerFantastic PlanetThe musicians to hear first are the ones who locate and release the inbuilt, idiosyncratic sound of their instruments, rather than using those tools as neutral translators for their own ideas. Sarah Lipstate, working as Noveller, does this on her solo-guitar records with a Fender Jaguar, an Ampeg Superjet amplifier, and a row of effects pedals. On “Fantastic Planet” (Fire), her new album, she produces tones that are lumpy and sheer, bluntly plucked and gracefully bowed, twinkling and dirty; she layers lines and builds a method to progress logically from the beginning of the song to the end. It’s ambient music, sort of, in its delicate moods, its lack of drums and vocals, and its willingness to let tones swell and recede. But if you pay closer attention, these are as plotted as pop songs.A version of this review appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page AR20 of the New York edition with the headline: More Than Tools: Sometimes Instruments Inspire.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.