AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertAs America’s oldest modern dance troupe, the Martha Graham Dance Company devotes much effort to maintaining traditions. A project called “Lamentation Variations” was not supposed to be one of them. The opening night of the company’s 2007 New York season happened to fall on Sept. 11. To commemorate the anniversary of the 9/11 attacks, the group’s artistic director, Janet Eilber, decided to invite three choreographers to contribute pieces inspired by a film of “Lamentation,” Graham’s canonical 1930 dance of grief.These were one-night-only experiments, not intended to last, and the directive was accordingly economical: Make a work no more than four minutes long (the duration of the original), without sets, and use no more than 10 hours of rehearsal time. Yet Ms. Eilber was so pleased with the results that she programmed the variations into the regular repertory and started commissioning more. When the company opens its two-week season at the Joyce Theater on Feb. 10, four premieres will bring the total to 12. “The variations have become a microcosm of what the company is trying to do,” Ms. Eilber said. “We want to use the Graham legacy as a springboard for wildly diverse projects. The variations encapsulate the idea of taking the legacy to a different place.”From the outset, Ms. Eilber tried to send a message of open-mindedness with her choices. One of the first choreographers she picked was Richard Move, who as a Graham impersonator had long been a controversial figure in Graham circles. Later, she invited Yvonne Rainer — in Ms. Eilber’s words, an “Antichrist in the Graham world” famous for rejecting and mocking Graham’s principles in the 1960s and thus helping to put Graham out of fashion. The four new selections sound similarly unorthodox. Kyle Abraham is best known for his incorporation of street dance and evocations of black urban life. Liz Gerring is a cool abstractionist whose athletic, informal-looking pieces shun Graham-like drama. Sonya Tayeh, who sports tattoos, piercings and erratically shaved hair, has made her name with aggressive routines for the Fox show “So You Think You Can Dance.” Michelle Dorrance is an acclaimed tap dancer. But if such eclectic choices seem to stray far from Graham’s aesthetic, they also hide connections. A dancer in Mr. Abraham’s company performs with the Graham troupe. Ms. Gerring sometimes rehearses in the Graham studio. Ms. Dorrance’s main childhood dance teacher was Ms. Eilber’s brother-in-law; more recently, Ms. Dorrance’s company has crossed paths with the Graham troupe at the Jacob’s Pillow Dance Festival and City Center’s Fall for Dance series. Ms. Tayeh, with her commercial background and punk look, might seem the most distant. Ms. Eilber met her when Ms. Tayeh was choreographing a Madonna tour and asked for permission to use a sequence from Graham’s “Night Journey.” It turns out that Ms. Tayeh is a huge Graham fan.So is Mr. Abraham, who studied at the Graham school while in college and was accepted into its pre-professional company, Graham 2. “People may not know that a lot of movement in my work derives from Graham,” he said. Ms. Gerring also studied Graham technique in her youth, although she described Graham as less of an aesthetic influence than an inspiring model of a female artist. The point of connection, she realized after Ms. Eilber invited her, could be found in athleticism. “I knew the Graham dancers would be able to commit physically,” she said, “and that proved to be the case.”The other three choreographers echoed her praise of the Graham dancers for their openness and versatility. Ms. Tayeh, who described her variation as “superphysical, like a shot out of a cannon,” was amazed at how they “dove right in, as if they had been doing my movement forever.” Mr. Abraham said: “These dancers are more than capable of doing what I am interested in. Plus they know the history and the origin of it.”Ms. Dorrance’s participation posed a more frightening question: Would she make them tap? “Never in a million years would I have made them do a lay person’s tap dance,” she said. “That would have been a disservice to their facility.” Instead she is making them walk in rhythm. Her piece layers pacing patterns of different speeds, and in reaction to the dancers, she adapted it to be far less complicated than she had originally conceived it. “On the first day,” she said, “their presence, even just walking in unison, floored me. So much power in simplicity.”For Ms. Gerring, the lessons in simplicity derived from Graham’s original choreography. “There are like five movements in the whole dance,” she said. “I thought about trying to be that strict. It’s too hard, but it’s what we’re all striving for: to convey clear meaning in a few gestures.” All of the choreographers described being daunted, even terrified, by the stature of the original work. “You have to talk yourself down,” Ms. Gerring said. “You have to tell yourself, ‘I’m just doing a variation. How to express grief.’ ” She and her colleagues variously channeled the death of a mother, the loss of an apartment, larger societal wounds. But the most difficult challenges were temporal: the short duration of the work (as Ms. Dorrance put it, “the best of yourself in four minutes”) and especially of the rehearsal period. Accustomed to taking months or years to make a piece, Ms. Gerring, Mr. Abraham and Ms. Dorrance lamented how very little time they had to create. Ms. Tayeh, though accustomed to working quickly in the commercial world, said that she wanted more time, too, but that the 10 hours felt fuller than she had anticipated. She could draw upon all of the time that the dancers had already spent together and the Graham language they already knew. “We really got down inside the work faster,” she said.The experience has confirmed her desire to do more in concert dance. Making a piece for the Graham company is quite an introduction to that world. And though the other choreographers are already established in the field, the recipients of major awards and critical accolades, the opportunity is a big one for them. The benefit flows both ways. The new choreographers make the Graham company seem more current, more connected to dance today. Perhaps they even reveal it to be so. “The ‘Variations’ project,” Ms. Eilber said, “keeps doing things that we never expected when we first put it together.”Advertisement