By JON PARELESJAN. 23, 2015
NASHVILLE —  At the Soundcheck rehearsal studio complex in Nashville, 18-wheeler trucks ready to haul equipment for country stars’ arena tours were backed up to loading bays. It’s probably a safe bet that on a recent Sunday afternoon, only Studio D held a band playing a replica of an 1858 fretless minstrel banjo and two sets of bones, the hand-held percussion instrument, clattering away in a medley of tunes at least 150 years old.That would be the band led by Rhiannon Giddens, preparing for her spring theater tour as a solo headliner. She has been celebrated on the folk circuit for a decade as a member of the group she helped found and still leads: the Carolina Chocolate Drops, dedicated to reviving and extending the tradition of the African-American string bands of the 1920s and 1930s. The group’s 2010 release, “Genuine Negro Jig,” won a Grammy for best traditional folk album. But now, Ms. Giddens is climbing out of that niche. She is to release her debut solo album, “Tomorrow Is My Turn” (Nonesuch), on Feb. 10, with a broader Americana repertoire, a celebrated producer and her own name at the top.Her producer, T Bone Burnett, was also behind Americana blockbusters like the soundtrack to “O Brother, Where Are Thou?” and the Alison Krauss-Robert Plant collaboration, “Raising Sand.” By telephone from Los Angeles, he said that Ms. Giddens has “a pretty profound gift.”“I’ve been doing this for 50 years, and I haven’t seen anything like it, ” he said.Over breakfast the next morning, she flinched, slightly but visibly, at the idea of being a star. “It’s not about me, it’s about the music,” she said while working her way through eggs, spicy stewed kale and a pot of tea at the restaurant Fido. “I don’t do this because I want to be a star. I don’t do this because I want to make a lot of money. As my mom always said, you never do anything for money, power or prestige. I believe that. This is a calling, definitely.”AdvertisementThat calling is to give old songs new life. “What’s really interesting to me,” Ms. Giddens added, “is to have a connection to what was going on in the past, but to make it a living thing. For me, the trick is to present the music and to present the history, to present all that. I can’t forget that I’m in there, because I’m an important part of it, and people are coming to see my interpretation of these things, and I get that. But, still, I just want to present the music and use my voice to do that.”AdvertisementFor many listeners, her emergence is overdue. Along with Chocolate Drops fans, those would include people who saw her shaking the rafters of Town Hall during “Another Day, Another Time,” the 2013 concert and Showtime documentary revisiting the 1960s folk revival, and those first hearing her in 2014 as a member of the New Basement Tapes, writing songs with rediscovered Bob Dylan lyrics alongside Elvis Costello, Jim James of My Morning Jacket, Marcus Mumford of Mumford & Sons and Taylor Goldsmith of Dawes. The concert and the New Basement Tapes were also Mr. Burnett’s projects.The Chocolate Drops are the core of Ms. Giddens’s touring band, now expanded with drums and upright bass. At rehearsal, they were rearranging songs from her solo album and from the New Basement Tapes. In the course of the afternoon, Ms. Giddens and her band worked through material gathered from Nina Simone, Dolly Parton, the gospel pioneer Sister Rosetta Tharpe and the mysterious blueswoman Geeshie Wiley. Those were songs from her solo album, which is both a panorama of American styles and a mosaic of women’s perspectives on love, war, work and faith.“I’m so interested in the feminism of women in American music,” Ms. Giddens said. “These ladies, going out on the road, way before the opportunities and advantages that I have — it was absolutely rough out there. The fact that they were still able to get their art out there and do what they’re doing is really impressive to me.”On her album, the old songs are remade with modern resources and twists. For instance, the Appalachian love song “Black Is the Color” (which she dedicates to her redheaded husband, with whom she has two children, in the album’s liner notes), gets a swinging beat from the percussive syllables of a human beatboxer. “I just want to push it to the next thing,” Ms. Giddens said.The album is a showcase for Ms. Giddens’s glorious voice, which merges an opera singer’s detail and a deep connection to Southern roots. She can summon the power of a field holler, Celtic quavers, girlish innocence, bluesy sensuality, gospel exaltation or the pain of slavery. She can sing velvety, long-breathed phrases or rasp and yip like a singer from the backwoods long ago. For all her technical control, her voice is a perpetually soulful marvel.“I was given the voice — I’ve developed it, but the voice was just here,” Ms. Giddens said. “I feel proud about what I’ve done with it, but it’s never been mine. It’s been given to me to take care of and to shepherd.”Ms. Giddens, the guitarist Dom Flemons and the fiddler Justin Robinson started the Carolina Chocolate Drops after they met at the Black Banjo Gathering, a 2005 convention in North Carolina devoted to the African-American string-band legacy that had grown nearly invisible as old-time music became a tributary of bluegrass and country. The Carolina Chocolate Drops — named in homage to the Tennessee Chocolate Drops, a 1930s string band — found a mentor, the North Carolina fiddler Joe Thompson, who died in 2012. They built a repertoire of their own from what he taught them, including, now and then, an anachronistic remake of something like Blu Cantrell’s 2001 R&B song, “Hit ’Em Up Style.” In the group, whose lineup has changed, Ms. Giddens takes turns on lead vocals with the other band members, a setup she preferred; she called it “anti-solo.”AdvertisementMr. Burnett noted: “It’s safer to be in a band. It’s good to have other people around her to absorb the blows. But in her case, it seemed like she was being, I won’t say wasted, but underutilized. In the Bible it talks about hiding your light under a bushel.”He nudged her into the spotlight. First, he invited the Chocolate Drops to make a track for a compilation he was supervising, the companion album to “The Hunger Games,” in 2012. “He wanted ‘Appalachian music from 300 years in the future,’ ” Ms. Giddens recalled. She adapted a song by Hazel Dickens, “Pretty Bird,” into “Daughter’s Lament” for “The Hunger Games: Songs from District 12 and Beyond,” which also included tracks from Taylor Swift and Maroon 5. But the flash point for her solo career was “Another Day, Another Time,” the Town Hall concert Mr. Burnett organized in conjunction with “Inside Llewyn Davis.” the Coen Brothers’ film set in the Greenwich Village folk revival. Barefoot in a long red dress, Ms. Giddens emulated Odetta’s dramatic, stop-time version of “Water Boy,” a song that now appears on her own album. Then she switched to Gaelic and the breakneck, tongue-twisting syllables of what’s called mouth music in a medley of Scottish songs. She got a roaring standing ovation. Soon afterward, Mr. Burnett invited her to make an album.Ms. Giddens came the long way around to the music of her birthplace. Although she grew up in the Piedmont region of North Carolina, a wellspring of country-blues, the music she heard at home was the folk-revival catalog of Peter, Paul and Mary and Joan Baez. When she got serious about singing, Ms. Giddens turned to opera, earning a degree in vocal performance.She was drawn to string-band music when she went to a contra dance while at Oberlin, expecting the English country dances she had read about in her beloved Jane Austen novels. Instead, she found rural American old-time music. She learned to become a contra dance caller and took up the banjo and fiddle she would play in the Carolina Chocolate Drops. When she and the Chocolate Drops made contact with Mr. Thompson, the elderly fiddler, it turned out he had grown up in her grandmother’s hometown. “It was cool coming back home and discovering what was right under my nose,” she said.She also delved into the Celtic side of Appalachian tradition in the North Carolina group Gaelwynd, which released an album in 2005. And somewhere along the way, she found time to explore Native American powwow singing and to visit Gambia to study the akonting, a three-stringed, centuries-old West African ancestor of the banjo. Between Carolina Chocolate Drops gigs, she has performed with symphony orchestras singing arias and, lately, arrangements of some of the earliest African-American songs heard on Broadway early in the 20th century — a catalog now widely ignored because performers still used dialect and wore blackface.“But they were transcending the blackface,” Ms. Giddens said. “I’m really passionate about this, because when the music is unknown and it’s great it gets my spider sense tingling.”In a way Ms. Giddens brings back an archetype of the folk revival: the opera-trained singer taking up traditional songs, like Marian Anderson and Odetta. But at 37, Ms. Giddens is also a musician of the Internet era. She built the Carolina Chocolate Drops’ website and designed their artwork. She embraced the song “Tomorrow Is My Turn,” originally from Charles Aznavour, after seeing a riveting YouTube clip of Nina Simone singing it in London.“You can interpret it as me saying, ‘Tomorrow is my turn,’ like I finally get to have a solo record, but it actually has nothing to do with that,” Ms. Giddens said. “I was watching her and just thinking this was the soundtrack for her.”AdvertisementFor her solo album, Mr. Burnett asked her to choose songs, and he assembled a band of trusted musicians. They would watch a YouTube clip of each song, find a key and then jam their way toward an arrangement. “I was quietly freaked for most of the time,” Ms. Giddens said with a laugh. “But it ended up being this really great band that clicked from day one.”The New Basement Tapes called for even more adrenaline, Ms. Giddens recalled. Mr. Burnett sent a stack of Dylan lyrics from 1967 to Ms. Giddens and the four other songwriters, then gathered them for just two weeks in a Los Angeles studio. “I’m a total baby songwriter,” Ms. Giddens said. “I’ve been an interpreter all my life. I knew coming in that I was bringing up the rear. So O.K., I’ve got to come from a long way back. But that’s sometimes when you can do your best work — you have to just stop thinking.”She added, “The biggest drama we had was getting over our insecurities. I had a lot of them. It was one of the hardest things I’ve ever done. But there were no egos. Everybody was just so happy to be there, and they just wanted the music to win.”The New Basement Tapes sessions also spurred Ms. Giddens to write the song that concludes her debut album. “Angel City” is a quiet waltz, almost a lullaby, that carries a parable about overcoming fears to become “closer to free.” In a way, it could be Ms. Giddens recognizing that she has plenty to offer on her own, in the spotlight. “Ultimately it’s just you and the song,” she said. “You’re singing it.”A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page AR1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Solo Spotlight for a Powerful Voice.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.