By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMJAN. 21, 2015
Happy endings in opera are few and far between — especially for women. Outside of comic opera, it is rare for a heroine to survive the final act; the price for love is usually death. Tchaikovsky’s one-act opera, “Iolanta,” is an exception to this rule, a luscious setting of a fairy tale in which a blind princess finds love and the gift of sight.It may seem cruel, then, to follow “Iolanta” with a performance of “Bluebeard’s Castle,” Bartok’s chilling psycho-thriller about the annihilating power of love taken to obsessive extremes. Yet that is exactly what the Polish opera and film director Mariusz Trelinski is doing in a double bill of these two operas conducted by Valery Gergiev that opens on Monday at the Metropolitan Opera. Swathed in the aesthetics of film noir with vivid echoes of Hitchcock and featuring two exceptional lead sopranos, Anna Netrebko as Iolanta and Nadja Michael as Judith, this production promises to be one of the most viscerally unsettling shows on offer this season.It’s the house debut for Mr. Trelinski, a star in his home country and the director behind taut, often controversial opera productions inspired by iconic films, including a “Manon Lescaut” that invokes David Lynch’s “Lost Highway” and Luis Buñuel’s “That Obscure Object of Desire,” and a “Traviata” influenced by Bob Fosse’s “All That Jazz.” But on opening night, much of the hype is likely to focus on two Russians with a long history at the Met: Mr. Gergiev and Ms. Netrebko. They last joined forces at the Met for Tchaikovsky’s “Eugene Onegin,” which opened the 2013-14 season to critical acclaim but also drew vociferous protests from gay-rights demonstrators criticizing the artists’ close ties to Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin, and their unwillingness to distance themselves from his policies.Both have since drawn further criticism in the West. Last spring, Mr. Gergiev was among the artists signing a petition supporting the annexation of Crimea. In December, Ms. Netrebko made a donation to an opera house in Donetsk, a city in Ukraine that had fallen under the control of pro-Russian separatists and where battles with Ukrainian forces have raged this month; she was photographed with a separatist leader jointly clasping the proposed flag of Novorossiya, a breakaway state the separatists hope to create. In a statement afterward, Ms. Netrebko said she was taken by surprise by the flag and did not immediately recognize it.(Mr. Gergiev declined to be interviewed for this article; Ms. Netrebko insisted on speaking only about the current production.)AdvertisementDouble bills of short operas are usually programmed according to musical affinity, like the pairing of Mascagni’s “Cavalleria Rusticana” and Leoncavallo’s “Pagliacci,” which will return to the Met in a new staging this spring. “Bluebeard’s Castle” is often placed next to another spiky, modernist piece. But Mr. Trelinski and his dramaturge, Piotr Gruszczynski, sought a connection that was psychologically revealing, even if the resulting musical juxtaposition was, in the director’s words, “explosive.” “On the one side is the beautiful, lyrical and Romantic music of Tchaikovsky, which is a very feminine side,” Mr. Trelinski said. “On the other is the masculine, modernist music of Bartok.”But he said that as he explored the psychosexual nuances of the two works, especially the darker aspects of the relationship between Iolanta and her controlling father, he began to think of the operas as two phases in the life of the same woman. “Judith continues the story of Iolanta,” Mr. Trelinski said. “We feel that the happy ending is not an end at all — that often, our addictions are stronger than us. There’s the classic repetition compulsion, where many years later you realize you have to leave normal life in order to relive your childhood trauma.”AdvertisementThe production also throws artists of very different sensibilities together. Mr. Trelinski’s speech is peppered with references to psychoanalytic thinkers including Freud, Jacques Lacan, and Bruno Bettelheim, whose seminal work on fairy tales he cites as a key influence. In Ms. Michael, he has a collaborator who brings her own intellectual approach and a willingness to explore different interpretations of her character. Ms. Netrebko maintains, however, that her character’s blindness is nothing more than a physical handicap and that the only thing represented by roses is — roses.“Iolanta” tells the story of a princess, blind from birth, who is raised in isolation and kept unaware of her condition at her father’s request. He turns down the offer of a Moorish physician, Ibn-Hakia, to restore her sight, fearing the shock might be too much for Iolanta. A knight, Vaudémont, breaches the garden wall, falls in love with Iolanta and, upon discovering that she is blind, talks to her about light and the visual magnificence of the world. Reluctantly, the king agrees to Ibn-Hakia’s procedure and grants his daughter’s hand to Vaudémont. The operation is successful: Iolanta can see.By contrast, Bartok’s Judith is undone by her desire to see. Arriving at the castle — itself an anthropomorphic character that groans, sighs and trembles — Judith professes her unconditional love for the forbidding Bluebeard. Noticing a number of locked doors, she insists on opening them one by one, finding each time evidence of violence: a torture chamber, bloodied weapons, blood-flecked jewels, a lake of tears. Judith becomes convinced that Bluebeard has murdered his previous wives and that the last door will reveal their bodies. But when she opens it, she finds them alive, trapped in a state of undead eternity, and she is compelled to join them.Although the two operas feature distinct casts, elements of the sets and a few props help pull them together. Mr. Trelinski said he worked with the two female leads to draw an arc that begins with Iolanta’s childlike innocence and subsequent maturing and continues with Judith, who arrives at Bluebeard’s castle a sexually confident woman and gradually regresses, passing through successive stages of neediness and subjection until her final, complete abdication of will.During a recent morning, Ms. Michael rehearsed the scene in which she opens the penultimate sixth door and finds the lake of tears, here represented by a claustrophobic white-tiled room. Crouched on her haunches, her arms wrapped tightly around her knees, she cowered in a fetal position. When Bluebeard, sung by the bass Mikhail Petrenko, entered the room, she came to him with her head bowed, her body language submissive and pleading.“For me this Judith is representative of all women,” Ms. Michael said during a brief break in rehearsals. “She is the feminine, needy side of us that yearns for love, for complete submergence. She seeks total devotion and is not shy to express that desire — something increasingly rare in our society. What is incredibly touching to me is this longing to lose oneself in the other, which we know is impossible. It kills everything — it’s not good — and yet we want it.”AdvertisementUsing “Iolanta” as a back story to flesh out her character makes sense, said Ms. Michael, who first sang in this production in 2013 at the Polish National Opera, which jointly produced it. Mr. Trelinski’s dark hints at an abusive side to the king’s overprotective love for his daughter help explain Judith’s actions. After all, she said, “it’s a damaged person who willingly puts herself into the hands of another so completely and leaves everything behind. And when those buttons — the memory of abuse — are pushed, she regresses and goes back to a child’s world shaped by punishment, reward and the withdrawal of affection.”Ms. Netrebko was reluctant to speculate about her character’s inner life. Asked how strong or vulnerable she planned to play her, she replied: “She’s blind. That’s it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Playing a blind character was a challenge, she said. When she first sang the role in 2009 at the Baden-Baden Festival in Germany, she prepared by attending rehearsals blindfolded. “Of course, immediately your sense of hearing becomes very intense, and your fingers are trying to help the body and figure out where you are in this world,” she said.Ms. Netrebko also recorded the role for a Deutsche Grammophon CD that was released this month. On that recording and in her current run of performances, she deviates from Tchaikovsky’s original libretto in a scene in which Vaudémont reveals her handicap to her. In the original text, Vaudémont describes light as God’s first gift to the world, and Iolanta expresses her desire to see so that she might fully revel in divine creation. Soviet editors later rewrote that exchange, removing references to God and replacing them with nature.Ms. Netrebko insisted on retaining the Soviet-era text. (The Met production, which features singers who grew up with the edited libretto, will be performed as a mix of both versions.) Iolanta, she said, wants “to see the beauty of the universe, the rivers, the mountains, the sun. That’s why she wants to see, not because she wants to say thanks to God. It makes more sense. For me it’s much more believable.”In other instances, too, Ms. Netrebko favors a literal approach. Asked what the white and red roses mentioned several times in the opera might represent, she retorted, “I don’t know: roses!” For Mr. Trelinski, meanwhile, red roses signify carnal knowledge, and white roses poetic love. Iolanta’s roses reappear in “Bluebeard’s Castle,” where they trigger a violent reaction in Judith.As for the procedure that restores Iolanta’s eyesight, Ms. Netrebko speculates that “if the father had decided to do it sooner, it would have been better for her.”But why, Mr. Trelinski asked, do Tchaikovsky’s stage instructions say that when Iolanta agrees to undergo the doctor’s procedure, she goes to him “like a lamb to slaughter”? A blind character, he suggested, “is the archetype of somebody who has inner knowledge. As long as Iolanta is blind, she has a special sensitivity, a rich inner world. There is a very interesting moment when Iolanta is speaking with Vaudémont and says, I don’t need an eye to see, I don’t need an eye to understand.”Many scholars believe that Tchaikovsky was gay. Drawing a link to the composer’s anxiety over his sexuality and the stigma that it carried in 19th-century Russia, Mr. Trelinski said: “It’s a very powerful message from Tchaikovsky. He, too, was different. Perhaps you can make an operation to be like everyone else. But in the moment you lose something — this tenderness, this sensitivity, this gift of prophecy.”In Mr. Trelinski’s production of “Bluebeard’s Castle,” Judith’s searching gaze ultimately also turns inward. Entering the castle, she accepts a blindfold from Bluebeard and ties it on willingly. Evocative video projections create a sense of dreamlike movement.AdvertisementThe audience is invited along on the journey. A set of speakers placed throughout the auditorium emits the creaking groans of Bluebeard’s castle. “Very often with opera, we are watching from a very safe spot: We have the orchestra pit, we have the curtain, we have this portal,” Mr. Trelinski said. “But in ‘Bluebeard,’ I tried to build a climate like in the movies. I tried to surround the audience with the sounds and whispers and noises of the castle. And I build in so many changing images to try to blur the line between opera and cinema, inside and outside.”A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page AR1 of the New York edition with the headline: Mirror, Mirror.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.