Season 1, Episode 13, “Welcome Back, Jim Gordon”Spoilers and a debauched mom lurk below.After the reckoning of last week, “Gotham” returned on Monday with one of its stronger episodes to date, springing Fish and Butch from Falcone’s incompetent clutches and escalating the war between Fish and the Penguin, which has animated the show for the past several episodes.Recaps of the Fox crime drama.On the other side of the thin blue line, Gordon resumed his crusading and found some cause for hope among his colleagues, who helped him take down the rogue cop Arnold Flass, even as Gordon was confronted with the reality that nothing is as straightforward as his messianic soul seems to believe.Was his stirring speech in the precinct, complete with badge-hoisting stagecraft, a bit cliché? Sure. But I was O.K. with it. It’s consistent with his general sanctimonious M.O., for one thing, and it was quickly undercut by the revelation that Gordon’s victory for justice stood on the shoulders of a burly thug torturing a man’s wife in front of him. The more Gordon is forced to face moral complexity — as opposed to just shouting absolutist good-cop rhetoric — the more interesting his story becomes.Elsewhere young Bruce had his heart broken by Selena, who telegraphed some unknown threat as she claimed to have lied about seeing the murder of his parents. We know she’s actually lying now, most likely driven by her streetwise survival instinct — she was visibly alarmed at Bruce’s re-emphasized aim to use her to find his parents’ killer. Obviously, the steampunk assassins spooked her a few episodes back but I’m curious about what else she’s seen, or who else has gotten to her off-screen. Seems like an avenue for future episodes to explore.But back to Fish, who would seem destined to ultimately fall to her former flunky turned formidable adversary, if only by the dictates of the animal kingdom. (What do penguins eat, after all?) But it will have to wait for at least another week.For all of his apparent criminal acumen, Don Falcone makes some lousy staffing decisions. His van jockeys had one job, which they totally botched in the time it took Butch to … do what, exactly, I’m not sure. One second he was bound in the back of the van, and the next he was dispatching his captors with ease. Whatever. Incompetent henchmen are the M.V.P.s of crime serials.Butch’s escape allowed him to vanquish Bob, the goateed torturer charged with punishing Fish for besmirching the memory of Don Falcone’s mom last week. To reiterate: Don Falcone’s current enemy No. 1 was being overseen by one measly distracted sadist. Bob survived Butch’s beating but not the later appearance of Victor Zsasz and his catwalk-ready minions. Zsasz continues to be mostly a one-note sicko but I enjoy the comic-book garishness Anthony Carrigan brings to the role.Meanwhile, the Penguin is celebrating his (presumed) victory over Fish with a little champagne and some quality time with his mother (Carol Kane), who is in full decadent continental mode. The cartoonish Mama Cobblepot has been pretty tedious in previous appearances but she added some fun here, swilling bubbly, dancing sloppily with Gabe the heavy and generally luxuriating in her son’s newfound clout. “Another handsome man at the party,” she slurs when Gordon shows up. “I’m so lucky.” The creepy acorn doesn’t fall far from the tree.I’ll be taking over this club as soon as a few “loose ends” are tied up, the Penguin tells her, but said ends are looser than he thought. His impresario fantasy montage is interrupted by the arrival of Fish and Butch, and soon he’s kissing his old boss’s shoe like the old days. But wait! Zsasz arrives to wing Butch and send Fish fleeing through a window and ultimately out of town.Should we kill Butch or “should we take him home to play with?” Victor asks his sidekicks. I think we know the answer. I wondered last week if Butch might be a goner but he’s improbably proving harder to kill than the Penguin.Later on a pier, Bullock and Fish share a tender sayonara that suggests that their history is deeper than we previously thought. “I’m gonna kill Penguin when the time is right,” Fish says, and I believe that she believes it. But I’m also a little torn. As I noted earlier, the clash between Fish and the Penguin has been the most interesting thing about “Gotham” lately. But it also feels like it’s run its course for now, doesn’t it? As much as I like having Jada Pinkett Smith around, I’d hate for one of the show’s strongest dynamics to get stale.“I’ll see you soon,” she tells Bullock. Take your time, Fish. Take your time.A FEW THOUGHTS WHILE WE WRING OUR HANDS• With the execution of Bob the clock-punching torturer, Gotham City is left with one less sadist and two more fatherless children. (Remember Fish asking him about his daughters?) I get it. Gotham’s a dark place and there are human consequences of wrongdoing — see also the lingering shots on the weeping widow of poor Leon Winkler, the ice-picked janitor. But while the collateral damage aspect worked with the crooked cop Delaware, because it complicates our protagonist Gordon’s emotional terrain, it feels a little lazy when the show wallows in graphic violence and then throws in some pitiful victims for cheap emotional punch. (Though note that I’m a family man myself and am possibly just too soft-hearted for this benighted burg.)• I know the mostly aloof Ms. Kringle showed Edward Nygma some kindness on Monday, but does anyone else think it will be her eventual rejection that finally drives him to the dark side?