Fans of the 1990s downtown musical “Hedwig and the Angry Inch” and its 2001 movie version turned out in strong numbers last week to see the original Hedwig, John Cameron Mitchell, play the role for the first time on Broadway in the hit production there. According to box office data released on Monday, “Hedwig” had one of the highest average ticket prices on Broadway last week — $115.72 — and grossed $609,617 for six performances, or 93 percent of the maximum possible amount. “Hedwig” is the creation of Mr. Mitchell (who wrote the book) and Stephen Trask (who wrote the music and lyrics), and won the Tony Award for best musical revival in June (as well as a best actor Tony for its star at the time, Neil Patrick Harris). Mr. Mitchell is scheduled to play Hedwig on Broadway through March 14.Most Broadway shows reported relatively modest sales at the box office last week, not a surprise in mid-to-late January when there are fewer tourists around to buy tickets. But some shows were in tougher shape than others. The new musical “Honeymoon in Vegas,” which opened on Jan. 15 with a rave review in The New York Times among other positive and mixed notices, grossed a modest $425,029 in its first full week after the reviews came out. The gross was 37 percent of the maximum possible amount; most musicals need to gross at least 45 percent of the maximum amount just to break even for the week. “The Last Ship,” a new musical with a score by Sting that closed on Saturday, had a good final week at the box office, grossing $843,445, or 68 percent of the maximum amount. Sting joined the cast in December to try to boost the show’s appeal; ticket sales did rise, but not exceptionally so, and the musical closed rather than risk plummeting grosses after Sting’s departure from the cast on Saturday. Over all Broadway musicals and plays grossed $21.3 million for 27 productions last week, compared to $19.1 million for 26 shows during the comparable week in 2014. Attendance was 212,288 compared to 198,773 a year ago.The economic impact of Monday’s snowstorm on Broadway shows will not be fully evident until box-office data for this week is released on Feb. 2.