The moody poster art for the musical “The Visit” shows the Tony Award-winning actress Chita Rivera looking regal in a crisp white maxi-coat, with bright red lips and a sparkling necklace adding bold accents to the scene.  She stands with a cane before a shadowy recess that hints at the show’s dark tale about a wealthy widow who seeks revenge on a former lover. (In his review for the production at the Williamstown Theater Festival, Ben Brantley wrote that Scott Pask’s set “suggests a long-abandoned train station where you can buy a ticket straight to hell.”) The long-gestating musical, from the songwriters John Kander and Fred Ebb (“Chicago”) and the playwright Terrence McNally, arrives on Broadway this spring. The photographer Frank Ockenfels recently spoke with ArtsBeat about taking pictures of Ms. Rivera for the poster, which was designed by Serino Coyne, an agency that specializes in advertising Broadway shows.  Following are excerpts from the conversation.  Where did you shoot the photo? It was taken at a sound stage in Brooklyn. We did motion and stills at the same time.  They needed a soundstage big enough to do both. I was there for just a day. It was just about a week before Christmas.  So you didn’t shoot on location? We tried to figure out exactly where to do this, but nothing exists that looks as amazing as the structure in the poster. I think on that day it was 32 degrees outside, if not colder.  To drag an actor out to a cold abandoned space to do this would have been difficult.  Where are we in the finished artwork? It’s a dramatic space. She’s at at a train station.  We shot with the feeling that there was a shaft of light, and she’s standing in Grand Central station, with smoke highlighting pieces of light. The hottest piece of light hits Chita to bring her out of the darkness as she walks through the station. We shot it against a gray seamless, the classic simple background that they can use to put her into whatever they are thinking. We used certain lights to highlight feelings, so it would feel like a studio shot. How much did you know about what the background and fonts would look like before you took the photo? I knew they wanted a train station. The logo was already done. They don’t want things to compete with it.  But there were variations that went into the final image, like how much smoke should there be, or how bright should the beams be. That kind of stuff always comes after we shoot the pictures. How was it working with Chita Rivera? She’s a grand dame.There are not a lot people left like her. She was so present and giving. There was no, “We’re done.”  She said, “Is there more I can do?” Sometimes with someone of her age, they are conscious of being overlit.  But she was more about what makes sense for the photograph, which is tremendously helpful. It was amazing to see her work with other actors and how she moved gracefully and beautifully. She had to step up on a piece of steel and she got up and there were no complaints. She moves around like a 20-year-old. She’s definitely front and center in the poster. It’s like if you have a movie with Brad Pitt in it, you’re going to use his face.  “The Visit” starts performances on March 26 at the Lyceum Theater, with opening night set for April 23.