By KATHRYN SHATTUCKJAN. 26, 2015
8 P.M. (TCM) DIRECTED BY LUIS BUÑUEL This five-film tribute to Buñuel (1900-1983), known as the father of Surrealist cinema, begins with “Belle de Jour” (1968), starring Catherine Deneuve (above right, with Geneviève Page) as a frigid young housewife able to achieve sexual satisfaction only after becoming a prostitute. Writing in The New York Times, Renata Adler called “Belle de Jour” “a really beautiful movie, and somehow, letting the color in — this is Buñuel’s first color film — has changed the emotional quality of his obsessions in a completely unpredictable way.” In “The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie” (1972), an Oscar-winner for best foreign film, at 10, six upwardly mobile friends try to have dinner together — but find they can’t. “In addition to being extraordinarily funny and perfectly acted,” Vincent Canby wrote, “ ‘The Discreet Charm’ moves with the breathtaking speed and self-assurance that only a man of Buñuel’s experience can achieve without resorting to awkward ellipsis.” The lineup continues with “Diary of a Chambermaid” (1964), an adaptation of the novel by Octave Mirbeau about the foibles and hypocrisy of the landed gentry as seen through the eyes of a worldly domestic (Jeanne Moreau), at midnight; “Viridiana” (1962), in which a young nun (Silvia Pinal) tries to help the poor after inheriting a fortune, at 2 a.m.; and “The Exterminating Angel” (1962), where guests at a lavish dinner party in an elegant home in Mexico City find themselves unable to leave the parlor for several days, during which the social order begins to break down, at 3:45.8 P.M. (CBS) SUPER BOWL’S GREATEST COMMERCIALS 2015 Boomer Esiason and Katharine McPhee host this 15th annual countdown of advertisements shown at Super Bowls past, divided into old-school commercials, like Coke’s “Mean Joe Green” and Pepsi’s “Cindy Crawford Classic,” and new-school picks, including Doritos’ “Sling-Shot Baby” and Volkswagen’s “The Force.” Viewers can vote for their favorites from each category at cbs.com/superbowl, with the two finalists advancing to the live broadcast held during the show.8 P.M. (Travel) THE TRIP: 2015 Samantha Brown, Bert Kreischer, Anthony Melchiorri and Don Wildman wax poetic on this giveaway of a two-week vacation to Hawaii worth $100,000. Viewers can enter at travelchannel.com. In the premiere of “Bizarre Foods: Delicious Destinations,” at 9, Andrew Zimmern uncovers the back story of dishes that define a location, starting in Athens, the birthplace of stuffed grape leaves, spanakopita, moussaka and Greek yogurt. At 9:30, he heads to Paris to indulge in steak frites, croquet monsieur and macarons.8:30 P.M. (BBC America) TOP GEAR In this Season 22 opener, Jeremy Clarkson, Richard Hammond and James May journey to Russia, where they race across St. Petersburg in a Renault, a bicycle and a hovercraft, while the Stig heads toward the finish line on public transportation. Ed Sheeran is the star in a reasonably priced car. In “Mud, Sweat & Gears,” a new show at 10, Tom Ford and Jonny Smith lead two teams of car nuts, who must transform everyday vehicles into something less ordinary.Advertisement9 P.M. (HGTV) ELLEN’S DESIGN CHALLENGE A sponge chair, anyone? Ellen DeGeneres, left, invites six competitors to sketch, design and build increasingly innovative furniture, with the help of carpenters and a decked-out workshop, for a grand prize of $100,000 from Wayfair.com and a spread in HGTV Magazine.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (Fox Business) STRANGE INHERITANCE Jamie Colby hosts this new series, broadcast Monday and Tuesday nights, which looks at bizarre objects bequeathed to family members. “Strange Inheritance Unpacked,” Wednesdays and Thursdays at 9:30, follows up on the stories. And on “Kennedy,” weeknights at 10, Lisa Montgomery, also known as Kennedy, takes on the headlines of the day.Advertisement10 P.M. (13), 11:30 P.M. (49) A PATH APPEARS In this three-part “Independent Lens” presentation, Nicholas Kristof, an Op-Ed columnist for The New York Times; Sheryl WuDunn, his wife and a former business editor at The Times; and celebrity activists including Mia Farrow, Jennifer Garner, Alfre Woodard and Eva Longoria explore the collision of gender inequality and poverty around the world.What’s Streaming NowILIZA SHLESINGER: FREEZING HOT Ms. Shlesinger riffs on gender differences and women’s ugliest secrets in this stand-up routine taped at the Gothic Theater in Denver. (netflix.com)TOP GEAR: TOP 41 Mr. Clarkson, Mr. Hammond, Mr. May and the Stig choose their favorite moments from the show’s previous 21 seasons. (huluplus.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on January 26, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.