Season 2, Episode 2It was the B team’s turn on Sunday night on “The Affair,” as the day covered in the season premiere the week before was seen again, this time from the points of view of Alison and Cole.Alison on the B team? Technically she and her lover, Noah, are the show’s leads. But she’s never been as interesting a character as Helen, the spurned wife, whose moods and mutability dominate the story no matter who’s telling it. Alison and Cole often feel like the show’s pretty wallpaper, with their one-dimensional back story (drowned son) and the tendency of the writers and directors to portray them in anesthetized states of grief. Alison’s and Cole’s p.o.v.’s on Sunday felt and played largely the same, like the middle stretches of a slow, downbeat indie feature.(I wondered if there might be an age-based affinity at work here. But while one of the show’s creators, Hagai Levi, is closer in age to the 40-something Helen and Noah, the other, Sarah Treem, who’s also the chief writer, is in the early-30s range of Alison and Cole.)The episode began with an Alison chapter, as we saw how she spent her day in Cold Spring while Noah was getting beaten down in New York. She went into town, thought about asking for another beneath-her-qualifications waitressing job, went home and found Cole there. After a testy visit with him, she was invited to the house of Noah’s landlords, a publishing executive and her husband, and on the spur of the moment was offered a job as the woman’s personal assistant. Noah then came home from the city and was mean to Alison, but this being “The Affair,” they soon had makeup sex on the kitchen table. While filling us in on Alison’s current situation and state of mind, the chapter also seemed focused on showing us how out of place she is — or feels she is — in Noah’s upstate literary retreat. The shots of her taking a book off the shelf and cracking its spine before setting it aside unread, or the clumsy way she handled Noah’s manuscript, could just reflect her own insecurity in this milieu (compared to Helen’s breezy name dropping of Jonathan Safran Foer and Nicole Krauss last week). And the show has a sense of humor about the book world, reflected in the framed book covers on the walls of the guest house, with tongue-in-cheek titles like “The Stone Stacker” and “Paper Plates.” But you couldn’t help feeling that the character was being slightly condescended to, a feeling that didn’t subside when she got a blister trying to walk to town and had to accept a ride. This helped set up her later triumphs, but they were correspondingly small — managing to walk back to the house, charming a self-absorbed pair of weekenders. (Negotiating Cold Spring, it turns out, isn’t that different from Montauk.)Noah’s return was the occasion for a major p.o.v. shift. Last week, from his perspective, it was an idyllic return to the lair, like Norman Rockwell crossed with Maxim. Through Alison’s eyes it was altogether different — an angry Noah complaining about his day, insulting her cooking, telling her she shouldn’t have taken the job and insinuating that she should sell her Montauk house to raise some cash. Then he apologized, after she poured herself a glass of wine, and initiated the tabletop sex, the usual answer to Noah and Alison’s problems.Cole’s chapter took us back to Montauk, where he was now driving a cab, the family horse ranch being gone. He gave a ride to Helen’s father, the famous author and jerk, who announced that, inspired by Noah’s leaving Helen, he was leaving his wife. Later, in an obligatory reference to his dead son, Cole later nearly ran over a child, a scene that was paralleled by Alison’s sitting on a bench watching a group of boys play soccer. Then Cole’s brother Scotty, still alive in the present time line, showed up to complain about money and, like Noah, ask what Alison planned to do with her house.The melancholy was heavy as we watched a drunk weekender (a “private landscape artist”) try to pick up Cole, only to vomit out the door of his cab, and a bone-tired Cole, having taken too many driving shifts, fall asleep at the wheel. Coming home to his shabby trailer outside Alison’s house, he saw someone moving about inside and thought she’d come home. But it was just her fellow Lobster Roll waitress, Jane, who had come to gather some clothes and send them to Cold Spring. Cole coerced her into giving him Alison’s new address, and then rather than mailing the clothes, drove to Cold Spring to deliver them.Arriving early, he went to the same cafe Alison would later stop by (and talked to the same waitress). Seeing Noah on his way to the train (what are the odds?), he pointed and fired an imaginary gun at him, a reminder of when he pulled an actual gun in Season 1. Was it also a bit of foreshadowing? His and Alison’s stories then converged as he drove to the house, for a reunion that Cole saw as amicable and emotional in the good way. Alison smiled when she saw him, offered to cook for him and recalled a special day in their married life. Earlier, in Alison’s telling, an aggressive Cole had seemed to be threatening her before playing it off as a joke. But even from her perspective, he was the gruff good guy, fixing the toilet chain Noah was incapable of handling (who can’t fix a toilet chain? A novelist, apparently) and returning their son’s wooden toy chest.As was the case last week, both chapters ended with a short peek into the future, on the day of Noah’s arraignment. Alison, pushing a baby girl in a stroller, was surprised to encounter Noah’s high-powered lawyer, who referred to her with icy sarcasm as “the famous Miss Alison Bailey.” Telling her that Helen was paying for his services, he dismissed her and said, “I’m sure this will work out exactly as it should,” the implication appearing to be that it’s Alison who should in some way be found guilty.In Cole’s story, we learned Alison and Noah’s daughter’s name, Joanie (if she is, in fact, their daughter), and heard the charges against Noah — the worst scenario, vehicular homicide in addition to obstruction and leaving the scene, with a $500,000 bail. A frightened Noah was led away while Cole, in a noticeably long shot, stared across the courtroom at Alison and Joanie, layering on the sense that Alison is in as much jeopardy as Noah.