AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Siobhan BurkeWhether or not you personally knew Remy Charlip, the choreographer and children’s book author who died in 2012 at 83, he’s easy to love. On Friday, as part of its Fridays at Noon series, the 92nd Street Y presented “Remy Charlip: I Love You,” a program of readings, performances and film screenings commemorating his whimsical life and work. “I Love You” is also the title of one of Mr. Charlip’s picture books. (He wrote or illustrated more than 30.) While children may have been the intended audience, adults can take just as much delight in their sublime simplicity, in the cyclical, telescoping riddles of such volumes as “Arm in Arm: A Collection of Connections, Endless Tales, Reiterations, and Other Echolalia” (1969). The tall, bearded Patrick Scully read from that collection — stories of betrothed octopuses, tea party guests and sailors at sea — after a droll delivery, by Ronald Dabney and Barbara Roan, of “Fortunately” (1964). Like many of the program’s contributors, these readers were Mr. Charlip’s friends and collaborators, and they took great care with the weight or levity of their words, as the dancers did with movement. Shirley Kaplan, representing a younger generation, read “I Love You,” savoring the refrain: “I said it once. I’ll say it twice. I love you because you feel so nice.”Mr. Charlip, a founding member of the Merce Cunningham Dance Company, infused his dances, both real and imaginary, with the same frisky, unguarded, sometimes melancholy wonder. The afternoon’s selection included “Twelve Contra Dances” (1980), in which Stephanie Chun and Sean Nederlof, radiant members of H. T. Chen and Dancers, opposed and complemented each other’s pathways through space, progressing from straight lines, right angles and basic steps (prancing, running) into more fanciful kinetic doodles. The estimable David Vaughan recited “Ten Imaginary Dances” (1982), fantastical scenarios dreamed up for a hypothetical troupe stranded in New Jersey.Drawing and dancing united in Mr. Charlip’s “Air Mail Dances,” born from postcards he sent to friends around the world. In “Falling Dance” (2010), Aileen Passloff transformed 35 illustrated postures, including several varieties of handstand, into a spry solo for Arthur Aviles, adding a leather sofa and Doug Schultz’s poignant piano accompaniment. Mr. Aviles, as usual, was transporting.Mr. Charlip was with us on-screen too, in films including his 1966 “Meditation.” As the camera zoomed out from a close-up on his hands and their precise, lyrical gestures, he grew farther away but no less present.Advertisement