AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Anthony TommasiniIn a way, by joining the esteemed Latvian violinist Gidon Kremer for a duo recital at Carnegie Hall on Friday, the dazzling Russian pianist Daniil Trifonov was taking a bigger risk than when he played all of Liszt’s torturously difficult “Transcendental Études” in a recital last month on the same stage.The boyish Mr. Trifonov, 23, hailed for his stupendous technique and expressive flair, has become a phenomenon in the field. Friday’s recital was just weeks after Mr. Trifonov’s acclaimed performance of Rachmaninoff’s First Piano Concerto with the New York Philharmonic.Still, it was heartening to see him embrace this opportunity to learn from a master, Mr. Kremer, 67. Their substantive program included a flinty sonata by the Polish-born composer Mieczyslaw Weinberg and Schubert’s great Fantasy in C, which is seldom heard probably because it is so difficult. And Mr. Kremer, whose adventurousness is undiminished, seemed inspired by Mr. Trifonov as well.The program opened with Mr. Trifonov in a subtly dramatic and rich-toned performance of a solo work: Mozart’s dark, moody Fantasy in D minor (K. 397). Then both artists gave a commanding, intense account of Weinberg’s Sonata for Violin and Piano No. 5 (Op. 53), a teeming, mercurial work composed in 1953 and dedicated to Shostakovich, who became Weinberg’s mentor in Moscow. The first movement is wistful yet unsettled, with folkloric themes and a sometimes jagged piano part. The restless second movement has scurrying lines in the piano and obsessive outbursts for both instruments. A mysterious scherzolike third movement leads to an impetuous finale interrupted by a demonic fugue for piano of stunning difficulty, though Mr. Trifonov had no trouble making the tangle of contrapuntal lines clear.In an elegant performance of Mozart’s vibrant Sonata in E flat (K. 481), Mr. Trifonov dispatched rippling runs with uncanny softness and milky colorings. I sometimes wanted a little more crackle and articulateness. Still, this was sensitive Mozart playing.Mr. Kremer, a Weinberg champion, ranks that composer’s Solo Violin Sonata No. 3 (Op. 126), from 1979, with comparable works by Bartok and Bach. He made a case for this episodic 22-minute piece through his engrossing performance, from the opening section, all staggered chords and melodic fragments, through the final bitter dance, reminiscent of Shostakovich. In the hushed first movement of Schubert’s Fantasy, a mournful violin theme emerges over delicate tremolos and rustling trills in the piano, music that in this rapt performance seemed profoundly mystical. The showy second movement is like a Hungarian folk dance, with leaping chords in the piano and the two instruments trading fancy runs and passagework. There is an elaborate slow movement — a grand theme with variations — and a rousing virtuosic finale. The piano part is especially hard, a maze of technical challenges. So having a virtuoso at the keyboard came in handy, especially one as sensitive to the music, and his veteran partner, as Mr. Trifonov.In the final of two encores these colleagues showed their penchant for fun: the Georgian composer Giya Kancheli’s “Rag-Gidon-Time,” written for Mr. Kremer. This sly piece emerges in fits and starts. Mr. Kremer was a deadpan comedian; Mr. Trifonov almost broke out laughing a couple of times. He’ll learn.Advertisement