By ROSLYN SULCASJAN. 25, 2015
BRUSSELS —  There is a lot riding on Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker’s new “Golden Hours (As you like it),” set to music by Brian Eno, which opened at the Kaaitheater here on Friday. In December, the Brussels opera house, the Théâtre Royal de la Monnaie, which co-produced the work, and with which Ms. De Keersmaeker has had a 23-year association, announced it would have to remove all dance from its programming if projected budget cuts by the federal government go ahead.La Monnaie has had strong dance links since Maurice Béjart’s Ballet of the Twentieth Century became its resident company in 1960. Mark Morris and his troupe were the controversial successors in 1988, and Ms. De Keersmaeker followed in 1992. Although her company, Rosas, has not been resident there since 2005, Ms. De Keersmaeker has maintained a strong relationship with the theater. La Monnaie is still waiting to hear what the government will decide. But “Golden Hours” might turn out to be one of the last dance performances it has a hand in producing.It would be nice to say that the work is a masterpiece of the kind that unquestionably demonstrates the potential loss to La Monnaie and its audience. In fact, it does unquestionably demonstrate a potential loss to La Monnaie and its audience, but for different reasons.“Golden Hours” is something of a mess. But it’s a mess by an important and deeply thoughtful choreographer trying to carve out new terrain. For this, she needs rehearsal and stage time. Without the investment by co-producers like La Monnaie (alongside a host of others here, including Sadler’s Wells in London, the Kaaitheater and Montpellier Danse), ambitious works like “Golden Hours” don’t get made, and don’t get the chance to evolve.AdvertisementIf that chance sounds utopian, think about theater, where works old and new often get several tryout weeks to iron out the kinks. Dance is a far more brutal business. New dance pieces are usually evaluated the very first time a paying audience sees the show, and they rarely run for long enough to allow choreographers to work on problematic elements.AdvertisementOften, dance pieces aren’t really ready by opening night, and so it was with “Golden Hours,” which is loosely structured around Shakespeare’s “As You Like It.” Ms. De Keersmaeker has rarely used narrative in her work. (Her 1990 “Stella” used text from Goethe’s “Stella” and from “A Streetcar Named Desire,” but disregarded a story line.) She has also rarely used pop music, and is usually given to more astringent tastes — her last work, the 2013 “Vortex Temporum,” used a blindingly tough score by the experimental French composer Gérard Grisey.“Golden Hours” takes its name from a song on Mr. Eno’s 1975 album, “Another Green World,” often described as an important transitional moment in his career as he moved toward an ambient minimalist sound. “Golden Hours” is, however, tremendously catchy, and it plays over and over at the start of the piece as 11 dancers walk very, very slowly forward, sometimes pausing. As they keep doing this — upstage, downstage, upstage, downstage — through repeats of the song, time seems suspended or uncertain, rather like Mr. Eno’s words: “The passage of time/is flicking dimly/up on the screen.”When they suddenly walk normally, it’s as if a spell has been broken. The music stops, and a man hurls himself into a solo dance. Text is projected on both sides of the stage — “I will no longer endure it” — and soon enough it’s clear that the dancers are enacting the characters and narrative of “As You Like It.” (The man, Mikko Hyvonen, is Orlando, about to foil his brother’s plot to have him killed in a wrestling duel.)From here on, most of the piece takes place in silence. Mr. Eno’s music recurs sparingly, mostly performed by a guitarist and singer, Carlos Garbin, who plays a number of other songs from the album. But this music seems only to have a tangential relationship with what the work has become; an oddly ambivalent enactment of Shakespeare’s play that teeters uncertainly between abstraction and literalism.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The words projected on the sides of the stage clue us in to the actions and interactions, which would otherwise be impossible to decipher. But the textual extracts, frequently out of sync (perhaps teething problems?) with what seemed to be happening, are intermittent, no character names are given, nor are the play’s multiple story lines offered in full. This presumes knowledge of the plot — to say nothing of English among a predominantly French-speaking crowd on Friday — that is probably unrealistic. (A multilingual synopsis was given out in the program, but it’s not a simple tale to keep in your head.)In some ways, the text seems more like a score than Mr. Eno’s music, which feels disconnected from the work after the compelling opening scene. It’s clear, watching the dancers, that they know the language of the play intimately, and that their movements are generated by its rhythms and meaning.Parsing the relationship between the dance — full of spiraling turns, abrupt jumps, loping walks and refined gestures — and the play’s poetry is fascinating. Sometimes a dancer is so clearly incarnating both the dynamics and meaning of their “lines” that, even if a specific text isn’t projected, you can almost hear them speaking. (Perhaps for this reason, the occasional thin singing of Mr. Eno’s lines by various dancers is a particular disappointment.)Although the physical expressivity that the 11 dancers achieve is remarkable (special plaudits to the alluringly androgynous Aron Blom as Rosalind and to the febrile Georgia Vardarou), the choreographic language is repetitive and stretched thin across the work’s two-and-a-half intermissionless hours. The long silences and abrupt comings and goings can feel interminable, the pacing slack. We get little of the cut and thrust of the story, its highs and lows, disappointments and joys.Nor do we feel the comic warmth or the deep humanity of “As You Like It.” “Golden Hours” remains unremittingly serious and dogged, without quite demonstrating that it has found its own identity. At least for the moment, while funding endures, Ms. De Keersmaeker has a chance of getting that right.“Golden Hours (As you like it)” runs through Saturday at the Kaaitheater in Brussels; kaaitheater.be. A version of this review appears in print on January 26, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Moving, Sometimes at a Snail’s Pace, to Music and Shakespeare.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.