The weather forecasts were alarming, but in the end it was the decision by city and state officials to shut down virtually all means of transportation in New York City at 11 p.m. that forced officials at the Metropolitan Opera reluctantly to call off Monday night’s planned premiere of its new production of Tchaikovsky’s “Iolanta” and Bartok’s “Bluebeard’s Castle.”“If only it was a shorter opera, we would have put it on,’’ said Peter Gelb, the Met’s general manager, noting that the performance would have ended at 11:20 p.m., after the streets had been closed to traffic and the subway had stopped running. “But we knew that the audience and the performers wouldn’t be able to go home, with all options of transportation shut off to them.”So Monday night’s unsung opera took its place on the short roster of canceled performances in Met history, which includes a performance of Wagner’s “Götterdämmerung” scheduled for Nov. 22, 1963, which was canceled after the assassination that day of President John F. Kennedy; an “Il Trovatore” canceled during the 1965 blackout; and two performances that were called off after Hurricane Sandy.This week there was an added complication: Because it was a new production, the Met had planned a gala dinner for the opening night, with cocktails scheduled for 6 p.m., to be followed a half-hour later by a black-tie dinner on the Grand Tier of the opera house. The invited guests included some of the Met’s biggest donors and a delegation of Polish diplomat. (The performance was a co-production of the Met and the Teatr Wielki – Polish National Opera.)“There were many disappointed people,” Mr. Gelb said.The “dark” night means that the opera house is likely to lose several hundred thousand dollars at a time of financial struggle. But Mr. Gelb said that ticket holders were given the option for refunds or exchanges and that many people were opting for the exchange.“There are international visitors here who are extending their stays beyond the airport closures to be able to attend, and we’re squeezing people in,” he said.The opera, starring Anna Netrebko, is now scheduled to have its first performance on Thursday.The Met — which is usually something of a 24-hour opera factory — sprang back to life on Tuesday morning, with Joyce DiDonato there rehearsing Rossini’s “La Donna del Lago.” A stage rehearsal of Mozart’s “Don Giovanni” was canceled for a complicated reason: The Met left its stage bare Monday night, because it did not have the usual overnight crew that would normally have taken down the “Bluebeard’s Castle” set and put up the “Don Giovanni” set. But Tuesday’s performance of Offenbach’s “Les Contes d’Hoffmann” was set to go ahead as planned.“I was on the phone with my various personnel between 5 and 6 this morning, monitoring the bulletins about when the bridges and tunnels and public transportation would start,” Mr. Gelb said. “We made the call as early as we could — around 8 — that we would go forward with a full slate of rehearsals for the day.”It was not the first time a Met premiere had been canceled. In 1996, a new production of Janacek’s “The Makropulos Case” was canceled twice before it had its belated premiere: The planned premiere was halted minutes after it began when the tenor Richard Versalle died after  suffering a heart attack onstage, and the second performance was called off because of snow.“That is certainly not a record we’d like to follow,” Mr. Gelb said. 