Season 6, Episode 1, “First Time Again”“The Walking Dead” is a zombie show that repeatedly tells you it’s not really a zombie show. The actual “walking dead,” we’re reminded — by Rick Grimes, by Robert Kirkman, by the show runner Scott M. Gimple, by commenters on this very blog — are the survivors who carry the horrors they’ve experienced inside them as they keep pressing on. As with previous misadventures with the Governor, Officer Dawn and Team Terminus, the back half of Season 5 was plenty bloody and most of it was spilled by humans. You had Glenn vs. Nicholas, the mysterious Wolves (or whoever that “W” gang is) vs. everyone and Rick vs. Pete the domestic abuser, a grudge that was resolved in the season’s final minutes when Rick shot his nemesis in the face.We flashed back to that moment in the opening of Sunday’s exciting, cleverly executed Season 6 premiere, the close-up of Rick’s execution face fading to black and white to introduce a device that separated the episode’s two timelines.The black-and-white one tracked the aftermath of the killings of Pete and of Deanna’s husband Reginald, the gentle architect sliced open by Pete’s sword. The color one, set later, focused on the episode’s main event: a walker drive to parts unknown. (Don’t try to understand ’em. Just shoot, bash and stab ’em.)Because for one week, at least, “The Walking Dead” was absolutely a show about zombies. About 20,000 of them, in fact, thronging in an old quarry not far from Alexandria. Their discovery made literal the promise of menace that made the Alexandrians’ suburban obliviousness so intolerable last season. Turns out they were afforded that luxury thanks to a natural walker trap, one that, as Rick and Morgan found on Sunday, was about to burst at its semitrailer seams. Alexandria’s days of blithe know-nothingness and cocktail parties are over.The revelation of the walker quarry enabled the true purpose of the episode: to allow Rick to take command of yet another group of people who need saving.Indeed, though the dual timeline format was innovative, in many ways this was a vintage installment of “The Walking Dead”: zombies and Ricktatoring. The man marched around the settlement, his patched up face like an old baseball, lobbying for immediate action and consolidating his power as Deanna rubber-stamped everything in a haze of grief.“You’re in charge now,” Carol, who didn’t have much to do this week, told Rick.There was token resistance from Carter (Ethan Embry), who was just killing time until his walker-chow destiny came to pass. “We’re all supposed to fly in line behind you after you wave a gun around, screaming, pointing it at people?” he countered. “After you shot a man in the face?”Solid points all, but Rick later disarmed him, literally and rhetorically, in a scene that, with its tension, extreme close-ups and black-and-white cinematography, had a nice noirish feel to it. “Did you really think you were gonna take this community from us?” he growled. Afterward he did one of his monologues, foreshadowing Carter’s demise, but it wasn’t necessary — the guy all but wore a sign that read I’M THE NEXT TO GO.So what will this version of the Ricktatorship look like? Well he still wants to kill folks, as he told Morgan about Carter, but he’s trying to do better. “I don’t take chances anymore,” he said early in the episode. But soon enough he was putting the callow Alexandrians through walker immersion therapy and ordering the more battle-tested survivors not to help. “You said you don’t take chances anymore,” Morgan said. Yeah, well…“The Walking Dead” burns plenty of calories on the ebb and flow of Rick’s totalitarian impulses. We need Rick! Rick’s out of control! Rinse, repeat. The push and pull reflects always relevant questions about the price of security — Rick is our era’s Col. Jessup — and the show deserves credit for making its hero morally complicated.But as a consistent theme, the fretting over Rick’s aggression can seem like contrived turmoil about a foregone conclusion. Unlike in the real world, with its terrifying but hazily defined foes, the danger in “The Walking Dead” is always clear and present, and it wants to eat you. Even the less ravenous enemies, five seasons have taught us, aim to kill or enslave you, or at least take your stuff. Rick’s shoot-first tendencies can seem extreme but vigilance, action and force are sensible reactions to a world full of predators. As my colleague Mike Hale noted in his review of the premiere, “Rick is always, obviously right, in his worldview and his strategy if not his tactics.”This season seems to be setting up the Jedi Morgan as a more democratic foil. (“I can stop him,” he told Deanna and others in a trailer.) There are other signs of dissension. Rick wants to close the ranks, telling Daryl the recruiter that other people can fend for themselves — we need to strengthen our own community. Wouldn’t it strengthen it to bring in some others? Daryl wonders.Thanks to the all-encompassing nature of the zombie relocation project, the other survivors were mostly just pieces in the scheme this week. Glenn forgave Nicholas, somewhat implausibly considering that he left Noah to die horrifically and then tried to kill Glenn himself. But undiluted nobility is kind of Glenn’s thing. Sasha, who spent last season alternately therapy-hunting walkers and lying down with them, seems to be healing. She found a new sense of purpose driving herd with the walkers.“Doing something as big as this,” she told Abraham, “that’s living.”As it happened, the community will be bringing in others but probably not the kind Daryl had in mind. The occasional face-eating aside, everything was going according to plan until an unexplained horn drew the walkers toward Alexandria. Is there a traitor in the subdivision? Have the Wolves finally arrived?Whatever the source, it looks like the non-zombie show zombie show will be a zombie show for at least one more week.A few thoughts while we look for a kid in a giant hat• So I guess Carl was somewhere canoodling with his girlfriend Enid this week?• The plight of another kid, Jessie and Pete’s son Ron, added a subtle dose of moral complexity this week. Even people who deserve to die have people who love them. The door might not be totally closed on Rick and Jessie, but Grimes has his work cut out for him.• The jarring opening sequence at the camp, as the zombies breached the barriers and forced the plan into action ahead of schedule — and before we had any idea what was going on — nicely conveyed the disorientation of the newbie Alexandrians. “We’ll do it live,” Abraham shouted in a fun goof on the famous Bill O’Reilly outtake.• Heath, the most prominent new character this week, is played by Corey Hawkins, last seen as Dr. Dre in “Straight Outta Compton.” “I fully respect the hair game,” Eugene said. Anything big happen while I was gone? Heath wondered. “We had a meeting last night,” said Eugene, that mulleted master of understatement. “Thank god nothing happened to your hair,” Tara told him, speaking for all of us.• The quarry once belonged to the Quint Materials Company, according to a sign on the property. Could that be a reference to another stint of deranged leadership from Rick?• Feel free to ask Scott Gimple about this or any other “Walking Dead”-related detail. We’re currently taking questions from readers and will pose some of the best to him soon.• What did you think of the premiere? Is Rick on a dark path? Did that moment between Carol and Morgan trip your shipper trigger? And what was with Morgan and his peanut butter protein bars? (That made no sense to me.) Please weigh in on this or anything else in the comments.