PARK CITY, Utah – At least 17 films playing at Sundance were made possible by Kickstarter, including the raw-edged “James White,” about a reckless man (Christopher Abbott) and his cancer-stricken mother (Cynthia Nixon).But no film may better demonstrate “the Kickstarter effect” than “Finders Keepers,” a nearly eight-year labor of love that makes its debut here Tuesday. Without people willing to contribute $80,000 over the Internet to finish the film, the world may never know the full story of John Wood and his missing mummified leg.It is also a true story.News, features and multimedia from The Times at the Sundance Film Festival, Jan. 22-Feb. 1.“Finders Keepers,” directed by Bryan Carberry and Clay Tweel, begins with a North Carolina man, Shannon Whisnant, buying a meat smoker at auction. He hauls it home and looks inside, where he finds a man’s yellowed, gnarled lower leg and foot. “It’s plum nasty!” the twangy Mr. Whisnant is heard shouting to a 911 operator.“Finders Keepers” explains that the leg belonged to John Wood and was amputated after an accident. Mr. Wood kept it and mummified it in his backyard by wrapping it in a piece of his home’s screen door, injecting it with embalming fluid and hanging it on a tree branch to dry. For real. Mr. Wood put his leg in the meat smoker for safekeeping before becoming addicted to drugs and essentially forgetting about it.Big problems arise when Mr. Whisnant refuses to return the leg. He bought it; he should get to keep it. And he has a plan for it: charging admission for a peek. “People would come,” he says in the film, “and watch the cholesterol drip out of it.” (That would be embalming fluid. But whatever.)The documentary follows the fight between Mr. Whisnant and the now-sober Mr. Wood, which twists through a TV court show and a Hardee’s freezer. (Don’t ask.)“Essentially every person in this film could have had their own documentary,” Mr. Carberry said. Added Mr. Tweel, “Once you get past their colorful exteriors, you realize how articulate and complex these people are.”Don’t believe him? Cross your fingers that “Finders Keepers” finds a distributor. And, yes, the film shows the leg – if not the dripping cholesterol.