This spring is shaping up to be a busy season for the tenor saxophonist Charles Lloyd, who at 76 may be approaching yet another peak in a long career. On April 14 he’ll break in a new relationship with Blue Note Records, by releasing a live album, “Wild Man Dance.” On April 18 he’ll present the North American premiere of the “Wild Man Dance Suite” in the Temple of Dendur at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.He’ll also perform the suite on April 23 and 24 at SFJazz in San Francisco, as part of a four-night residency there. And during that same week, he’ll be recognized as an NEA Jazz Master by the National Endowment for the Arts, in a concert and ceremony on April 20 at Frederick P. Rose Hall, home to Jazz at Lincoln Center.Mr. Lloyd has been a notable solo artist in jazz for some 50 years, though his track record hardly suggests an unbroken line. He found fame in the latter half of the 1960s, selling more than a million copies of the album “Forest Flower” and becoming the first jazz artist to headline the Fillmore Auditorium. Then, at the height of his prominence in the early ’70s, he retreated into meditative seclusion in Big Sur, Calif. (The arc of his career forms the subject of “Arrows Into Infinity,” a recent documentary film directed by his wife and manager, Dorothy Darr, and the producer Jeffery Morse.)Mr. Lloyd’s major resurgence as a jazz artist came about in the ’80s, with a series of tours and albums that includes the only other Blue Note title to his name, “A Night in Copenhagen,” recorded in 1983. For about the last 25 years he had been affiliated with ECM Records, which released his most recent studio album — “Hagar’s Song,” featuring duets with the pianist Jason Moran — in 2013.“Wild Man Dance” was recorded in 2013 at the Jazztopad Festival in Wroclaw, Poland, which had commissioned the suite. The album features Mr. Lloyd on tenor saxophone, flute and tarogato, a Hungarian woodwind instrument. His ensemble features Sokratis Sinopoulos on Greek lyra and Miklos Lukacs on Hungarian cimbalom, with an American rhythm section: the pianist Gerald Clayton, the bassist Joe Sanders and the drummer Gerald Cleaver.The lineup will be slightly different at the Temple of Dendur, with Mr. Moran on piano and Eric Harland on drums. Both musicians, longtime associates of Mr. Lloyd, were on hand the last time he memorably performed in that room a couple of years ago.A version of this article appears in print on 01/30/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Still Going Strong on the Sax at 76.