AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck7:30 P.M. (Starz Cinema) IN DARKNESS (2011) A Polish sewer worker and sometime thief (Robert Wieckiewicz) and his young sidekick (Krzysztof Skonieczny) discover a group of Jews who have taken refuge from the Nazis in the underground waterways of Lvov and decide to help them — first as a business proposition, and then out of moral obligation — in this dramatization of real-life events by the director Agnieszka Holland. “The visual contrast between the worlds above and below ground is handled beautifully and evocatively, and it gives ‘In Darkness’ the dreamlike quality of a fairy tale,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times about this Oscar nominee for best foreign-language film. “It is not a bad movie,” he added. “It is touching, warm and dramatically satisfying. But that, given the subject matter, is exactly the problem.”11 A.M. (HBO Signature) 50 CHILDREN: THE RESCUE MISSION OF MR. AND MRS. KRAUS (2013) In spring 1939, Gilbert Kraus, a lawyer in Philadelphia, bade farewell to his wife, Eleanor, and their son and daughter and set sail for Nazi Germany. His plan: to save 50 Jewish children on the eve of the Holocaust by bringing them back home for safekeeping: the largest kindertransport to the United States. “This is really crazy,” Eleanor replied when Gilbert first described his scheme. “I’d be too scared to put a foot in that country, assuming the storm troopers would even let me in.” And yet a few weeks after her husband’s departure, at his request, she did exactly that. This documentary, directed by Steven Pressman, the husband of the Krauses’ granddaughter Liz Perle, uses archival footage, excerpts from Eleanor’s journals and first-person accounts to follow the couple as they procure visas and persuade friends to sign affidavits vowing to support the 25 boys and 25 girls, ages 5 to 14, who left their families in Vienna without knowing if they would ever see them again.3:30 P.M. (MoreMax) UP IN THE AIR (2009) George Clooney portrays Ryan Bingham, a corporate assassin — he fires people for a living — and frequent flier who reaches a crossroads when an upstart (Anna Kendrick) tries to change the rules of the game in this film from Jason Reitman. Vera Farmiga is Alex, the fast-moving executive who, for the first time, causes Bingham to rethink his life. “ 'Up in the Air’ is an assertively, and unapologetically, tidy package, from its use of romance to instill some drama into the narrative (the book introduces disease instead) and the mope-rock tunes that Mr. Reitman needlessly overuses,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times about this adaptation of the Walter Kirn novel. Still, one of the film’s pleasures is that its actresses “share the frame with Mr. Clooney as equals, not props.” The film, chosen by Ms. Dargis as a Critics’ Pick, received Oscar nominations for best picture, three of its actors and Mr. Reitman.6 P.M. (FX Movie Channel) JENNIFER’S BODY (2009) Megan Fox’s Jennifer is a dream girl, the kind other girls envy and all the boys want — at least before she’s transformed into a succubus by a run-in with an indie-rock band, and those same young men start dying in droves. Amanda Seyfried plays Jennifer’s best friend and social antithesis, Anita, or Needy for short. This “bloody high school demonic-possession, serial-killer comedy,” written by Diablo Cody and directed by Karyn Kusama, “is an unholy mess,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. He meant that as a compliment, he added.8 P.M. (NBC) PARKS AND RECREATION Leslie (Amy Poehler) and Ben (Adam Scott) suspect that Gryzzl — “the cloud for your cloud” — is invading the privacy of Pawnee residents. At 8:30, Leslie holds a rally to keep J J’s Diner from closing. And Tom (Aziz Ansari) surprises Donna (Retta) with a pre-wedding gift.10 P.M. (Cooking) REBEL WITHOUT A KITCHEN Matt Basile travels across North America in search of the best in street-food-inspired restaurants, food trucks, pop-ups and carts, starting at the Canadian National Exhibition in Toronto.What’s Streaming NowLOS COWBOYS In this new English-language reality show, Latino professionals in Los Angeles gather on weekends at Rancho Los Dorados in La Puente, Calif., to practice being charros — their skill set includes bull riding, wild-bronco jumping, horse reining and trick roping — with one goal in mind: to qualify for the Mexican national rodeo championship in Guadalajara. (hulu.com)Advertisement