Season 2, Episode 2: “A Matter of Geography”The second season of “The Leftovers” may have been characterized initially as a series reboot. But its second episode, “A Matter of Geography,” suggests that thematically it’s actually about how difficult it is to truly start over.“Do you want to get out of here?” Kevin asks with childlike giddiness in one of several scenes that flashback to the middle space between the end of Season 1 and the moment Kevin and Nora arrive in Miracle. “Out of the restaurant?” Nora says. No, that’s not what he means. He means out of here: out of Mapleton, out of his own, messed-up head space and just out, period. It’s one of several questions/statements in this episode that are slathered with subtext: about the possibility of breaking cycles versus repeating the same old patterns, about free will versus fate, about the capacity for spiritual renewal versus being stuck in hell. You know, “Lost”-ish stuff. (I must stress, for the record, that when I compare “The Leftovers” to “Lost,” I am paying the HBO drama a compliment.)Consider the conversation that ensues when those M.I.T. researchers visit Nora with a staggering $2.7 million offer on her $600,000 house, a residence they say is anomalous, because three departures occurred simultaneously within its kitchen walls. “Our guess is that it’s a matter of geography,” says their spokesman, who adds that studying the house may help them prevent future departures from occurring.“You think it’s going to happen again?” Nora asks.“Why wouldn’t it?” M.I.T. guy responds. Subtext: Another departure may be fated, but on the other hand, maybe these Massachusetts smarties can exercise their free will and, like Matt Damon in “The Martian,” science the heck out of it.There’s the comment Kevin’s father, fresh out of the mental institution and suddenly “cured,” makes after announcing his plans to go to Australia (again with the Australia references!): “I can cry about how the world ended. Or I can start it up again.” (This notion of starting it up again — coupled with the letter that Miracle’s homeless guy sent to a David Burton in Sydney in the premiere — suggests there may be a new religious movement of some kind forming Down Under. As I noted in last week’s recap, H. David Burton is the name of an actual former Mormon Church leader who once did missionary work in Australia. It’s also worth mentioning that Mormonism was first born in western New York, perhaps not far from the fictional “Leftovers” version of Mapleton. )Then there’s the money quote of the episode, from Patti “She’s ba-ack” Levin, whose spirit is again following Kevin Garvey in a way that parallels the cricket sounds dogging John Murphy from next door. “It’s hard to tell if they’re part of your story,” she says to Kevin, referring to the Murphys, “or you’re part of theirs.” That’s a commentary on the way these families’ story lines interweave in these first couple of episodes, as well as an acknowledgment that it’s not clear who is in control here. Did Kevin and Nora decide to come to Miracle purely by choice, or did other forces draw them there? Will the Murphys affect their ability to stay? (Probably.)Given its direct connections to the Season 1 finale, this episode easily could have been the first installment of Season 2 instead of the second. But positioning it this way was smart; it not only heightens the sense that there’s something shadowy happening in Miracle, it also allows us to use our knowledge from the previous week to start putting together some plot puzzle pieces.When the Garvey/Durst squad arrives at the Jarden visitors’ center, where it is greeted by an orientation video that, yes, is vaguely reminiscent of the Dharma Initiative, the members realize the house they planned to rent is uninhabitable because it burned down. Because of last week’s episode, we know that fire happened at Isaac’s and was caused by John. An African-American man approaches Kevin in the visitors’ center and tells Kevin to come and see him because he “can help with your situation.” Because of last week’s episode, we know that’s the man Michael Murphy went to visit and pray with, though it’s not clear why the man seems to know Kevin. After Kevin, Nora, Jill and Lily eventually show up at the cottage where Matt and Mary Jamison are staying, Nora asks Matt, “What aren’t you telling me?” Because of last week’s episode, we know there absolutely is something Nora’s brother isn’t telling her yet.We still don’t know what that something is, because it’s unclear what convinced Matt Jamison that there really are miracles happening in Miracle, or why he has to stay silent about them. Another thing that’s unclear: why the Jarden officials insist on quarantining Kevin’s dog for 60 days in keeping with their policy of not admitting wildlife to Miracle until “we clear their blood work.” One wonders whether any dog allowed in Miracle might turn vicious, as the canines in Mapleton did, revealing secrets the resident want to keep hidden. Or maybe they just won’t ever die, sort of like Erika Murphy’s shoebox bird. Maybe?As much as it reveals, this episode of “The Leftovers” still leaves a lot of holes unfilled. That’s not worrisome, really, because the storytelling is handled with such deliberate authority and because its opacity, in usual “Leftovers” fashion, seems designed intentionally to mirror Kevin’s own mental short-circuiting.Speaking of: yeah, we need to talk about Kevin. Initially he seems enthused about taking in Lily. Right after the baby is found, when both Kevin and Nora confess their respective sins and agree to become a family unit, Kevin weeps with joy. “It’s O.K.,” a phrase Nora repeats like a prayer, is a concept that has seemed so out of reach to Kevin for so long that he can’t believe it’s within his grasp. (By the way, that confessional conversation, particularly Nora’s blunt announcement that she hires prostitutes to shoot her, is hilariously devoid of pertinent follow-up questions.)Once time fast-forwards, it’s clear that Kevin is not interested in Lily, is often dissociated from reality and is still fixated on what happened with Patti. The only way he can find any semblance of peace, is by mainlining loud music straight into his cranium via a pair of sturdy ear buds.An attempt to dig up Patti’s body and turn himself into the police — where an officer with an eye patch and a strong belief in eye-for-an-eye justice regarding the Guilty Remnant lets him go free — doesn’t provide the liberation Kevin craves. Neither does a trip to Miracle, because Patti, or her ghost anyway, follows him there, too. Eventually, as it did in last week’s episode, that earthquake hits. This time we view the aftermath of it from Kevin’s perspective, and once again there are major gaps in the timeline of events. We don’t see where Kevin is when the ground starts to shake. We encounter him suddenly waking up in that practically dry streambed, with fishes flapping helplessly nearby and a cinderblock tied around his ankle. Was he trying to commit suicide but failed to drown because the water disappeared? Did Patti “make him do it,” or did someone else throw him in? Unexplainable things have happened in this location long, long ago, as that biblical prologue to last week’s episode illustrates. It seems fair to assume that what’s happening here is a matter of geography. Like Nora Durst’s kitchen, Miracle is an anomaly. Which means that Kevin Garvey is right to ask yet another of this episode’s many loaded questions: What if it’s no safer here than anywhere else?