By NATE CHINENJAN. 26, 2015
There isn’t much in the modern-jazz-musician tool kit that Marc Cary hasn’t mastered, but he has a particular subspecialty in the area of groove. A pianist who came up the old-school way, with mentors like Abbey Lincoln and Betty Carter, Mr. Cary has always been adept with a range of rhythmic strategies, from a deep-house pulse to a swinging churn.His concept of rhythm can suggest a wavelike continuum, more a matter of dynamic flow patterns than rigid linearity. In the hands of Mr. Cary and his tight circle of collaborators, that concept can tease out connections between the folkloric and the ultramodern. And for better or worse, it can subsume most other aspects of a performance, as in his opening set at Ginny’s Supper Club on Friday.Kicking off a weekend two-nighter billed as “Marc Cary’s Harlem Homecoming,” Mr. Cary quickly made himself comfortable, stationed behind a Fender Rhodes piano, an acoustic piano and an Access Virus synthesizer. His core partners were Tarus Mateen on electric bass and Sameer Gupta on drums and tabla, with the trumpeter Igmar Thomas as a featured guest. A second bassist, Mimi Jones, sat in near the top of the set and ended up staying for the duration, bringing a welcome viscosity to the mix.Mr. Cary’s main outlet in recent years has been his Focus Trio, with Mr. Gupta and the bassist Rashaan Carter working in a postbop vein. The dimensions of Mr. Cary’s sound here recalled a separate endeavor, stretching back some 15 years to the album “Rhodes Ahead,” which delivered a blend of chiming soundscapes and cooled-out club beats.AdvertisementHis next album, due out on the Harlem label Motéma on March 17, will be “Rhodes Ahead Vol. 2,” a more self-assured trek to the heart of jazz-funk futurism, and a likely breakthrough for his public profile. Yet he played just one track from that release here: “Essaouira Walks,” a chant in quintuple meter, inspired by Moroccan trance music.Most of the set suggested a gluey, shape-shifting vision of groove, with melody and harmonic variation relegated to the back burner. One tune began with a gospel invocation on piano, coalesced around a staccato riff, and shifted into 12/8 polyrhythm before smoothing into a slower gear. Mr. Gupta and Mr. Mateen produced a swirling undertow, and Mr. Cary worked deep within it, bringing distinct subtleties of touch to each of his instruments.AdvertisementAn outlying tune in the set was Burt Bacharach and Hal David’s “The Look of Love,” featuring April Sashay, an aspiring young singer who works behind the bar at Ginny’s. Ms. Sashay, one of Mr. Cary’s protégés in Harlem, capably spun the song into a sultry register, against an assertive R&B groove. If the structured looseness of the moment evoked a high-caliber jam session, that was all to the better: Mr. Cary could work wonders with a long-term club residency, and this would be a good place to start.The Marc Cary Focus Trio will appear on Saturday at the Cell, 338 West 23rd Street, Chelsea; 646-861-2253, thecelltheatre.org. A version of this review appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Versatile Pianist Grounded in Groove, His Collaborators in Tow.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.