By SIOBHAN BURKEJAN. 26, 2015
MONTCLAIR, N.J. —  Some choreographers build up to audience participation, or infiltration, during the course of an evening, but not the South African artist Robyn Orlin. Within the first five minutes of her expansively titled “At the same time we were pointing a finger at you, we realized we were pointing three at ourselves,” her fluorescent-clad dancers clamber into the audience, swatting at the seats and the people in them with rubber flip-flops.Those dancers are members of Compagnie Jant-Bi, an all-male troupe based in Senegal and directed by Germaine Acogny. “At the same time,” which had its American premiere over the weekend as part of the Peak Performances series at Montclair State University here, takes inspiration from a Senegalese tradition, the faux-lion ceremony, reimagined by Ms. Orlin and the performers to explore issues surrounding gender and homophobia.Or so Ms. Orlin suggests in her program notes. In practice that exploration remains half-realized among the many moving, toppling parts of this chaotic production. In the first of many stormy moments, several towers of colorful buckets crash to the ground, freed up for various uses. Other matters take the forefront, chiefly Ms. Orlin’s status — and ours — as outsiders looking in on Senegalese culture. Known for her politically provocative work, she writes, “I felt I could not critique their culture in the same way I do mine.”Instead of a critic, then, she serves as a kind of translator — one who doesn’t take herself too seriously — transmitting explanatory text messages throughout the show. These pop up on the same screen where blurry, real-time videos of the dancers appear. (Equipped with smartphones, the dancers film themselves and each other at every available moment.) Of the flip-flop ritual, a sort of pre-ceremony cleansing, Ms. Orlin texts: “Sorry everyone but the theater is full of bad spirits so this is going to take a while. XXX Robyn.”AdvertisementIt’s hard to tell where tradition ends and theater begins, and Ms. Orlin, it seems, means to keep that line fuzzy. She invites us to read about the ceremony in our programs, where we learn that it’s a longstanding but evolving community celebration, performed by men and accessible to children, a space in which basic fears can surface.Fear never seems too urgent in “At the same time,” even in the skirmishes that play out among the rambunctious, charismatic men of Jant-Bi. In Birgit Neppl’s costumes, which include a stuffed-animal skirt and sequin briefs with platform heels, they inhabit roles including an entertainer and a backup singer, grounding the scattered proceedings in bursts of spectacular dancing. After a fake call from Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, they demanded identification from the audience and pulled one spectator onstage, placing paper-bag masks of Christopher Columbus, then Mickey Mouse, over his head: “Eat him or let him go?” Columbus gets devoured; Mickey survives.AdvertisementAmid all this Ms. Acogny also has a presence, a virtual one, dancing across the screen against a desert backdrop. At the end, standing in the audience again, the men hold their phones up to her image. There’s no incoming text to tell us why.“At the same time” continues through Sunday at the Alexander Kasser Theater, Montclair State University, 1 Normal Avenue, Montclair, N.J.; 973-655-5112, peakperfs.org.A version of this review appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Translating, if Not Analyzing, Gender Dynamics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.