AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Vivien SchweitzerOne of the most striking features of Grieg’s String Quartet in G minor is the textural richness created by techniques including double stopping, in which two notes are played simultaneously. Given the work’s allure, it receives surprisingly infrequent airings. But listeners had a chance to admire the score’s many charms during a passionate performance by the Amphion String Quartet at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday evening, in a concert presented by the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center. An impressive number of brilliant young string quartets are heard each season in New York; the Amphion musicians (the violinists Katie Hyun and David Southorn, the violist Wei-Yang Andy Lin and the cellist Mihai Marica) proved themselves among the best. Well known for his piano concerto, piano miniatures and the incidental music for “Peer Gynt,” Grieg wrote few larger-scale works and only one complete string quartet. Finished in 1878, its impressionistic idiom foreshadowed Debussy’s string quartet. Grieg’s affinity for Norwegian folk music is also in bountiful evidence. The Amphion has championed the Grieg on an excellent recent  recording on Nimbus Records. Its commitment rendered this live performance a treat. With Mr. Southorn as first violinist, the quartet played with feisty energy in the brash opening passages and produced a glowing, gently rounded sound in the more introspective moments. The lyrical lines unfolded with gorgeous tone, the ensemble’s plaintive, intimate sound a vivid contrast to the hard-driving momentum of the more tumultuous sections. The musicians also used their wide palette of tone and timbre to illuminate the intricacies of Janacek’s String Quartet, “Intimate Letters,” a homage to that composer’s young muse. Mr. Lin and Mr. Marica delicately highlighted the harmonic quirks of the first movement; Mr. Lin played the elegiac viola solo beautifully. Trills and subtle crescendos were stylishly rendered throughout, the whole performance enhanced by Ms. Hyun’s energetic leadership. The program opened with Haydn’s Quartet in C, “The Bird,” a gracious performance particularly commendable for the humor and grace with which Ms. Hyun and Mr. Southorn played their witty avian duet. Advertisement