By ZACHARY WOOLFEJAN. 26, 2015
The violinist Miranda Cuckson started to play Mario Davidovsky’s “Synchronisms No. 9” (1988) just after 3 p.m. on Sunday at Spectrum on the Lower East Side. While the piece is a duet with electronics, it begins with a plaintive solo line, lonely yet warm, like the glow of firelight spied across a snowy plain by night.It sounded, to my surprise, not so far from Sibelius, whose darkly lustrous “Nocturne” (1906) another violinist, Paul Huang, had performed at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center just a few hours before. I had chosen to take in these two recitals in the same day as a study in contrasts, a symbol of the variety in the city’s cultural scene. Old music, newer music; uptown, downtown.But the continuities and similarities turned out to be more striking than the differences. What I’d thought would be a stark separation of classic and modern turned out to be a sustained reflection on Romanticism and its reverberations.Not that these two violinists don’t have distinctive styles and sounds. Mr. Huang is a rising artist: A recent prize winner in the Young Concert Artists International Auditions, he will be a member of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center’s CMS Two program for young musicians from this fall until 2018.AdvertisementAppearing under the auspices of Lincoln Center’s sweet Sunday Morning Coffee Concerts series, he played with a coppery, wiry bite, and ample vinegar laced his honeyed tone. This gave his sound focus and cut away at the sentimentality, even in the most poignant lyrical passages. In this rendition, Janacek’s Violin Sonata (1914-15) — Jessica Xylina Osborne was the alert pianist — never seemed quaint, bristling with taut tension before relaxing, a bit, into uneasy calm.Even Sarasate’s picturesque “Romanza Andaluza,” from “Spanish Dances” (1879), was more wry than over the top. Mr. Huang does well by emotive pieces, like Grieg’s poetic Sonata No. 3 in C minor (1886), mainly by doing them with a measure of restraint.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Further along in her career — she teaches at Mannes College the New School for Music — Ms. Cuckson is a fixture of New York’s modern-music scene. She has been an advocate in both performances and recordings for underserved gems of the 20th and 21st centuries, including Luigi Nono’s surround-sound “La Lontananza Nostalgica Utopica Futura.”A longtime collaborator with Mr. Davidovsky, an electronic-music pioneer who was present on Sunday, Ms. Cuckson intended this recital as an immersion in his work. It was the second in the new-music collective counter)induction’s new series “X+N,” which juxtaposes electronic classics with live, largely acoustic examples. But an equipment failure on Sunday made the playback of Mr. Davidovsky’s three seminal Electronic Studies (1961-63) impossible.AdvertisementThere was little reason to feel cheated, thanks to Ms. Cuckson’s commanding performances of two Davidovsky works alongside a complementary one by Donald Martino. As “Synchronisms No. 9” continues, the electronic beeps, burbles and metallic resonances chase and echo the violinist through a landscape alternately impassioned and skittish.The overall thrust of the piece is as exuberantly emotional and changeable as in the Grieg sonata, or as in Mr. Davidovsky’s “Duo Capriccioso” (2004). Here quiet passages — a slicing soft violin note emerging from uncertain wanderings in the piano (the penetrating Ning Yu) — coexist with bustling energy.Mr. Martino’s “Fantasy Variations” (1962) doesn’t include electronics but, as Ms. Cuckson wrote in her program note, its agile, jumpy elements seem to evoke the influence of electronic experiments like Mr. Davidovsky’s. Ms. Cuckson brought out the work’s singing quality, a soulfulness as deep as anything in Janacek. Her tonal luster and variety of touch enliven everything she plays.The next Sunday Morning Coffee Concert is on Feb. 8, featuring the pianist Steven Osborne, at the Walter Reade Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org. The series “X+N” continues March 12 with Jessica Meyer and Halim El-Dabh, at Spectrum, 121 Ludlow Street, second floor, Lower East Side; spectrumnyc.com. A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Seeking Contrasts, Finding Similarities.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.