Season 5, Episode 2, “The Tradition of Hospitality”I’m going to recap this episode really quickly, because this week, I want to play a game: Let’s say you had to pick a new best friend out of Homeland: Season 5.  Who would you want it to be? Astrid (Nina Hoss), of German intelligence, Allison Carr (Miranda Otto), possibly the soon to be ex-Berlin C.I.A. station chief, or the lone wolf assassin Peter Quinn (Rupert Friend)? All are appealing choices, and we’ll consider them one by one.But first, tonight’s plot: By having cleverly tapped into the rules of hospitality and honor followed by Hezbollah’s commanders, Carrie secures safe passage into a refugee camp on the Lebanese-Syrian border for her über-narcissistic boss, Otto Düring (Sebastian Koch). Düring has been promised just one hour of safety — a limitation he has no intention of respecting, what with all the handshakes, introductions and photo ops he envisions (“Press the flesh. Isn’t that the expression?” he asks.) Predictably enough, he overstays his welcome, and, after stopping to grace a mother and son with his attention, is saved from a suicide bomber by Carrie, her quick order, “Take him,” a bitter reminder of the choice she did not make last season to order a hit in which Saul would have been collateral damage. Racing out of the refugee camp, Carrie saves Düring again from what appears to have be a planned bombing. Clearly shaken and perhaps somewhat humbled (though not that much: his desire to “make some calls first” before boarding his plane speaks to a level of self-importance that transcends survival instincts), he thanks Carrie at the airport, only to learn that she’s insisting upon staying behind — “It’s not a debate. I’m staying.”Upon returning to her hotel room, Carrie learns that she — not Düring — was the real target of the attack. Back in Berlin, the German government wants heads to roll after the outing of their secret spy deal with the Americans. Allison’s head is on the block — she’s supposed to get out of the country within 24 hours — and when Saul won’t go to bat to try to help her to stay, she goes around him, making what appears to be a convincing case to Dar Adal back in Washington that she’s more valuable on the ground in Europe than his old comrade-in-waffles. Oh, and it looks like the next name on Quinn’s kill list is Carrie.Now on to the fun.The pros for Astrid as your bestie: She has an enchanting speaking voice, a great sense of humor (Her line, “I heard you. You have a loud voice,” in response to that awful Laura Sutton and her squeals of “I want my lawyer” was just wonderful) and a refreshingly pleasing old world intolerance for youthful sanctimony and shortsightedness. (“Laura, do you understand the situation we’re in here?” she asks, her impatience blunted by decades and decades of existential fatigue. “Do you want to make a job of this?”)Cons: That selfsame old world jadedness can get depressing, if you think about it long enough. As Laura puts it, “You have these laws because you know how bad it can get. You’ve lived it.” Allison’s undoubtedly right; Astrid’s “one of the good guys.” But too heavy, too much bad history, for a BFF.
Moving on.Allison strikes me as a right-on woman. She’s quick with a compliment and loyal when loyalty’s due (she notably did not take the bait and turn on Carrie when sulky Saul asked her if she thought his former protégé was in cahoots with Laura.) She’s agreeably foul-mouthed and blunt and honest with her emotions, if not always super on-point in her social skills. (Berating Saul for his long-term favoritism toward Carrie — “She’s gone, Saul. So start showing some [expletive deleted] allegiance to the people who stuck around to support you” was not a great example of managing up.) And instead of getting mad when condescended to grotesquely by both Dar Adal (“Don’t overdramatize, Allison.”) and Saul (“Excuse me?”), she gets even, with active, fully owned, nongirlie aggression.“Give them Saul’s,” she tells Dar, of Berlin’s request for a “scalp.” “Be honest,” she says, “Who would you rather have on the ground, him or me?” It’s Allison, as you can undoubtedly tell, who already has my vote, but in the interest of gender-inclusivity (and because, if we’re talking about the “good guys,” we have to have him), let’s not forget Peter Quinn.
Quinn, I imagine, would probably not be the most reliable companion for a Saturday morning yoga class-Starbucks routine, and his verbal abilities, we’ve seen, vacillate with his moods. But there’s no getting around the fact that he’s an assassin with a heart of gold. Just look at all the good he’s done, just two episodes into the season: stopped a vicious bomb-maker in his tracks, interrupted the suicidal trajectory of some vibrant young women, removed a honey-tongued, human trafficking extremist from our midst. I don’t believe he’d ever kill Carrie — arguably his real BFF — do you? Which isn’t to say that he wouldn’t kill me. Not ideal. You may wonder why I haven’t included Carrie herself in this amusing game of Mystery Friend. We all know the reason: she’s way too exhausting. I mean — she’d be at the yoga class (particularly now that she has a docile boyfriend to watch Franny), but she’d be way too intense about it, breathing too hard, pulling muscles and hyperextending, and bursting into tears during savasana. She’s obviously working so hard to stay grounded this season: sober nine months; checking in on Franny in the evenings from her exciting business trip; walking away from what might have been sizing up to be a too-close re-encounter with a former C.I.A. colleague in Beirut . (I’m talking about Hank, the one convinced that she’s in town on a “play.” It wasn’t clear, but she seemed to put her old flirty face on again when she saw him.)Speaking of: I really liked the way Carrie set boundaries with Düring out on the roof terrace of the ego-stroking meet-and-greet that proceeded his visit to the refugee camp. (And, while we’re on the topic of Düring jerkishness, I loved the way the United Nations colonel put the Düring Foundation fixer in his place with a quick, disdainful  recollection of having met him “last year with Angelina.”) Düring was so clearly getting lubriciously wound up at the thought of Carrie’s torturous past. But she slammed the door smartly, quietly and with definitive subtlety.
“There wasn’t anyone for me back at home,” is the answer she gives when he asks what has changed since she left her old life.  Message: there is now. And that’s the end of that.It’s sad — even with her now-solid bond to Franny, even with the steady presence of her (admittedly somewhat low-octane) lawyer beau, I’ve never found Carrie so alone as she seems this season, with unknown killers closing in and none of the passionate, if treacherous connections — to Saul, to Brody, to Quinn, to the C.I.A. itself — that formerly sustained her. “Oh please, please God help me,” she begs in a bathroom, as the pull of the past floods in. But the heavens appear to be silent. I’m almost glad trouble is brewing.  In trying to make such a clean break with her violent past, Carrie may have killed off too much of herself.Judith Warner, a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine, is the author, most recently, of “We’ve Got Issues: Children and Parents in the Age of Medication.”