The Cold War spy drama on FX.
Season 3, Episode 1: “EST Men”Здравствуйте, дорогие товарищи!Hello, dear comrades! When we left Paige, at the end of Season 2, she was fresh from a no-nukes protest, bubbling over with tips from Civil Disobedience 101 and high on the idea of sacrificing oneself for the greater good. Her boldest act of adolescent rebellion: going to church.Her mother, Elizabeth, whose past privation eclipses any sacrifice Paige (Holly Taylor) could imagine, listens to her with the same frozen contempt she reserves for F.B.I. department heads, and a little pity, too, that her child, reared in the Washington suburbs, could reach the age of 14 and still be so politically naïve.This season, Paige, as vanilla pudding as a girl can be, is likely to be at the center of the action — a pawn, to be sure, but one who is on everybody’s mind.Philip and Elizabeth Jennings (Matthew Rhys and Keri Russell) have always sworn they would not involve their children in their work. But now that they have been told (and told, and told) that Moscow wants Paige groomed as a second-generation spy, trepidation looms every time they tighten a garrote, slip into a stranger’s bed or break a jaw. The pressure has been relentless, and it is cracking the foundation of the marriage on which their interlocking identities are built.They shared the horror last season when they found their mirror image, another K.G.B. Directorate S couple, brutally killed along with their younger child. And they saw what happened to the surviving teenage son, Jared, who was trained secretly by the K.G.B. over his parents’ objections. He killed his family in a hotel, then headed for the pool. His career ended when took a bullet himself a few months later while in a tight spot with Elizabeth and Philip. His last words? A plea to make sure Moscow would hear that he had saved their lives.There’s more than a little moral confusion here.The subject of homegrown Russian-American spies comes up again over a dinner prepared by Gabriel, an old, well-connected, trusted friend, played by Frank Langella, who radiates affection for the couple, but whose deep, and, yes, sexy voice, and hooded eyes might just conceal something sinister.Gabriel asks, delicately, about their progress in indoctrinating Paige. In response, Elizabeth reels off their efforts so far, casting the church activities as not only an introduction to left-wing political thought, but also as a way of getting closer to her daughter and preparing her for the truth about her parents’ past and her own future.Philip’s eyes go flinty as she speaks, and on the way home, he fairly flays Elizabeth with his words. “You’re assessing her!” he says. “You’re developing her!”When Elizabeth spits back, “She’s my daughter,” she could mean almost anything.Were her words at dinner treachery? Or is Elizabeth merely appeasing Gabriel and Moscow? I couldn’t help but think that, being the smart, calculating and dedicated sort, she’s hedging her bets for as long as she can. It’s Philip who might do something crazy. How far will he go to keep Paige out of the spying game?You can see he is still steaming inside when he grabs a knife and tries to attack a pan of brownies (to eat them, of course). Elizabeth snatches them from his grasp to take them to the church potluck, leaving him in a menacing pose with a knife that is disproportionately large for brownies but perfectly calibrated to his anger level. (We’ve seen these All-American brownies before, as a welcome gift for the F.B.I. agent next door, Stan Beeman, when he and his wife, Sandra, moved in.)Other questions:When will Stan finally figure it out?
In this episode, Elizabeth, in disguise, has a sympathetic drink with a disaffected veteran C.I.A. officer played by Jordan Baker. Listening to the woman’s tale of sexism and maltreatment, Elizabeth waits for her cue, the three little words every K.G.B. agent longs to hear: “Screw the C.I.A.”In moments, she is out the door and striding down the street with her prize in her pocket — the names of C.I.A. personnel backing the mujahedeen against the Soviets in Afghanistan (click here for a handy and concise B.B.C. timeline).Two men burst out of the darkness, and we hear a familiar voice. Could it be Frank Gaad (Richard Thomas) on a foot-chase? Isn’t this below his pay grade? As they draw near, Elizabeth strikes. She takes both men down with some explosive hand-to-hand combat and clever improvisation with a passing motorcycle, and finds herself pointing a gun in the face of, you guessed it, Gaad, Stan’s boss at the F.B.I. She slams the gun across his face (Goodnight, John Boy!) and is gone. But so is the precious paper she was trying to protect.At home, she’s battered and badly bruised, wearing her robe and holding an ice pack, as Philip and Stan arrive from an EST meeting – part of Stan’s latest attempt at patching up his long-broken marriage by retracing the emotional journey of his love-starved and now estranged wife. (And based on the crude snippet we hear of the meeting, it’s hard to believe Sandra, played by Susan Misner, found someone there worth hooking up with).Unable to detect the wince beneath Elizabeth’s smile, the bumbling Stan buys her excuse that she was injured carrying groceries.The next morning he sees the “other guy,” his amusingly bandaged boss, and ribs him about being on the losing end of the fight against a woman. A petite woman. Probably a Russian spy. Maybe even one of those illegals they have been searching for. And yet another set of sketches of her is on the way. Heh heh.At this point, you want to shout: Dude, the spy lives next door! How did you ever stay alive undercover when you can’t make basic observations about your surroundings?They won’t kill Nina, right?
It’s hard to imagine that this could be the end for the alluring and resourceful Nina (Annet Mahendru), even if she has been linked to treason and espionage. The show needs this double-double agent who was sleeping with the enemy and the enemy’s enemy. We’re all rooting for her, aren’t we? (If not, tell us why in the comments.)There are indications that her savior may be Oleg Burov (Costa Ronin), the young upstart agent, who is grieving her absence despite her underhanded ways. I found him newly contemplative, rueful and somewhat less of a hot dog than before, at least for this one episode, but he still needs to work on impulse control. And, of course, he needs to persuade Daddy to intervene in Nina’s case.But for another talented asset, Annelise, it’s all over for sure. She is (or was) the other information-seeking missile the Jenningses had deployed on the Afghan front, the wife of a State Department official and the bait in what John le Carré would have called a honey trap. Early in the series, Philip declared her “half off her rocker,” which, in retrospect, looks like a gross understatement. Was it smart to send her when Elizabeth was wiling to do the job?As Annelise (Gillian Alexy) cultivates the devotion of a high-ranking Pakistani, Yousaf, she believes she’s working for Swedish intelligence. She tells her handler and sometime lover “Scott” (Philip with glasses and sideburns) that the C.I.A. people in Peshawar can’t get “anywhere near the mujahedeen command, even though it’s their money and their weapons.”The intelligence services are “all messed up,” she reports. “You’ve got your religious guys and your nonreligious guys like Yousaf,” and trust between them is nonexistent. Some of his bodyguards, she says incredulously, “pray like 10 times a day!”The next time Annelise sees Yousaf (Rahul Khanna), he has a proposal for her, and she has a confession for him. Suffice it to say that while it is always tragic to lose an asset, the next best thing is to entrap a new one. And perhaps that was the plan all along.Philip, eavesdropping on the tryst from the adjacent hotel room, sacrifices Annelise and turns Yousaf by offering to erase his crime of high-profile passion.But there is more grief in the season premiere. In the secret room in the Jennings basement, Elizabeth is playing the tape Gabriel slipped her. It is her mother. She is dying. A tear slides down Elizabeth’s cheek as she hears the familiar voice in a message of farewell. And images of her mother’s kindness and wisdom come welling up. Is it such a different kind of love than she and Paige share?Of course, since it’s 1982, someone else is breathing his last: Leonid I.Brezhnev, the Soviet leader who extinguished so many lights — crushing Prague Spring in 1968; imposing martial law to silence Solidarity in Poland; and authorizing the invasion of Afghanistan in 1979. It will be interesting to see how the show handles his successor: Yuri Andropov, a former K.G.B. chief.Are these new characters going to stick around?
The new face at the Rezidentura, where the registered Soviet agents — the ones with diplomatic immunity — can be found, Tatiana (Vera Cherny). The heretofore unseen Tatiana is an unknown quantity. Arkady (Lev Gorn) the chief of station, cautions Oleg about shooting off his mouth about the pointlessness of fighting in Afghanistan in her presence.That young man with a Benedict Cumberbatch-y accent in Elizabeth’s rearview mirror. From beneath the bangs of her blonde wig, Elizabeth tells him he’s “doing great” in his training with her, presumably in the art of automotive surveillance.Paige’s potential, if almost silent, boyfriend. The bottle-blond Pastor Tim (Kelly AuCoin) seems to be helping Cupid along, when with a meaningful glance at Elizabeth, he summons Paige to help a lanky, curly-haired boy set out food at a church meeting.Is Martha going rogue?
We knew Martha (Alison Wright) owned a handgun, but now she’s pointing it at the camera, shooting us at point-blank range. Turns out it’s just target practice, but she seems full of fury, with a time bomb for a biological clock, and she’s rapidly improving her shooting technique. The combination could prove lethal to someone.Other stuff:

Some ’80s signposts, which are used to perfect effect:

A carton of Frusen Glädjé as a hostess gift. “It’s Swedish!” Elizabeth says brightly. (It’s about as Swedish as Elizabeth is American, but faux Swedish is what the ’80s were all about.)George Jefferson (Sherman Hemsley), who appears on the TV screen in a minute comic bit when Paige channel surfs away from a very young Tom Brokaw, who is announcing the death of Brezhnev.Paige’s voluminous Breck Girl mane. She has enough hair to hide a couple of issues of Seventeen in her curls.The Kama Sutra, which was reissued in a popular translation in 1980, guides Martha and the randy “Clark” (Philip, man of a thousand faces and proclivities) in a hilarious undertaking of vertical feats of balance – oops! Did she really say, “Next?”Better than a wig…Elizabeth’s reversible jacket, hammer-and-sickle red on one side; charcoal on the other. It will make a new woman of you. But the pockets need a little reinforcement for added security. Lives depend upon it.