AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (13, 49) PENGUIN POST OFFICE Every summer in the Southern Hemisphere, a British post office at Port Lockroy, above, becomes the most popular tourist attraction for cruise ships to the Antarctic Peninsula, as some 3,000 gentoo penguins take up residence alongside the other seasonal inhabitants: volunteers from the United Kingdom Antarctic Heritage Trust, who run the remote outpost. There, each November, after a bout of intensive deep-sea fishing, the gentoos find their mates, build their nests, raise their young — and pose for pictures, as long as the photographer stays 15 feet away. This “Nature” episode ventures to Antarctica to film the four-month ritual. In “Sinkholes — Buried Alive,” at 10, “Nova” investigates what happens when the ground opens up beneath your feet.7 P.M. (Encore Family) BEND IT LIKE BECKHAM (2002) A British teenager named Jess (Parminder Nagra) finds her dreams of soccer stardom clashing with the wishes of her Sikh family in this comedy from Gurinder Chadha. Archie Panjabi is the older sister who can’t understand why Jess doesn’t share her boy-crazy, shopping-centered approach to life; Keira Knightley is Jules (above right, with Ms. Nagra), who persuades Jess to train with a club; and Jonathan Rhys Meyers is the coach with whom Jules and Jess are smitten. “The title, and some of the local dialect, may require a bit of translation, but the film’s warm-and-fuzzy amalgam of multiculturalism and feminism will look very familiar indeed,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “It is stuffed to bursting with affectionate stereotypes and the sticky, somewhat oppressive Gemütlichkeit that is the hallmark, at least on screen, of immigrant families, wherever they come from and wherever they reside.”7 P.M. (FX Movie Channel) UNSTOPPABLE (2010) A veteran engineer (Denzel Washington) and the hotheaded new conductor (Chris Pine) he is charged with training try to stop a runaway train speeding through Pennsylvania with a load of hazardous cargo in this Tony Scott action-adventure. Writing in The Times, Manohla Dargis said that Mr. Scott, working with the cinematographer Ben Seresin and some ace sound technicians, “creates an unexpectedly rich world of chugging, rushing trains slicing across equally beautiful industrial and natural landscapes.”9 P.M. (Fox) EMPIRE Lucious (Terrence Howard) tries to steal a chart-topping artist from his rival. Jamal (Jussie Smollett) struggles with writer’s block. And Cookie (Taraji P. Henson) works to mend things with Hakeem (Bryshere Y. Gray).9 P.M. (CNN) VOICES OF AUSCHWITZ Wolf Blitzer, who recently discovered that his paternal grandparents died at Auschwitz, hosts this special, honoring the 70th anniversary of that death camp’s liberation, in which survivors recount atrocities committed there. Mr. Blitzer also interviews Steven Spielberg, who, while filming “Schindler’s List,” established what would become a foundation that gathers video testimonials from people who survived or witnessed the Holocaust.10 P.M. (TV Land) HOT IN CLEVELAND Joy (Jane Leeves) starts viewing Bob (Dave Foley) differently when he helps her grandson fend off the school bully. Elka (Betty White) prompts Melanie (Valerie Bertinelli) to reconnect with a woman (Mackenzie Phillips, Ms. Bertinelli’s “One Day at a Time” co-star) from her past. And Victoria (Wendie Malick) struggles to keep up with her younger boyfriend.10 P.M. (Starz) MASTER AND COMMANDER: THE FAR SIDE OF THE WORLD (2003) In Peter Weir’s adaptation of novels by Patrick O’Brian, Russell Crowe stars as Jack Aubrey, commander of a British frigate whose crew members must battle a faster, larger French vessel off the South American coast during the Napoleonic wars. Paul Bettany is the ship’s surgeon and the sensitive foil to Aubrey’s fierceness. Writing in The Times, A. O. Scott said that the film “hums with humor, passion and life.” He added, “It makes you wish Napoleon were still around, so we — that is, I mean, the British Empire — could beat him all over again.”What’s Streaming NowVALERY GERGIEV AND THE MARIINSKY ORCHESTRA In the first live orchestral webcast from Carnegie Hall, Mr. Gergiev conducts the Mariinsky Orchestra from St. Petersburg in a Russian program of Rodion Shchedrin’s Concerto for Orchestra, “Naughty Limericks”; Tchaikovsky’s Second Piano Concerto, with Denis Matsuev at the keyboard; and Prokofiev’s Fifth Symphony. The concert will stream from Isaac Stern Auditorium at 8 p.m. on Wednesday. (medici.tv) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement