AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Siobhan BurkeWhen his troupe turned 30 last year, David Parsons established GenerationNOW, a fellowship for up-and-coming choreographers. On Thursday at the Joyce Theater, Parsons Dance unveiled the first result of that admirable initiative, a world premiere by the former company member Natalie Lomonte, alongside new and old works by Mr. Parsons, Trey McIntyre and another Parsons alumnus, Robert Battle. That multiplicity of voices is a good idea. And yet, much like the dancers in the ensemble, these choreographers are not all that different. Mr. Parsons favors a conventional look, build and attitude among his company members — sturdy, athletic, industrious, enthusiastic — and the work he presents can be similarly anodyne, despite, or perhaps because of, its relentlessly high energy. This is a “dance your heart out” (at all times, no excuses) kind of enterprise, where nuance tends to get lost behind kicks, splits and turns.On Thursday’s program, the dancers flung themselves most ardently into Mr. Battle’s “Train” (2008), a New York City premiere. In this dramatic, combative piece, set to a militant chorus of drums (by Pankaj Udhas), a six-person squad alternates between organized behavior — dropping into push-ups, rolling across the ground, springing back up — and wild, writhing eruptions, as if possessed by the thunderous percussion. The most startling of these outbursts is a solo for the spitfire, superstrong Elena D’Amario, who continues to be the company’s most distinctive, eye-catching dancer. She and Sarah Braverman made an agile, mutually supportive pair in the New York City premiere of Mr. McIntyre’s “Hymn” (2007), a brief duet that on alternate nights is also performed by men. Set to a scratchy, ethereal CocoRosie song, “Hymn” is contemplative, compared with most of the Parsons oeuvre. Let’s hope it sticks around.Sometimes Ms. D’Amario comes on too strong, flashing her flirtatious half-smirk to the point of distraction, as she did in Mr. Parsons’s “Bachiana” (1993), which opened the program. This lighthearted piece for four couples, danced to Bach, gently pokes fun at ballet, with the women, at one point, bobbing uncomfortably through something like the Four Swans section from “Swan Lake.” The two newest works, Ms. Lomonte’s “Within” and Mr. Parsons’s “Whirlaway,” came after intermission, separated by Mr. Parsons’s popular strobe-lit solo “Caught” (1982). In “Within,” Ms. Lomonte animates four women and three men to the sultry sounds of Nina Simone, inserting an impassioned solo for Christina Ilisije to “The Other Woman.” The work is refreshing for its asymmetrical configurations (Mr. Parsons, in his own choreography, prefers the opposite), but the movement couldn’t match the power of Simone’s voice. As the dancers shook out their limbs, chests lifted to the sky, their efforts to be moved by the music seemed more dutifully acted than deeply felt.Music proved a more authentically driving force in the colorful, catchy “Whirlaway,” to upbeat tracks by the New Orleans jazz composer Allen Toussaint, including “Yes We Can Can.” This is Parsons Dance at its most characteristically optimistic, zooming across the stage with grand jetés and skittering runs, as if by playing it safe, nothing could ever go wrong. Parsons Dance continues through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-242-0800, joyce.org.Advertisement