By GRAHAM BOWLEYJAN. 27, 2015
The Smithsonian Institution said on Tuesday that it was considering opening a new 40,000-square-foot exhibition space in London in 2021. The move, if it goes ahead, will be the first time in the Smithsonian’s 168-year history that it has opened a permanent exhibition space outside the United States.The gallery would be part of a new cultural quarter planned for the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park in East London, where the 2012 Olympics took place.In an interview, Albert G. Horvath, the Smithsonian’s acting secretary, said that the institution had been working to reach new audiences, and that the London site offered the chance to raise the organization’s profile internationally.He said it was too early to discuss the kind of material the Smithsonian would include in its London programs or what schedules it would follow to ensure that American audiences continued to see its treasures. But he said the proposed British gallery would show some of the Smithsonian’s most important objects.Advertisement“This is going to be about showing the best and the breadth of the Smithsonian,” he said. “We have 130 million-plus objects at the Smithsonian. We have no shortage of things that we can certainly use to tell our story. So I am not concerned that there will be any diminution in the kinds of things we are doing here at our home base because of this.”AdvertisementTo persuade the Smithsonian to take part in the plan, the London authorities have promised to pay the estimated $50 million cost to construct the Smithsonian’s exhibition space and ship Smithsonian exhibits to London. The plan is that the Smithsonian will occupy a gallery in a large new building, yet to be constructed, to be shared with other cultural institutions on a 4.5-acre waterside site close to the Olympic Stadium in a cultural and education district the London authorities call Olympicopolis. The $50 million is being raised from private donors.In addition, the gallery’s annual operating costs — which the Smithsonian estimates at $5 million to $7 million — would be met by private philanthropic funds and special-exhibition admission fees, the Smithsonian said, so the plan would require no extra federal funds.The plan to explore a London satellite was approved by the Smithsonian’s Board of Regents on Monday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Further negotiations must determine issues like the length of the Smithsonian’s lease in London and how the Smithsonian will be presented in the planned building.The regents will be updated in April on the progress of discussions, and the Smithsonian said a decision was likely this year.If the Smithsonian decides to go ahead, it will join other partners who have committed to the new site, inside the same building and nearby.The Victoria and Albert Museum and Sadler’s Wells Theater have said they will open new spaces, and two universities are planning additional campuses. Mark Robinson, a spokesman for the London Legacy Development Corporation, part of the London mayor’s office responsible for developing land used for the games in the east of the capital, said it was in discussion with other American and international institutions but could not say who they were and said its interest was at a very early stage.The London authorities first approached the Smithsonian last spring, Mr. Horvath said, and the subsequent discussions involved trips to London last year by Smithsonian officials, including G. Wayne Clough, secretary at the time, and some Board of Regents members.Mr. Clough left his position at the end of last year, and Mr. Horvath is acting as the institution’s leader until the incoming secretary, David J. Skorton, takes up his position in July.A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Smithsonian Considers Opening London Location.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.