A Czech concertmaster had a 19th-century violin seized by Russian customs officials as he tried to leave Russia late last week. The officials said the violinist, Josef Spacek, who plays with the Czech Philharmonic Orchestra, failed to fill out proper documentation when he entered Yekaterinburg, Russia, where he performed at a music festival last week.The seizure took place at Yekaterinburg’s Koltsovo Airport on Oct. 8, before a flight from Yekaterinburg to Prague. A report posted on the website of the Urals region branch of Russia’s federal customs service said that a black case with a violin and bow, “presumed to be a cultural treasure,” was found among the luggage of a Czech citizen, who was identified only by an initial matching Mr. Spacek’s last name. The customs service report included a photograph of the instrument, which was also shown in a Russian television news report.The website of Mr. Spacek, who studied at the Curtis Institute of Music and the Juilliard School and is a concertmaster of the Czech Philharmonic Orchestra, states that he “plays a violin made in 1855 in the workshop of Jean-Baptiste Vuillaume,” a French violin maker.Oleg Chetenov, a spokesman for the Urals region customs service told the official TASS news agency that while “most likely, this instrument indeed belonged” to the musician, he will have to prove it. Tass also reported that the spokesman said that customs officials were compelled to hold the instrument because “many cases are known in which swindlers brought instruments worth several euros into the country, and already in Russia replaced them with expensive instruments that they took out of the country without impediment.” Mr. Spacek was in Yekaterinburg for the Eurasia International Music Festival. On Oct. 7, he performed there with Italy’s RAI National Symphony Orchestra.Jeroen Tersteeg, a spokesman for Mr. Spacek, said the violinist “took multiple precautions to ensure such a situation would be avoided” and that Mr. Spacek was “staying in Russia until the situation is resolved, and he is fully cooperating with the authorities.” 