AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Mike HaleWhen “Suits” started three and a half years ago, its premise didn’t seem built for the long haul. An entire show built around the idea of a lawyer who has to pretend that he went to Harvard Law School? Something like that worked for Michael J. Fox in “The Secret of My Success,” but for not quite two hours.Here is “Suits,” though, entering the homestretch of its fourth season on USA (new episodes return on Wednesday night), and that premise is more central than ever. Every episode seems to bring the law firm Pearson Specter a new crisis predicated on the need to cover up the false résumé of the brilliant young Mike Ross (Patrick J. Adams), a secret that, in the show’s fantasy of American corporate life, threatens all who share it with prison time, financial ruin and deep personal shame. In Wednesday’s episode, the steely managing partner Jessica Pearson (Gina Torres) tells yet another elaborate lie that’s sure to have bad consequences.Of course, “Suits,” which is an established guilty pleasure among television critics, is actually about a lot of other things, primarily the snappy banter among the ever-circling pool of sharks at Pearson Specter and the schadenfreude of watching them tear one another apart on a weekly basis. Add an undergirding of sentimentality — an unfortunate but customary strategy for keeping us on board with characters who are, objectively, horrible people — and you have a slight but entertaining show, less morbid than “Mad Men” and less emotionally involving than “The Good Wife.” Well, just less than “The Good Wife,” period.USA’s long run as the top nonsports cable channel in prime time has been built on glossy workplace dramedies akin to “Suits” — “Royal Pains,” a medical show that’s really about a family business; “White Collar,” a crime show focusing on the corporate world; “Covert Affairs,” a spy thriller that’s really about office politics inside the C.I.A. What they really have in common is that they’re about charismatic, attractive, mostly white people whose coolness under pressure and ability to play the system equates, in the world of these shows, to moral superiority. It’s surprising (to me, anyway) that the cultural iconography on display in “Suits” isn’t more often commented on. In the show’s central dynamic, a pair of prototypical Anglo frat boys, Mike and the man who hired him, Harvey Specter (Gabriel Macht), are the wisecracking, cool-kid insiders. Their antagonist is Louis Litt (Rick Hoffman), a smart but squirmy and socially awkward outsider who craves their acceptance. He also happens to be plain, dark-haired, barrel-chested and Jewish. You could read this as a smart commentary on the realities of the American workplace, but I’m not sure the show should be given that much credit.Louis may never win, but he gets his revenge in one sense: Mr. Hoffman’s funny, completely convincing and strangely moving performance is by far the best reason to watch the show. (The only other regular cast member who achieves much more than perkiness is Ms. Torres.) Who knows, maybe someday Mr. Hoffman’s name will appear along with Mr. Adams’s and Mr. Macht’s in the list of the show’s producers, which in “Suits” terms would be the real victory.Advertisement