AdvertisementSupported byThe TV WatchBy Alessandra Stanley“The Americans” has a deep and discerning sense of irony, which is probably a prerequisite for a series about Soviet spies posing as suburban parents in Reagan-era America. Season 3 of this espionage drama begins on Wednesday on FX, and it may be the most provocative one yet.Government officials sit around a table in a secure room, grim-faced as they stare at a video. A hostage is kneeling on the ground, hands bound, head bowed, surrounded by Islamic militants who hold a rifle at his head. Their leader speaks to the camera; when his rant is finished, one of the men fires a bullet through the prisoner’s head.It could be State Department analysts studying the latest video by militants from the Islamic State, but instead these are Russian diplomats at the Soviet Embassy in Washington, in late 1982; the Islamic extremists are Afghan rebels; and the hostage is a captured Russian.That kind of thing, and worse, happened to civilians and soldiers during Russia’s long, bloody war in Afghanistan, but this particular scene, and video, seem to have been inspired by the more recent footage of James Foley’s execution by Islamic State militants.The Afghan rebels were the enemy of our enemy back then, but they didn’t stay friendly for long. The United States not so secretly provided weapons, including Stinger missiles, to groups fighting Communist rule. But the country was supporting Islamic extremists who would go on to turn against the United States and provide shelter to the terrorists behind the Sept. 11 attacks. Some of the more extreme militants are now beheading hostages on camera.The United States, like Russia, has waged an unwinnable war in Afghanistan, and that lends some poignancy — or at least plausibility — to the lost cause the show’s heroes risk their lives to defend. “The Americans” uses all the benefits of hindsight to make the Cold War seem immediate and relevant.Philip Jennings (Matthew Rhys) and his wife, Elizabeth (Keri Russell), are still undercover and deep into the espionage business after too many close calls, and they are busier than ever trying to find out who at the C.I.A. is in charge of supplying weapons to the mujahedeen. In their eyes, their friends and colleagues are being slaughtered in Afghanistan with help from the Reagan administration.They believe in their mission, but their marriage, always in flux, is once again strained. The K.G.B. wants to recruit their American-born daughter, the 14-year-old Paige (Holly Taylor), who has no idea that her typical American parents are not really travel agents but undercover Soviet agents whose marriage was arranged by Moscow. Philip is appalled at the idea, but Elizabeth, who is tougher and more doctrinaire at heart, thinks Paige might have a calling. There’s just one problem with that: Paige has joined a Christian youth group and wants to be baptized.Their neighbor, Stan (Noah Emmerich), is an F.B.I. agent with secrets of his own, including an affair with a pretty Soviet Embassy employee, who was caught and sent back to Moscow as a traitor. Stan wants to help win her release, but he also wants to win back his estranged wife, who joined the EST self-empowerment movement and left Stan for a new boyfriend. But Stan is also very busy trying to babysit for a Soviet defector as well as hunt down the Soviet moles who keep escaping capture — he has no idea they live right next door.The tradecraft on “The Americans” is a lot more sophisticated than real-life espionage seems to be nowadays. The show was inspired by the 2010 arrest of a ring of actual Russian sleeper agents, who had lived for years as ordinary Americans, but didn’t do much intelligence work besides keeping up with American newspapers. And unlike the Jenningses, Russians keep getting caught. On Monday, the American government announced criminal charges against three Russians in New York City — a banker, a trade representative and a diplomat — who are accused of conspiring to gather economic intelligence, including information about American sanctions against Russia.The spy work on “The Americans” may stretch credulity — so many disguises, so many assassinations, so many chases, so little paperwork — but the characters always ring true.“The Americans” is an unusually clever, subtle drama that uses the conventions of a Cold War thriller to paint a portrait of a complicated, evolving but not unhappy marriage. It’s not a comedy, but there are hints of black humor behind all the subterfuge. There are no real villains or heroes on this series. Mostly, the misguided lead the misled; action devolves into misadventure; and every season gets more complicated, and is all the better for it.Advertisement