By CHRIS SUELLENTROPJAN. 27, 2015
Play enough video games and soon you’ll start to wonder what it all means. Is there a point?Something fundamental about video games — the way they feel like alternate universes, promising an “extra life” — brings existential questions to the fore. A few well-known games have addressed this digital anxiety, directly or obliquely. BioShock questioned the nature of free will inside video game worlds. Ian Bogost’s Cow Clicker sent up the meaninglessness of the virtual labor in Facebook games like FarmVille. Last year’s iPhone hit Make It Rain did the same for mobile games, satirizing the emptiness of the finger swipe while also exploiting its seductiveness.The Talos Principle, released in December and one of six games nominated this month for the grand prize at the Independent Games Festival awards in March, takes their inquiries a step further.The Talos Principle prompts you to meditate on the meaning of life outside the screen. Here is a game that quotes Milton, Blake, Kant and Chesterton, among others, and expects you to piece together why any of it matters.Like so many video games, The Talos Principle begins with an amnesiac who awakens in a new world and tries to make sense of it. It’s a game of puzzles, not the least of which is uncovering who you are and why a disembodied voice is speaking to you. Yet while much about The Talos Principle is opaque at first, its core concerns — the nature of consciousness, the existence of God — are clear from the outset.AdvertisementThe game’s religious imagery is not applied with a light touch. “Behold, child, you are risen from dust,” a sonorous voice declaims before telling you he is Elohim, your maker. There are references to a temple, a garden, a covenant, the promise of eternal life.AdvertisementElohim is the first name given to God in the Hebrew Bible, but the mysterious voice of The Talos Principle clearly isn’t meant to be That Guy. Uncovering exactly who he is and why he has put you there requires solving a series of puzzles. Elohim has hidden Tetris-shaped sigils behind locks and gates of escalating complexity. Beams of light, and later cubes and fans, must be arranged in intricate geometric webs to reach the sigils, which then must be rotated and assembled into rectangles, which open doors that lead you to evermore brain teasers.As pleasing as these challenges are, The Talos Principle is as much a game about reading as it is a game about puzzling through logic exercises. A series of computer terminals are placed throughout Elohim’s world. By using them, the player can read found texts — whether poetry, philosophical digressions or Internet chat logs. Unlike the insipid text that most video games ask players to plow through, these readings are routinely engaging, clever and thought-provoking.Even more rewarding are a player’s encounters with the Milton Library Assistant, the game’s rough equivalent to Eden’s serpent. Elohim forbids the player from climbing a tower that contains knowledge of the world beyond. The assistant inside the terminals urges the player to ascend anyway. Like Lucifer in “Paradise Lost,” the Milton Library Assistant is a more fascinating creature than the remote and inscrutable Elohim.As the player character types on the game’s virtual keyboards, his (her? its?) fingers reveal themselves to be robotic, and the assistant begins a series of questionnaires that ask the player to prove that he or she is a conscious being. The game partly functions as a reverse Turing test — a computer asking a human to prove its capacity to think, rather than the other way around.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Talos Principle’s heritage can be traced in part to the science fiction of “2001: A Space Odyssey,” “Blade Runner” and the writings of Philip K. Dick (cited as an influence by one of the game’s two writers). Like those works, this game is deeply interested in the nature of artificial intelligence and the potential of machines to reason. (In Greek mythology, Talos was a giant made of bronze.)To say much more would spoil a game that rewards close attention and whose deepest pleasures lie in slowly unraveling its mysteries. I spent 35 hours with The Talos Principle, and while I achieved an ending to the game that made the credits roll, there are still puzzles to complete and stories to discover. As the puzzles, and the mystery behind them, grow more layered and more complex, the game acquires momentum rather than becoming needlessly bloated.A life lived inside video games can feel unexamined or even wasted. With The Talos Principle, the unlikely designers at Croteam — a Croatian developer best known for Serious Sam, a shooting game about an alien invasion — have created one of the most literate and thoughtful games I’ve encountered.Will playing it give your life meaning? Maybe not.  It surely won’t answer the questions the game poses about whether there is another world beyond this one. But there are few better ways to pass the hours while we wait to find out. The Talos Principle, developed by Croteam for Windows, Mac and Linux PCs, is not rated by the Entertainment Software Rating Board. It has Gregorian chants, organ music and Jeff Goldblum jokes, but other than a few exploding robots, it has no sex or violence.A version of this review appears in print on January 28, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Enticing All to See the Bigger Picture.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.