By MATT WOLFJAN. 27, 2015
LONDON — A weighty topic should be no excuse for indifferent writing. Indeed, it could be argued that the gravity of some scenarios, whether rooted in historical fact or otherwise, requires playwrights to go the extra distance so that their chosen subject matter is not doing the heavy lifting for them.All the more reason, then, to cast a quizzical eye on “Taken at Midnight,” the debut play from the television writer Mark Hayhurst that opened Monday at the Theater Royal, Haymarket, after eliciting strong reviews at its Chichester Festival premiere south of London last fall. Running through March 14, the play tells the fascinating if grievous account of the German lawyer, Hans Litten (played here by Martin Hutson), who put an ascendant Adolf Hitler on trial in 1931 only to pay in due course for his actions in Dachau, where Litten died in 1938 at the age of 34.The story is a sorrowful one, and Robert Jones’s stark, angled set — lit with shadowy, shivery verve by Tim Mitchell — suggests from the start that we are in for a grim time. Mike Walker’s brooding sound design combines with the agitated strings of Matthew Scott’s music to create the kind of edgy environment in which distrust is rife and where a smile can soon give way to overriding contempt and hate. That is the character arc traced by Dr. Conrad (John Light), the Gestapo official who plays down the severity of Litten’s fate even as he knows the atrocities that await; Mr. Light is suavely chilling in the part.Much sensitivity and skill have been brought to bear on Jonathan Church’s production, all of which makes one wish that the play itself were less pro forma than it is. Time and again, there is the sense that the actual events must have been infinitely more disturbing, and the gathering portentousness of the writing has the perverse effect of closing off the experience, instead of enlarging a playgoer’s empathic response.AdvertisementThe play in essence is an illustrated lecture from Litten’s formidable mother, Irmgard (Penelope Wilton, most widely known these days as Isobel Crawley in “Downton Abbey”), who strides purposefully in and out of view to narrate events that are then played out before us — the bulk of them involving the incarceration and multiple humiliations of her son. The cut-and-thrust between Irmgard and Dr. Conrad is also returned to throughout.AdvertisementThis strategy allows the necessary information to be imparted — about, say, the Night of the Long Knives in 1934 — but can also seem pretty clumsy. No sooner does Dr. Conrad refer to being “with friends” before Irmgard Litten turns to report to us, “he’d been with friends, he said.” The self-seriousness casts a faintly ponderous pall over the whole, as well, with vague glances in the direction of gallows humor prompting uneasy laughs from the audience. Ms. Wilton brings to her role the requisite stoicism and forbearance that allow Irmgard to remain self-possessed even when inwardly “screaming,” but the play itself could use more primal fury. You are left pondering the prevailing self-importance when you ought to be screaming inside, too.As this week marks the 70th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, the legacy of the Holocaust drives a second, altogether different recent London opening — the American writer Joshua Harmon’s “Bad Jews,” which has transferred to the St. James Theater for a limited run through Feb. 28, following its British premiere last August at the Theater Royal in Bath.Having first caught Mr. Harmon’s play during its Off Broadway engagement in 2012, in a separate production for the Roundabout Theater Company, I remain taken by the caustic vibrancy of the writing, however much a second viewing throws various improbabilities in the plot into bolder relief. The setting is the Manhattan apartment of Jonah (Joe Coen), a withdrawn young Jew who has come together with his brother and cousin after the funeral of their fondly remembered “poppy,” or grandfather, who was a Holocaust survivor.Death can amplify the tension within families, and here the battle lines are drawn over who will take ownership of the “chai,” the medallion that played a highly emotive part in helping this beloved man through the war. Jonah’s older brother, Liam (Ilan Goodman, excellent), claims the symbol-laden object as his, wanting to use it to propose to his (non-Jewish) girlfriend, Melody (Gina Bramhill, whose entire demeanor suggests a younger Kristin Chenoweth).None of that — a shiksa girlfriend included — sits well with the brothers’ cousin, Daphna (Jenna Augen, the lone American in the cast), a frizzy-haired termagant who insists that “poppy” would have wanted the item bequeathed to her. A prickly customer who perceives slights in even the most innocuous of comments, Daphna is not going to sit quietly as this heirloom is passed outside the faith. Her point of view only ramps up Liam’s animosity toward his “super-Jew” scold of a relation. Jonah attempts some semblance of neutrality, his passivity mistaken as a gesture of allegiance by both Liam and Daphna, in turn.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Daphna here, as in New York, is the dominant part, and the role as written seems to have got the better of Mr. Harmon, who might have reined in the character just a touch so as to fine-tune the dynamics among his quartet. (If you turn off to Daphna from the start, then the play is all but over.)It seems a shame, for instance, that Melody is conceived as such a soft target; surely it would have made for a more real showdown if Liam were marrying someone of proper substance and weight and not this ever-smiling blonde, no matter how charmingly Ms. Bramhill attempts to hold her corner. The moment when this would-be singer warbles a dubious rendition of “Summertime” seems as unlikely as Daphna wanting to know who Porgy and Bess are.The play, and Michael Longhurst’s adroit staging of it, occupies stronger terrain when Daphna and Liam lock ideological horns. She is as defined by her faith as her cousin is keen to assimilate — for example, he goes by Liam and not the Hebrew name, Shlomo, that he loathes.AdvertisementAnd to Mr. Harmon’s credit, Daphna is revealed to have crucial chinks in her armor: the denouement arrives via a sequence of “oh, my God” moments (the phrase belongs here to the characters, not to me) that lay bare the fantasist beneath the firebrand.One could quibble about several plot contrivances, and the monosyllabic Jonah is handed an 11th-hour revelation that feels like too much too late, but to watch the superb Ms. Augen in full take-no-prisoners flow is to be sucked into the vortex of that rare stage creature who compels and repels in equal measure. Look away, and you find you cannot.Taken at Midnight.  Directed by Jonathan Church. Theater Royal Haymarket. Through March 14.Bad Jews. Directed by Michael Longhurst. St. James Theater. Through Feb. 28. A version of this review appears in print on January 28, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.