By MIKE HALESEPT. 30, 2015
As a producer and writer, Denis Leary is steadily building a library of shows about 21st-century manhood, and they don’t present a pretty picture.Whether it’s firefighters (“Rescue Me”), paramedics (“Sirens”), rock musicians (“Sex&Drugs&Rock&Roll”) or amateur hockey players (the new “Benders”), he’s interested in degenerate, inadequate bands of brothers. Male friendship, in these series, is a matter of laughing not through pain but through constant, acute embarrassment.“Benders,” which begins on Thursday on IFC, was created by the longtime Leary collaborators Jim Serpico and Tom Sellitti; Mr. Leary takes an executive producer credit. It’s more casual and less sitcommish than earlier Leary shows, and the characters appear to be younger — less of the humor comes out of middle-aged defensiveness.But the other sources of comedy are familiar. The premiere opens with Paul (Andrew Schulz), the one husband among the show’s four hockey-playing buddies, in bed with his sarcastic wife (Lindsey Broad) and builds to a no-sex-in-marriage gag that recalls the opening minutes of HBO’s “Togetherness.” One episode, built around Paul’s reluctant effort to carry out an uncle’s dying wish, has a “Louie” feel to it, while another, about the group’s mutual infatuation with a new female goalie, smacks of “Curb Your Enthusiasm.”There’s nothing in the early episodes of “Benders” that’s as explosively funny as any random 10 minutes of “Louie” or “Curb.” But it can impart a sort of calming buzz — if you lower your expectations for laughs in the same way that the show diminishes expectations that its characters will achieve any kind of triumph. Rounding out the feckless foursome are a handsome doofus (Ruy Iskandar), an ex-jock (Chris Distefano) and a Wall Street jerk (Mark Gessner). Ms. Broad, apparently the only prominent female member of the cast, is also the most consistently funny.One thing “Benders” has that you don’t see much on TV anymore — even on the sports channels — is hockey, and it’s diverting to watch the highly unskilled game action. The friends aspire to move from their eighth-level league to seventh level, and they momentarily do so by joining a Christian team (even though Paul is Jewish).For a while, they follow the squad’s rules against checking and fighting, but when they finally break down and climb over the boards, the Christian captain (named Christian, and played by Dan Amboyer) yells after them: “Guys, no, no! Mark 12:31!” It’s probably the first laugh line combining hockey and Jesus since “Slap Shot,” which has to be worth something.A version of this review appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Hip Checks and Humiliation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.