The Unsound Festival, a Polish electronic music festival, has relocated shows after being accused of promoting Satanism. Organizers said that multiple churches in Krakow, including St. Catherine’s Church, had withdrawn from hosting concerts for the weeklong festival, which started on Sunday.“These accusations, initially made in a letter to St. Catherine’s Church, are completely unfounded, unreasonable, and slanderous,” the festival’s organizers said in a statement. “They undermine the good name of the festival, which since 2003 has been an enthusiastic participant in Krakow’s cultural life.”In addition to the letter, organizers said that a post on the right-wing blog Salon24 had also claimed that the festival had satanic ties. (The post has since been taken down.)The controversy revolves around Current 93, a British postindustrial rock band that deals in themes of death and Christianity.  (In 1999, Ben Ratliff wrote in The Times that the band “fulfills a deep need among fans, who crave the mordant comfort of fantasizing that the world is one great barren moor.”) The band had been scheduled to play at St. Catherine’s Church on Oct. 16, but the festival is now searching for a new, nonreligious venue. Malgorzata Plysa, the festival’s executive director, said in a telephone interview that she harbored no ill will toward the church because of the potential security risks. “We have our audience and our artists; it’s our priority to have the concert taking place in a secure environment,” she said.Current 93’s band leader, David Tibet, responded to the cancellations in a statement, saying, “My work may sometimes be unorthodox and misunderstood by those holding different views to my own, but I have stated on many, many occasions that I am Christian.”Additional surprise sets from John Tilbury, Raphael Roginski and Rrose also had to be relocated after the Church of St. Peter and St. Paul pulled out. The Unsound Festival started in 2003 and had its fourth iteration in New York last year. The scheduled performers this year include Andy Stott, Liturgy and Holly Herndon. 