By KATHRYN SHATTUCKJAN. 29, 2015
9 P.M. (HBO2) THE COUNSELOR (2013) In this thriller directed by Ridley Scott from a screenplay by Cormac McCarthy, Michael Fassbender portrays the title character — a corrupt, high-flying Texas lawyer who gets in over his head in a drug deal with Reiner (Javier Bardem), a nightclub owner involved with a Mexican cartel promising an astronomical return. Brad Pitt is the Counselor’s wary business associate, Cameron Diaz is Reiner’s predatory girlfriend, and Penélope Cruz is the woman the Counselor intends to marry. “From all the ellipses, as well as the eccentric, mesmerizing poetry of his dialogue, Mr. McCarthy appears to have never read a screenwriting manual in his life. (That’s a compliment; this is his first produced film script.),” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times.8 P.M. (CBS) THE BIG BANG THEORY Sheldon (Jim Parsons) asks his friends to make him miserable after determining that his cushy living arrangements are prohibiting his scientific progress. On “Mom,” at 8:30, Christy (Anna Faris) picks up after Bonnie (Allison Janney) when she acts out in the wake of Alvin’s death. On “Two and a Half Men,” at 9, Walden (Ashton Kutcher) worries that the adoption of Louis (Edan Alexander) will be jeopardized after Alan (Jon Cryer) breaks up with their social worker (Maggie Lawson) to reunite with Lyndsey (Courtney Thorne-Smith). And on “The McCarthys,” at 9:30, Ronny (Tyler Ritter) starts dating a referee (Zach Cregger) with a history of infuriating Arthur (Jack McGee).8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY Meredith (Ellen Pompeo) distracts herself at the hospital, while Derek (Patrick Dempsey) prepares for his move to Washington. In “Scandal,” at 9, we learn what happened to Olivia (Kerry Washington) — this time, from her perspective. And in “How to Get Away With Murder,” at 10, the students are called in the day after Sam’s murder to help Annalise (Viola Davis) find her missing husband.9 P.M. (Fox) BACKSTROM An arson case is elevated to attempted murder when a family is involved. But after evidence goes missing from the crime scene, Backstrom (Rainn Wilson) determines that the most likely culprit is the person the police least suspect.Advertisement10 P.M. (NBC) PARENTHOOD The Braverman family deals with the circle of life — the wedding of Sarah (Lauren Graham), the faltering health of Zeek (Craig T. Nelson), the early days of his namesake — as the series draws to a close. Bring hankies.Advertisement10 P.M. (IFC) PORTLANDIA The eco-terrorists travel to San Diego — it’s warmer than Antarctica and has better fish tacos and tanning possibilities — to go after their next target: SeaWorld. Olivia Wilde, Jeff Goldblum and Natasha Lyonne guest star.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (Sundance) BABYLON Liz (Brit Marling) faces scrutiny over her relationship with Miller (James Nesbitt), while Finn (Bertie Carvel) positions himself to become the acting commissioner. The armed-response team, meanwhile, rushes to a nightclub — and into disaster — amid reports of an altercation involving a gun.10:30 P.M. (Food Network) DUFF TILL DAWN Duff Goldman’s Baltimore bakery becomes an after-hours battleground for cake decorators, who face off in challenges testing technique and artistry in this new competition series. The creators of the most over-to-top confections win bragging rights and a golden whisk.What’s Streaming NowLINDSEY VONN: THE CLIMB Red Bull TV uses crash footage and family interviews to chronicle 22 months in the life and career of Ms. Vonn, the Olympic downhill champion, as she recovers from two devastating injuries to return to the top of her sport. (redbull.tv)THE WHITE QUEEN Amazon Prime Instant Video has become the exclusive streaming home of this Starz series, set in 1464 and adapted from “The Cousins’ War,” Philippa Gregory’s best-selling series of novels centered on the Wars of the Roses, about three women who laid claims to the English throne: Elizabeth Woodville, known as the White Queen (played by Rebecca Ferguson); Margaret Beaufort, the Red Queen (Amanda Hale); and Anne Neville, the Kingmaker’s Daughter (Faye Marsay). Max Irons portrays Edward IV, of the House of York, who is crowned king with the help of his mentor and adviser, Lord Warwick (James Frain), called the Kingmaker. (amazon.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page C8 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Thursday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.