AdvertisementSupported byTelevision ReviewBy Mike Hale“Fortitude,” an ambitious 12-episode murder mystery beginning on Thursday night, takes place in two unusual locales. One is its slightly fantastical far-far-north setting, a fictional Arctic island — based on the Norwegian archipelago of Svalbard — where a small international community is outnumbered by polar bears; crime is thought to be nonexistent; and anyone near death is exiled to the mainland, because bodies can’t be buried in the permafrost. The other is the obscure cable channel Pivot, which will provide “Fortitude” to its relatively small audience of 47 million households at the same time that the show makes its premiere in Britain. Pivot is a minority partner in the production with the British network Sky, which put up a substantial amount of money to shoot on Icelandic locations and to hire a cast that includes Stanley Tucci, Michael Gambon, Christopher Eccleston and Sofie Grabol, the Danish actress who is a favorite in Britain for her starring role in the original iteration of “The Killing.” The exotic setting — we’re a lot farther north than Fargo — has the obvious benefit of gorgeous backdrops, and the cinematographers take full advantage of mountains, glaciers and sea. It also telegraphs darkness, claustrophobia and the titillating weirdness bred by isolation (“Fargo” again), and offers the show’s creator and main writer, Simon Donald, some ready-made metaphors. The polar bears, we’re told, are beginning to eat one another — “the last resort for any species” — and the things kept intact by the freezing weather, like a mammoth carcass that plays a key role, mirror the dizzying array of secrets held by the island’s residents.Unfortunately, the story concocted by Mr. Donald (writer of the British television movie “Low Winter Sun,” on which the American series was based) doesn’t live up to its surroundings. It can’t be described in much detail, because the overly complicated plot is a minefield of spoilers. There is a grisly murder at first thought to be the work of a bear, and a virtual aurora borealis of suspects. A plan for a new ice hotel may figure in the murder. The local police, the island’s governor (Ms. Grabol) and the outsider brought in to investigate (Mr. Tucci) all have murky motives. Information is withheld from viewers in arbitrary and irritating ways simply to goose the suspense. Through five episodes, the investigation seems barely to have begun.Humor, clever dialogue and interesting characters could make up for this, but Mr. Donald appears to have been so busy building his puzzle box of a story and laying on the thematic connections to the Arctic ambience that he didn’t have time for much else. Mr. Tucci, with his panache and meticulous wit, livens things up when he arrives near the end of the two-hour premiere, and Mr. Gambon (as a terminally ill expert on bears) and Ms. Grabol are fine, but their characters are ciphers. It doesn’t help that some of the British actors display a variety of what sound, to American ears, like atrocious Scandinavian accents.The setting and the presence of Ms. Grabol make comparisons to the Nordic noir television genre inevitable. But the hallmarks of Scandinavian shows like “The Killing” and “The Bridge” don’t really have to do with weather, landscape and the cast of light. They have to do with rigorous logic, understated humor and good faith — characters who act like rational human beings and stories that don’t insult our common sense. “Fortitude” is great to look at and will eventually provide the basic pleasure of a convoluted mystery solved, but it’s a distinctly chilly piece of storytelling.FortitudePivot, Thursday nights at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Produced by Pivot and Sky Atlantic. Created by Simon Donald; Mr. Donald, Jeff Skoll, Holly Hines, Patrick Spence, Frith Tiplady, Anne Mensah and Cameron Roach, executive producers.WITH: Stanley Tucci (D.C.I. Eugene Morton), Richard Dormer (Sheriff Dan Anderssen), Sofie Grabol (Hildur Odegard), Christopher Eccleston (Prof. Charlie Stoddart), Michael Gambon (Henry Tyson), Luke Treadaway (Vincent Rattrey), Verónica Echegui (Elena Ledesma), Sienna Guillory (Natalie Yelburton), Johnny Harris (Ronnie Morgan), Nicholas Pinnock (Frank Sutter) and Jessica Raine (Jules Sutter).Advertisement