AdvertisementSupported byOn ComedyBy Jason ZinomanThe choreography of stand-up comedy is usually pretty simple: Walk onstage, grab the microphone and tell a joke. Lean forward, look one way and tell another. There are variations, of course, but only once in a while comes a comic like Sebastian Maniscalco, who treats the stage like a dance floor. At Gotham Comedy Club last month, he strutted toward the crowd, his rubbery body in constant motion, hopping on one leg, swiveling his hips and swinging his arms and legs in opposite directions, perfectly in sync. He makes a simple pantomime like grabbing a piece of bread look like a violent assault, and for a gag about Chipotle employees making a burrito, he jitters sideways like MC Hammer doing the Chinese Typewriter. Mr. Maniscalco, whose new Showtime special is “Aren’t You Embarrassed?,” would be funny even if you couldn’t hear what he was saying. In fact, he might be funnier that way. While his thin jokes hinge on exasperated observations about minor irritations — loud guys, his Sicilian dad’s frugality, the word “selfie” — they are giddily animated by a flamboyant, even graceful physicality. With form-fitting clothes and spiky hair, he favors a default pose that’s ridiculously amped-up Italian machismo, like a guy desperately trying to be as cool as John Travolta in “Saturday Night Fever.” What distinguishes his crowd-pleasing approach is his full-bodied commitment to the act-out: stand-up jargon describing a comic’s shift from narrating a joke to acting it. Dramatizing a conversation, for instance, or impersonating an animal, vegetable or anatomical part are examples of act-outs. Most working stand-ups use act-outs to expand and embroider a joke. But a few make them the centerpiece. Robin Williams, whose punch lines were often hyperactive, motor-mouth act-outs, is probably the most famous example. In his classic specials in the 1980s, Eddie Murphy leaned almost as hard on them, doing jokes that came off like elaborate, hilarious and carefully devised sketches in which he played all the parts. In today’s booming and diverse comedy scene, act-outs appear increasingly in vogue, partly because stand-up is filling more and more theaters, arenas and other big rooms these days. Act-outs can beef up the scale of a joke and make punch lines broader and more emphatic. They make behavior, rather than analysis, the focus; by comparison, the Seinfeldian observational style doesn’t use many act-outs. And the device can be essential to comedic storytelling, while blurring the lines between stand-up and one-person show. Good act-outs can be subtle and flesh out another side of a joke, taking the audience beyond the point of view of the comic. Maria Bamford, who does act-outs as well as anyone right now, seamlessly integrates characters into her jokes in a way that makes her humor more complex and intimate. Among younger comics, Rachel Feinstein, who’s based in New York, does similarly impressive character work. Her persona has the slightly cynical, moderately raunchy perspective that is quite common in clubs these days. In an observational act that addresses topics like dating, family and social mores, she flashes a strategic smile, and times her punch lines with meticulous calibration. She’s the kind of even-keeled pro who delivers the same level of energy to a sparsely attended late show in an East Village basement as she does to a packed house at the Comedy Cellar. While Ms. Feinstein has an ear for offbeat words, and her jokes are well-made, the spark of her act comes when, mid-joke, she shifts into one of her splendidly realized and quirky characters. In a joke about some idiot hitting on her by telling her what Las Vegas is really about, she responds in the voice of a naïve ingénue from the golden age of Hollywood. She sounds a little like Judy Garland in “The Wizard of Oz,” but more frazzled and tense. She’s a superb mimic, but what makes her act-outs better than most is that they are never quite on the nose. They are caricatures with a delightful eccentricity all their own. A bit about catcalling evokes an assembly line of New York ethnic types without ever sounding exactly like one you’ve heard before. Ms. Feinstein, who is developing her own Comedy Central show with sketches and woman-on-the-street comedy, does a nice portrait of her mom, a well-meaning but slightly clueless liberal who describes her daughter’s stand-up as “a talent show.” Ms. Feinstein affectionately pokes fun with enough specificity to make you feel as if her mother were part of her act. (Ms. Bamford’s impression of her mother is also a richly funny creation.) Instead of the standard whine of a Jewish mother joke, the impression has the nuance of someone who has paid close attention. Ms. Feinstein’s act-outs are generally more vocal than physical. She does a joke about how her dad stretches in public that would probably get a bigger laugh with more elaborate physical comedy. But it would be the kind of goofy laugh that isn’t part of her aesthetic. Like an Al Hirschfeld illustration, Ms. Feinstein’s characters are stylish quick sketches with elegant flourishes. Mr. Maniscalco is more a shameless ham, happy to indulge in silly and exaggerated gestures. When miming picking a tomato off a tree or thrusting his hips while just hanging out at a bar, he makes Jim Carrey look restrained. It’s easy to sneer at this clowning as reaching for cheap laughs, and his high-energy style is surely not as cool in the current scene as soul-baring material or absurdist one-liners. But finding and executing the funniest gesture in a joke is as much an art as timing the perfect punch line. Mr. Maniscalco’s act-outs are broad and over the top, but they are also refined, turning goofiness into its own kind of panache. His loose-limbed mimes overshadow the material but they also make his act more interesting, since the incongruity between Mr. Maniscalco’s cranky cool dude pose and his doofus physicality may be his best joke. Advertisement