AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Jon ParelesA big voice and a loving heart versus a thoughtless, deceitful boyfriend. There should be no question about which deserves to prevail. But without the struggle, countless pop songs would never exist. Seinabo Sey (pronounced SAY-na-bo See) joins the fray with the sadder-but-stronger songs she brought to Le Poisson Rouge on Tuesday night. “Hard time forgiving/Even harder forgetting,” she warned in “Hard Time,” the most adamant of the martial soul-pop songs that filled her half-hour set. Many of them, she said, were about a guy she described between songs with a crude anatomical epithet. She offered a prequel, though, called “Poetic,” a vow to do anything — “I lose my breath for you and I don’t want it back” — because she was so in love. “I actually hate singing this song because I kind of hate that I was this pathetic — but it’s true,” she said with a nervous giggle. “I still like him though.” Most of her set came from her debut EP, “For Madeleine” (Neon Gold), which was released in October; it’s named after her mother, who is Swedish. Ms. Sey was born in Sweden. Her father, Maudo Sey, is a musician, and she spent some early years in his country, Gambia in West Africa, before returning to Sweden and studying music. There’s a hint of West Africa in the way her voice hops from its husky, assertive contralto to the occasional high flourish. But her more obvious grounding is in the soul and R&B that have gospel underpinnings. More than one song opened with sustained, hymnlike keyboard chords as she unfurled her voice, treating a verse like a spiritual. She brought a lean backup band — keyboards, bass, drums — augmented with some recorded backup vocals, but she didn’t need any electronic help. Ms. Sey emerged in 2013 with songs produced by Magnus Lidehall, who has also worked with Katy Perry and Maipei. Their collaborations are stately, exalting her voice, moving from barely adorned declamation to the brawny solidarity of a march beat, with flickers of other styles. There’s no escaping the shadow of Adele and her gutsy recriminations in some of Ms. Sey’s songs; “We could have had it all,” she sings in “Pistols at Dawn,” echoing Adele’s “Rolling in the Deep.” But Ms. Sey is just getting started, and where Adele tends to stay personal, Ms. Sey pushes toward the philosophical and metaphorical. “Younger,” a song about ambition and impatience, counsels, “There is a light to all this darkness if only we/fight against them telling us how we should be.” The power and determination in her voice and lyrics promise that Ms. Sey will find a more individual path — and as she said, apologizing for the short set, “I have to finish my album!”Advertisement