AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Vivien Schweitzer“Scarlatti,” announced the French pianist Alexandre Tharaud before his second encore at Zankel Hall on Tuesday night, emphatically pronouncing the name of a composer he has championed live and on disc. He offered Scarlatti’s Sonata in D Minor (K. 141), decisively rendering the percussive effects and guitarlike inflections in a rendition notable for its articulation and wild exuberance. His limpid touch and understated playing in the Bach/Siloti Prelude in B minor, his first encore, also proved entrancing. Mr. Tharaud, an idiosyncratic pianist, has made a name for himself with his richly hued interpretations of Baroque music, as well as several well-received Chopin discs. His Mozart (on this occasion) proved less assured: He opened the program with a sometimes fussy performance of Mozart’s Piano Sonata in A (K. 331), which lacked the control and finesse he demonstrated in other repertory in the concert. His performance of Schubert’s 16 German Dances (D. 783), which came after intermission, was more solid; Mr. Tharaud amply illustrated the lyrical charm and character of these miniatures. He imbued the opening of Beethoven’s Sonata No. 31 (Op. 110) with a poetic introspection, although the performance as a whole seemed jumbled, rife with idiosyncratic touches that, while distinctive, did little to render the overall performance cohesive. Mr. Tharaud sounded most comfortable (and convincing) during his joyous traversal of selections from Couperin’s “Pièces de Clavecin,” vivacious character pieces he has made a cornerstone of his repertory in recent years. He makes full use of the modern piano while playing these works, originally written for harpsichord, bringing a warm touch, wide dynamic range and singing tone to his colorful interpretations. His phrasing and singing lines were lovely in the aria-like “Les Rozeaux”; he imbued “Les Ombres Errantes” with a delicate intimacy, and “Les Calotines” unfolded with wit and vigor. Over all, his soulful, imaginative approach rendered the Couperin set a delight. Advertisement