AdvertisementSupported byTelevision ReviewBy Neil GenzlingerPerhaps you choked down all three seasons of “The Newsroom,” the fictional HBO series that wrapped up last month, and have been feeling as if you need some kind of antidote. Something to counteract all the earnestness, all the impossibly sharp newsroom dialogue about earthshaking issues. Five minutes of “Breaking Greenville” should do the trick.This preposterous new series on TruTV, which begins Thursday night, also looks at the television news business but it’s a reality show, as droll and frivolous as “The Newsroom” was serious. It follows two competing local news stations in one of the country’s smallest markets, Greenville, Miss. And it completes a circle. We’ve had mockumentaries that look almost exactly like the shows or movies they’re parodying, and now we have a reality show that looks almost exactly like a mockumentary.The stations, WABG and WXVT, are in a constant ratings war, with WABG alarmed in the premiere because the underdog WXVT is threatening to take over the top spot. The dueling morning news shows receive the focus, the WABG anchor Lucy Biggers versus WXVT’s Callie Carroll. Those two, though, are surrounded by an odd, rather endearing collection of co-workers: a no-nonsense news director who compares herself with Oprah Winfrey; a producer who really wants to direct; a meteorologist with a comic touch.It seems unlikely that government leaks or geopolitics are going to preoccupy these crews as they did the fake “Newsroom” journalists. In the premiere, a big issue is whether Ms. Biggers should have high-fived a farmer she was interviewing. If sometimes everyone tries too hard to be a character, that’s part of the appeal. How real is what we’re seeing? In a mock mockumentary, you never know. Breaking GreenvilleTruTV, Thursday nights at 10:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 9:30, Central time.Produced by Electus. Ben Silverman, Adam Paul, Chris Grant, Corie Henson and Jessica Sebastian, executive producers.Advertisement