AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperCarnegie Hall will celebrate its 125th anniversary next season not only with its customary assortment of the world’s leading orchestras and performers playing long-cherished masterpieces but also by starting a new project to commission some 125 new works over the next five years.“New music has to be part of the future of music,” Clive Gillinson, Carnegie’s executive and artistic director, said in an interview. “Obviously, the heritage is unbelievable — it’s some of the greatest creations of the human race. But it’s still got to be moving forward.”The program will effectively double the number of works that Carnegie commissions each year. Many will be joint commissions with other organizations, but Carnegie officials said Wednesday that they expected to spend more than $1 million on the project. Next season will feature music by composers including Magnus Lindberg, John Adams, Olga Neuwirth, Jonathan Leshnoff and the composing collective Sleeping Giant, the officials announced.Carnegie named the Kronos Quartet its creative chair for the season and said that as part of the new-music project, it would jointly commission 10 new works a year with the group for the next five years.There will be plenty of nods to tradition as well. Simon Rattle will lead the Berlin Philharmonic in a complete cycle of Beethoven’s nine symphonies in five concerts on consecutive days. The pianist Yefim Bronfman will present a complete Prokofiev sonata cycle over the course of the season. The English Concert will continue its popular series of Handel operas and oratorios with a performance of “Orlando” starring the countertenor Iestyn Davies. In November, Evgeny Kissin, one of three featured artists at Carnegie next season along with Mr. Rattle and the singer-songwriter Rosanne Cash, will become the first pianist to repeat a solo recital there since Vladimir Horowitz in the 1970s, Mr. Gillinson said.And Carnegie will continue to expand its ambitious educational offerings with what it is calling the Somewhere Project, described as a citywide exploration of “West Side Story” in the spring of 2016 involving students in all five boroughs and featuring a big production of the musical in March at the Knockdown Center, a restored factory in Queens, conducted by Marin Alsop and directed by Amanda Dehnert. The hall will welcome back a pair of American orchestras that have been tested in recent years by searing labor disputes. Osmo Vanska and the Minnesota Orchestra, whose last Carnegie concerts were canceled during a 16-month lockout, will bring their acclaimed interpretations of Sibelius to New York in March. A month later, the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra, which ended its own divisive lockout earlier this season, will return to Carnegie with its mighty chorus.Carnegie will mark its actual 125th anniversary on May 5, 2016, with a gala featuring artists on its board of trustees: Martina Arroyo, Emanuel Ax, Renée Fleming, Marilyn Horne, Lang Lang, Yo-Yo Ma, Audra McDonald, Jessye Norman and James Taylor.The New York Philharmonic will open Carnegie’s season on Oct. 7 for the first time since it left the hall for its home in Lincoln Center, officials said, led by Alan Gilbert in a concert of Tchaikovsky’s Piano Concerto No. 1 with Mr. Kissin as soloist. Its season will end in May with the Met Orchestra, conducted by James Levine, which will abandon its old practice of playing concerts sprinkled throughout the season and perform in three concerts over eight days. Those concerts will feature Mr. Kissin, playing Rachmaninoff’s Piano Concerto No. 2; Ms. Fleming, singing a Richard Strauss program; and the soprano Christine Goerke and the tenor Johan Botha, performing excerpts from Wagner’s “Ring” cycle. Advertisement