AdvertisementSupported byBy The NumbersBy Stephen HeymanHollywood studios spend exorbitant sums of money promoting their Oscar-nominated films to voters of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. But exactly how much is spent, and where all that money goes, is something of an industry secret. This lack of transparency is characteristic of Hollywood in general, says Stephen Follows, a London-based producer who teaches at the National Film and Television School in Britain and blogs frequently about the economics of movies.“I have a friend who’s an astrophysicist and he laughs at me because he studies dark matter and has more data about his subject than I do of mine,” Mr. Follows said. In a recent blog post, Mr. Follows delved into the financing of Oscar campaigns. He obtained the Oscar-related promotional budgets for four films nominated for best picture between 2011 and 2014. The figures came from Hollywood consultants and were given to Mr. Follows on the condition that he keep the films’ titles and studios anonymous. While he notes that this sample is hardly representative, it does offer a glimpse into how a typical Oscar campaign might break down financially.Campaigns for the four films ranged in total cost between $5.3 million and $8.3 million. In all cases, the largest category was advertising — the studios spent on average $3.5 million placing ads targeting Academy voters in trade publications and union magazines. An average of $850,000 per film was spent sending DVD screeners to Academy voters (the screeners are typically individually watermarked, which discourages piracy but makes them much more expensive to produce than a regular DVD, Mr. Follows said). An additional $1 to $2 million goes to other costs — from publicist fees, to hosting screenings, to sending nominated actors and directors to award-season events.Estimates on the total amount of money that Hollywood spends each year promoting its nominated films to academy voters have ranged from $100 million to $500 million. Certain winning films, which at first seemed like underdogs for best picture — such as “Shakespeare in Love” (1998) and “The Hurt Locker” (2008) — were reported later to have benefited from multimillion-dollar Oscar campaigns that rivaled their production budgets.But even if a nominated film wins an Oscar, does all this investment eventually pay off? Only in terms of prestige, Mr. Follows said, because an Oscar gives Hollywood players the clout to secure new projects or demand higher prices. But the actual box office “bounce” from an Oscar win is quite limited. In 2013, the data analyst Edmund Helmer  put the relative box-office value of an Academy Award win at $3 million — often less than half of what a studio spends in its Oscar promotion. A Golden Globe win, by contrast, was worth $14.2 million to a prospective film. That disparity mostly has to do with timing, Mr. Follows said. Oscar films must debut in American cinemas by the end of the year, but the awards ceremony does not take place until late February (this year on Feb. 22). “How many films are on the tip of people’s memories for two months? Very, very few,” he said. “Whereas the Globes are happening soon after those films have to be out. If a film wins a Globe, you can go see it the next day. With the Oscars, when something wins, everyone’s like, ‘Oh yeah, I remember that film from last year.”’ Advertisement