Faces Then; Faces Now
Center for Fine Arts.
Feb. 6-May 17.
These parallel shows explore the changing face of European portraiture since the Renaissance. “Faces Then” assembles around 50 16th-century portraits from across northern Europe by prominent artists like Joos van Cleve and Simon Bening. “Faces Now” ropes other countries into the fold, exploring contemporary Europe through photographs. Artists on view include Alberto García-Alix, a Spanish artist who, since the 1970s, has documented his rock ’n’ roll lifestyle, often training the camera on himself and his friends. 
Medulla
La Monnaie — Salle Malibran.
Feb. 4-8.
The Icelandic singer and songwriter Björk made headlines last week when she released her new album two months early, aiming to pre-empt further online content leaks. This new production brings her 2004 conceptual album “Medulla” (which consists almost entirely of layered voices rather than instrumentation) to the stage. A minifestival, featuring several performances dedicated to Björk, has been organized to coincide with the work. A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Various shows
Tel Aviv Museum of Art.
Ongoing.
Chairs, magazines, toys and video cassettes are suspended from the ceiling of this museum’s airy atrium for “Up in the Air,” an installation by the artist Tom Friedman. The exhibition is one of several shows running here through the spring, including “Arabesque #3,” which features giant wood lattice structures by Mahmood Kaiss based on Islamic designs; a group display showcasing the winners of an art prize issued by Israel’s cultural ministry; and “Production Routes,” which explores how markets shape our built environment. Berlin International Film Festival
Various venues.
Feb. 5-15.
Wim Wenders’s latest 3-D film “Every Thing Will Be Fine” will have its world premiere here, while the director will also receive a lifetime achievement award. New films by directors like Werner Herzog, Isabel Coixet and Terrence Malick will vye for the festival’s top prize, the Golden Bear, while many other screenings and events take place across the city, at venues ranging from the intimate 70-seat Sputnik Kino to the 1,895-seat Friedrichstadt-Palast.Paul/Rigal/Lock
Palais Garnier.
Feb. 3-20.
A new pas de deux choreographed by Benjamin Millepied, who took over as the Paris Opera Ballet’s dance director last fall, was a late addition to this evening of short works. For that piece, titled “Together Alone,” Aurélie Dupont and Hervé Moreau will dance to music by Philip Glass. The other three works will be Nicolas Paul’s “Répliques,” Édouard Lock’s “AndréAuria,” and a new dance, “Salut,” by Pierre Rigal set to a score by the electronic musician Joan Cambon. Perth International Arts Festival
Various venues.
Feb 13-Mar. 7.
Giant puppets will roam through the streets of Perth for a three-day public art performance commemorating the Australian and New Zealand troops who fought in World War I. The rest of the festival includes a high-profile array of performance and visual art. Handspring Puppet Company, which created puppets for the international theater hit “War Horse,” will appear with a piece that explores apartheid in its native South Africa; and the late film director Anthony Minghella’s production of the opera “Madama Butterfly” will also show. The contemporary music lineup includes rising stars like Perfume Genius as well as indie favorites who have hit the mainstream, like Rufus Wainwright and London Grammar.Paintings by Taikan, Shunso, Gyoshu and Other Members of the Japan Art Institute
Okada Museum of Art.
Through March 31.
This new museum — nestled among hot springs and mountains about 80 minutes south of Tokyo — holds a wide collection of art objects and paintings, primarily from Japan. The museum marks its one-year anniversary with a special show dedicated to the “Japan Art Institute,” a training ground for artists formed during the Meiji Restoration, which set out to create a uniquely Japanese painting style for the modern era. Yokoyama Taikan, Hishida Shunso, Hayami Gyoshu and a number of lesser names feature in the show, which focuses largely on colorful landscapes. Paul Gauguin
Fondation Beyeler.
Feb. 8-Jun. 28.
Gauguin’s reputation has taken a number of hits in recent years, tarnished by accusations of paternalistic attitudes toward France’s colonies and personal cruelty (a recent book by two German academics suggested that Gauguin, in fact, cut off van Gogh’s ear). This exhibition largely sets these concerns aside and turns its attention to around 50 of Gauguin’s artworks, including early biblical imagery and his iconic paintings of Tahitian women.Intimate Impressionism from the National Gallery of Art, Washington.
Mitsubishi Ichigokan Museum
Feb. 7-May 24.
Meanwhile, another self-portrait by Gauguin — dedicated to the artist Eugène Carrière and painted in the late 1880s — will appear in Tokyo for an exhibition dedicated to some of the stars of the Impressionist and Post-Impressionist movements. Around 70 artworks from the National Gallery in the United States will appear, including still lifes by Cézanne, dancers by Degas and some of Monet’s languorous depictions of the Seine.