Björk’s new album “Vulnicura,” released two months ahead of schedule last week as an emergency response to a leak, is a record about heartbreak and estrangement, and based in real events. But the string arrangements are astringent and intense, the beats spacious or chopped-up, and her lyrics refuse to default in revenge or self-pity. She’s looking for safety, clarity, and the right way to mourn the end of one family construct and to build another. “Don’t remove my pain,” she sings in “Notget.”  “It is my chance to heal.” The New York Times music critics talk each week about the latest pop music news. Subscribe in iTunes.
Jon Pareles traveled to Reykjavik to interview Björk in her house last November, during a period when she was making the video for “Stonemilker”; he watched the shoot (at low tide on a seawall, filmed with 360-degree cameras), and came along for a series of after-parties, some of them soundtracked by her iPod. They talked about process and structure, the ideas behind the record’s formal pressure points, and her collaborations with Arca and the Haxan Cloak. They also talked about writing lyrics that are unusually personal and specific for an artist who normally goes metaphorical and universal, who likes to “zoom out, to tectonic plates and stars being born,” as Mr. Pareles put it on this week’s Popcast.  “There aren’t a lot of details [on the album], but there are a lot of feelings,” he says. “She told me that usually she sketches out lyrics and then fixes them up, thinks about them, edits them. Here she kept her original impulses…. She didn’t put a cerebral superstructure on it, she just let it out.”Plus: what’s in her house — whalebone balustrade, feather chandelier — and what’s on her iPod, some of which is included in the Spotify playlist below.  (“Vulnicura” itself is not available on Spotify at the time of this writing.)Listen above, download the MP3 or subscribe in iTunes. RELATEDJon Pareles on Björk’s “Vulnicura”And, straight from the reporter’s notebook, here’s some of what’s on Björk’s iPod:Reshma: “Lambi Judaai”Chaka Khan: “I Feel for You”Brandy: “What About Us”Jeremih: “Go to the Mo”Lata Mangeshkar: “Teri Mehfil Mein”LFO: “Love Is the Message” Blawan: “Getting Me Down”Mila J: “Smoke, Drink, Break-Up” (L-Vis 1990 Remake)Yummy Bingham: “Come Get It” (feat. Jadakiss)Objekt: “Agnes Demise”Cassie: “Me and U (Remix)” (feat. Diddy and Yung Joc) Syclops: “Jump Bugs”SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks by artists discussed this week. Spotify users can also find it here.
