By KATHRYN SHATTUCKJAN. 30, 2015
9 P.M. (13); 10 P.M. (49) SHAKESPEARE UNCOVERED Actors and directors tour some of Shakespeare’s greatest works in this series, which begins a second season. Hugh Bonneville, who began his career at the Open Air Theater in Regent’s Park in London understudying Ralph Fiennes as Lysander in “A Midsummer Night’s Dream,” goes to see the play on Midsummer Night at the Globe Theater. There he speaks with the artistic director, Dominic Dromgoole, and the actor David Walliams; looks back at performances by James Cagney and Helen Mirren and settings by the directors Peter Brook and Julie Taymor; and offers some musings of his own. At 10, Christopher Plummer takes on “King Lear,” a role he has played to acclaim under the direction of Jonathan Miller, by delving into the play’s history, pondering how the storm scenes might have been produced at Shakespeare’s own theater and looking at some alternate endings. Ian McKellen and Simon Russell Beale share their insights as well.5 A.M. (NY1) FIT KIDS FEBRUARY The 24-hour news channel gets a jump on a monthlong initiative to help families achieve health and fitness by way of apps, recipes and activities featured on the “News All Morning,” “News All Day” and “News All Evening” programs. A “Fit Kids Challenge” will feature a weekly theme and “tool kit,” complete with expert advice, at twcfitkids.com. Viewers can also submit their own 30-second “Fit Kids Video Tips” for possible use on the shows and online. Local On Demand viewers can take part in a sweepstakes, from Monday through March 2, for prizes including fitness trackers and a $1,000 healthy-grocery shopping spree.9:30 A.M. (HBO) IN VOGUE: THE EDITOR’S EYE (2012) Fenton Bailey and Randy Barbato dissect the work of the many formidable women — among them, Grace Coddington, Polly Allen Mellen and Carlyne Cerf de Dudzeele — who have conjured the fashion images in Vogue magazine across the last several decades. At 10:30 a.m., in “The Devil Wears Prada” (2006), Meryl Streep draws on perhaps the most formidable of them all — Anna Wintour — to portray Miranda Priestly, the tyrannical boss of Andy Sachs (Anne Hathaway), a budding journalist and personal assistant, in this adaptation of Lauren Weisberger’s tissue-veiled portrait of the fashion magazine business.10 P.M. (Comedy Central) KEY & PEELE SUPER BOWL SPECIAL Comedy Central and the N.F.L. team up to present this humorous celebration of all things football, anchored by Keegan-Michael Key and Jordan Peele in a sports-news setting and featuring sketches with professional players. Craig Robinson & the Nasty Delicious provide the halftime entertainment. A three-part companion web series is available for streaming on the Comedy Central and Pepsi YouTube channels.Advertisement10 P.M. (HBO) REAL TIME WITH BILL MAHER Mel Brooks and the documentarian Laura Poitras are the interview guests. Representative Joaquín Castro, Democrat of Texas; and the journalists Katty Kay and Monica Mehta are seated at the round table.10:05 P.M. (Starz Cinema) SHOPGIRL (2005) In this adaptation of a novella by Steve Martin, who also wrote the screenplay, a down-on-his-luck stencil artist (Jason Schwartzman) and an older millionaire (Mr. Martin) compete for the attention of a lonely saleswoman (Claire Danes) in Beverly Hills. “As it relates the delicate, almost anecdotal story of a young woman looking for love in modern Los Angeles, the movie reveals what is missing from most others of its kind: the fact of sex and the possibility of heartbreak, which is to say the very conditions of romance itself,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. " ‘Shopgirl’ is a resolutely small movie, finely made and perhaps a bit fragile. Under the pressure of too much thought, it might buckle and splinter; the characters might look flimsy, their comings and goings too neatly engineered, their lovability assumed rather than proven. And it’s true that none of them are perfect. From where I sit, though, the film they inhabit comes pretty close.”AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowINSPIRED In five new AOL Original short videos, the skier Bode Miller; the journalist Lisa Ling; the “X-Files” creator Chris Carter; the basketball coach Doc Rivers; and Ed Zwick and Marshall Herskovitz, the creators of “thirtysomething,” recount the rock-bottom moments that catapulted them to new heights in their careers. (aol.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page C25 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.