By BRIAN SEIBERTJAN. 29, 2015
Before each performance of “Social Dance 1-8: Index,” the choreographer Moriah Evans personally escorts audience members to seats of her choosing. It’s the action of a hostess, though Ms. Evans isn’t cordial. As a cold abstraction of a social gesture, and as an indication of Ms. Evans’s close control over every part of her work, this is an apt introduction to what follows.The setting, at Issue Project Room in Downtown Brooklyn, is also coldly formal: a ballroom made for an Elks Lodge, with a high, vaulted ceiling and lots of marble. At first, the choreography is precise, minimalist and repetitive. The five dancers work out patterns and permutations, shifting among orientations and speeds, coming and going like changings of the guard.Yet they also hold hands, as in folk dance, and move together in circles and lines. Occasionally, they include a seated viewer in their circle, connecting by hand clasp; the gesture is at once sweet and cultishly creepy. The costumes, by Alan Calpe and Christopher Crawford, are austerely black, yet also sparkling with sequins and fringed for twirling. The minimalist vocabulary admits shimmying shoulders, rippling torsos, rolling hips.These are moves associated with getting down on a different kind of dance floor. At Issue Project Room, accompanied by David Watson’s score of low drones and long violin lines that have been partly erased, the moves are abstracted. The performers maintain eye contact with one another and even smile — Maggie Cloud appears to be having a ball — but much of “Social Dance” can feel like social dance drained of pleasure, of life.That is, until the middle of the work, when a repressed energy seems to break out. To the sound of wolf whistles, Ms. Cloud and Sarah Beth Percival engage in a chase. To the sound of a vibraphone, dancers spin off from the group, turning order and disorder electrically dynamic. A series of duets plays excitingly with the paradoxical ratios of intimacy and proximity in contemporary social dance.In this hot core, all the work’s elements loosen up. Once relaxed, however, the dance loses coherence, and Ms. Evans re-establishes order by reverting to dutiful patterning. There’s a late charge of freedom in a final solo for the captivating Ms. Cloud, a person escaping the system, but it is not quite a climax. Choreography has stifled dancing, which may be Ms. Evans’s point.“Social Dance” continues through Sunday at Issue Project Room, 22 Boerum Place, at Livingston Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-330-0313, issueprojectroom.org. A version of this review appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page C16 of the New York edition with the headline: Abstracted Moves.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.