AdvertisementSupported byBy Joshua BaroneMuseums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and other diseases? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out diseases. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Grolier Club: ‘One Hundred Books Famous in Children’s Literature’ (through Feb. 7) Early editions of children’s literary classics printed from 1600 to 2000 — including “Robinson Crusoe,” “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland” and “Tom Sawyer” — are on display along with more than 50 artifacts. Monday through Saturday from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., 47 East 60th Street, Manhattan, 212-838-6690, grolierclub.org; free.Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum: ‘Masters of Disguise: The World of Camouflage’ (through Feb. 24) The art of camouflage in nature and its appropriation by hunters and the armed forces are explored in this exhibition, which uses digital images, artifacts and interactive elements to showcase how color, shade and shapes can be used to deceive the eye. Daily, from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘Endangered by the Moving Image: The Criminalization of Black and Brown Bodies’ (Sunday) As part of its Changing the Picture series, the museum is bringing together a group of panelists to discuss media depictions of minorities and their treatment by the criminal justice system. Participants include Jelani Cobb, who has been at the forefront of The New Yorker’s coverage of the events in Ferguson, Mo.; Mia Mask, a film professor at Vassar College and co-editor of “Poitier Revisited: Reconsidering a Black Icon in the Obama Age”; and Greg Tate, a writer, musician and author of “Flyboy in the Buttermilk: Essays on Contemporary America.” From 2 to 5 p.m., 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.New-York Historical Society: ‘Chinese American: Exclusion/Inclusion’ (through April 19) In his review for The New York Times, Edward Rothstein called it a “vigorous and imaginative new exhibition,” that includes a look at “how Chinese-American identity came to be, how immigration and discrimination were followed by recrimination and conflict, and how, finally, a people’s trials give way to celebration.” Tuesday through Thursday and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Friday until 8 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Public Library for the Performing Arts: ‘Emily Dickinson: Musician and Poet’ (through March 6) Emily Dickinson’s poems and letters as well as the library’s collection of her work provide the backdrop for this exhibition, which focuses on the musical side of her writing. Dickinson’s musical identity encompassed piano performances, the collection of sheet music and concert outings, and those experiences are detailed here. Friday, Saturday, Tuesday and Wednesday from noon to 6 p.m.; Monday and Thursday from noon to 8 p.m.; 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/lpa; free.New York Transit Museum Annex: Holiday Train Show (through Feb. 22) This free annual treat for model train enthusiasts, featuring vintage Lionel trains, is on display in Grand Central Terminal. Weekdays from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Saturdays from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Sundays from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; at Grand Central Terminal, near the Station Master’s Office; mta.info/mta/museum.EventsAthena Film Festival (Thursday through Feb. 8) This festival, now in its fifth year, features fiction and nonfiction films that highlight female leadership. This year’s lineup, which can be found at athenafilmfestival.com, includes last year’s art-house hit “Obvious Child” as well as the well-reviewed films “Beyond the Lights,” “Dear White People” and “We Are the Best!” There will be screenings, activities and discussions with producers, directors and actors. The festival will also honor Jodie Foster. At various location on the Barnard College campus, 3009 Broadway, at 117th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-1264.40th Annual Thunderbird American Indian Dancers Concert and Powwow (through Feb. 8) The Thunderbird American Indian Dancers, the oldest troupe of its kind in New York, presents its annual concert and powwow. Expect dances, storytelling and traditional music from the Iroquois and other tribes of the Northeast, Southwest and Great Plains regions. Money made from the event will go toward scholarships for American Indian students. Tickets are $1 for children 12 and younger at matinee performances. Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 3 and 8 p.m., Sundays at 3 p.m., Theater for the New City, 155 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village, 212-254-1109, theaterforthenewcity.net.‘Invisible Heroes: African Americans in the Spanish Civil War’ (Wednesday) The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture will host a free screening of this film, by Alfonso Domingo and Jordi Torrent, about the 85 black Americans who joined the International Brigades in support of the Spanish Republic. A discussion will follow with Mr. Torrent; David Levering Lewis, the Pulitzer Prize-winning historian; and Mireia Sentís, the photographer and writer. At 6:30 p.m., 515 Lenox Avenue, at 135th Street, Hamilton Heights, 212-491-2206, schomburgcenter.org.Soul on Ice Winter Skating Party (Monday) Figure Skating in Harlem hosts its 18th annual Gwendolyn Simmons Soul on Ice Winter Skating Party, a fund-raiser for the nonprofit. Evan Lysacek, an Olympic gold medalist, will be there, as will some of the princesses from Disney on Ice. The organization’s student athletes will also perform. At 6 p.m., Trump Wollman Rink, Central Park, entrance at 59th Street and Avenue of the Americas, 646-698-3440, figureskatinginharlem.org.Video Games Live (Saturday) If you spend enough time with a video game, its soundtrack can become a comforting familiarity. This show brings that music to the stage, with a live orchestra conducted by the video game composer Emmanuel Fratianni. Expect to hear some of the classics, such as Castlevania and Halo, as well as more recent hits like Skyrim. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 212-465-6500, beacontheatre.com.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesdays) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotes (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win free drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videology.info.Spoken WordBrooklyn Open (Monday) The Brooklyn Public Library hosts its monthly open mike event for teenagers. Young people are encouraged to share their poems, stories — even their experiences with activism. All aspects of the free event, from hosting to disc jockeying, will be done by teenagers. At 5 p.m., Brooklyn Public Library, Central Library, Grand Army Plaza at Flatbush Avenue and Eastern Parkway, Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-230-2100, brooklynpubliclibrary.org/central.An Evening with the Stylist and Author David Zyla (Wednesday) Mr. Zyla, the Emmy Award-winning stylist, discusses his book “How to Win at Shopping.” He will share his wisdom about smartly creating and shopping for your wardrobe. He will sign books afterward at this free event. At 6:30 p.m., Theresa Lang Theater at Marymount Manhattan College, 221 East 71st Street, 212-517-0471, mmm.edu; R.S.V.P. by emailing ckirklin@mmm.edu.John Hooper in Conversation With Alexander Stille (Tuesday) Mr. Hooper, whose book “The Spaniards” provided cultural and historical context to understand what makes Spanish people tick, pulls off the same trick with his new book, “The Italians.” Mr. Hooper uses new research to build on his work as a correspondent for The Economist and The Guardian based in Rome. He will be joined at this free discussion by Alexander Stille, a contributor to The New York Times and author of “Excellent Cadavers: The Mafia and the Death of the First Italian Republic.” At 8 p.m., McNally Jackson, 52 Prince Street, between Lafayette and Mulberry Streets, SoHo, 212-274-1160, mcnallyjackson.com.Nick Hornby in Conversation With Bill Tipper (Wednesday) Mr. Hornby, author of “High Fidelity” and “About a Boy,” discusses his latest novel, “Funny Girl,” a coming-of-age story about an intrepid young woman navigating 1960s London. Joining Mr. Hornby in this free conversation will be Bill Tipper, an editor of the Barnes & Noble Review. At 7 p.m., Barnes & Noble Union Square, 33 East 17th Street, 212-253-0810, barnesandnoble.com.Ron Lieber in Conversation With Jennifer Senior (Monday) Mr. Lieber, the Your Money columnist for The New York Times, discusses his latest book, “The Opposite of Spoiled: Raising Kids Who Are Grounded, Generous, and Smart About Money,” the day before its release. In his book, he urges parents to talk to their children about money, regardless of their age. He will be joined by Jennifer Senior, who wrote “All Joy and No Fun: The Paradox of Modern Parenthood.” At 7:30 p.m., Congregation Beth Elohim, 271 Garfield Place, at Eighth Avenue, Park Slope, Brooklyn, brooklynbythebook.com.‘Timeless: Love, Morgenthau, and Me,’ by Lucinda Franks (Tuesday) At this free event Ms. Franks, a former reporter for The New York Times, will read from her memoir “Timeless: Love, Morgenthau, and Me,” about her marriage to Robert Morgenthau, the former Manhattan district attorney. The book details her love affair with her husband, who is 30 years her senior, and how their generational differences fueled their relationship. At 8 p.m., the National Arts Club, 15 Gramercy Park South, 212-475-3424, nationalartsclub.org.Walking ToursFlatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.The Secrets of Grand Central (Saturday and Sunday) For many commuters, Grand Central Terminal is only a hectic portal from one place to the next. This walking tour, on Saturday at 1:30 and 2:45 p.m. and Sunday at 12:45 and 2:30 p.m., is a chance to slow down and appreciate Grand Central’s Beaux-Arts décor and grandeur. Stops include a secret apartment that was once used as a speakeasy and the station’s “whispering” galleries. Reservations can be made by calling 212-465-3331.Skyscrapers Gallery Tour (Saturday) This Midtown art gallery tour covers seven shows in a span of two blocks. Some of the works on view include glass installations, a Spanish artist’s enormous sculptures of crowds and paintings inspired by biology. At 1 p.m., meeting at 20 West 57th Street, 212-946-1548, nygallerytours.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org. JOSHUA BARONEInformation on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. Advertisement