AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel Graeber‘Hello From Japan!’Poor Godzilla. He didn’t make the cut.“Hello From Japan!,” the latest exhibition at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, crams a lot of culture into one room. While it doesn’t include movie monsters — perhaps too scary? — it has other fanciful Japanese creatures: dragons, beckoning white cats (they’re good luck) and yuru-kyara, odd mascots representing places, sports teams, businesses, even individuals. The city of Narita, for instance, takes pride in its eel restaurants and busy airport, so its yuru-kyara, Unari-kun, is half eel and half airplane. Part of the fun of “Hello From Japan!” is an opportunity for children to create their own mascots; no hybrid is too bizarre.At one end of the exhibition, you’ll stroll through displays representing Tokyo’s Harajuku district, the center of teenage life and wacky fashion. Little visitors can join the fun by dressing up according to the kawaii, or cute, aesthetic — think of Hello Kitty — and singing karaoke to tunes like “Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star.” (A video screen shows you how to pronounce the Japanese lyrics.) This is Japan at its sweetest and silliest.A more serious and serene aspect, though, lies across a small bridge, where the exhibition evokes one of Japan’s many Shinto shrine parks. The Shinto religion honors kami, or spirits, which are believed to exist in all things and can help humans. A reproduction of a shrine to Inari Okami, or the kami protecting rice fields, includes figures of kitsune (foxes) believed to be this spirit’s messengers. (Perhaps not surprisingly, they look like Pokémon.)Central to this area is a big wishing tree, trees being conduits for kami. Children can follow the practice of writing wishes on ema — wooden plaques, here represented by notecards — and tying them to the branches. They may not understand the religious references — Buddhism is mentioned, too — but it’s refreshing to see a show for young people deal with non-Western faiths so straightforwardly.The exhibition also succeeds in entertaining a range of ages. Preschoolers can build miniature bridges or serve a plate of pretend shun (seasonal food); older children can investigate the Japanese language via touch screens that allow them to trace characters with a finger, stroke by stroke, and spell the words for various fruits and vegetables. Kamishibai Weekend: The Art of Storytelling, this Saturday and Sunday, will offer traditional Japanese tales and crafts.And yes, the show will teach you how to say hello: “Konnichiwa.”(Through May 17, the Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org. Full schedule is on the website.) LAUREL GRAEBERFor Children‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’  (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; until 4 p.m. on Fridays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.Baby Got Bach: ‘Wonderful Winds’ (Saturday) The pianist Orli Shaham, a mother of twins, draws on her musical and her maternal talents as the host and artistic director of this concert series, intended for ages 3 through 6. One big draw: Little ones don’t just hear instruments played; they also play with them during a preshow exploration. This weekend’s concert, “Wonderful Winds,” concentrates on that section of the orchestra, with pieces that include Bach and Beethoven. Young audience members will compose a melody and experiment with conducting. At 10 a.m., Weill Art Gallery, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org/babygotbach; $18.Ben Rudnick & Friends (Saturday) Whether it’s Beatles’ tunes or “Over the Rainbow,” Ben Rudnick and his band seem to play it. In this concert, part of the Just Kidding series at Symphony Space, they’ll offer plenty of original work, too — bluegrass, rock, country — and opportunities for the audience to sing along. One anticipated tune: the group’s hit “A Frog Named Sam,” from its animated music video. At 11 a.m., 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.Broadway Playhouse: Meredith Willson  (Sunday) Today’s children may not be familiar with “The Music Man,” but they might recognize some of its tunes. (Pharrell Williams has used “76 Trombones” in his work.) At this program, part of the Broadway Playhouse series at Merkin Concert Hall, which introduces classic musicals and their creators to the next generation of audiences, they can discover the music man behind “The Music Man”: Meredith Willson. Singalongs and interactive games are part of the introduction, as well as exposure to signature songs. At 11 a.m., 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, kaufmanmusiccenter.org/mch.‘Click, Clack, Moo’ (Sunday) These dairy workers need a union. But they’re not farm employees — they’re cows. Theatreworks/USA has revived its very funny musical adaptation of Doreen Cronin’s picture book about the members of a herd who take to typing up their workplace grievances (hence the title). With a book by Billy Aronson, who’s updated the story so that the cows now use a laptop; music by Brad Alexander; and lyrics by Kevin del Aguila, the show, closing this weekend, is recommended for theater (and milk) fans 4 and older. At 11 a.m., Kaye Playhouse, Hunter College, 68th Street, between Lexington and Park Avenues, 212-772-4448, theatreworksusa.org.‘Everything About a Family (Almost)’ (Saturday, Sunday and Wednesday) It’s a pretty inexhaustible topic, but Tada! Youth Theater has captured much of the fun and frustrations of family life in this one-hour musical, which had its premiere in 2009. Now the show is being revived by the troupe, whose young members developed the plotline themselves and selected the songs from submissions by professional composers and lyricists. The humorous conceit is an adolescent given — wanting a different family — but the results, set at a couple of different reunions, are often unexpectedly poignant. (Through Feb. 16.) Saturday and Sunday at 2 and 4 p.m.; Wednesday at 10 a.m. and noon; Tada! Theater, 15 West 28th Street, Manhattan; 212-252-1619, Ext. 5, tadatheater.com.Family Benefit at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (Thursday) What made a samurai warrior’s sword so powerful? And just what’s inside those animal mummies in Egyptian tombs? These intriguing questions and many more will be explored at this fund-raising event, whose theme is “Metropolitan Mysteries.” Other activities — besides dining in the Temple of Dendur — will include touring the galleries, making art, and writing and interpreting secret messages based on American works in the collection. From 5:30 to 8 p.m., 212-570-3948, metmuseum.org/familybenefit.Family Day: Korean New Year (Saturday) American New Year’s celebrations are now over, but many Asian ones are just beginning. Local children can enjoy them all in the fifth CelebrAsia NYC: New Year’s Festivities for Families, a three-month festival. This weekend the focus is on Korea, where a new year is also a time to honor the past. In this event at the Korea Society, children will practice the sebae, a deep bow made for elders to convey respect and good wishes. Young visitors will also learn Korean calligraphy and brush painting, play traditional games, make crafts and listen to Korean folk tales. At 1 and 3 p.m., 950 Third Avenue, at 57th Street, eighth floor, Manhattan, 212-759-7525, koreasociety.org; space is limited.‘Fancy Nancy the Musical’  (Saturday and Sunday) One of the arts’ youngest divas has returned to the McGinn/Cazale Theater. This musical from Vital Theater Company focuses on a little girl who wants everything to be fancy — especially herself. Based on the book series written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, the production explores the predicament that ensues when Nancy finds out that she hasn’t been cast as the glamorous mermaid she’d hoped to be in the coming dance show. With a book by Susan DiLallo, a score by Danny Abosch, and lyrics by both, the musical humorously follows Nancy’s attempts to cope with a most unfancy role: that of a tree. (Through April 26.) At 1:30 p.m., 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘Give Me Sound!’ (Sunday) Hayes Greenfield has been giving sound for years, and at this program, he’s encouraging children to give it back. A jazz musician, composer and educator, Mr. Greenfield will work with young audience members — the recommended ages are 3 through 7 — in sonic activities and games, with the goal of creating a “sound sculpture” at the end of the hour. While little enthusiasts will use their natural rhythm makers — voices and bodies — instruments from home are welcome, too. (Through March 22.) At 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-675-6677, 13thstreetrep.org.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one will sprout indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which is reviving Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor will now star in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Weekdays, except Mondays, at 10:30 a.m. and noon (with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.); weekends at 1 p.m. (Some shows are sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.‘Lionboy’ (Friday through Sunday) Charlie Ashanti may not be a superhero, but he does have one extraordinary power: He can talk to cats. The hero of “Lionboy,” adapted by Marcelo Dos Santos from the science-fiction trilogy by the mother-daughter team known as Zizou Corder, Charlie is out to rescue his parents, who’ve been taken by the evil organization the Corporacy. The first family show from the British company Complicite, “Lionboy,” which closes this weekend, uses shadow puppetry, acrobatics and African instruments to tell Charlie’s tale. Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at noon; New Victory Theater, 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan; 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.‘Party Mix’ (Saturday and Sunday) This isn’t something to munch on or to drink, but it will be a feast for the eyes. The Museum of the Moving Image is showing a series of highlights from the New York International Children’s Film Festival, and this weekend’s 71-minute program, free with museum admission, will be devoted to shorts for ages 8 through 18. Including award winners from previous festivals (some with English subtitles), the titles feature animals, among other themes. A partial list: “Rabbit and Deer” (Hungary), “The Centipede and the Toad” (France) and “The Princess, the Prince and the Green-Eyed Dragon” (Germany). At 1 p.m., 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.Portrait Power Family Day (Sunday) The human face has captivated artists for centuries, and this event at the Jewish Museum will make it both inspiration and canvas. After exploring the exhibition “Helena Rubinstein: Beauty Is Power” (educators will give three spotlight tours), young visitors can create headdresses and masks patterned after the African art Rubinstein collected, and sculpt pendants that evoke her jewelry. Children can also paint watercolor portraits, pose for family photos in museum-provided costumes and have their faces painted by Agostino Arts. Those not inclined to sit still can have fun, too, dancing to music by Heidi Swedberg and the Sukey Jump Band (concerts at 12:30 and 2:30 p.m.). Noon to 4 p.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through May 9.) Saturdays at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, 13thstreetrep.org.‘Somebody Come and Play: 45 Years of “Sesame Street” Helping Kids Grow Smarter, Stronger, and Kinder’ (Friday and Saturday) Sesame Street now has an additional address: the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts. This free show, closing this weekend, showcases more than 250 artifacts related to the beloved preschool public television series “Sesame Street,” including set designs, original sketches for characters, scripts, storyboards, animation cels, Claymation models, videos and, of course, over 20 Muppets, among them Elmo, Zoe and Bert and Ernie. A children’s area includes “Sesame Street” books and activities. Noon to 6 p.m., 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, Lincoln Center, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/lpa.Soul on Ice Winter Skating Party (this event, originally scheduled for Monday, has been canceled because of the weather) What sounds more exciting? To glide across the ice with an Olympic gold medalist or a Disney princess? Young guests will have both options at the annual Gwendolyn Simmons Soul on Ice Winter Skating Party, which benefits Figure Skating in Harlem, a nonprofit providing educational programs and skating instruction to underprivileged girls. Evan Lysacek, winner of a gold medal in figure skating at the 2010 Olympics, will attend, along with several of the skaters portraying princesses in Disney on Ice. The evening includes food, drink, skating and raffles. From 6 to 8 p.m., Trump Wollman Rink, Central Park, entrance at 59th Street and Avenue of the Americas, 646-698-3440, figureskatinginharlem.org.‘Theatresports’ (Sunday) It may involve actors, but it’s still a competitive event: The members of Freestyle Repertory Theater, an improv troupe, are once again thinking fast on their feet. They break into two teams and perform skits based on suggestions from the audience. Children will not only vote to determine the contest’s winner but also participate onstage. At noon, Gallery Players Theater, 199 14th Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-595-0547, Ext. 6, galleryplayers.com.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 10:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘Tropical Discoveries’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) At least a little bit of New York resembles the tropics, even at this time of year. It can be found at the New York Botanical Garden, whose latest exhibition, “Wild Medicine in the Tropics,” investigates the medicinal use of rain forest plants. Visitors to the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden can explore this area through “Tropical Discoveries,” in which they’ll compare tropical and temperate plants inside the William and Lynda Steere Discovery Center and pot up a tropical species to take home. They can also take field notes on the hidden signs of life in the winter garden outdoors. (Through Feb. 26.) Weekends, 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; weekdays, except Mondays, 1:30 to 4:30 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.‘Under the Tangle’ (Thursday) Adolescence can certainly be a complicated thicket, and in this dance-theater piece from the troupe Treehouse Shakers, it is literally so. The company, whose “Hatched” was for babies and preschoolers, presents this production for ages 8 through 13. Conceived and directed by Emily Bunning, it focuses on an orphaned girl trying to find her way through a wooded labyrinth filled with curious creatures and characters. (Through Feb. 8.) At 11 a.m., Ailey Citigroup Studio Theater, 405 West 55th Street, Clinton, 212-715-1914, treehouseshakers.com.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Through Feb. 19, the museum features the exhibit “A-Maze N’ Shabbat,” whose activities include a challah-braiding workshop and a life-size maze that teaches about the Jewish sabbath. Hours: Mondays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; until 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Winter Green Festival: A Tu B’Shvat Celebration (Sunday) It may be winter, but in the Jewish calendar, it is also time to celebrate the approaching spring with Tu B’Shvat, a kind of New Year’s festival honoring trees and their fruit. This event at the Museum at Eldridge Street will focus on family trees as well as physical ones. Children can enjoy a traditional Tu B’Shvat Seder, join a genealogy workshop, go on tours of the “green” restoration of the Eldridge Street Synagogue and enjoy a concert by Bash the Trash, which uses instruments made from recycled objects. (Young visitors can also create their own.) From 1 to 4 p.m., 12 Eldridge Street, between Canal and Division Streets, Lower East Side, 212-219-0302, eldridgestreet.org. LAUREL GRAEBERAdvertisement