By KATHRYN SHATTUCKOCT. 11, 2015
9 P.M. (AMC) THE WALKING DEAD Season 6 goes big and bold, starting with what is essentially a 90-minute high-intensity combat operation to clear out all those zombies. Mike Hale, writing in The New York Times, said, “It variously recalls Hollywood biblical epics, European art-house pastorals and the teeming photographs of Sebastião Salgado.” The story picks up after Rick has executed one of the Alexandrians, leading those left behind to wonder whether his aggressive approach is the only way to live — or whether they can get back to a kinder, gentler pre-apocalyptic society. Hmm. Nah. Rick is always right. Chris Hardwick and company mull it over in “Talking Dead,” at 10:30. (Image: A walker)3:15 P.M. (Starz Cinema) SHOPGIRL (2005) Steve Martin plays a wealthy businessman, and Jason Schwartzman is a down-on-his-luck stencil artist competing for the attention of Claire Danes’s lonely Beverly Hills saleswoman. (If Mr. Martin seems perfect for the part, it may be because he adapted the screenplay from his own novella.) It’s a delicate but exquisitely tailored story and puts most Hollywood romances to shame with “the fact of sex and the possibility of heartbreak, which is to say the very conditions of romance itself,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. (Image: Ms. Danes)7:30 P.M. (CBS) 60 MINUTES President Obama talks about Russia’s involvement in Syria.8:30 P.M. (CBS) MADAM SECRETARY After a State Department employee is kidnapped in Afghanistan, Elizabeth seeks advice from former Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright — then ignores President Dalton’s recommendation about how to negotiate a safe return. Henry, meanwhile, tries to figure out how to get his Russian student to spy for the United States. In “The Good Wife,” at 9:30, Alicia interviews private investigators for a museum vandalism case. The one she hires looks a lot like Jeffrey Dean Morgan.8 P.M. (13, 49) HOME FIRES After a successful jam-making project, the Women’s Institute is back up and running, just in time to welcome the Royal Air Force to town. In “Indian Summers,” at 9, the Sipi Fair comes to Simia — the only time of the year that the Indian residents are allowed onto the grounds of the club. But there’s witness tampering going on in the background. And in “The Widower,” at 10, the murderous Malcolm returns to Scotland and reinvents himself as the perfect boyfriend.Advertisement9 P.M. (Showtime) HOMELAND Carrie works to secure Düring’s safety at the refugee camp in Lebanon. Back in Berlin, Saul and Allison go at each other after the C.I.A. hacking, and Quinn stays focused on his mission. To his and hers, they add theirs to “The Affair,” at 10, as Noah and Alison’s exes, Helen and Cole, offer their sides of the story — and Maura Tierney and Joshua Jackson get to show off their acting chops.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (HBO) THE LEFTOVERS The Garveys get a fresh start in Jarden, Tex., nicknamed Miracle because no one was lost to the Sudden Departure. In “Doll & Em,” at 10:30, Emily tries out a few new ideas on Evan Rachel Wood and Olivia Wilde with the premiere of the play only a day away. Dolly makes an offhand comment and offends the actresses. (Image: Justin Theroux)10 P.M. (ABC) QUANTICO Alex finds out more about her father’s past with the F.B.I., while Liam persuades her mother to hold a news conference asking her daughter to turn herself in. Back at the academy, the recruits learn how to profile their classmates’ strengths and weaknesses.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowTHE HOUR Before his turn as the philanderer in “The Affair,” Dominic West did a bit as the philandering on-air talent in this show about sex, ambition and espionage in the British Broadcasting Corporation in 1956 London. “This BBC series isn’t a pale imitation of anything else on television,” Alessandra Stanley wrote in The Times. “ ‘The Hour’ does borrow from the movie ‘Broadcast News,’ as well as the 2003 BBC mini-series ‘State of Play,’ but with a style and intelligence all its own.” (acorn.tv)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page SP13 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.