By ANTHONY TOMMASINIJAN. 29, 2015
Other ensembles may play more consistently with technical prowess and exacting coordination than the Mariinsky Orchestra. But at its best, this ensemble, the house band of the Mariinsky Theater in St. Petersburg, Russia, brings dark, rich sound; vivid character; and emotional depth to its performances, especially in Russian repertory. The orchestra was not quite at its best for the two all-Russian programs that Valery Gergiev, its longtime music director, conducted at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday and Wednesday nights.Still, each was a privilege to hear. The performances exuded authenticity and palpable involvement, especially the account of Prokofiev’s Fifth Symphony that concluded Wednesday’s program. I have heard the piece better executed. There were some ragged stretches, careless entrances and out-of-tune sustained harmonies. Yet, under Mr. Gergiev, who seemed inspired, these players delved beneath the Neo-Classical surfaces of the piece to reveal the ambiguity and intensity within.The punishing schedule this orchestra has been maintaining surely affected the overall level of performance. These concerts took place in the middle of the Mariinsky’s American tour. The blizzard threat that forced Carnegie Hall to cancel its concerts on Monday night had caused travel problems for the players. (The Metropolitan Opera also canceled Monday’s performance, the opening of its new production of Tchaikovsky’s “Iolanta” and Bartok’s “Bluebeard’s Castle,” which Mr. Gergiev will be conducting.)And it may be hard on the orchestra to know that almost every time Mr. Gergiev appears in the United States these days, he is greeted by protesters denouncing him as an unabashed ally of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. So it was on both nights outside Carnegie, where, undeterred by the winter weather, about 15 people held a demonstration before and after each concert and passed out fliers.AdvertisementFor this visit to Carnegie, Mr. Gergiev brought along two pianists to play concertos. On Tuesday night, the fast-rising Uzbek pianist Behzod Abduraimov was soloist in Prokofiev’s Piano Concerto No. 3 in C, a work he plays (along with Tchaikovsky’s First Piano Concerto) on an acclaimed Decca recording released last year. Though 24, Mr. Abduraimov is so boyish-looking and energetic that you might think that he is still a teenager. He brought fluid fingerwork, lots of dash and appealing impetuosity to his performance of this popular piece, with its famously daunting piano part. There are hard-driving and demonic elements to the concerto, which erupts with leaping chords, tangled passagework and bursts of arm-blurring octaves. If anything, Mr. Abduraimov let his youthful ebullience get the better of him, playing the first and last movements with breathless abandon.AdvertisementI wish that Mr. Gergiev, rather than enabling his young soloist, had reined him in a little. Mr. Abduraimov played so fast that the crisp, dancing rhythms of the finale became obscured. But he won over the audience and played an encore, a tender account of a dreamy Tchaikovsky nocturne.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Wednesday, after Mr. Gergiev began with Rodion Shchedrin’s short, riotously playful Concerto for Orchestra No. 1 (“Naughty Limericks”), the Russian virtuoso Denis Matsuev, 39, was the soloist in Tchaikovsky’s Piano Concerto No. 2 in G. Mr. Matsuev boasts a prodigious technique and interpretive flair. He is built like a weight lifter and plays with muscularity and power. His sound can be steely and harsh, especially his crash-bang dispatching of fortissimo chords.Still, on this night he also revealed a lyrical, reflective side. He certainly has masterly command of this formidably difficult work. One reason that Tchaikovsky’s Second Concerto is overlooked in comparison with his popular First Concerto may be that it is, if anything, even more difficult to play. During its rousing first movement, stirring themes that unfold over long stretches are interrupted by fiery bursts of virtuosic piano writing. Repetitive chords, double-barrel octaves, keyboard-sweeping runs — nothing daunted Mr. Matsuev.The novel slow movement is like a trio for solo violin, solo cello and, eventually, the piano, that morphs subtly into a concerto movement. Tchaikovsky packs a lot into the short, restless, almost giddy finale, which Mr. Matsuev played with uncanny ease. After a prolonged ovation, he offered two encores: Rachmaninoff’s Étude-Tableaus in A minor and Scriabin’s Étude in D sharp minor.The main work on Tuesday night was Shostakovich’s awesome and often baffling Symphony No. 4 in C minor. The modernist elements of this 60-minute score come not just from grating harmonic experiments and the feverish din the music sometimes reaches, but also from stunning discontinuities and mood shifts. The music seems to evolve in fragments and non sequiturs. Mahlerian passages of angst are followed by fractured dances or banal-seeming tunes accompanied by sour chords or repeated obsessively. The triumph of this performance went beyond the slashing power and fervor of the playing. These musicians, under Mr. Gergiev, put you in a mind-set where you just went along with the contradictions and strangeness, rather than trying to make sense of it all.On Wednesday, after the Prokofiev Fifth, the orchestra offered an unlikely but perfect encore: the Adagio from the Grand Pas de Deux of Tchaikovsky’s “The Nutcracker,” played with glowing, rich string sound and stylistic authority.A webcast of the Mariinsky Orchestra’s Wednesday performance is available at medici.tv. A version of this review appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page C13 of the New York edition with the headline: Spurning Placidity for the Fire Within.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.