AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ Auntsforcamera  (through Feb. 15) The New Museum hosts this exhibition of nine video works dispersed throughout the building, a project of the protean dance entity Aunts. The entries deal with everything from dancing with drones to mastering the original Harlem Shake. Grab a map and find your way among the monitors and screens, or take an artist-led tour, offered on selected days. Tours are free with a submission to Karl Scholz’s interactive experiment “#auntsforcamera.” Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Fridays through Sundays from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., Thursdays from 11 a.m. to 9 p.m., New Museum, 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Siobhan Burke)Suzanne Beahrs Dance (Thursday through Feb. 7) The title of Ms. Beahrs’s new work, “Rise,” sounds like a grand call to action but she has a more internal revolution in mind. She, along with six other women, will tackle the conundrum of how to be yourself. In this evening-length work, part of Danspace’s Dance:Access series, the mission is to embrace the influences that shape an artist but also to let the dance reveal its own authentic self. At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Brian Schaefer)★ Company XIV (Friday and Saturday) “Nutcracker Rouge,” Austin McCormick’s baroque-burlesque take on the Christmas classic, is a saucy fusion of dance, theater, circus and song that takes place in the company’s intimate and opulent new home in NoHo. Cocktails and coquetry abound for those 21 and older. At 8 p.m., Saturday at 10 p.m., XIV, 428 Lafayette Street, between Astor Place and East Fourth Street, 212-677-1444, companyxiv.com; many performances are sold out. (Schaefer)Cora Dance (Friday and Saturday) Out of 10 companies participating in the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s professional development program, Cora Dance was one of four chosen to present its work at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. “Stories” features choreography by the company’s founder, Shannon Hummel, who is interested in the spectrum of human emotion and likes to tackle big existential questions. Which means that of the catalog of stories presented here, some will be contemplative, angsty and internal; others more joyful. At 7:30 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schaefer)★ Dance on Camera 2015 (Friday through Tuesday) The 43rd annual festival of dance on film is a colorful collection of big personalities, small stories and inventive choreography created specifically for the screen. Dozens of films — fiction and nonfiction, feature-length and shorts — will be shown over five days. Subjects include known names like Benjamin Millepied, Elizabeth Streb, Jiri Kylian and Meredith Monk as well as explorations of American cheerleading, dance for Parkinson’s patients and the history of dance in Catalonia. At various times, Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, and Elinor Bunin Munroe Film Center, 144 West 65th Street; 212-875-5601, filmlinc.com. (Schaefer)★ Moriah Evans (through Sunday) In “Social Dance 1-8: Index,” Ms. Evans moves five dancers across space and time through a system of repeating and transforming choreographic units. The culmination of a creative residency at Issue Project Room, the work seeks to illuminate how we build relationships both onstage and off. At 8 p.m., Issue Project Room, 22 Boerum Place, at Livingston Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-330-0313, issueprojectroom.org; sold out. (Burke)FLICFest (Friday and Saturday) Established five years ago by Jeramy Zimmerman of CatScratch Theater, this festival gives artists a chance to exceed the time limit imposed by most choreography showcases. (“FLIC” stands for Feature-Length Independent Choreography.) The festival wraps up this weekend with Jin Ju Song-Begin’s “Neverend” and “Kiri no Jikan (In the in Between)" from CatScratch Theater on Friday, and André M. Zachery’s “The Inscription Project” and Nicole Wolcott’s “PaperPieces” on Saturday. At 7:30 and 9 p.m., Irondale Center, 85 South Oxford Street, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, 866-811-4111, irondale.org/FLICfest.html. (Burke)Fresh Tracks (Friday and Saturday) This signature development program, which has been nurturing new artists since 1965, returns with its annual showcase to introduce a new class of fellows: Briana Brown-Tipley and Hilary Brown (known as Same as Sister), Nico Brown, He Jin Jang, Niall Jones, Julie Mayo and Lindsay Reuter. Thematically, all seem to be turning inward to mine the depths of self; in describing their own work, all seem to approach movement from a cerebral, analytical and almost academic perspective. At 7:30 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Schaefer)★ Gerard & Kelly (Wednesday through Feb. 15) For Brennan Gerard and Ryan Kelly, pole dancing is less about titillation and more about intimacy and vulnerability. In “P.O.L.E.,” the duo’s new multidisciplinary project — which stands for People, Objects, Language, Exchange — poles are a catalyst to explore relationships and queer identity. In performances, film, project-based installations, classes and conversations, the duo finds fantasy and meaning in their chosen symbol. Museum hours: 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., and Thursdays until 9 p.m., New Museum, 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Schaefer)★ Raja Feather Kelly and Tzveta Kassabova (Friday and Saturday) The captivating performers Raja Feather Kelly and Tzveta Kassabova pair up for a self-produced evening of four works as part of Danspace Project’s Dance: Access program. Each performs a solo then together they present two duets: “Be Still, My Heart” and “Super We” (also the evening’s title), which plays with the function and meaning of rhythm. This duo manages to make quick sputters across the floor and quiet moments in a chair equally compelling. At 8 p.m., St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Schaefer)★ Daniel Léveillé Danse (Friday through Sunday) Mr. Léveillé is a choreographer from Montreal who both challenges and exposes his dancers, often with intricate, exhausting choreography and by denying them clothes. His latest work to come to New York, “Solitudes solo,” part of the Abrons Arts Center’s new dance series Travelogues, uses physical risk to tap into a more emotional nakedness. The series of solos performed by five dancers, and set to aching Bach sonatas, is a strenuous study in loneliness. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side, 866-811-4111, abronsartscenter.org. (Schaefer)Bessie McDonough-Thayer and Kayvon Pourazar (Wednesday) The Brink series at Dixon Place gives artists an extended platform to test out works-in-progress. Next week, Ms. McDonough-Thayer gives herself a series of tough tasks that test her memory and resilience in the solo “everything that’s happening now is happening now,” while Kayvon Pourazar considers whether collaboration and certain filters change the way audiences perceive and respond to performance in his work “trouble, trouble.” At 7:30 p.m., Dixon Place, 161 Chrystie Street, Lower East Side, 866-811-4111, dixonplace.org. (Schaefer)★ Nederlands Dans Theater 2 (Tuesday through Feb. 8) It’s been five years since this junior company of one of Europe’s finest troupes last visited. At that time they were under the direction of Jiri Kylian; now it’s Paul Lightfoot at the helm. Mr. Lightfoot and his artistic partner Sol León contribute two of their physically flamboyant works to the program, accompanying “I new then” by Johan Inger and “Sara,” a subtle, haunting work by the alluring Israeli team of Sharon Eyal and Gai Behar. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m.; Thursday, next Friday and Feb. 7 at 8 p.m.; matinees on Feb. 7 and 8 at 2 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)★ New York City Ballet (through March 1) Three weeks into the winter season, City Ballet will present its first premiere of 2015: the latest from its new resident choreographer, Justin Peck, in which he takes Aaron Copland’s “Rodeo” score and strips it of the literal hoedown imagery that Agnes DeMille initially saddled it with. Joining that work on Wednesday — in a program, “New Combinations,” that will be repeated on Feb. 8, 10, 11 and 27 — is Alexei Ratmansky’s “Pictures at an Exhibition” and Christopher Wheeldon’s “Mercurial Manoeuvres.” Other programs include “Hear the Dance” series, with mixed bills highlighting the influence of Russian composers within the company’s repertoire (on Friday and Sunday), and the music of J.S. Bach (Saturday evening and Thursday). And Balanchine fans can get their fix in two “All Balanchine” programs on Saturday afternoon and Tuesday. Tuesdays through Thursdays at 7:30 p.m., Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m., Sundays at 3 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Schaefer)★ Robyn Orlin & Compagnie Jant-Bi (through Sunday) The South African choreographer Robyn Orlin likes to be a thorn, poking audiences with her blunt take on contemporary African issues through a blend of theater, storytelling, song and dance. She was last stateside in 2011, and has returned with the United States premiere of “At the same time we were pointing a finger at you, we realized we were pointing three at ourselves...,” which explores issues relating to gender and homophobia. It is being presented in collaboration with Compagnie Jant-Bi, the powerful and mesmerizing all-male Senegalese troupe. Friday at 7:30 p.m., Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Alexander Kasser Theater, Montclair State University, 1 Normal Avenue, Montclair, 973-655-5112, peakperfs.org. (Schaefer)Parsons Dance Company (through Sunday) These powerhouse dancers, directed by David Parsons, have returned to the Joyce Theater in works by Trey McIntyre, Robert Battle and a former company member, Natalie Lomonte, a participant in the company’s new choreographic initiative, GenerationNOW. Mr. Parsons’s own brand of lithe athleticism will also be on display in the New York premiere of his “Whirlaway,” to music by the jazz musician Allen Toussaint, and his wildly popular solo “Caught,” in which strobe lights create the illusion of a dancer unhindered by gravity. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)The Pharmacy Project (Friday and Saturday) “Joan,” a new work by this Brooklyn dance company, celebrates and examines the lives, ambitions and passionate following of two audacious and extraordinary women who share that name: Joan of Arc and Joan Rivers. This loose narrative, without text, follows three dancers as they dig into the myths and emotions of these legends, with the help of some red carpets, bales of hay and a smoke machine. At 8 p.m., Sky Gallery, 460 Union Street, Brooklyn, gowanusartandproduction.com. (Schaefer)Ellen Robbins (Saturday and Sunday) Ms. Robbins’s annual “Dances by Very Young Choreographers” program is exactly what it says it is: an opportunity for her students, ages 8-18, to present the work they’ve developed under her guidance. Short solos join group pieces in this fun, imaginative and occasionally illuminating showcase of contemporary dance as seen through the uninhibited lens of young budding artists. Saturday at 2 p.m., Sunday at 1 and 4 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Schaefer)Soaking Wet (Thursday through Feb. 8) Soaking Wet, the annual showcase by the choreographer David Parker, offers two distinct programs this year featuring emerging and established artists. Program A welcomes Racy Brand, Tina Croll, Jennifer Edwards, Garnet Henderson and Hanna Q Dance Company in a collection of dances depicting abstract emotions, relationships to horses and much more. Program B is mostly dominated by Catherine Tharin, a veteran of Erick Hawkins’s dance company, and includes three premieres. Program A: Thursday through Feb. 7 at 7 p.m., Feb. 8 at 2 p.m.; Program B: Thursday through Feb. 7 at 8:30 p.m., Feb. 8 at 4 p.m., West End Theater, 263 West 86th Street, 800-838-3006, thebanggroup.com. (Schaefer)Thunderbird American Indian Dancers (Fridays through Sundays, through Feb. 8) In 1963, 10 Native American men and women founded the Thunderbird American Indian Dancers to preserve the performance traditions of their heritage. The troupe’s annual concert, celebrating its 40th anniversary this year, features songs and dances of the Iroquois, Pueblo and many other tribes. Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 3 and 8 p.m., Sundays at 3 p.m., Theater for the New City, 155 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village, 212-254-1109, theaterforthenewcity.net. (Schaefer)Advertisement