JAN. 29, 2015
Reviews of classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera‘Les Contes d’Hoffmann’ (Saturday and Thursday) The headstrong, talented tenor Vittorio Grigolo is on better behavior here — singing with relative restraint, skipping the showboating — than in his last few appearances at the Metropolitan Opera. He is joined in Bartlett Sher’s scattered production of Offenbach’s late masterpiece by Erin Morley (a remarkably nuanced Olympia) and Kate Lindsey (a silver-toned, elegant Nicklausse), as well as by Hibla Gerzmava, Christine Rice and Thomas Hampson, who is underpowered as the four villains. (This cast performs through Feb. 5, but the opera returns, with different singers and the conductor James Levine, for a run from Feb. 28 through March 21.) This Saturday’s matinee is a Live in HD performance that will be shown in theaters internationally, with an encore screening on Wednesday evening. Saturday at 1 p.m., Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)‘Don Giovanni’  (Wednesday) Into the Metropolitan Opera’s dull production of Mozart’s classic, originally directed by Michael Grandage, steps a cast led by the conductor Alan Gilbert, making the trek across Lincoln Center Plaza. The charismatic Peter Mattei sings the Don and Luca Pisaroni, just as magnetic, is Leporello. Elza van den Heever, Emma Bell and Kate Lindsey are Giovanni’s conquests, and two singers make debuts: Dmitry Korchak as Don Ottavio and Adam Plachetka as Masetto. (Through March 6.) At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)★ ‘Iolanta’ and ‘Bluebeard’s Castle’  (Tuesday) Anna Netrebko brings Tchaikovsky’s lush fairy tale “Iolanta” to the Metropolitan Opera for the first time, singing the title role of a princess whose blindness is cured by love. The slightly surreal production is directed by Mariusz Trelinski with references to film noir, and as in “Eugene Onegin,” Ms. Netrebko is conducted by the Russian master Valery Gergiev. He also leads the second half of the evening, Bartok’s “Bluebeard’s Castle,” whose mysterious central couple (sung by Nadja Michael and Mikhail Petrenko) arrive at a less happy ending. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)Advertisement‘The Merry Widow’ (Saturday) Given the creative team and cast that the Metropolitan Opera lined up for its new production of this Lehar operetta, it looked most promising. But the production by the director and choreographer Susan Stroman, a five-time Tony Award-winner making in her Met debut, though colorful and full of lively dancing, feels tentative and timid. Renée Fleming looks and sounds lovely as the widow Hanna, left a fortune by her banker husband; Nathan Gunn is debonair as Count Danilo, Hanna’s former flame who falls for her again; and Kelli O’Hara, a queen of Broadway, in her Met debut, brings a sweet voice and sassiness to the ingénue role of Valencienne. But the Met is far too big a house for this intimate operetta: The spoken dialogue (written by Jeremy Sams for this production) has to be amplified. The performances over all seem a little constrained and underpowered. Paul Nadler conducts. (This production returns on April 24, with a new cast and conductor, for a run through March 7.) At 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)AdvertisementClassical Music★ Brentano String Quartet and Joyce DiDonato (Thursday) Part of Ms. DiDonato’s season-long Perspectives series at Carnegie Hall, this concert brings an eminent mezzo-soprano together with an eminent quartet. They join for selections from Carnegie’s Lullaby Project, written by teenage women who are pregnant, homeless or incarcerated, and Jake Heggie’s new cycle, “Camille Claudel: Into the Fire.” The Brentano players add Charpentier’s Suite in D minor and Debussy’s String Quartet. At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Woolfe)★ Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center (Tuesday) Percussion is in the spotlight here, with a multimedia lineup featuring four percussionists (Victor Caccese, Christopher Froh, Ayano Kataoka and Ian David Rosenbaum) and two pianists (Gilbert Kalish and Wu Han). They will perform works by Toru Takemitsu, Steve Reich, John Cage, Conlon Nancarrow, Thierry de Mey and Bela Bartok. At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)Chicago Symphony Orchestra (Friday through Sunday) Riccardo Muti continues to thrive as the music director of this ensemble, and it’s always an event when this esteemed maestro brings that great orchestra to Carnegie Hall, as happens this weekend. There are three programs: Friday’s includes Debussy’s “La Mer” and Scriabin’s Third Symphony (“The Divine Poem”); Yefim Bronfman is the soloist in Brahms’s Piano Concerto No. 2 on Saturday, a program including Schumann’s “Rhenish” Symphony; and, on Sunday afternoon, Mr. Muti, a Scriabin champion, conducts that composer’s First Symphony and Prokofiev’s powerful music for the film “Alexander Nevsky.” Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)★ Composer Portrait: Missy Mazzoli  (Thursday) Seven of Ms. Mazzoli’s works for strings — all of distinct and varied styles — make up her turn in the Miller Theater’s indispensable series. “Quartet for Queen Mab” receives its world premiere with the quartet Ethel, and, among much more, there’s also an aria for the soprano Marnie Breckenridge that’s part of Ms. Mazzoli’s continuing opera project on the Lars von Trier film, “Breaking the Waves.” At 8 p.m., Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (David Allen)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Focus! Festival  (Friday) This annual Juilliard School festival, organized by Joel Sachs, is an opportunity to focus, as it were, on a particular place and time, and this year, the theme is “Nippon Gendai Ongaku: Japanese Music Since 1945.” The closing concert, by the Juilliard Orchestra, conducted by Tadaaki Otaka, features a tribute to Toru Takemitsu as well as works by Claude Debussy, Akira Miyoshi and Takashi Yoshimatsu. It is free, but tickets are required. At 8 p.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, Lincoln Center, 155 West 65th Street, 212-799-5000, events.juilliard.edu. (Woolfe)★ International Contemporary Ensemble (Friday and Saturday) This intrepid ensemble continues its residency at the Abrons Arts Center, where it celebrates the centennial of the Henry Street Settlement with commissions from New York composers. The lineup on Friday includes George Lewis’s “Born Obbligato,” inspired by Beethoven’s Septet; a piece by the experimentalist Pauline Oliveros; and John Zorn’s “Baudelaires.” On Saturday, the program includes music by Ms. Oliveros and the premiere of Mr. Zorn’s Gauguin-inspired “Oviri.” At 8 p.m., Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side, 212-352-3101, abronsartscenter.org. (Schweitzer)Juilliard String Quartet (Thursday) This dependably excellent quartet presents a varied program that encompasses works by Haydn, Beethoven (the ruminative String Quartet No. 16) and Shulamit Ran’s String Quartet No. 2 “Vistas.” At 8 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-671-4050, lincolncenter.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Juilliard415 and Jordi Savall (Saturday) The viola da gamba player Jordi Savall, a star of the early-music world, leads Juilliard415, the school’s period-instrument ensemble, in a program featuring music by Jean-Marie Leclair, Georg Philipp Telemann, Jean-Philippe Rameau and Francesco Geminiani. At 8 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, events.juilliard.edu. (Schweitzer)Advertisement★ Jennifer Koh (Saturday) This probing violinist concludes her Bach & Beyond series with an absorbing program featuring Bach’s Second and Third Sonatas for solo violin, Berio’s “Sequenza VIII” and Harbison’s “For Violin Alone,” a world premiere co-commissioned by the 92nd Street Y. At 8 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ New York Philharmonic (Friday, Saturday and Thursday through Feb. 7) The dynamic American conductor David Robertson joins the Philharmonic for two more performances (on Friday and Saturday) of an enticing program, offering Rachmaninoff’s Vocalise, Stravinsky’s “Firebird” Suite, Bartok’s “Miraculous Mandarin” Suite and, with the superb pianist Emanuel Ax as soloist, Chopin’s Piano Concerto No. 2. On Thursday the eminent conductor David Zinman takes the podium for a program of Christopher Rouse’s “Iscariot” (1989), Barber’s great Violin Concerto, with the brilliant violinist Lisa Batiashvili as soloist, and Rachmaninoff’s colorful Second Symphony. Friday at 11 a.m., Saturday at 8 p.m., Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Tommasini)★ NYFOS Next (Tuesday) This festival’s artistic director, Michael Barrett, curates this year’s opening, and he’s put together an intriguing program for the soprano Meredith Lustig and the baritones Theo Hoffman and Jonathan Estabrooks. Songs come from Gabrial Kahane (including premieres from his new “Three Vernacular Songs”), Jonathan Dove, Juantio Becenti, Adam Guettel and George Steel. At 7 p.m., National Opera Center, 330 Seventh Avenue, at 29th Street, Chelsea, 212-796-8620, operaamerica.org. (Allen)Matthew Polenzani (Wednesday) Today’s lyric tenor of choice and the pianist Julius Drake have an unexpected, likely-to-be fascinating program for their appearance at Lincoln Center’s Great Performers series. Three songs by Satie and five by Ravel root an evening that also includes Liszt, Beethoven and Barber’s “Hermit Songs.” At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org. (Allen)An earlier version of the entry for the New York Philharmonic included outdated information about the ensemble’s program, with works by Rachmaninoff, Stravinsky, Bartok and Chopin, on Friday and Saturday. The program now features Stravinsky’s “Firebird” Suite, not the composer’s “The Song of the Nightingale.” (Last Tuesday’s rehearsals were canceled because of the snowstorm, resulting in the substitution.)A version of this schedule appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page C22 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.