AdvertisementSupported by Prices may not reflect ticketing service charges. For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Akon in Tribute Concert (Friday) It’s been seven years since this charismatic, increasingly electropop-leaning singer-rapper released his last album, “Freedom,” but he has not been idle: Last year he appeared on songs by Chris Brown, Wizkid and Jeezy. This month he announced the release of a five-part concept album, “Stadium,” for later this year. Each disc will focus on a different musical label: Euro, pop, urban, island and world. On this evening, he headlines a tribute to Robert Montanez, a.k.a. Screw, his former road manager who was killed in New Jersey in 2004. With Joell Ortiz, Mike Tyson, DJ Camilo and others. At 10 p.m., Stage 48, 605 West 48th Street, Clinton, 212-957-1800, stage48.com. (Stacey Anderson)★ Bonobo (D.J. set) (Thursday) This British down-tempo electronic D.J.-producer (whose less-simian real name is Simon Green) takes a boyish glee in his evocations of the primal world; his first two knotty, trip hop-influenced albums were called “Animal Magic” and “Dial M for Monkey.” Mr. Green often performs with a full band, placing his own bass work at center stage. He pares down the ensemble show for this set, which also includes the DFA Records darling Museum of Love. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Anderson)Ben Howard  (Friday) A British singer-songwriter unmistakably influenced by floor-quaking, drawling late 1960s and ’70s psychedelic rock, Mr. Howard allows his lengthy folk tales to unspool slyly while working to a mammoth apex. His debut studio album, “Every Kingdom,” was nominated in 2011 for the prestigious Mercury Prize in Britain; he released the follow-up, “I Forget Where We Were,” last year. With Hiss Golden Messenger. At 8 p.m., Hammerstein Ballroom, 311 West 34th Street, Manhattan, 800-745-3000, ticketmaster.com. (Anderson)Ladysmith Black Mambazo  (Saturday) A touring university of sorts, this male choral group prides itself on traveling the world to teach the history and culture of South Africa. Who among us would not accept a syllabus from the sublime voices that backed Paul Simon on “Graceland”? At 7 p.m., members of the ensemble will take part in a preshow discussion and Q. and A. At 8 p.m., Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, Brooklyn, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org. (Anderson)Bettye LaVette (Friday through Sunday and Tuesday through Feb. 7) Her 2005 comeback album, “I’ve Got My Own Hell to Raise,” a collection of songs by women, was a soulful highlight of that year. A performer since the early ’60s who toured with James Brown and Otis Redding, Ms. LaVette has the steamroller magnetism to invigorate the night. “Thankful N’ Thoughtful,” released in 2012, celebrated her 50th anniversary in the business; she celebrates her 69th birthday with this Café Carlyle engagement. At 8:45 p.m., 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. (Anderson)LE1F (Saturday) A former ballet dancer with a penchant for neon colors and Pokémon masks, Le1f (pronounced “leaf”) is a rapper from New York City with a gravelly and rapid-fire delivery reminiscent of Busta Rhymes’s. He performed his breakthrough single, “Wut,” on “The Late Show With David Letterman” last spring, after which Mr. Letterman reasonably tried to buy his righteous shoes. He’s on a bill headlined by Sick Feeling; other acts include Dark Blue and On a Clear Day. At 8 p.m., Aviv, 496 Morgan Avenue, near Beadel Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, 510-316-4730, facebook.com/avivbrooklyn. (Anderson)Lincoln Center American Songbook Series: John Reilly & Friends (Friday) Comedians playing it straight in American roots music is a burgeoning trade; consider Steve Martin’s bluegrass banjo scholarship and Woody Allen’s sure-footed 1920s-era jazz ensembles. The character actor John C. Reilly, who has taken his fair share of pratfalls in films like “Step Brothers” and “Walk Hard: The Dewey Cox Story,” also moonlights as a folk singer and rhythm guitarist. His trio joined Jack White at the Newport Folk Festival last summer for a cozy rendition of the waltz standard “Good Night, Irene.” He drops his middle initial when performing music but, unlike many of his roles, not his pants. With Becky Stark and Tom Brosseau. At 8:30 p.m., the Appel Room, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-721-6500, jazz.org. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret: Christine Ebersole and Cheyenne Jackson (Friday and Saturday) One of this month’s high points is the return of Christine Ebersole to 54 Below in her tart semi-autobiographical show, “Big Noise From Winnetka.” She concludes her two week run of the show this weekend. Friday and Saturday at 7 p.m., 54 Below, 254 West 54th Street, 646-476-3551, 54below.com. (Stephen Holden)★ Diana Ross (Tuesday) This Supremes star and first lady of Motown is one of the latest entertainers to walk that well-worn path to Las Vegas, where she’ll start a mini-residency at the Venetian this spring. The first lady of ’60s and ’70s soul-pop and R&B received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 2012, after which she toured largely abroad. Now, she returns to New York. Expect “Baby Love,” “Stop! In the Name of Love,” “Ain’t No Mountain High Enough” and a parade of other singalong-worthy hits at the grand reopening of Kings Theater, a once-glorious, newly restored vaudeville theater. At 8 p.m., Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Flatbush, Brooklyn, kingstheatre.com. (Anderson)Savages (Saturday) The singer of this British postpunk quartet, Jehnny Beth, remains the heir apparent to the Joy Division frontman, Ian Curtis — she possesses the same androgynous beauty and cagey charisma. This all-female band whipped a furious lather on “Silence Yourself,” one of the best debuts of 2013 — not least for its fractious anthem “Husbands,” which should be screeched at all contentious divorce hearings. Over the course of nine area shows this month — all sold out — the band plans to debut new material. At 8 p.m., Saint Vitus, 1120 Manhattan Avenue, at Clay Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, saintvitusbar.com. (Anderson)Seth Troxler  (Friday) This dance D.J.-producer nods heavily to the deep techno scene of Detroit in his nimble mixes, for which he was anointed by Rolling Stone as one of the “Top 25 D.J.s That Rule the Earth.” Mr. Troxler, who was born in Michigan and now lives in Berlin, is also a fixture at Burning Man and on the New York dance festival circuit. He headlines Output’s Year Two anniversary party, which also features Craig Richards, Doc Martin and others. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Anderson)★ Jack White and Run the Jewels  (Friday) Mr. White, blues-rock’s main mad man, operates at a tireless pace: in addition to his current national tour, he has dates with Coachella and several Lollapalooza stages in South America; he is releasing a belated White Stripes live album; and he is developing a 3-D concert-viewing app. Mr. White brings his guitar pyrotechnics to Madison Square Garden, with opening support from Killer Mike and El-P, the hip-hop duo also known as Run the Jewels. “Run the Jewels 2” was the most assertive, confrontational and exhilarating rap album of 2014. Thanks to a Kickstarter campaign, that release will have an authorized remix, title “Meow the Jewels,” consisting of cat noises. Here’s hoping Mr. White adds his own feral yowl to a live preview. At 8 p.m., 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)Wolfgang Gartner  (Saturday) The bucolic central California town of San Luis Obispo has yielded a considerable musical output that belies its size: At various points in their lives, Weird Al Yankovic, John Darnielle of the Mountain Goats and the folk singer-songwriter M. Ward have called it home. Add to that list Joseph Thomas Youngman, who under the stage name Wolfgang Gartner is a tech-house purveyor firmly entrenched in Britain’s influential Ministry of Sound scene. His corrosive, distorted beats evoke (and encourage) the most debauched of dance parties. At 10 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)Advertisement