AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Zachary WoolfeThere is an ineffable, unmistakable quality at the core of great live performances. Call it energy; call it joy. And it doesn’t require the material to be happy: It is possible for a rendition of a symphony to be joyful, even if the work is weighty.This elusive quality was too often missing in the New York Philharmonic’s concert on Wednesday evening at Avery Fisher Hall. It was doubtless a disjointed week for the orchestra, with rehearsal cancellations due to the snowstorm making a program change necessary.That may partly account for the merely responsible mood that hovered over large swaths of the concert. Led by David Robertson — a frequent guest who was spoken of 10 years ago as a serious contender for the Philharmonic music director position that eventually went to Alan Gilbert — the orchestra offered some surface dynamism and slackness underneath.Part of the trouble was the design of the program, an exploration of different kinds of meaty, pungent escapism during World War I, into which Chopin’s Piano Concerto in F minor (1829-30) was dropped like a rather delicate alien spaceship. Where was the contemporary music of which Mr. Robertson is so gifted an interpreter? While he, like Mr. Gilbert, is known for effectively juxtaposing new and classic sounds in a way that illuminates both, here Chopin was simply swamped by the Technicolor savagery of Stravinsky and Bartok.Not that the orchestra helped Chopin put up much of a fight. Mr. Robertson summoned slight character from the musicians in the concerto’s rustling, bustling Allegro Vivace finale. The soloist, Emanuel Ax, played with blunt clarity and only limited allure, drama or variety of texture. Even when his palette broadened a bit in his account of the slow second movement, there was no sensuality in the orchestra’s support.The second half of the program featured dueling Orientalist fantasias: Stravinsky’s 1919 Suite from “The Firebird,” which replaced his originally scheduled “Song of the Nightingale,” from the same period, and Bartok’s Suite from “The Miraculous Mandarin” (1917-19). These are dazzling displays of an orchestra’s prowess, but on Wednesday, both seemed strangely flat in impact, with loudness but no power. That quality of joy was in short supply.This program will be repeated Friday and Saturday at Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center; 212-875-5656, nyphil.org.Advertisement