AdvertisementSupported byInside ArtBy Randy KennedyGardens have been formative playgrounds for great artists at least since Michelangelo spent his teenage years poring over antiquities in the Medici gardens in Florence. But few artists have made gardens as central to their work as Isamu Noguchi, whose museum and sculpture garden in Long Island City, Queens, turns 30 this year.“When the time came for me to work with larger spaces,” Noguchi (1904-88) once said, “I conceived them as gardens, not as sites with objects but as relationships to a whole.”Beginning Sept. 8, the Brooklyn Botanic Garden will be the whole, and the relationships will be formed around 15 important Noguchi works — from the 1940s through the mid-1980s — as part of a celebration to honor the centennial of its Japanese Hill-and-Pond Garden, the first of its kind created in an American public garden.“Isamu Noguchi at Brooklyn Botanic Garden,” which continues through Dec. 14, will be the garden’s first significant foray into the art world, where several American public gardens, including Brooklyn Botanic’s neighbor to the north, the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx, have been experimenting more ambitiously in recent years.Dakin Hart, the Noguchi Museum’s senior curator, said in an interview that the collaboration came about after discussions several years ago concerning the possibility of a single Noguchi loan to the garden. The idea for a full-scale exhibition made sense largely because of the Hill-and-Pond Garden, whose creator, Takeo Shiota, “clearly was looking at an American sensibility and trying to find ways to make a Japanese garden comprehensible here,” Mr. Hart said, by mixing in Western elements like bronze crane sculptures and a decidedly Italianate waterfall.“Noguchi was really interested in where nature met the man-made, and where cultures came together, and those things happen all over the garden,” Mr. Hart said, adding that the Brooklyn garden’s location at the margin of a glacial moraine also provides boulders aplenty for visual conversations with Noguchi’s well-known stone works. “I hope a lot of these, in a way, almost pass notice unless you’re really paying attention,” he said. “Or that they’ll look like they’ve been there for a million years.”NEW GALLERY FOR KELLEYMike Kelley, one of the most influential artists of the last few decades, was steeped in an anarchic art-as-life tradition that flourished on the West Coast in the 1970s around figures like Allan Kaprow and Paul McCarthy, with heavy European input from the Swiss-German firebrand Dieter Roth.Now the work of Mr. Kelley, who committed suicide in 2012, will join that of all three of those artists under the umbrella of the gallery Hauser & Wirth. The gallery will become the worldwide representative of the Mike Kelley Foundation for the Arts, formed five years before his death, and will begin work on exhibitions, publications and sales of Mr. Kelley’s work, examples of which have sold for well over a million dollars in recent years.The decision by the foundation comes as something of a surprise, because Mr. Kelley was represented for many years, until his death, by the Gagosian Gallery, one of the most powerful in the world, which organized several highly regarded exhibitions of his work. But after Mr. Kelley’s death, the foundation and his estate withdrew his art from all galleries that were selling it and effectively ended consignments, in order to regroup and think about how best to promote his legacy.Representatives from neither Hauser & Wirth nor the Kelley Foundation would comment on the agreement, beyond releasing a statement describing Mr. Kelley’s career and accomplishments. But the gallery’s representation of Mr. McCarthy — a highly regarded artist with whom Mr. Kelley frequently collaborated and shared a deeply transgressive worldview — may have been a factor. Among the most memorable pieces that Mr. Kelley and Mr. McCarthy did together was a 1992 video reimagining of the Swiss novel “Heidi” as a kind of anti-authoritarian horror story with erotic overtones.“It was a lot of laughing, making jokes,” Mr. McCarthy once recalled about their working methods, “and then all of a sudden we’d see something and go: ‘That’s an idea. We should do it.’ Then it’s like, ‘Should we really do it?’ ”SALUTING ARTIST (AND DOG)Barbara Walters is not known as a major art collector. But she recently opened her checkbook to help a quite significant collector, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, acquire a sculpture by Anne Seymour Conway Damer, the first recognized English female sculptor, whose work was not previously among the Met’s holdings.Both the sculpture and the donation line on the museum label will undoubtedly delight a certain species of art lover: The Carrara marble work, from about 1782, is a painstakingly fluffy representation of a Maltese, given by Ms. Walters “in honor of Cha Cha,” her beloved Havanese, who died last year at 12, though hardly in obscurity. (Ms. Walters often mentioned the dog on her daytime show “The View,” on which she announced her retirement and ended her television career last year.)Luke Syson, the Met’s curator in charge of European sculpture and decorative arts, said in an interview that he had sat next to Ms. Walters at a dinner last year and described the Damer work to her, telling her that it was being offered by a London dealer. “And she got excited about it and thought it was a great thing,” he said. “So she just immediately asked me what it would cost to support the purchase.”Ms. Walters said on the telephone that the price was $300,000 and that she surprised herself by purchasing the work: “I don’t go to auctions. I don’t have all this money, and I don’t know what made me do it. But I wanted to buy it for Cha Cha.” She added: “I know everybody feels this, but she was the best dog in the world. Take my word for it.”The sculpture recently went on view in the museum’s gallery for British decorative arts, along with another Damer sculpture borrowed from a private collection, a portrait bust of her mother, Caroline Campbell, possibly from the 1780s, included to show the range of Damer’s ambition and talent.“My impression initially of the dog sculpture,” Mr. Syson said, “was that it didn’t seem like the kind of serious work the Met would acquire. But it’s an extremely complex piece of carving. And it does have its place here, in another sense, at a museum that is in Central Park, where thousands of dogs take their constitutionals every day.”Advertisement