AdvertisementSupported byAntiquesBy Eve M. KahnAs soon as 19th-century developers started carving Florida’s swampland and palm groves into resorts and subdivisions, colonies of artists formed there to document the vanishing landscape. On Feb. 8, a new building devoted to the art of the region opens at the Museum of Arts and Sciences in Daytona Beach.The building, the Cici and Hyatt Brown Museum of Art, holds depictions of only Florida subjects. The Browns, a philanthropic couple, have acquired about 2,600 works and researched artists who are not widely known for having traveled in the state, like Thomas Hart Benton and Louis Comfort Tiffany. The collection will allow curators to focus on how artists captured local architecture, cloud formations and plant life, among other topics.“We can pull any kind of thematic exhibition out of it,” Andrew Sandall, executive director of the Museum of Arts and Sciences, said in an interview.He added, “It’s showing a Florida that’s disappeared.”The state’s other major private collectors, Sam and Robbie Vickers, have gathered about 2,500 paintings dating to the 1700s at their Jacksonville home. The holdings represent longtime Florida residents like the painter Martin Johnson Heade, who died in St. Augustine in 1904, as well as occasional snowbirds like Winslow Homer.The Vickerses are now choosing a possible institutional home for their collection. “It definitely has to stay in Florida,” Ms. Vickers said.Their tableau of peonies from 1902 by the artist Felix de Crano is on loan through March 1 at the Lightner Museum in St. Augustine, which has organized the first major de Crano retrospective (with a catalog by the historian Deborah C. Pollack). De Crano, a French émigré, set up a St. Augustine studio in the 1890s, around age 50. He painted Florida’s marshes, dune scrub, sailboats and stuccoed houses with tiers of porches.After his death in 1908, his widow, Mary Gratz de Crano, a Philadelphia real estate and railroad heiress, displayed his canvases and watercolors at his studio for decades even as they fell out of fashion. They now sell for as little as a few hundred dollars each. Similar floral works by his friend Mr. Heade, who died in relative obscurity but was rediscovered in the 1940s, can bring six-figure prices.Robert Harper, the Lightner Museum’s executive director, said that the discrepancy in value between works by two simpatico painters “shows the fickleness of the art market.”A disbanded colony of Florida painters, the Highwaymen, is also drawing attention from historians and collectors. The Highwaymen consisted of two dozen African-American painters from Fort Pierce, mostly self-taught and all men except for a charismatic gospel singer named Mary Ann Carroll. In the 1960s and ’70s, the group knocked on doors to peddle scenes of palm groves, beaches at sunset and swamp shacks. (Prices per painting then were around $30, and now can surpass $1,000.)Gary Monroe, the author of a recent monograph, “Mary Ann Carroll: First Lady of the Highwaymen” (University Press of Florida), has found paintings by the artists in odd spots. Al Black, one of the most prolific Highwaymen, created tropical murals for Florida prisons while incarcerated for fraud and drug-related crimes. When the Highwaymen landscapes were unveiled there, Mr. Monroe said in an interview, “that cinder block wall becomes a window into paradise.”He has just finished documenting a set of Black murals at a women’s prison near Tampa that is facing demolition.MEMORABILIA OF EXPOSIn San Francisco and San Diego, where buildings from 1915 expositions survive relatively intact, curators and collectors are reassembling objects originally shown at the fairgrounds.For the centennial of the Panama-California Exposition in San Diego, museums there are bringing out souvenir jewelry and pennants and plaster ornaments from demolished buildings. (Exhibitions are listed at Save Our Heritage Organization’s website, sohosandiego.org, and members of the public can add their own finds to a database, pancalarchive.org.)David Marshall, an architect in San Diego who is lending memorabilia to the shows, said that collecting in the field requires patiently poring over websites for oddities like tiny photos of expos packed into walnut shells.“Some of the best things I have were only a few bucks,” he said.To commemorate the Panama-Pacific International Exposition in San Francisco (centennial events are listed at ppie100.org), the de Young museum will show about 250 of 11,000 artworks that were hung in the 1915 galleries. Their wanderings after the fair are sometimes dramatic. The federal government seized roomfuls of Hungarian paintings, sculptures and textiles, deeming them a wartime enemy’s property. The Hungarian owners made mostly futile entreaties to have the art returned.Gergely Barki, a Hungarian art historian, has been tracing them to auction houses, institutions and private collections. A half-dozen will appear at the de Young, with documentation on how much else has disappeared into what he calls “a kind of Bermuda Triangle of Hungarian art.”World’s Fair Auction, a dealer in Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., is holding an online sale through Tuesday. Among the 1915 lots (estimates start at a few dollars each) is a children’s book about Billy Whiskers, a mischievous goat who roams the San Francisco fairgrounds.REGIONAL MODERNISMMuseums are carving the subject of modernist architecture and design into narrow regional slices for exhibitions this year.“A Tradition of Progress: Ohio Decorative Arts 1860-1945” opens on Feb. 7 at the Decorative Arts Center of Ohio in Lancaster, with boxy Mennonite and Arts and Crafts furniture, Santa Claus glass night lights, a chrome-trimmed vacuum cleaner and a kitchen mixer. “Middlesex County Modern,” opening in October at the Concord Museum in Massachusetts, will have Scandinavian-inspired furniture and vintage ads for flat-roofed homes alongside Revolutionary War battlefields. In November, curators of “St. Louis Modern” at the St. Louis Art Museum plan to park a 1950s Corvette near abstract stained-glass windows from a demolished church and models of destroyed ceiling and wall components designed by the sculptors Harry Bertoia and Isamu Noguchi.Exhibition organizers said that they hoped the displays of local varieties of modernism would inspire preservation efforts and attract visitors who like old cars and appliances but rarely go to museums.Andrew Richmond, a curator of the Ohio show, said that by juxtaposing hand-crafting and mass production at the center’s 1830s brick headquarters, “we’ll definitely turn a few heads.” He added that the modernism exhibition trend is a sign that many institutions “recognize that we need to get, for lack of a better term, fresh meat in the galleries.”Advertisement