AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael Cooper and J. David GoodmanIt was an encore performance. The pro-Ukrainian protester who was arrested after climbing onto the stage of the Metropolitan Opera following a performance said on Friday that he had done something similar at a concert at Harvard last year.On Thursday, the protester, Roman Torgovitsky, 38, of Boston, took to the Met stage during curtain calls for the diva Anna Netrebko to criticize her and the conductor, Valery Gergiev, for their support of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. Mr. Torgovitsky said in a telephone interview from a holding pen in Manhattan that he had also gone onto the stage of the Sanders Theater at Harvard last spring during a performance by the Russian violinist Vladimir Spivakov, who had signed a letter endorsing Mr. Putin’s actions in Ukraine. He spoke while awaiting arraignment on expected criminal trespass charges.“I see very well known, and amazing, Russian musicians who unfortunately not only passively support President Putin’s war against Ukraine, but also quite actively support it,” said Mr. Torgovitsky, who said that he had started a group, Wounded Warrior Ukraine, to train people to help those suffering in Ukraine.Ms. Netrebko was taking her bows on Thursday after singing in Tchaikovsky’s “Iolanta” when Mr. Torgovitsky leapt onto a narrow ledge that runs along the left side of the orchestra pit, walked onto the stage and unfolded a sign with pictures of Ms. Netrebko and Mr. Gergiev, an image of Mr. Putin that was doctored to look like Hitler, and the blue and yellow of the Ukrainian flag.“I almost lost balance — for a millisecond I thought, ‘I’m going to fall into the musicians,’ ” he said.The breach raised questions about security at the Met. Peter Gelb, its general manager, said that the Met would tighten its security at the coming performances of the operas.“Going forward, we will have more security personnel inside,” he said, noting that the protester’s walk to the stage had been obscured by the standing ovation for Ms. Netrebko. “We will be extra careful to have personnel in all the strategic places where they need to be.”Mr. Torgovitsky said that he had tried to minimize the disruption he caused by waiting for the end of “Iolanta,” which he said he enjoyed. And he compared his actions with those of Mr. Putin, who he said had ignored international treaties in Ukraine and the Crimea.“I did just .001 percent of that,” he said. “I did ignore the feelings of Netrebko and Gergiev for sure, but basically hoping to bring this issue visibility and discussion.”Advertisement