AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Jon CaramanicaIt’s tempting to want to watch Savages from a distance. As a unit, this London band works on a grand scale, making a post-punk squall that’s streamlined but not skeletal. From its earliest shows, it’s been adept at filling a space with a sound that’s imposing, urgent and mildly gloomy.But on Wednesday, at the Mercury Lounge, up close was the way to view the show. Savages has been performing regularly in New York City this month, workshopping a set of new songs in tiny, tiny rooms, especially compared with the ones they usually play. The final show of the run will be on Saturday night at Saint Vitus in Greenpoint, Brooklyn.Watching a band evolve and mutate in real time isn’t an opportunity that’s given very often, so it’s one worth taking. I went to three of the nine shows, one in each week of the residency. (The other two were at Baby’s All Right, in Williamsburg.)Savages has an exceedingly clear idea of itself, with a laser-honed aesthetic — dressing in all black, all the time — and a sound that’s almost as defined. Even though the group was playing a lot of new material, it was not at risk of veering off course. Which meant that the all-female band — the singer Jehnny Beth, Gemma Thompson on guitar, Ayse Hassan on bass, and Fay Milton on drums — could focus on the small things.Wednesday’s show was the seventh of the run, and was notable for both its smoothness and its hiccups. By this point, the new songs were fully fleshed out. “Adore” had a slow, mercenary groove, like earthy stoner rock. The introduction to “Sad Person” felt like Gang of Four, and this night’s rendition was the most enthused of the three. “This Is What You Get” was a repetitive taunt that grew more amusing over the three shows. On this night, Ms. Hassan fumbled the tricky bass line on a new song, “Slowing Down the World,” perhaps distracted by an audience member hurling comments in her direction.At the first of the three shows, Jehnny Beth was still using lyric sheets on some songs: “We haven’t finished writing our songs but we thought, what the hell?” she said. On Wednesday, the best of the three shows, she was loose enough to engage with some yappy audience members without losing her cool. These were almost exclusively men, including one who said that Ms. Milton was “sexy” — there is a much higher bro quotient to the group’s crowd than you might expect. But Jehnny Beth is very much in control of her stage. “Thank you for pointing that out,” she said. “What about the songs?”She is an authoritative, commanding, fearsome singer — and yet not a powerful one. This is where the band’s narrative begins to fracture slightly. At times, there can be a hollowness to its sound, a foreboding cavern with little inside. In the past, it has been icy and distant at times.Jehnny Beth delivers lines like a drill commander, and she’s a magnetic stage presence, but sometimes her words feel more percussive than textural. And that can be underwhelming, especially given that lyrically, the new songs (especially “I Need Something New”) felt pared down, even from a band that had not previously emphasized complexity.Given that Savages didn’t change musically much night to night, what multiple viewings afforded was an opportunity to home in on individuals. Most of the time, that meant attention on Ms. Milton, who is a monstrous drummer, completely limber and athletic in a way that’s unique in the band. Sometimes she sounds as if she were drumming for a metalcore band; sometimes it sounds as if she were playing house music. Whatever the mode, she is meticulous and energetic, and responsible for a disproportionate amount of this band’s gale force. On guitar, Ms. Thompson is insular and poetic, emphasizing mood and caress over technique. On bass, Ms. Hassan is durable, with a light touch.At each show, I stood in a different place — first, rear left; second, center right, third, front left. From the back, it was easiest to experience Savages as pure sound, a unit working as one. But the closer I got, the more I realized that wasn’t quite the case. Up close, you can see how Ms. Hassam and Ms. Milton toss each other glances throughout the show. You can see how Jehnny Beth, so rigorous, still sweats. She is also more of an encouraging ringleader onstage than is obvious from a distance, throwing out little grins and looks to her bandmates, little nudges inside the storm.At one show, there was a five-minute mostly instrumental outro, with Jehnny Beth moving like a fitness instructor. But the ending of the third show felt more apt. At the moment the final beat dropped, the lights went dark, as if the plug had been pulled — a band no longer trying things out, instead knowing exactly when to stop.Advertisement