By BRIAN SEIBERTJAN. 30, 2015
Shannon Hummel founded Cora Dance in 1997 as a dance company, but in recent years her organization has branched out in its aims and activities. Committed to increasing access to dance, she has opened a pay-what-you-can community-center studio in Red Hook, Brooklyn, and taken her choreography and workshops to parks and public housing developments. “Stories,” the program that opened at BAM Fisher on Thursday, is designed as a “container,” as she put it, for all that Cora Dance now is.It was a mixed bag, holding offerings of various grades and value and one rare gem. A result of this all-inclusive approach was that there wasn’t really an intermission. Instead, in the middle of the show in Fishman Space and other places around the building, came selections from “Common Dance,” a series of short works designed for public spaces.In the downstairs lobby, the hip-hop dancer Solomon Goodwin and the wonderfully focused child performer Mateo Vidals did an elastic little dance of attachment and rejection on a couch. Back in the theater, Mr. Goodwin and Sarah Burke acted out a similar dynamic in the front row of the audience.Tender, amusing and tightly constructed, these miniatures, including another piece for children, were good within their limitations. A preview of a collaboration between Ms. Hummel and Mr. Goodwin looked like what it was: an early stage of experimentation. But the two full-fledged premieres were thin.AdvertisementIn “Cluck,” the image of Nadia Tykulsker lovingly trying to coax a raw chicken into flight as she is assailed by lemons was nicely absurd, yet the piece was underdeveloped. In “Enough,” Katie Dean was convincing as a choreographer struggling to create, but this was compelling as neither dance nor drama, and a suggestion at the end that her emotional distress was actually caused by a breakup sank the work further into bathos.But the pain of long-term relationships is clearly a subject Ms. Hummel understands how to express. A 45-minute duet for Ms. Dean and Calia Marshall, titled “down here,” recasts the playful push-pull of “Common Dance” into rare and harrowingly recognizable emotional truth. Mostly body language and made-up gestures, as if for the deaf, the work is closer to a silent play than to a conventional dance, although strong metaphorical use is made of the ability or failure to move in sync. Tiny human figures fashioned from aluminum foil serve as potent symbols for the buildup of old habits.AdvertisementShowing “down here” alone might have been a shrewder presentation of Ms. Hummel’s artistry, but there is more to her story. Amid these many tales, “down here” reasserts that she knows how to tell one.Cora Dance performs through Saturday at the Fishman Space at the Fisher Building of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene; 718-636-4100, bam.org. A version of this review appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Grab Bag of Wit and Pathos.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.