AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Jon ParelesThere’s no musical generation gap in the Thompson Family Band, which started a sold-out three-night stand at City Winery on Thursday. Richard Thompson, a pioneer and grandmaster of British folk-rock, shared the stage with his children, a grandchild and some helpful in-laws. They continue to follow the songwriting template he laid out in the 1960s with Fairport Convention and in the 1970s with his wife at the time, Linda Thompson. Mr. Thompson, then and now, has fused a British traditional heritage with hardheaded contemporary lyrics and the kick and twang of American rock and country. While the rest of the family members are not his equals as a songwriter — few are — they don’t tarnish the family name either. And their vocals harmonize richly even when they’re airing familial tensions. The songwriter Teddy Thompson, Richard and Linda’s son, gathered new songs and arrangements from his relatives via overdubbing and some shared sessions for the album “Family” (Fantasy/Concord), released last year; Linda Thompson has songs on the album but is not on the tour. It’s a self-conscious project; Teddy’s own song, “Family,” which opened the concert, starts with the words, “My father is one of the greatest to ever step on a stage/My mother has the most beautiful voice in the world,” and goes on to confess his own insecurity. He also sang an older ballad, “Home,” about visiting his mother, falling back into “the family embrace” and then, after a few days, wanting to escape. In the Thompson family, introspection is rarely far away from caustic observation or backhanded humor. Teddy Thompson took the family’s obvious love of sarcasm into the inevitable pitch for the CDs and memorabilia on sale, allowing that they were “of varying quality” and “exorbitantly priced.” Kami Thompson, Teddy’s sister, sang a countryish waltz, “I Long for Lonely,” complaining that, “The husband, the baby, the dog and the cat/Are all closing in on this miniature flat.” She was accompanied by her husband, James Walbourne, with whom she performs and records as the Rails. The concert moved between pristine ballads and more boisterous roots-rock, linking Celtic to country. From his decades-long catalog, Richard Thompson chose some songs he had recorded with Linda before their divorce, and praised her as “the matriarch.” Kami Thompson, who looks and sounds like Linda, sang the choruses with him. Richard Thompson was also on call for his unmistakable electric-guitar leads — taut, keening lines that hark back to country and rockabilly but take barbed tangents of their own. He also faced off with younger guitarists: his grandson Zak Hobbs, who came close to matching Richard’s bends and jabs, and Mr. Walbourne, who had his own sharp-elbowed rockabilly streak. After Richard Thompson and Mr. Walbourne traded solos in “Panic Attack Blues,” a Rails song, Kami Thompson grinned and scoffed: “Show-offs!” Mr. Hobbs has also studied his grandfather’s elaborate fingerpicking and his unsparing worldview, both on display in Mr. Hobbs’s “Root So Bitter.” The Thompson Family songs looked inward, lashed out and came back to sharing. The family closed the night with “Wall of Death,” a ringing song about a death-defying carnival attraction that was the final track on the last Richard and Linda Thompson album. Two generations later, it was a cherished heirloom. The Thompson Family Band continues through Saturday at City Winery, 155 Varick Street, near Spring Street, South Village; 212-608-0555, citywinery.com. Advertisement