By ZACHARY WOOLFEJAN. 30, 2015
Helena Rubinstein, the cosmetics magnate and subject of a current exhibition at the Jewish Museum, didn’t want to just sell makeup. She wanted to give her customer what she called a “salon experience.”Rubinstein’s stores were to the five-and-dimes of her day as the cellist Maya Beiser’s concerts are to the average recital. For more than 20 years, Ms. Beiser has built a cult following by creating events — experiences, you could say — as much as music. Video, dramatic lighting, electric instruments, goth-inflected gowns, spoken word and recorded elements are all in the mix, as is a highly personal quality Ms. Rubinstein may well have appreciated.“When I was a little girl, I had a lot of fears,” Ms. Beiser said from the stage on Thursday during “Beauty Is Power,” a concert at the Jewish Museum inspired by the Rubinstein exhibition. At another point in her show — presented with the new-music collective Bang on a Can, with which Ms. Beiser has a long association — she referred to her “inner shrine.”This New Age tinge extended to the music, a characteristically wide-ranging, flamboyantly reflective mixture that included the music of the medieval nun Hildegard von Bingen, Janis Joplin and a world premiere. Ms. Beiser favors moody, mahogany-tone sounds, a landscape that on Thursday was seductive if also, after 70 or 80 minutes, wearing.AdvertisementAs she did on her recent album of rock covers, Ms. Beiser showed a remarkable ability to plow through every mode, from sublimity to schlock, by sheer force of personality. Her take on Joplin’s classic version of “Summertime,” constructed from looped layers of her own playing, started out a busy mess, but Ms. Beiser eventually willed it into something kitschy, succulent and irresistible.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Keening phrases were on offer throughout, from Hildegard’s quivering “O Virtus Sapientiae” to Anna Clyne’s ferocious lullaby “Rest These Hands.” Tan Dun’s “Feige/Antiphonal Song” brought together soulful cello lines with prerecorded video of a Chinese vocalist singing a tangy ancient Hunan melody. In selections from Eve Beglarian’s “Far Off Country,” Ms. Beiser recited ominous texts by Henri Michaux as she played lush, seething melodies.The most intriguing thing she’d scheduled, as of a few weeks ago — Yoko Ono’s seminal “Cut Piece,” in which the audience is invited to cut off the performer’s clothing — ended up omitted from the program, a sore loss of a work that would have been fascinating from a musician appearing in a museum.Trying to match the softly hallucinogenic processed vocals of Imogen Heap’s song “Hide and Seek,” Ms. Beiser just sounded uncomfortable. But in the premiere of Julia Wolfe’s “Emunah” (the Hebrew word for faith or belief), she more effectively united her own voice — wordless, dark-hued, trembling — and her sinuous playing.Ms. Beiser told me once in an interview: “If something comes from an artistic impulse, it can’t be wrong. It may not be great, but it can’t be wrong.” Even when this idiosyncratic, lovable artist isn’t great, she manages to seem, sometimes against your better judgment, somehow right.Bang on a Can presents a concert in conjunction with the exhibition “Revolution of the Eye” on May 14 at the Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street; 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. A version of this review appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Recital Experience, Expanded.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.