By JAMES R. OESTREICHJAN. 30, 2015
The pianist Shai Wosner is probably sick of hearing that he bears a certain physical resemblance to Schubert (though his choice of eyeglasses only fosters the notion). His identification with the composer, however, clearly runs much deeper, as he showed in a superb rendition of the late Sonata in A (D. 959) at the 92nd Street Y on Wednesday evening. The performance was part of a two-concert series, “The Schubert Effect,” which Mr. Wosner, its curator, is sharing with the Parker Quartet.The idea behind the series — juxtaposing Schubert’s music with more or less related works by living composers — dates at least as far back as 2013, when, in a brief recital at the Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival in New Mexico, Mr. Wosner paired the great B flat Sonata (D. 960) with Jörg Widmann’s “Idyll and Abyss: Six Schubert Reminiscences.”Here, Mr. Wosner opened with Missy Mazzoli’s “Isabelle Eberhardt Dreams of Pianos” (2007), a meditation on a Swiss adventurer who, in Ms. Mazzoli’s words, “abandoned a comfortable aristocratic life for a nomadic existence in North Africa” and died in 1904, at 27, during a flash flood in the Algerian desert. Understandably captivated by the tale, Ms. Mazzoli returned to it in a chamber opera, “Song From the Uproar” (2012).In “Isabelle Eberhardt,” the piano enters tentatively over initially faint, diffuse electronics, and the whole builds to an exuberant climax before dissolving into the placid, otherworldly theme of the Andantino from the A major Sonata. This set a tone of concentrated listening that Mr. Wosner sustained beautifully throughout the sonata itself. The effect can be heard on Mr. Wosner’s splendid new CD on the Onyx label, which offers those two works and Schubert’s “Moments Musicaux” (D. 780).In the second half of Wednesday’s concert, the young Parker Quartet players — Daniel Chong and Ying Xue, violinists; Jessica Bodner, violist; and Kee-Hyun Kim, cellist — tried something similar, opening with Gyorgy Kurtag’s “Aus der Ferne V” (“From Afar V”) and pushing directly into Schubert’s “Death and the Maiden” Quartet. These were good performances, though the group showed that it has room to grow in its corporate sound and its interpretive acuity.But some sense of anticlimax was perhaps inevitable, after Mr. Wosner’s transcendent achievements in the first half.The final program of “The Schubert Effect” is on Sunday afternoon at the 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; 212-415-5500, 92y.org. A version of this review appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Schubert, Then and Now.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.