By NEIL GENZLINGERJAN. 30, 2015
Some of you have probably been worried about what has become of Rob Lowe since he left the quirky comforts of Pawnee and “Parks and Recreation” last year. You have good reason to be. Turns out, he married a stripper who had him brutally murdered.Mr. Lowe is the central figure and victim in “Beautiful & Twisted,” a made-for-television movie that has its premiere Saturday night on Lifetime. It is based on the headline-grabbing case of Ben Novack Jr., a hotel heir who was found dead in a hotel in Rye Brook, N.Y., in 2009. The Spanish actress Paz Vega plays his wife, Narcy, who was sentenced to life in prison for orchestrating the murder.And who has the classic features necessary to play the mother of Mr. Lowe’s character convincingly? Candice Bergen, that’s who. She too, alas, meets a gruesome end in this bizarre case, which is full of sex and greed and Batman collectibles (Mr. Novack’s hobby).The story is cheekily told here, and pretty well, if you don’t mind “cheeky” as the tone for a tale in which real people died. Mr. Lowe gets to narrate his own demise, even though among the first things we see is his corpse being shelved in a morgue, because on TV you can do that sort of thing.The case has already had a number of television treatments on true-crime shows, but this version has much higher production values and a fair amount of spunk. Lifetime’s movies, in case you haven’t noticed, have been getting better and less formulaic. This one starts with some pretty steamy scenes for basic cable, and the actors are not mailing it in, as sometimes seems to be the case with such fare.As for Mr. Lowe, he’s already risen from that slab — his DirecTV commercials are hard to escape — and he’ll even return briefly to “Parks and Recreation,” the NBC series where he was a much-loved semiregular for years. He has said that he puts in an appearance in the series finale, coming Feb. 24.Beautiful & TwistedLifetime, Saturday night at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time.Produced by Sony Pictures Television. Written by Teena Booth, Inon Shampanier, Natalie Shampanier and Stephen Kay; Judith Verno and Rob Lowe, executive producers.WITH: Rob Lowe (Ben Novack Jr.), Paz Vega (Narcy) and Candice Bergen (Bernice Novack).A version of this review appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Till Death Parts Them.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.