By STEPHEN HOLDENJAN. 30, 2015
As Billy Porter transformed “Take the Moment,” an obscure song from the Richard Rodgers-Stephen Sondheim musical “Do I Hear a Waltz?,” into a pop-gospel plea at the Appel Room on Wednesday evening, his performance created the kind of epiphany that a great voice can conjure out of thin air. The key lay not only in Mr. Porter’s innate vocal power but also in his commitment to shoot the moon, no matter the consequences. His go-for-broke approach recalled singers like Patti LaBelle, for whom there are no halfways and who risk drowning in emotional intensity.A Broadway tenor whose portrayal of Lola, a drag queen in “Kinky Boots,” won him the 2013 Tony Award for best actor in a musical, Mr. Porter was opening the new season of Lincoln Center’s American Songbook series. The forces accompanying him comprised a 13-piece orchestra (embedded with a string quartet), led by James Sampliner, and the Broadway Inspirational Voices, a large, excellent gospel choir. Most of the material came from Mr. Porter’s recent album, “Billy’s Back on Broadway” (Concord Records).Many of the arrangements were boldly inventive stylistic mash-ups of Broadway, swing, disco and old-time gospel, some propelled by the shivery sound of a church organ. The show began with three songs associated with Broadway divas: “But the World Goes Round,” “Everything’s Coming Up Roses” and “Don’t Rain on My Parade.” Its centerpiece and theme song was the Sammy Davis Jr. hit “I’ve Gotta Be Me,” from the musical “Golden Rainbow.” Applying his own personal spin to a song that used to be a staple of preening Las Vegas crooners, Mr. Porter resuscitated it as a sleek pop-funk anthem of gay self-acceptance. It segued directly to a suite from “Kinky Boots,” cresting with “I’m Not My Father’s Son.”As the musical styles shifted and overlapped, Mr. Porter changed persona, from an old-fashioned song-and-dance man; to a haughty drag queen wearing red high-heeled boots and a bow tie; to a contemporary hipster.The evening’s coup was his stirring reinvention of “Sunday,” the climactic song from “Sunday in the Park With George,” as a church anthem, which he delivered flanked by the Broadway Inspirational Voices. That show’s grand theatrical summation became a solemnly joyful, quasi-religious hymn of praise that fused Broadway and gospel traditions. It was the kind of juxtaposition that probably only Mr. Porter could have pulled off, and it struck deep.Billy Porter performs again on Wednesday at the Appel Room, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway; 212-721-6500, americansongbook.org. A version of this review appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: The Theater Is His Church.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.