AdvertisementSupported byBy Lorne ManlyLOS ANGELES — It may be the last day of September, but here in a middle-class, suburban enclave where the new CW show “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” is filming, it’s Thanksgiving. One at which a Nicki Minaj-style song just broke out.Perched primly on a divan between the Filipino parents of her former boyfriend — she ditched her job as a lawyer and moved across the country in a Hail Mary attempt to win him back — Rebecca Bunch (Rachel Bloom) does her best to woo them.She’s already presented them with her homemade dinuguan, a Filipino stew. Now she bombastically spits out some lyrics from “I Give Good Parent”: “Your home is such a beautiful, comfortable space/ Bitches, you two have wonderful taste.”In a season in which the offerings from the broadcast networks seem more formulaic than ever, “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” decidedly stands out. Spurned by Showtime before landing at the CW, it is a full-fledged musical, veering across genres from R&B to country, as it integrates two to three original numbers into every hourlong episode.The creators, Ms. Bloom and Aline Brosh McKenna, the writer of films like “The Devil Wears Prada” and “27 Dresses,” have imported most of the core cast members from the New York theater world. A full-time choreographer is on staff. And Adam Schlesinger, a founder of the band Fountains of Wayne, is a regular songwriter.All this to create a skewed take on romantic comedies, where love conquers all and happiness abides.“This is the dark flip side of that,” Ms. Bloom said.“Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” ultimately came about thanks to the intervention of the writer’s favorite pastime: procrastination.One day more than two years ago, Ms. Brosh McKenna was checking out websites rather than attacking the blank page when she landed on one of Ms. Bloom’s music videos: “Historically Accurate Disney Princess Song.” As bluebirds trill, an animated princess wanders her medieval village, past a blacksmith with his 10-year-old daughter-wife and a cart of baby corpses, pining for her prince. “And he’d fill me with his seed, forcibly and rough, and I’d give birth to a son and die right after.”Entranced, she quickly devoured all the other videos she could find. There was the innuendo-laden “Chanukah Honey,” a counterpoint to Eartha Kitt’s “Santa Baby,” in which Ms. Bloom serenades the object of her affections with a mix of compliments (“You got your M.B.A. from Penn. Amen. That is such a good school.)” and come-ons (“So come and flip my latkes tonight.”) And “We Don’t Need a Man,” a Beyoncé-inspired, postbreakup song of female empowerment during which Ms. Bloom intersperses lines like “I don’t deserve love.”Ms. Brosh McKenna, 48, was struck by the comedic sensibility of the 28-year-old Ms. Bloom — songs with societal critiques cloaked in cheeriness, intellectual references cheek by jowl with the sophomoric, the over-the-top sexiness deliberately undercut. “All the characters have some pain at the center of them, and some delusion at the center of them,” Ms. Brosh McKenna said. “So it makes even the edgiest comedy emotionally compelling.”Ms. Brosh McKenna asked her best friend, Kate Adler, a comedy executive at CBS Television Studios, to set up a meeting with Ms. Bloom, and though she had no desire to do TV, she found herself brainstorming with Ms. Bloom in the parking lot.Ms. Bloom’s first impulse was to set a musical TV show in the entertainment milieu, like “Empire.” But Ms. Brosh McKenna had a different idea. “Crazy ex-girlfriend” was a sexist term she and several of her friends had appropriated to describe obsessive behavior, whether prompted by a relationship gone awry, twisted work politics or even something trivial like having a car fixed.“My deep conviction,” she added, “is we’ve all been that person.”Over the next few months, they fleshed out the show. Rebecca became a miserably unhappy New York real estate lawyer who moves to a post-housing-bust California, landing in the quintessential American suburb of West Covina.Surrounding Rebecca with new friends and colleagues as she tries to revive a summer camp romance from 10 years earlier, the creators set about subverting the romantic comedy and toying with the contradictory signals society sends women.“You’re supposed to have it all, but also you should give everything up for love,” Ms. Bloom said. “But also know what’s your zodiac sign. But also you should be substantive.”After several networks expressed interest, the creators opted for Showtime. But even with Marc Webb (“The Amazing Spider-Man”) directing the pilot, the network passed.Gary Levine, a Showtime senior executive said: “We loved working with Rachel, Aline and Marc, but at the end of the day, we didn’t think the pilot was a perfect fit for Showtime. We are beyond delighted that their work will live and grow on the CW.”In Hollywood, busted pilots are not exactly in high demand. Asked how often a pilot nixed by one network lands at another, David Stapf, CBS Studios president and a 30-year veteran of the business, replied, “Very, very rarely.”But then, after numerous fruitless pitch meetings at other cable and streaming networks, came another video intervention. Finally getting around to watching “Jane the Virgin,” the CW’s show about a Latina virgin who discovers she’s pregnant after a mishap at her doctor’s office, Ms. Brosh McKenna detected a kindred spirit to “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend.” Though the shows are very different, they share unconventional female leads and the fizziness of the classic screwball comedies.She suggested the CW. Shockingly, the executives at the CW agreed.Mark Pedowitz, president of the CW, said he was not worried that taming “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” for a broadcast network would materially change its tone. As he told the creators, “Your creativity should allow you to say the dirty words differently.” (The show will release both clean and uncensored versions of most of the songs.)The bigger challenges include supersizing both the individual episodes – adding about nine minutes each – and the length of the season – from 13 to as many as 22.Most crucially, are TV audiences ready for the equivalent of a Broadway musical-comedy each week?Santino Fontana, a Broadway transplant (the prince in “Rodgers and Hammerstein’s Cinderella”) who plays a self-hating wannabe love interest for Rebecca, will show off his piano-playing chops with a Billy Joel-like song in a future episode.Gospel will make an appearance when Donna Lynne Champlin (“Sweeney Todd”), who plays Rebecca’s best friend, belts out an inspirational song. Besides Ms. Bloom and Mr. Schlesinger, the songwriting team includes Jack Dolgen and the occasional outside contributor.“Glee” and “Smash” had their acolytes, but the songs logically connected with the high school glee club and making-of-a-musical environments. Shows that have ventured outside that comfort zone have not always been encouraging. Steven Bochco and William M. Finkelstein’s 1990 police procedural musical, “Cop Rock,” which in its pilot married a gritty courtroom scene with a jury breaking into a gospel song, was canceled after 11 episodes. “Galavant,” a cheeky fairy tale parody, garnered middling ratings during its run in January, though ABC has renewed it.But the creators of “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” and the show’s executives said they believed that the conceit lent itself more to a comedy than to a drama. Particularly one about the show’s ultimate subjects.“The most important thing for a musical number isn’t the excuse of why it is a musical number, it’s the heightened emotion that gets you there,” Ms. Bloom said. “And there’s nothing more heightened than love and obsession taking over your body and your thoughts.”Advertisement