By JON PARELESFEB. 1, 2015
Feedback erupted time and again as Jack White headlined Madison Square Garden on Friday night. It was no accident; Mr. White’s music hangs on the edge of overload, and the feedback only proves it. The occasional electronic screeches were part of his joyful assault; so were the quivering whoop in his voice and the way his guitar solos rushed way up high and stayed there, to zoom around or wriggle and wail. And so was the flat-out bashing of the band’s drummer, Daru Jones, who often stood up to provide extra wallop.But every so often, with the stage lights down as the crowd screamed its applause, Mr. White and the band would quickly switch to acoustic instruments and the music would stay rowdy but turn folksy, leaning toward country and skiffle. Suddenly what had been a stomping, guitar-drenched blues-rock band happened to feature a fiddle or a mandolin (played by Lillie Mae Rische) and a pedal-steel guitar (Fats Kaplin). Mr. White has made it his business to hot-wire the connections between roots-music styles and arena impact, and in shows like the one he put on at Madison Square Garden, he has found an exact alchemy of strategy and wildness.He played most of the songs on his 2014 album, “Lazaretto” (Third Man/Columbia), along with songs from his previous groups, the White Stripes and the Raconteurs. They harked back to an arena-rock past; Led Zeppelin looms behind Mr. White’s androgynous wail, his cranked-up guitar riffs and Mr. Jones’s cymbal crashes. And Mr. White isn’t shy about playing the blues-rock archetypes of lovelorn suitor and swaggering rock stud; “Any boy with a microphone can tell you what he loves the most,” he sang as he opened the concert with the White Stripes’ “Dead Leaves and the Dirty Ground.” But he has other things on his mind, too, like history, literary allusions and modern technology; “Three Women,” his update of Blind Willie McTell’s “Three Women Blues,” mentions a digital photograph. There’s a thinker behind the manic howl.A music-history assertion — that hip-hop is the heir to deep blues — was part of the Madison Square Garden show. As Mr. White began “Ball and Biscuit,” a volcanic slow blues, he announced that he had recently visited Mississippi and that “the mud on my shoes, that was probably packed on Robert Johnson’s grave, is still on the bottom of my shoes right now as they walk through Madison Square Garden.” He added, “The Furious Five, Kurtis Blow, Run-DMC are no different from Robert Johnson and Charley Patton and Blind Willie McTell,” and called for applause for New York hip-hop.Then, as he sang a rap-tinged rocker, “That Black Bat Licorice,” Mr. White suddenly brought out the Queens-born rapper Q-Tip, from A Tribe Called Quest, who shouted along in Mr. White’s song before the band backed Q-Tip and Mr. White rapping A Tribe Called Quest’s “Excursions.” Even as he reignites the old roles of rock belter and guitar hero, champions hand-played music and pumps out vinyl for his label, Third Man Records, Mr. White refuses to be just a throwback. The concert’s audio was livestreamed by Pandora.Mr. White also chose the opening act: Run the Jewels, the hip-hop duo of El-P from New York and Killer Mike from Atlanta. Their songs constantly jump-cut between testosterone-fueled bluster and vehement anti-authority politics, bristling with confrontational spirit. Midset, they were briefly joined by Zack de la Rocha from Rage Against the Machine; Boots, who produced much of the “Beyoncé” album, also joined them to play some hard-rock guitar. Mr. White’s fans gave Q-Tip a roaring welcome. But facing the prospect of new hip-hop, many chose to skip the opening act; apparently they prefer the throwback.Jack White continues his tour Tuesday at McCasland Fieldhouse at the University of Oklahoma; jackwhiteiii.com.A version of this review appears in print on February 2, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Blues and Hip-Hop Meet at the Hands of a Power Guitarist.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.