LONDON — Comedy comes in many shades, from jet black to shocking pink. In a rare moment of giddy confluence, the theaters here seem to have the whole rainbow on display.Truly funny plays tend to be the exception rather than the rule in New York these days. So I have grabbed the chance here to wander across the spectrum of what makes people laugh – and groan and sigh.Within only a few days, I was able to savor both the midnight blues of the first-rate revival of Kevin Elyot’s “My Night With Reg,” a portrait of gay men quipping and quailing in the shadow of AIDS, and the stage-blood-red farce of “The Play That Goes Wrong,” an unexpected, gut-busting hit about an incompetent amateur troupe staging a mystery melodrama.Impressions of the theater scene from the critics of The Times.I also sampled two distinctively colored satires, each very much of the moment in which it was written: Peter Barnes’s pitch-dark “The Ruling Class,” a gory vivisection of the British aristocracy from the 1960s, and the acid-hued “Golem,” a technologically ingenious fable from the company called 1927 at the Young Vic (with inspired animation design by Paul Barritt) about our own technologically ingenious age. These were both admonitory in tone, and kept me at an intrigued but chilled distance.“My Night With Reg” and “The Play That Goes Wrong” are more emotionally immersive works, perhaps better suited to a jet-lagged New Yorker in need of instant catharsis. Both elicit tears, though through very different means. “Wrong” is one of those breakneck exercises in idiocy that make you laugh till you cry, despite yourself. “Reg,” on the other hand, is a stealthy comedy of manners that shifts from silly to sad before you know it.The work that made the name of Mr. Elyot, who died last year, “Reg” picked up a slew of prizes in the mid-1990s (including an Olivier Award for best comedy) and became a film in 1996. I had seen and enjoyed its first New York incarnation, by the New Group in 1997. But this latest version – which transferred from the Donmar Warehouse to the Apollo Theater – makes “Reg” seem both gentler and harsher, and far more substantial, than I recalled.“Reg” is set in the mid-1980s when AIDS – the disease itself and the fear of it – was beginning to assert a stranglehold on gay men. In form, it resembles “The Boys in the Band,” Mart Crowley’s landmark 1968 comedy (and 1970 film) about the sorrows and pleasures of being gay and witty. Like “Boys,” “Reg” is a party play (it begins with a fraught dinner for five in a London flat) that suggests that the bigger party is already over. One major difference, though: in “Boys,” it was encroaching age and self-contempt that was dampening the festivities; in “Reg,” it’s an awareness that death is just around the corner.Directed by Robert Hastie, with a beautifully co-dependent ensemble, this “Reg” fades slowly from giddy brightness into twilight. It has the structure of an erotic French comedy, echoing both Feydeau’s farces and Eric Rohmer’s cerebral films, translated into the camp, flip banter that is the lingua franca of its characters.But there’s another language shared among the men portrayed here that “Reg” parses better than any play I know. And that’s sex. Coupling is the primary social currency for Mr. Elyot’s characters. And it’s a currency that is suddenly being devalued by the disaster of a mortal illness.Toward the play’s end, two upper-middle-class lads on the edge of middle age dance to David Bowie’s “Starman,” a song that summons memories of their salad days at university. As performed by Geoffrey Streatfeild and Julian Ovenden, this dance seems to encompass the whole course of a relationship – and arguably of a collective moment in gay history – as it progresses from energizing self-abandonment to a wilting self-awareness. As they wind down, the two men lean against each other, forehead to forehead. You’re not sure whether they’re going to start necking passionately or just collapse into a defeated heap. Instead, they right themselves and more or less soldier on, though with sagging shoulders. It’s a moment that’s kind of funny and deeply sad. This is comedy with a sting in its tail.There’s nothing nuanced about “The Play That Goes Wrong,” a creation of the young and enterprising Mischief Theater troupe, and that’s a large source of its appeal. It starts off punch-drunk and just keeps getting drunker. Originally staged above a pub in north London two years ago, it is now ensconced at the Duchess Theater in the West End and seems likely to stay there for a while.Its title is dead accurate. Most of the show, directed by Mark Bell, is a play-within-a-play (a moldy “Mousetrap”-style thriller performed by the fictitious Cornley Polytechnic Drama Society) that unfolds as a nightmarish series of mishaps. Lines are forgotten, props are lost, actors are injured, and the ramshackle scenery (by Nigel Hook) falls apart as if struck by a progressive earthquake.The show’s premise is hardly new to farce. (It’s the basis of Michael Frayn’s blissful and far more sophisticated “Noises Off.”) And by rights, its slam-bang approach shouldn’t work as well as it does. Yet my audience (which included the sitcom queen Miranda Hart) roared pretty much nonstop.Yes, I admit that I roared rather a lot myself. And honestly, that had nothing to do with the fact that at intermission, the actor playing the leading role handed me an envelope with my name on it. “I believe you dropped something,” he said ingratiatingly. Inside was a five-dollar bill (American money!), with a little note attached. It was labeled with a single word: “BRIBE.”A version of this article appears in print on 02/04/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: A Full Comic Spectrum Has London in Stitches.