AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck6 P.M. (NBC) SUPER BOWL XLIX The New England Patriots face off against the Seattle Seahawks at the University of Phoenix Stadium in Glendale, Ariz. Al Michaels provides play-by-play commentary; Cris Collinsworth is the analyst; and Michele Tafoya reports from the sidelines. Kickoff is at 6:30. Katy Perry, above, will take the stage at halftime, with Lenny Kravitz and Missy Elliott as special guests; Idina Menzel will perform the national anthem; and John Legend will sing “America the Beautiful.” Bob Costas will host the pregame show, starting at noon, featuring commentary and analysis; visits to the teams’ hotels; an interview with Ms. Perry by Josh Elliott; celebrity reports by the figure skaters Johnny Wier and Tara Lipinski; a stop at the official tailgate party; and an interview with President Obama by Savannah Guthrie.10 A.M. (CNN) FAREED ZAKARIA GPS Mr. Zakaria sits down with President Obama.10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Senator Kelly Ayotte, Republican of New Hampshire; Dennis B. Ross, a former senior adviser to President Obama on the Middle East; and Gen. Jack Keane discuss United States policy in the Middle East. Gov. Greg Abbott, Republican of Texas, and William J. Bennett, a former secretary of education, analyze the Common Core standards.10 A.M. (ABC) THIS WEEK Scott Walker, the Republican governor of Wisconsin, discusses his possible 2016 presidential bid.10:30 A.M. (CBS) FACE THE NATION The guests include Senators Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, and Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, and former Secretary of State James A. Baker III.10:30 A.M. (NBC) MEET THE PRESS Representative Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, talks about tax policy, trade and the 2016 presidential campaign. Former Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates discusses the Islamic State and what a new king in Saudi Arabia means for that country’s relationship with the United States. NOON (Hallmark) KITTEN BOWL II More than 90 kittens (including Richard Purrman and Cat Stafford) from the North Shore Animal League America and Last Hope Animal Rescue and Rehabilitation show off their most agile moves as part of the newly minted Feline Football League, overseen by its commissioner, Boomer Esiason. Beth Stern hosts; John Sterling and Mary Carillo provide play-by-play commentary; and Katy Perry provides the show’s theme song, “Roar.” The show will repeat at 3 and 6 p.m. 3 P.M. (Animal Planet) PUPPY BOWL XI Team Ruff takes on Team Fluff as the Puppy Bowl introduces competitive scoring, while 55 baby bruisers go in for tackles, fumbles and “Fido first downs.” Dan Schachner calls plays and penalties as the referee; goats cheer from the sideline; Meep the Bird tweets the action online; and aerial coverage is provided by a biplane and its hamster pilots. Not to be missed: the Bissell Kitty Halftime Show, featuring Katty Furry. The action is repeated at two-hour intervals throughout the day and evening. Viewers can log on to AnimalPlanet.com/PuppyBowl to participate in a Fantasy Puppy League. 6 P.M. (Nat Geo Wild) FISH BOWL II Not to be outdone by puppies and kittens, the network focuses on Goldie the goldfish and her new co-star, Charlie the clown fish, as they visit a barnyard filled with cows, horses, pigs, chickens and other friends of Dr. Jan Pol’s. A marathon of “The Incredible Dr. Pol” leads in, starting at 7 a.m.9 P.M. (13, 49) DOWNTON ABBEY Lady Rose (Lily James) makes a new acquaintance; Thomas (Rob Collier-James) continues his physical decline; Lady Edith (Laura Carmichael, left) draws attention as she dotes on Marigold; and Simon Bricker (Richard E. Grant) and Lord Grantham (Hugh Bonneville) come to blows. In “Grantchester,” at 10, an old woman tells Sidney Chambers (James Norton) that someone wants her dead. Then she dies.What’s Streaming NowTOYOTA ADZONE 2015 Hulu’s annual Super Bowl special allows game viewers to vote in real time for their favorite commercial. (hulu.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement