By BRIAN SEIBERTJAN. 31, 2015
A few weeks ago, Jay Donn, a pioneer of the Brooklyn street-dance form known as flex, was stopped by police officers in a subway station. This wasn’t part of the crackdown on dancing in trains: The police were concerned about the wires protruding from the bags he carried. What the officers found inside must have surprised them. This heavily tattooed dancer was transporting tutus.A few days later, other flex dancers in the city could be witnessed expressing the effects of solitary confinement, their contorting limbs suggesting minds breaking apart. For a flex performance, such traumatic subjects are common. What was unusual was the setting, a wood-paneled room decorated with oil paintings in gilded frames within the august Park Avenue Armory, and the person introducing the dancers, the theater and opera director Peter Sellars.These two events, though not directly connected, both point to how far flex dancers are traveling, culturally, from the streets of East New York. On Feb. 10, Jay Donn (born Jonathan George) will be joining the contemporary ballet troupe BalletNext as a choreographer and featured dancer for its weeklong season at New York Live Arts. In late March, a crew of 20 flex dancers will take over the Armory’s cavernous Drill Hall for “Flexn,” a production directed by Mr. Sellars and the veteran flex dancer Reggie Gray, known as Regg Roc.Flex is said to have originated in the 1990s in Jamaica with a dancer who called himself Bruck Up. It developed in Brooklyn, mainly in dance battles and tournaments, both informal and organized. Although the form has found exposure through television competitions and an ocean of online music and dance videos, the attention from the likes of Mr. Sellars is recent. Much of it stems from the 2013 documentary “Flex Is Kings.”AdvertisementThe connection between “Flex Is Kings” and the BalletNext project is Chris Lancaster, an electroacoustic cellist who helped compose the film’s score. He describes his first live interaction with flex dancers, at a fund-raiser for the movie, as one of the best nights of his life. Seeking to extend that collaboration and to give flex dancers opportunities to experiment outside the battle format, he has been bringing them into projects in a realm he knows well, the world of concert dance.AdvertisementEnter Michele Wiles, a former principal dancer for American Ballet Theater. It was in pursuit of new challenges that she left the company in 2011 and founded BalletNext. She met Mr. Lancaster last year when he was playing for a ballet class and recalls thinking that his classical-contemporary sound was “what I’ve been waiting for all my life.” Later she attended a rehearsal for one of his flex dance projects and decided, “This is it — the energy I’ve been trying to incorporate into ballet.” she said.The dancer who caught her eye was Jay Donn, a manic jester of flex, overflowing with ideas and giddy energy. (In “Flex Is Kings,” he’s the performer who seems most likely to forge a mainstream career.) Ms. Wiles invited him and Mr. Lancaster to join her company at a rehearsal residency upstate. On his first day there, as Jay Donn put it, “I was trapped in a room with three girls and a cello.” He began choreographing, using mouthed sound effects to direct the dancers because he knew almost no ballet terms. (Many of those sounds are preserved in Mr. Lancaster’s score, along with some Vivaldi and drum ’n’ bass beats.) In that way they could communicate, but soon they discovered a deeper connection between their arts: storytelling.Flex is a form of extreme animation; dancers habitually describe trying to recreate special effects from movies like “The Matrix” with their bodies. Much of that expressive energy comes out not as spectacle but as graphic pantomime. That can also be true of ballet, with its traditional stories involving visions and fantasies. “Something Sampled,” Jay Donn’s piece with BalletNext, recounts a dream he has of interacting with ballet dancers.In the work, he joins the company’s members at the barre, as he did when he joined their rehearsals. He teaches them angular arm-folding, which they graft onto ballet footwork. As the exchange of vocabulary develops, his contributions include references to the video game Mortal Kombat. In the end, he and Ms. Wiles face off in a duel between flex and ballet.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In working with the ballet dancers, he said, he has tried to “break them out of being stiff, help them be themselves and be free.” (He has also adapted their costumes, wiring the tutus with lights; hence the police attention.) But their art has affected him, too. “It flows through me,” he said. “I wake up in the morning thinking about ballet.”If “Something Sampled” is about a flex dancer alone in the ballet world, “Flexn” is more about transplanting a community of flex dancers onto the Armory stage. And while “Something Sampled” is a bright fantasy, much of “Flexn” is closer to a nightmare, drawing on flex’s grotesque side. In Mr. Sellars’s words, it “speaks to America about things America can’t articulate.”When Mr. Sellars began working with the dancers last summer, the death of Eric Garner after a police confrontation in Staten Island was a pressing topic of conversation. Then came the fatal shooting of Michael Brown  with an officer’s firearm in Ferguson, Mo. “Flexn” addresses the emotional aftermath. Its interlocking stories culminate in scenes of a criminal trial and solitary confinement, all expressed through flex.“Street dance has graduated,” Mr. Sellars said. “It now has a breadth and depth of vocabulary that we’ve never seen before.” He lauded the flex performers for their brilliance, likening them to “the first generation of nuclear physicists” but attached more importance to their humility and vulnerability. “Most street dance is convincing you, ‘I’m armor-plated, invincible,’ but this acknowledges actual flesh, a feeling human being,” he said.AdvertisementTo preserve the improvisational nature of flex, the choreography, supplied by the dancers, is not set. Instead the subject matter is. “The dancers come onstage to face certain things,” Mr. Sellars said, “certain parts of themselves. We’ve made the challenge of the battles have a different vector. The stakes are high, and everyone responds with honesty and courage.”In “Flexn,” none of the dancers leave the stage. This idea, Mr. Sellars said, is rooted in a circle of support that Regg Roc created for the performers in an organization he leads called the Dream Ring. “They can share complicated emotion because a space has been made where they can trust each other,” he explained.Everything about “Flexn” is large-scale. These dancers will face the challenge together.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page AR19 of the New York edition with the headline: Flexing to Embrace a Flip Side.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.