By MICHAEL WHITEOCT. 7, 2015
LONDON — Nine years ago, a chubbily cherubic English pianist with unruly hair made his concerto debut at Carnegie Hall, playing Ravel. His name was Benjamin Grosvenor. He was 13. And though no one knew him in America, he had some profile back in Britain where, at just 11, he had won the keyboard finals of a television competition. Word had spread, hence the invitation to New York. And great things were predicted for him.On Thursday, Oct. 15, he’ll be back at Carnegie for his recital debut, playing more Ravel. Just turned 23 and slimmer, with the hair tamed but the face still pug-cute, he remains boyish. But the past nine years have changed his life beyond all recognition.His career has soared, thanks to adoring notices in publications like The Times of London (“electrifying,” “unimaginable brilliance”) and Gramophone magazine (which thinks he “may well be the most remarkable pianist of our time”). He wins enough awards to fill a bathroom shelf respectably. He plays the grandest halls. And while certain new arrivals on the keyboard circuit draw the quiet contempt of more established colleagues — usually for showmanship and self-indulgence — you’re unlikely to hear anything but praise for Mr. Grosvenor.“He’s the real thing: the outstanding player of his generation,” the pianist Steven Osborne said in a recent interview. Of all the budding superstars still in their 20s — including Daniil Trifonov (24), Yuja Wang (28), Federico Colli (27), Behzod Abduraimov (25) and more — Mr. Grosvenor is arguably the one with the most pure, unforced sound. Listen to the Chopin on his first recital disc, from 2011, and you hear the kind of clean, transparent authenticity that wizened Chopin specialists rarely manage. And it comes with modesty to a degree that can make him hard to interview.AdvertisementHe knows his own worth, but he doesn’t trumpet it. “I’m not so shy now as I used to be,” he volunteered in an interview at a London railway hotel (he was on the move, as busy pianists are). “But you could say I’m introverted. I’ve got good friends, a supportive family, a girlfriend in Berlin. But I’m away so much I don’t see enough of them. It’s a notoriously lonely business, playing the piano, with a lot of hanging around in hotel rooms, although the Internet makes that more bearable. You can at least keep in touch with people.”AdvertisementA particular concern has been keeping in touch with his roots. When we met he was house-hunting in the London suburbs, but until now he’s always lived with his parents in a small seaside town, with an upbringing markedly different from that of many wunderkind musicians who get processed into specialist schools and hothouse environments.Born in 1992 in Westcliff, on the southeast coast of England, Mr. Grosvenor was the youngest of five brothers and educated locally; he had his first experience of public performance playing in a seafront restaurant that served fish and chips. But what began so unremarkably developed into something that his mother — who taught piano — recognized as special and beyond her competence.At 9, he enrolled as a boarder at the Menuhin School for talented musicians, but lasted only a few days there before coming home, partly because it involved separation from his brother Jonathan, who has Down syndrome.Winning the keyboard section of the BBC Young Musician competition came two years after the abortive Menuhin School experience. That he failed to win it over all was almost certainly because of his extreme youth (he lost out to the 16-year-old violinist Nicola Benedetti), but the television audience loved him and offers rolled in.At 13 he was playing concertos at the Royal Albert Hall. At 14 he was taken up for “development” by the record label EMI. And no, he wasn’t overwhelmed by pressure. “My parents were careful, controlling the engagements so there weren’t more than I could handle,” he said, “and organizing them in three-month blocks so there wasn’t too much interference with school.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He made a firm choice to avoid the major international competitions — he’s ambitious but not gladiatorial. And he didn’t need to with a champion like the BBC, which nurtured his career. In 2011, he became, at 19, the youngest artist to open the BBC Proms season, with Liszt’s Second Concerto; he was featured again at the Proms, playing the Britten Concerto; he was signed by Decca, its first new British pianist in 60 years; and he issued his first disc on the label, winning two Gramophone Awards and a Classical Brit.While all this was happening he was still a student at London’s Royal Academy of Music — he graduated in 2012 — and it was strange to see him there, surrounded by contemporaries who were struggling to schedule lunchtime concerts in local churches while he was playing in the glare of international attention, a glare that intensified this year when he starred at the Last Night of the Proms, playing Shostakovich’s Second Concerto to a broadcast audience of millions worldwide.What impresses in his playing is a synthesis of youthful freshness and intense maturity that seems uncalculated, unaffected. There’s no posturing, no antics, nothing in the way — and yet the personality is unmistakeable.Advertisement“I never want to hear people praise a performance as just about the music,” he said, “because it’s not. The player is there too, and part of it. You don’t set out intending to be different — that’s an indulgence. But what the composer puts on the page isn’t the last word. The pianist Jorge Bolet said that composers might live with a piece for months but performers live with it for a lifetime and discover things the author never realized were there. I think that’s true.”So far, the process of discovery for Mr. Grosvenor has been crazily accelerated. Rising young musicians have to learn a lot of repertory rapidly to fill their concerts. And it’s noteworthy that though the benchmark Austro-German classics — Mozart to Brahms — do turn up in his schedule, it’s on other, less “core” music that he’s built his reputation.His recital programs have an idiosyncratic eloquence. At Carnegie he’s playing works by 19th- and 20th-century composers that revisit 18th-century Baroque style. There’s Busoni, César Franck, some almost unknown Mendelssohn, and as a centerpiece, the suite “Le Tombeau de Couperin” by Ravel, a figure central to his growth as a performer.It was with Ravel that he competed for the BBC Young Musician prize, and made that adolescent Carnegie debut. The composer’s music features on his first two Decca discs. And he plays it with a poise and elegance that nonetheless acknowledges the silent scream of pain contained by the perfection of its formal packaging.As for the Viennese classics, he plays two of the Beethoven concertos, not enough of the Mozarts (though he’s about to learn K. 595), and will take up Brahms’s First Concerto next year. But otherwise he’s biding his time, which is sensible. To have achieved so much at 23 invites questions about what you’ll do during the next half century. A risk with long careers is that eventually you look back with embarrassment on what you did, so publicly, when young. But that’s not something Mr. Grosvenor needs to worry about yet.“Of course I’ll change,” he said. “In 30 years from now my playing will be different. I can only hope that people find it differently interesting.”A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page AR10 of the New York edition with the headline: The Once and Continuing Prodigy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.