AdvertisementSupported byPlaylistInterview by Joe CoscarelliWith their second act as a band, the members of Fall Out Boy have pulled off what once seemed at least highly unlikely: not only outlasting their emo peers from the early aughts but also transcending them all the way to the top of the Billboard charts — and with real guitars, too, a rare sound on pop radio today. After a five-year hiatus, the band returned in 2013 with “Save Rock and Roll,” a typically irreverent album that made its debut at No. 1; now, its new single, “Centuries,” is hovering in the Top 20 and scoring sporting events on TVs and in stadiums across the country. But it’s not just power chords and heartbreak anymore, although it is still that, too. The band’s new album, “American Beauty/American Psycho,” out now from Island, also features production from the French D.J. SebastiAn, and borrows familiar riffs from Suzanne Vega’s “Tom’s Diner,” Mötley Crüe’s “Too Fast for Love” and the theme song from “The Munsters.” Joining the band on its forthcoming “Boys of Zummer” tour is to be the rapper and walking cloud of weed smoke Wiz Khalifa, who also added a verse to a remix of the band’s new “Pulp Fiction” homage, “Uma Thurman.”“We have a collective sense of experimentation,” said Patrick Stump, the band’s singer, owing his open ear to his father’s taste for experimental jazz and Grateful Dead records, including the one that inspired the new album’s title (the second half comes from the Bret Easton Ellis novel). “It’s hard for us to tell how many of our fans really know the Dead, or our film and book references,” said Pete Wentz, the band’s bassist, pop-culture aficionado and primary lyricist. Both he and Mr. Stump spoke with Joe Coscarelli by phone from the Trump SoHo in New York. These are excerpts from the conversation. Q. Why incorporate samples into this album?Wentz We were emailing back and forth with SebastiAn over Google Translate, and the idea was to come up with a futuristic rock song. Who would have thought to cut up the Mötley Crüe punk album?Stump I feel like it’s not common in rock music, and it gets kind of lazy to do the same thing over and over again. Especially when so many other genres have figured out how to do it in a creative, exciting way. There are still a lot of rock musicians standing around going, “That’s not music, man!” It just makes us dinosaurs if we can’t figure it out as a genre. Pete, you wrote recently, “Rock should not be relegated to a quaint little corner of Guitar Center for dads to find.” How do you get kids interested again?Wentz The only way to do it is for kids to be able to see bands that are playing in arenas and amphitheaters that also have current songs being played on the radio. I can think of 10 bands that can sell out arenas, but I’m not sure if kids are buying their music. The future of rock is going to come from kids that listen to Skrillex and to Kanye West. Hopefully they also listen to Fall Out Boy or bands that are playing instruments as well.Where do you go online to find new music?Wentz You know how when you were into punk rock you would look at a band’s “thank you” list, and that’s how you would find new bands? The Internet version of that is like, “Who does this person follow on SoundCloud?” or “Who is this D.J. talking to online?” One of my favorite songs of last year was iLoveMakonnen’s “Tuesday,” and I followed it down this rabbit hole to this other remix he did [for “Down 4 So Long”]. Ezra [Koenig] from Vampire Weekend does a verse on it that’s probably one of the funniest and best verses that I’ve heard recently.What do you say to pop-punk fans confused or even upset that you’re touring with rappers?Wentz This isn’t the first time we dipped our foot in here: We had Jay Z on a record; we signed Tyga to a record deal; we had Lil Wayne on a record; we had Kanye do a remix. But we’re not cramming it down anyone’s throat. If you don’t want to watch something, you have the luxury of not coming to the show at all.How did Rick Ross end up with a cameo in the video for “Centuries”?Wentz When the [gladiator-themed] video ends, the next villain is supposed to be scarier than the Goliath, and we were trying to come up with who that could be. Rick Ross seems like he could be pretty intimidating, so we reached out to him. He filmed it in Miami and had great comments on the video. He wanted to make sure his shadow was fat enough. The song was also featured heavily throughout the college football playoff, and you performed at the N.H.L. All-Star Game. Is Fall Out Boy the new “Jock Jams”?Stump It’s funny, I lost a lot of weight a little while ago, but when I was really heavy and taking zero care of myself people used to come up to me and say, “I run to your stuff — you’re my workout music!” Wentz There are no better songs than the ones that get played for highlight reels, like Queen or, more recently, “Power” by Kanye. There’s a visceral reaction. It’s the only way that I feel like I’ve infiltrated my dad’s friends at all.Stump We’ve been doing this for a while, but when your music makes it to sports then all of a sudden you get a lot of surprising emails and calls: “Congratulations, you’ve made it!” Advertisement