Season 2, Episode 15: “Spellcaster”Events took quite a turn in the final 15 minutes of Monday’s “Sleepy Hollow.” It was almost enough to drive the memory of last week’s karaoke scenes right out of our heads.We’ve suspected all along that there was an evil core in Katrina (Katia Winter), the witchy wife of Ichabod Crane (Tom Mison). And we’ve had our doubts about the true allegiances of Frank Irving (Orlando Jones) since he went through that whole death-and-resurrection thing and comingled blood with Mr. Evil Incarnate. Well, now we know that we were right to be concerned on both counts.A confrontation with a nasty warlock named Solomon Kent put Katrina in touch with her inner malevolence, and by the episode’s end she seemed to be rather entranced by her dark side. Solomon, played by Johnathon Schaech and looking a lot like the title character in the movie “Solomon Kane,” apparently escaped from purgatory in the aftermath of Moloch’s death and turned up at an auction house in White Plains searching for a spell book called the Grand Grimoire.Two unfortunate auction house employees bit the dust, and ultimately Katrina, Ichabod and Abbie Mills (Nicole Beharie) confronted the nasty fellow, who, it must be said, sported a cool hat. Katrina was already familiar with this particular warlock — it turns out that he was the cause of the Salem witch hunts, which did not leave her forebears unscathed.In the course of the battle with Solomon, Ichabod got a chance to say, “Curb thy foul stench, unholy minion,” which caused Abbie to urge him to work on his trash talk. But, more important, Katrina’s eyeballs turned all white, the universal TV sign for, “I’m a lot badder than I was a minute ago.” Are the writers setting her up for some kind of termination, answering a prayer prayed by many fans of this series? Or was she just having a demonic day?And then there was Frank, who convinced the usually skeptical Abbie rather too easily that he was back to normal again and an ally. Viewers could see what Abbie and her pals apparently couldn’t: that he was a little TOO normal. And sure enough, at the episode’s end, he secreted away the Grand Grimoire and then passed it off to Henry Parrish (John Noble). An ominous exchange, to say the least.So, it was certainly an eventful episode, one that answered a few questions but also left one glaring one: Where were Jenny Mills (Lyndie Greenwood) and Nick Hawley (Matt Barr)? Prediction: In the next episode we find out they took a weekend flight to Vegas for a quickie wedding.