Recaps of the Fox crime drama.Season 1, Episode 14, “The Fearsome Dr. Crane”Spoilers and signs of progress lurk below.At the beginning of “Gotham,” I worried that for all the built-in appeal of the “Batman” saga, the series would spend a sizable chunk of its 22-episode debut season cycling through paint-by-number cop show filler, which is what it went on to do for a sizable chunk of the first half of the season.But since returning a few weeks ago, the series has put together a string of episodes that play to its strengths, letting the underworld subplots do much of the narrative heavy lifting and finding new things for interesting performers like Cory Michael Smith (Edward Nygma) and Donal Logue (Harvey Bullock) to do. The arrival of Morena Baccarin, as the beguiling Dr. Leslie Thompkins, has enlivened Ben McKenzie’s Jim Gordon, breaking him out of a tired cycle of crime-fighting, speechifying and bickering with poor, sad Barbara.Meanwhile, criminals like the Electrocutioner in the first couple episodes and the titular Dr. Crane this week, are being given multi-episode arcs and thus more room to breathe than earlier one-and-done psychos like Balloonman and the Goat. This has helped “Gotham,” which came off earlier this season as a tidy CBS procedural’s slightly nuttier cousin, seem more like the ongoing chronicle of a twisted place that the series presumably aspires to be.The bottom-line result is that “Gotham” has evolved into a more consistently engaging show, even if some of its conventions might eventually get a bit repetitive. (More on this below.) This will be my last recap of “Gotham” for awhile (more on this below, too), but I plan to keep watching and hope the show is finally finding its legs.Monday’s episode hinged on a killer with a creatively ghoulish plan: To torment phobic victims, goading their adrenal glands into maximum cortisol production before killing them and harvesting said hormone-rich glands.To what aim is unclear — Dr. Crane, played by an icy Julian Sands, got away at the end of the show. But it’s worth remembering that a Dr. Jonathan Crane, a later contemporary of Batman who doubles as the Scarecrow (played by Cillian Murphy in the most recent “Batman” films), was also into dark psychotropic experiments and fear manipulation, generally with the aid of homemade drugs. Homemade drugs brewed from pilfered cortisol? Who knows? This Dr. Crane appears to be Scarecrow’s father so perhaps the apothecary tinkering is a family tradition. (In the group therapy scene he mentioned an illness that he was afraid of passing along to his son.)The Dr. Crane plot was also notable for giving Mr. Logue’s Harvey Bullock something else to manage besides the weekly quip quotient. Namely, the well-being of the comely swimming pool fearer Scottie Mullen (played by Maria Thayer, who will always be Little Dude to me).“Are you Irish? You seem like you could be Irish,” says Bullock, who you’d think would have better game. But by episode’s end he had thwarted Scottie’s attempted murder and retrieved her from a particularly sinister natatorium, so things are looking up. I wish them the best.Elsewhere, the Penguin again basked in the afterglow of his apparent victory over his former boss Fish Mooney. “We can assume she’s either dead or extremely unwell,” Penguin tells Don Maroni, mere moments before Fish calls  and we are reminded, for the umpteenth time, that no one can ever assume anything in Gotham City.Because though I posited last week that the Fish-Penguin battle had run its course for now, Fish had one last salvo on her way out of town: An expertly timed revelation to Maroni that Penguin had been Don Falcone’s inside man all along.I enjoyed the juxtaposition of Maroni’s growing rage with the smug assurance of the Penguin, obliviously dressing down a waiter over dirty silverware as Fish ratted him out on the phone. You’d think he’d learn to distrust the taste of victory because it never lasts for long (see also: last week’s champagne-fueled wallow in the club, ended by the arrival of Fish and Butch).But maybe that doesn’t matter when you have a superhuman ability to evade all peril. After everything came out during the Oatmeal Summit in the country, the Penguin found himself locked inside a car inside a car crusher. I’m sure Maroni assumed such a foolproof plan would do in his “monkey friend.” But again …How did you feel about this latest installment of “How Will the Penguin Get Out of This One?” It’s become a bit of a joke, this trope of placing him in jeopardy in order to let him use his ingenuity to escape. I like the character enough that I don’t mind the redundancy — yet — and there was a certain believability in the means of exit this time. Less plausible are these Rube Goldbergian death schemes, but their irresistibleness to supervillains is well-established.The Penguin was eventually saved, corporeally if not spiritually, by a church bus full of gospel singers. Are you by chance headed to Gotham City? he asks them. Indeed they were. And so the Penguin, as is his wont, headed back to his hometown and no doubt many more cartoonishly close shaves.A FEW THOUGHTS WHILE WE CALL IT A SEASON, FOR NOW• There was some nice camera work this week dialed up by the episode director, John Behring. I liked the shot of Fish framed by the ship cabin’s porthole, and the claustrophobic depiction of Penguin’s near-death in that car crusher. But my favorite visual of the week was the irreverent shot of the initial victim dangling outside the building, unbeknownst to a maid in the foreground vacuuming in headphones.• Don Maroni: “A bird in the hand is 9/10ths of the law.” It was a clear ripoff of — or perhaps tribute to, if we’re being charitable —the constant malapropisms on “The “Sopranos.” But I laughed.• “The Walking Dead” lumbers back into view on Sunday, which means I am going to step away from weekly recaps of “Gotham”  to do them for that series. Many thanks to anyone who has followed along — we may check back in on the show from time to time.