LONDON — A group of experts, including art historians based at the University of Cambridge, researchers at the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam and a professor of clinical anatomy from the University of Warwick, is claiming that two virile bronze figures mounted on panthers were sculpted by Michelangelo.If the attribution is confirmed, the sculptures would be the only known surviving bronzes by Michelangelo, according to the Fitzwilliam Museum at Cambridge, which is displaying the works beginning Tuesday.But even with the researchers’ methodical review of the sculptures  — including stylistic, scientific and even anatomical evidence that links them to the artist  — their word is not likely to be the last. Through the centuries a variety of provenances have been attributed to the sculptures, and the researchers themselves said that their declaration is just one step in an ongoing scholarly process.“We’ve done due diligence,” said Victoria Avery, a lead curator in the applied arts department of the museum. “It’s the right moment to present it to the wider world. And if there is a strong counter-case, then, fine, let it be heard. This is how scholarship moves on.”The museum will display the works with a precisely worded sign, describing them as “attributed” to Michelangelo. A conference is scheduled for July, when the researchers hope to announce that further evidence means they can firmly cite Michelangelo as author of the works.Ms. Avery explained the confluence of evidence that led the researchers to their attribution. “The original attribution published in 1878 was to Michelangelo and then it got immediately dismissed without any good reason,” she said, suggesting that “a jealous rival” of the works’ 19th-century owner baselessly questioned their provenance.The statues drew academic attention in 2002, when they were sold at auction from a relatively unknown private French collection into a British one. In 2003, they traveled to the Frick Collection in New York, where they were attributed to the Dutch sculptor Willem van Tetrode. The works were most recently shown in 2012, when they visited the Royal Academy in London for “Bronze,” a wide-ranging exhibition on the medium. There, they were credited to an unnamed mid-16th-century Roman sculptor.Paul Joannides, an emeritus art history professor at Cambridge, instigated the current inquiry. In the fall of 2013, he noted that a series of images that an apprentice copied from Michelangelo featured a sketch of a young man riding a panther. That connection inspired a deeper look into the claim.After Mr. Joannides’s initial discovery, an array of researchers from various disciplines examined the works. For example, conservation specialists at the Rijksmuseum sent the statues to a neutron imaging laboratory in Switzerland to look inside. They discovered that the statues had thick walls — an indication that they were crafted in the era when Michelangelo was working, before Italian bronze technology was refined. The anatomy professor Peter Abrahams, of the University of Warwick, compared the statues’ muscles to the scientific understandings of the body available to artists working in Michelangelo’s era.In addition to welcoming new input from outside researchers between now and summer, those currently involved in the project will undertake further research of their own. Mr. Abrahams, for example, plans to meet with a bodybuilder to compare his physiognomy to that of the sinuous statues. 