By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 2, 2015
10 A.M. (AMC) GROUNDHOG DAY (1993) Once more, with feeling: A smug Pittsburgh weatherman (Bill Murray, above) is condemned to relive one day in Punxsutawney, Pa., until he gets it right. Andie MacDowell plays the woman of his dreams; Stephen Tobolowsky is the most annoying guy in town. Or is he? Writing in The New York Times, Caryn James called Mr. Murray “the screen’s most likable cynic.” The movie repeats at 12:30, 3 and 5:30 p.m.5:15 P.M. (MoreMax) LITTLE MISS SUNSHINE (2006) Abigail Breslin, right, received an Oscar nomination for her portrayal of the unlikely 7-year-old princess Olive Hoover in this comedy about a family of misfits determined to get her to a beauty pageant, using a dilapidated Volkswagen bus. Alan Arkin won the best supporting actor Oscar as the heroin-using grandfather who helps put Olive’s talent routine over the top. Writing in The Times, Manohla Dargis called this film from Jonathan Dayton and Valerie Faris “a tale about genuine faith and manufactured glory that unwinds in the American Southwest, but more rightly takes place at the terminus of the American dream, where families are one bad break away from bankruptcy.”8 P.M. (Food Network) KIDS BAKING CHAMPIONSHIP Duff Goldman and Valerie Bertinelli put eight bakers ages 10 to 13 through challenges intended to test their technique and originality. The winner gets bakeware, a profile in Food Network Magazine, a confection featured at Mr. Goldman’s Charm City Cakes and $10,000.8:30 P.M. (BBC America) TOP GEAR Jeremy Clarkson (in a BMW M6 Gran Coupe), Richard Hammond (a Bentley Continental GT V8) and James May (a Nissan GT-R) encounter crocodile-infested rivers, an open cast mine, the world’s longest truck and 4,000 cows as they race across the Northern Territory of Australia. Kiefer Sutherland is the star in a reasonably priced car.Advertisement9 P.M. (CW) JANE THE VIRGIN Jane (Gina Rodriguez, left) moves to the next level, careerwise, thanks to Rogelio (Jaime Camil). Rafael (Justin Baldoni) worries about the connection of Sin Rostro to his hotel and the safety of his family. And Petra (Yael Grobglas) learns the ugly truth about someone close to her.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (Fox Business) STRANGE INHERITANCE Jamie Colby looks at some bizarre objects bequeathed to family members, starting with a fake 1913 Liberty nickel that might actually be the real thing and, at 9:30, guns used by Bonnie Parker and Clyde Barrow in their final shootout.Advertisement10 P.M. (NBC) STATE OF AFFAIRS Charlie (Katherine Heigl) and Lucas (Adam Kaufman) join the F.B.I. manhunt for an Ar Rissalah terrorist who escaped into the woods of West Virginia. President Payton (Alfre Woodard) protects the C.I.A.’s Operation Bellerophon in a deal with the media that could expose her own secrets on national television. And Nick (Chris McKenna) and Fatah (Farshad Farahat) prepare for the arrival of the world’s most dangerous man, Sheikh Hakam (Yousuf Azami).10 P.M. (13), 11 P.M. (49) A PATH APPEARS In the second episode of this three-part “Independent Lens” presentation, Nicholas Kristof, a columnist for The New York Times; Sheryl WuDunn, his wife and a former business editor at The Times; and celebrity activists including Jennifer Garner, Alfre Woodard and Eva Longoria explore the collision of gender inequality and poverty in West Virginia, Haiti and Colombia.What’s Streaming NowSEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD (1956) In this spectacle-travelogue filmed in wide-screen Cinerama, the adventurer Lowell Thomas flits around the globe in Smasher, a converted B-25, stopping first at the only original wonder still in existence — the Pyramid of Cheops (and the Sphinx) at Giza, Egypt — before sweeping off to a live volcano in East Africa, under the bridges of New York City and over Rio de Janeiro, the Parthenon in Athens and Angel Falls in South America. “Anyone with a tendency to airsickness is hereby warned to beware,” Bosley Crowther wrote in The Times. “For this hodgepodge of scenic observations in color is not only caught in large part from the air, but the screen images also are so often tilted at radical angles, as the camera planes bank over the places being viewed, that the customer is likely to find himself clutching for seat straps and feeling a distinct discomfort of vertigo.” (fandor.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on February 2, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.