By MIKE HALEFEB. 1, 2015
It’s been a long war for the British detective Christopher Foyle. On screen, he’s served as a home-front police superintendent and MI5 operative for nearly seven years, from mid-1940 to early 1947. In the real world, it’s been even longer — “Foyle’s War” had its premiere in Britain 13 years ago, producing 28 feature-length episodes around long hiatuses and one premature cancellation.Retirement has finally arrived for television’s most terse policeman, however. The final three episodes of “Foyle’s War” were shown in Britain in January and go online at Acorn TV beginning on Monday. In the dingy, straitened, politically jumbled world of postwar London, the dogged Foyle, played by Michael Kitchen, now 66, continues to drive his MI5 bosses crazy while meting out justice to black marketeers, proto-fascists and Zionist terrorists. He even works in a visit to the Nuremberg trials.“Foyle’s War” has long been celebrated for the “historical accuracy” (those are the words always used) achieved by its creator and writer, Anthony Horowitz. It’s questionable how much accuracy is possible or even desirable in a 90-minute mystery story. The better word is probably scrupulousness — the special texture of the show owes to the faith we feel in Mr. Horowitz’s depiction of the clamped-down, suspicious yet doughty atmosphere of 1940s Britain, and to the trouble and expense to which the production has gone to recreate those times.Even more important is the scrupulousness the show has maintained with Foyle himself, a character whose convictions and behavior have never oscillated for the convenience of the plot. This has everything to do with Mr. Kitchen, who was the perfect match for Mr. Horowitz’s quiet, understated style. A marvelously subtle actor, he can communicate volumes with the tilt of his head and arch of his eyebrow in response to a suspect’s lies, and he’s always worth watching, even when the mysteries are slight and the solutions formulaic.In a final conversation between Foyle and his stalwart aide, Sam (Honeysuckle Weeks), Mr. Kitchen’s last two lines characteristically consist of one word each. When she asks him a question and he replies, “Honored,” the series ends on a perfect note.Foyle’s WarAvailable for streaming on Mondays on Acorn.tv.Produced for Acorn Productions and ITV by Eleventh Hour Films. Created and written by Anthony Horowitz; Jill Green, Nicole Finnan and Mr. Horowitz, executive producers; John Chapman, producer.WITH: Michael Kitchen (Christopher Foyle), Honeysuckle Weeks (Sam Wainwright), Daniel Weyman (Adam Wainwright), Ellie Haddington (Hilda Pierce), Tim McMullan (Arthur Valentine) and Rupert Vansittart (Alec Myerson).A version of this review appears in print on February 2, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Understated Detective Wraps It Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.