By STEPHEN HOLDENFEB. 1, 2015
Oscillating tones, shimmering and percussive, echoed through the Appel Room on Saturday as an array of musicians from various musical worlds performed works by Stephen Sondheim and Steve Reich. This Lincoln Center American Songbook concert was a genial two-hour-plus seminar, moderated by John Schaefer, in which the composers chatted and compared notes in a program whose selections followed a through-line, each piece roughly continuing the style of the one before. An excellent trio (Tedd Firth on piano, John Beal on bass, Paul Pizzuti on drums) anchored Mr. Sondheim’s songs.The concert illustrated a mutual interest in what, for lack of a better term, might be called musical pointillism. Mr. Sondheim freely acknowledged his debt to Mr. Reich in his score for “Sunday in the Park With George,” the musical written with James Lapine, about the painter Georges Seurat and his most famous work, “A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte.”Above all, Mr. Sondheim said, he is a harmonist whose songs are inspired by theatrical characters. He said that the pop revolution of the 1960s had freed him from the pressure to write stand-alone songs that might be hits. Mr. Reich is a Minimalist whose pieces, unlike Mr. Sondheim’s, often lack clear-cut beginnings, middles and ends. Even as it changes texture, his music hovers.The show began with a performance by Alexander Gemignani of “Finishing the Hat” (from “Sunday”), followed by Mr. Reich’s more abstract and heavily percussive “Finishing the Hat — Two Pianos,” performed by Anthony de Mare and Blair McMillen on facing keyboards.A ravishingly beautiful medley of “Color and Light,” and “Move On” from “Sunday,” sung by Mr. Gemignani and Kate Baldwin, was followed by Mr. Reich’s scintillating “Electric Counterpoint,” in which the guitarist Derek Johnson accompanied a recording of Pat Metheny. This bracing musical dialogue with the self, first recorded by Mr. Metheny in 1987 and since adapted for other instruments, is a slowly evolving organism whose themes seem to chase each other around in circles. If Mr. Sondheim is a traditional melodist in the romantic tradition, Mr. Reich is master of the half-melody.AdvertisementThen there were three songs from the Sondheim score for “Company,” led off by Ms. Baldwin’s rendition of “Another Hundred People.” With its rapid-fire staccato diction, the song almost doesn’t need lyrics to convey a rush-hour freneticism. Ms. Baldwin was joined by the singer Michael Cerveris for “Barcelona,” followed by his rendition of “Marry Me a Little.”AdvertisementNext came Mr. Reich’s “Radio Rewrite,” which integrates barely recognizable fragments of two songs by Radiohead: “Everything in its Right Place” and “Jigsaw Falling Into Place.” Scored for a small orchestra (conducted by Jerry Hou) that included two vibraphones and two pianos, it is a vigorous pulsing piece charged with purpose.The evening concluded with “Poems” and “Someone in a Tree,” both from “Pacific Overtures,” which with its fragmented lyrics and pentatonic melodies is as close to outright Minimalism as Mr. Sondheim has gotten.As much as the concert emphasized their similarities, you would never confuse Mr. Reich and Mr. Sondheim. They rule adjacent territories whose borders are sharply defined.A version of this review appears in print on February 2, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Melodist and Minimalist in Harmony.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.