By SIOBHAN BURKEFEB. 1, 2015
When we watch a dance performance, we rarely think about where it has been and where it’s going. The dancers you see in New York today could have been halfway around the world last week. With a new series at Abrons Arts Center, Travelogues, the independent producer Laurie Uprichard (formerly a curator at Danspace Project and Dublin Dance Festival) frames performance as something that exists before and after we see it. The series began over the weekend with the American premiere of “Solitudes Solo” by Daniel Léveillé, whose company is based in Montreal. (Ms. Uprichard had seen the work in Montreal and Paris before bringing it to the Lower East Side.) This is a dance that, wherever it goes, plants itself firmly in that place — or at least it did on Friday in the intimate Experimental Theater at Abrons.In a suite of eight solos for five unflagging dancers, to Bach’s sonatas and partitas for solo violin, Mr. Léveillé exploits gravity for the full force of its downward pull. His stark, devilishly difficult vocabulary tethers the dancers to the floor, releasing them only to yank them down again. When they jump — straight up, spinning 360 degrees or more in a completely vertical alignment — they land where they started with a startling thud. Other falls — knees, forearms, knuckles crashing to the ground — are just as brusque, foils to the music’s lyricism. (The audience member in front of me, an esteemed dancer and choreographer, jumped in his seat more than once.)Arriving and departing through a propped-open side door, the dancers — four men and one woman, the riveting Esther Gaudette — take turns rising to the challenges of the movement. In their stern gazes, they don’t mask the effort required, say, to leap through space with no preparation, or to bend the standing leg in a forward-tilting balance very, very slowly. (Neither does their clothing; for the most part, they wear only briefs.) Mr. Léveillé plays intriguingly with transitions, sometimes elongating but more often compressing the time between one action and the next. Amid taut, linear poses, he inserts the rare head roll or pelvis ripple, moments of softening and, for the watcher, relief.Like someone left alone to ruminate, “Solitudes” can feel too inward-looking, too in its head, turning the same thought over and over. Yet that’s also a source of its unexpected pathos. The dancers appear together only once, standing still and facing us. When it comes to the toughest work, they’re on their own.Travelogues continues May 21-24 with Kimberly Bartosik and Dylan Crossman at Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side; 866-811-4111, abronsartscenter.org A version of this review appears in print on February 2, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: With Dramatic Drops, Exploiting Gravity’s Force.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.