By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMFEB. 1, 2015
Atmospheric conditions united two Juilliard-related concerts last week. Baroque music inspired by extreme weather and natural phenomena was the focus of Saturday’s concert by Juilliard 415, the Juilliard School’s period-instrument ensemble, at Alice Tully Hall. And the previous night at the conclusion of the school’s Focus! festival dedicated to contemporary Japanese music and its influences, Debussy’s “Clouds” led a program by the Juilliard Orchestra at the Peter Jay Sharp Theater.Real clouds, of the snow-dispensing kind brought along by a winter storm, had their own effect. Because Juilliard 415’s rehearsal time with its guest conductor, Jordi Savall, was cut short, Geminiani’s colorful “The Enchanted Forest” was replaced by Handel’s well-worn “Water Music.” And like a flight taking on passengers stranded by earlier cancellations, Friday’s concert made room for Toru Takemitsu’s “Paths” for solo trumpet, which would have been part of another Focus! concert that fell victim to the storm.The addition of “Paths” actually brought a welcome dose of variety to a program that was otherwise so aesthetically cohesive as to border on the monochrome. Debussy’s influence loomed large in this selection of works by Mr. Takemitsu, Akira Miyoshi and Takashi Yoshimatsu, which the Juilliard Orchestra played with exquisite attention to nuance under the direction of Tadaaki Otaka.For the most part this is atmospheric music that draws its allure from a shimmering color palette. Mr. Otaka excelled at conjuring up billowing surges of great plasticity and vaporous pianissimos, as in Mr. Takemitsu’s “Twill by Twilight,” which begins with an upward curling motif that drifts, planes and seemingly evaporates into nothing. There was a wonderful transparency to parts of Mr. Miyoshi’s “Noesis” where the borders between individual sounds seemed to grew porous.The same illusion was employed in Mr. Takemitsu’s filigree violin concerto “Far calls. Coming, far!,” in which the solo line travels alongside another instrument for brief stretches, discovering and discarding common traits. The commanding soloist here was Alex Shiozaki. By contrast, “Paths” splits the soloist’s personality in two. The trumpeter Sam Jones created a riveting dialogue between a nasal, slightly neurotic muted voice and one that was warm and full-bodied.AdvertisementMr. Yoshimatsu’s “Threnody to Toki” is inspired by the flight of the toki bird, also called the Japanese crested ibis. The orchestra is set up in the shape of a bird, with the strings arranged in a horseshoe intersected by a line formed by the conductor, a piano and the percussion instruments. The music mimics the swoop and flutter of the toki while high harmonics in the strings evoke blinding bright light.AdvertisementIf Friday’s program was dominated by contemplative, essentially eventless music, Saturday’s concert by Juilliard 415 paid tribute to the Baroque taste for music that was descriptive, dramatic and narrative. The challenge, for Mr. Savall and the young players, was to bring out the distinctions in pieces by Leclair, Telemann and Rameau that variously depicted thunderstorms, earthquakes, tempests and the rush of the tide. The percussionist Christian Lundqvist was much in demand, operating a hand-cranked wind machine that whirred, whined and hissed convincingly.But there was an inevitable sameness to the breezy up-and-down scales and the blustering dynamic swells. In Telemann’s Overture-Suite “Hamburger Ebb und Flut,” I thought I could detect a difference between the gradual liquid surge depicting the tide and the rendering of the irascible tantrum in the “Aeolus’s Storm” section. But in a series of orchestral movements from Rameau operas, I was hard pressed to distinguish between a thunderstorm and an earthquake.The orchestra’s sound was appealingly fresh throughout, and the playing responsive. In Handel’s Suite from “Water Music,” the addition of impressively confident natural horns and trumpets lit a spark that glowed brightly at the end of a blustery program.A version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Gray and Stormy Palettes Mirroring Reality.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.