AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott ReyburnLONDON — A couple of weeks before the world’s wealthiest art collectors and speculators gorge themselves on yet another blowout menu of contemporary art sales, London’s auction houses offered appetizers aimed at more modest budgets.The financially savvy habitués of Christie’s, Sotheby’s and Phillips’s flagship evening and day sales are not usually much interested in lithographs and screen prints estimated in the thousands of pounds. With their arcane technical processes and large edition sizes, contemporary prints have a reputation for being less desirable than unique artworks, unless they happen to be by a commercial superstar such as Andy Warhol or the graffiti artist Banksy.This thinking seemed to be turned on its head when Phillips held an“Evening & Day Editions” auction on Jan. 22 at its new European headquarters on Berkeley Square and found buyers for 91 percent of the 238 lots, raising a total of 2.8 million pounds with fees, or $4.2 million, well above the £2.4 million high estimate, based on hammer prices.A selling rate of more than 90 percent at a high-volume auction of artworks from various owners is unusual, particularly in the realm of prints. What was going on?The move to the wealthy district of Mayfair in London seems to have helped. More than 2,000 people attended the stylishly presented view in the company’s new 52,000-square-foot building in a district bristling with hedge funds, up-scale galleries, designer stores, exclusive hotels and apartments.Phillips’s previous London auction in this category (the company does two in London and two in New York each year) had been held in June at its former salesroom in the less-illustrious neighborhood around Victoria. That view attracted about 240 people, and the sale raised £1.3 million.“A lot of the people coming in to Berkeley Square were young professionals decorating apartments,” said Robert Kennan, Phillips’s head of modern and contemporary editions in London. “They were attracted by blue-chip names at prices that are affordable.”“Affordable” can be crazily relative in the world of contemporary art. Nonetheless, Phillips’s sale did include attractive works by well-regarded artists with come-hither estimates of under £1,000. A black-and-white “connoisseur” etching, such as Lucian Freud’s 1984 female portrait, “Head of Ib,” was snapped up just above the low estimate at £6,250.But works with plenty of color and wall power by international brand names drew competitive bidding. Donald Judd’s 1988 ultramarine-blue suite of 10 minimalist woodcuts, “Untitled,” was pushed by four telephones to £182,500, falling to a private European buyer, and Keith Haring’s lurid 1988 carved plywood wall relief, “Totem,” sold for £134,500. Both prices, though broadly in line with upper estimates, were new auction highs for these particular editions.“These sales pay off because private buyers can see how the works would look in their own homes,” said David Cleaton-Roberts, a director at the London print gallery Alan Cristea.“Phillips are also clever to have got rid of the word ‘print.’ It sounds old-fashioned and has connotations with reproduction,” added Mr. Cleaton-Roberts, who was amazed by the £9,375 paid, more than three times the low estimate, for the pair of 2007 silhouettes, “Luc and Ludivine Get Married” by the Cristea gallery artist Julian Opie. He said another pair was available in the gallery, priced at £4,800.Price increases at contemporary “editions” auctions tend to be incremental. For example, Paddle8’s most recent online contemporary print sale, from Jan. 13 through Jan. 28, included another version of a Robert Longo 2005 flower study, “Untitled (Rose, from Ophelia),” which sold for a low estimate of £3,000 at Phillips. With two hours of the auction left, before the final prices were erased from its website, Paddle8’s rose had attracted four bids up to $3,900.Thanks to the Internet, everyone in the market can find out what everything is currently worth, and most print buyers, unlike wealthy collectors of unique big-ticket works, are reluctant to lock egos in bidding duels that overly inflate auction prices.This was clearly in evidence at Bonhams on Wednesday, when Steve Lazarides, London’s most prominent urban-art gallerist, sold 30 Banksy prints from his personal collection to raise money for new projects. Mr. Lazarides worked closely with the street artist from the mid-1990s until 2008. Every work in the sale carried the all-important certification from Pest Control, Banksy’s authentication service.Demand for Banksy, who no longer makes commercially-marketed prints, is not as febrile as it was back in 2005 to 2008, when the new editions Lazarides published by the artist were being instantly flipped for huge profits on eBay and his Kate Moss “Marilyn” print was selling for as much as £96,000 at auction.An example of the print sold for £40,000 at Phillips on Jan. 22, at the midpoint of its estimate.At Bonhams, no fewer than 25 of the limited-edition prints sold almost metronomically for £10,000 and £20,000 with fees, setting a ballpark current valuation for many of Banksy’s most familiar signed images. All of the works on paper (and one sculpture) sold, raising £434,600.“Like a lot of people, I had a budget,” said John Haw, a sales director in telecommunications and a private collector from Wiltshire in southern England, who was in the room to buy a 2006 Warhol-inspired “4 Soup Cans” screen print for £10,625 with fees. When originally issued by Lazarides, it cost£3,000 plus the value-added tax. “I didn’t want to spend more than £11,000 on a print,” Mr. Haw said.The highest price of the Banksy collection was the £32,500 paid by a telephone buyer for the early black-and-white stencil print, “Rude Copper” from 2002.Meanwhile, provided they have been certified by Pest Control, unique works by the world’s most famous graffiti artist continue to be bought for huge sums by superwealthy individuals with few if any budgetary constraints.During the “Frieze Week” auctions last October in London, Phillips sold the 2006 Banksy sculpture “Submerged Phone Booth” for £722,500, more than double the presale middle estimate.“I’ve noticed the print market works best when there’s a big disparity between the editioned and unique works of an artist,” Mr. Lazarides said a couple of hours before his Banksy sale. He added: “When the prices of originals rise above a certain point, it drives the sales of prints. The prices of the prints aren’t necessarily higher, but they sell quicker.”Now that so much original art by so many contemporary artists has become so expensive, “editions” are becoming an increasingly popular way of hanging brand-name art on a wall at a palatable price.Advertisement