Season 6, Episode 3, “Noblesse Oblige”Ava Crowder (Joelle Carter) has already killed two men. She ran a brothel. She killed a woman in prison while trying to take over the drug trade there. Yeah, we know she can be pretty mean. In this, the third episode of  “Justified,” we learn whether she can ever go straight. We also learned a bit more about Avery Markham (Sam Elliott), this season’s arch-villain, and Boyd Crowder (Walton Goggins), our long-winded criminal anti-hero. But our attention is riveted on Ava as she chooses between the law and the outlaw. Ava’s always been more than an ornament in this male-dominated series. And she can take action and seize a moment, even if she wants others to think she is passive. But we’ve always sensed she really wants an out, to escape the Kentucky thug life. The show opens with Boyd and Ava drunk and happy in the early morning hour. They haven’t smiled much since, oh, a season and a half ago. But after drinking bourbon for six hours together, she has reconnected with Boyd, her fiancé, even if it isn’t clear if he fully trusts her.Ava is interrupted by a text message summons from Raylan Givens (Timothy Olyphant), deputy U.S. marshal. She is hung over and feeling good, but her mood changes when she realizes she is just going to be pressured for information on Boyd. It gets worse when the assistant U.S. attorney and the head of the marshal’s service in Lexington intimidate and threaten her.  We know that she knows a lot at this point, but she gives up nothing. That can only mean ones thing: She is siding with not Raylan, but Boyd and the criminal life. Nothing in the hours that follow seems to divert her from that decision.She later goes to Pizza Portal, to do a little reconnoitering for Boyd. The Portal is a restaurant that was a bank that is now the headquarters for Markham’s gang. Under the pretense of cleaning up after spilling a drink on herself, she heads for the basement to shoot photos with her cellphone. She finds a giant Excelsior 5400 bank safe. (It appears to be a fictitious brand name.) And she also finds Choo-Choo (Duke Davis Roberts), the slow-brained henchman. She flirts with him; and the dimwit is smitten. He tells her his real name – Mundo — and explains that he earned his nickname because he likes trains, not because, as he has explained to others in the past, he hits hard like a train. Did you notice his moondog look when he asks for her name as they say good bye? She gives him a fake last name (her maiden name is Carter, not Randolph). Perhaps he might turn out to be a gentle giant and come to her rescue someday. Unfortunately Ty Walker (Garret Dillahunt), another Markham henchman, was also in that basement and at least he is bright enough to figure out what she is up to. For his part, Boyd gets three stern warnings that robbing the Portal is a catastrophic idea. At his bar, nursing a hangover, Walker pays a visit. In flowery speech that echoes Boyd’s manner, Walker warns that Markham is not to be trifled with. “He operates at a different level than you are used to,” Walker says.Deterred? Nah. Do Ava’s photos of the Portal’s basement persuade Boyd that the job is too tough? Nope. He just orders up more explosives. How about a kidnapping and disfigurement? Markham’s gang take him and threaten a nose slitting—“Have you seen ‘Chinatown,’ Boyd?”  The gang also threatens to disfigure Ava. Does that change his mind?  Nope. Three warnings and you’re a chump. Boyd has always overestimated his own intelligence or underestimated the intelligence of others. Boyd may be missing the message, but Markham has Ava’s number. He shows up at Ava’s place where he reveals two things: He doesn’t like bourbon and he understands Ava and her love of the outlaw life. He explains to her what that means. “I know for a woman to survive in this line of work, she has to be harder than men,” he says. She has to be willing to do what the men won’t do. “Are you that kind of woman?” he asks. We get no answer, but I’m beginning to think she is and she will.When Boyd arrives, he apologizes to Markham for trying to steal his money. But it’s a ruse — he tells his partner in crime, Katherine Hale (Mary Steenburgen), the woman who not coincidentally is sleeping with Markham: “I’ll rob him and stick a bullet in his head.” The very last scene cinches Ava’s commitment to the dark side: She sleeps with Boyd. Questions:
Raylan, after thwarting the  explosives heist, jaws on about children. He gets a little advice from an old friend who wants to take the fall for his son’s misdeeds. Doing anything you can for a child, the man says, “doesn’t stop and it don’t get any easier. You’ll see.” Do you think the conversation will resonate at all later in the show as Raylan acts — or doesn’t act—because he is a father?Have you noticed how each director in this series seems to prefer shooting Raylan starting from his boots and panning up? Why? (This episode’s director was Peter Weller, famous for playing lanky heroes, RoboCop and Buckaroo Banzai.)And finally:
The show drink: This week, Ava continues to step it up. In the first episode of the season, she drank discount vodka. Last week, Ava drank Wild Turkey in her kitchen for breakfast. This week, Boyd breaks out what he calls “the good bourbon.” Could anyone identify the bottle? Maybe Carla Carlton, The Bourbon Babe, or one of our other regular readers/bourbon drinkers can help out. 