AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleIt’s one thing to tempt fate. It was another order of hubris entirely to write this exchange into the first episode of the new ABC comedy “Dr. Ken”:“It’s not good, is it?”“No. It’s a train wreck.”Several million heads will nod when they hear that on Friday night, and it won’t be because of the young boy on screen doing a mime routine to a Katy Perry song.“Dr. Ken,” which stars Ken Jeong as a suburban Korean-American doctor and father, is based on his own experiences: He earned his medical degree from the University of North Carolina and completed a residency in internal medicine before veering into comedy.The show shouldn’t set back the cause of the Asian-American comedy series, which ABC kick-started last year with “Fresh Off the Boat,” but it’s a severe disappointment for anyone who has laughed at Mr. Jeong’s high-wire performances in the “Hangover” films or, more aptly, as the paranoid nut case Ben Chang in the series “Community.”Written by Jared Stern (“The Internship”) and directed by the sitcom veteran Scott Ellis, the “Dr. Ken” pilot is a tough watch — a relentlessly mediocre and formulaic half-hour of family comedy that appears to have no aspirations to satire. Ken is one of those clueless television misanthropes who insults and bullies his patients, ignores his staff and lectures his children but can be counted on to go marshmallowy before the end credits. The jokes don’t bear repeating, but it’s worth noting that a major character appears to have been given the nickname of a popular drug just so Ken can go to a rave in search of her and yell, “I’m looking for Molly!”In fairness to Mr. Stern, Mr. Ellis and the rest of the cast, though, the situations and repartee aren’t really that much worse than what you’d find in a lot of other generic comedies. What makes “Dr. Ken” such a cringefest is the disconnect between Mr. Jeong’s florid persona — pitched at the edge of desperation — and everything else on screen, which stays within the boundaries of a network family series.What works in smaller doses in an adventurous show like “Community” becomes a little grotesque when it’s at the center of a stagebound, laugh-track sitcom — Mr. Jeong starts to look like a performing animal. And he’s not the only victim. Suzy Nakamura, who’s been consistently funny in shows like “Back to You” and “The Goldbergs,” plays Ken’s wife and is mostly reduced to shaking her head at his antic behavior. The wife’s placid acceptance of Ken’s writhing, twitching narcissism, even if it’s meant to have a satirical charge, makes Ms. Nakamura look faintly ridiculous. (In a later episode involving Ken’s parents, she does get to show some venom of her own.)Mr. Jeong has been credited with subverting, as well as charged with exploiting, the contrasting stereotypes of the Asian male: inscrutability versus shrill aggression, physical ineptitude versus evil Fu Manchu genius. In “Dr. Ken” — which so far looks happy to skate on the surface of clichés about small stature and stern grandparents — his persona is less about race than about a style of frenzied, fully embodied comedy stretching back through Jerry Lewis to vaudeville. He needs a completely different show around him. Maybe on Netflix. Or in France.Advertisement