LONDON — The boys with the rifles separated us according to sex, the men forced into one group and the women into the other. Most of us complied, a startled and sheeplike herd.One figure, though, stood frozen in the middle of the red-dirt killing fields that had been made out of the Royal Court’s Jerwood Theater Upstairs for ‘‘Liberian Girl,’’ a harrowingly effective first play by Diana Nneka Atuona. This small, cowed person was a 14-year-old girl. She was dressed as a boy, though, and she knew that if she passed as one, the deception could save her life.Viola, the cross-dressing heroine of Shakespeare’s ‘‘Twelfth Night,’’ comes to see disguise as ‘‘a wickedness.’’ Martha, the helplessly passive title character of ‘‘Liberian Girl’’ — which just completed its run at the Royal Court and will be performed later this month in other London neighborhoods — has far stronger reasons to think the same thing. Passing for male among the Small Boys’ Unit of a revolutionary cadre in the Liberian civil war of the early 1990s, Martha, played by Juma Sharkah, is trained to shoot, kill and pillage as her ragtag squadron cuts an annihilating path to the capital of Monrovia. She even participates in the gang rape of a young girl, or pretends to.Impressions of the theater scene from the critics of The Times.While the face of Ms. Sharkah, who at 21 is making what must be a harrowing professional theater debut, betrays little obvious emotion, we can sense — in a way her testosterone-drunk comrades-in-arms cannot — the inner distress and profound confusion of a young woman coming of violent age as a young man. This is partly because, unlike the boys, we have first been allowed to know Martha as she was — as a book-loving, playful and utterly unworldly girl.But our identification with her is also compounded by sheer proximity. Throughout the production, directed with both brute force and quiet indirection by Matthew Dunster and designed by Anna Fleischle, Martha is seldom more than a few yards away from the several dozen of us who choose to stand downstairs. (There is an upper tier of seats for audience members who prefer to be ‘‘out of the action,’’ an option offered by the ushers as we enter.)At times, we may be close enough to feel her short, frightened breaths. Another young female character, shot as she ran away, seemed to fall dead at my feet, blood pooling on her back.Immersive theater that melts the boundaries between audience and performance is hardly a novelty these days. Even productions in which actors pretend to hold theatergoers at gun point has been around since at least the 1960s.But ‘‘Liberian Girl’’ — which is written in simple, in-the-moment dialogue that rarely pauses for reflection or introspection — uses the immersive form to unsettle in singularly effective ways. As Martha, who has been renamed Frisky, grows into her masculine and martial identity, the intimacy of the setting enhances both empathy and complicity on our part. (In that sense, we are making a leap of imagination originally taken by Ms. Atuona, who grew up in London, not Liberia.)The passivity that is part of being an audience member is exploited to underline our feelings of helplessness and of a voyeur’s guiltiness. We can’t look away — not when we’re this close to the action (and are being told by rifle-toting boys to pay attention) — but we certainly can’t intervene. Whenever I looked around at my fellow theatergoers, they seemed never quite to know how to arrange their faces.At least one major critic here faulted ‘‘Liberian Girl’’ for providing no broader political context. But the enforced limitations of the play’s point of view seem to me to be one of its strengths.We are asked to imagine what it must be like for a provincial girl to reinvent a life without choices as she goes along, never knowing what awaits her or why she is doing what she’s doing, except to stay alive. At a certain point, we may even find ourselves caught up, as she is, in what feels almost like good sport, as the young rebels converge on Monrovia, plundering previously unknown treasures of modern urban life.The involuntary adrenaline spike that comes with such moments subsides into a disgusted queasiness. And even Martha’s nostalgia for the uneventful rural life she shared with her protective grandmother (Cecilia Noble) is contaminated by the end.The rebels whom Martha winds up joining invaded her village on the eve of her initiation into womanhood, which she had regarded as a thrillingly mysterious ritual. Only later, when Martha has morphed into Frisky, does she learn from another girl (Weruche Opia, who exudes a longtime survivor’s brokenness and canniness) that this initiation would have meant her being circumcised.The play’s conclusion, a scene so gentle and soft-spoken that it’s almost thrown away, finds Frisky poised to turn back into Martha. Clearly, though, in this world there is no sanctuary in being either sex.