By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 3, 2015
2:30 P.M. (Sundance) THE KING’S SPEECH (2010) Colin Firth, in the role that won him an Oscar for best actor, portrays Albert Frederick Arthur George, or Bertie, as his family called him, the shy second son of George V of Britain (Michael Gambon) in this film from Tom Hooper. Geoffrey Rush is Lionel Logue, the speech therapist who helps Bertie conquer a debilitating stutter. And Helena Bonham Carter is Elizabeth, Albert’s wife and staunch support system, who can’t quite stomach Wallis Simpson (Eve Best), the American divorcée who leads Bertie’s older brother, David (Guy Pearce), to abdicate as Edward VIII. “It isn’t exactly ‘Pygmalion,’ not least because Mr. Hooper has no intention of satirizing the caste system that is one of this movie’s biggest draws,” Manohla Dargis, writing in The New York Times, said of the film, which received 12 Oscar nominations and also won for best director, best picture and original screenplay. “Like many entertainments of this pop-historical type,” she added, “ ‘The King’s Speech’ wears history lightly no matter how heavy the crown.”2:45 P.M. (HBO) CINDERELLA MAN (2005) In this biopic from Ron Howard, Russell Crowe portrays James J. Braddock, the Depression-era heavyweight boxing champion, who on June 13, 1935, fought the fight of his life against Max Baer (Craig Bierko). But it’s the face-off between Braddock and his manager (Paul Giamatti) that gives the film its bite. One of its satisfactions is that the fight is not what the filmmakers seem keen to sell, Manohla Dargis said in The Times. “Their Cinderella Man is the decent little guy who affirms what movie people call the triumph of the human spirit,” she wrote. “The story Mr. Crowe tells, with Mr. Giamatti riding shotgun as a gleeful Mephistopheles, is that of a man who, having sampled the blood of others, clearly enjoyed the taste.”8 P.M. (Fox) MASTERCHEF JUNIOR The eight remaining cooks must impress the judges with unique banana dishes before facing Gordon Ramsay’s daughter Matilda and one of her favorite entrees — salmon en croûte — in the elimination challenge.9 P.M. (ABC) MARVEL’S AGENT CARTER Peggy (Hayley Atwell) is entrusted with a mission and calls on her Howling Commandos squad for help. But Chief Dooley (Shea Whigham) threatens to blow her cover.Advertisement9 P.M. (Fox) NEW GIRL Jess (Zooey Deschanel) helps Schmidt (Max Greenfield) and Nick (Jake Johnson) promote their new business venture, a suit made of sweatshirt material, to the entrepreneur Lori Greiner of QVC fame. In “The Mindy Project,” at 9:30, Mindy (Mindy Kaling) is offered a chance to open her own practice in San Francisco and doesn’t quite know how to tell Danny (Chris Messina), especially after he shows her the brownstone he bought for them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (13, 49) THE BIG BURN “American Experience” looks back at the summer of 1910, when a wildfire devoured more than 3 million acres across the northern Rockies in 36 hours and defined the fire policy of the fledgling United States Forest Service for the rest of the 20th century. Timothy Egan, a contributor to The New York Times, wrote the book that inspired this documentary from Stephen Ives.Advertisement9 P.M. (Oxygen) STREET ART THROWDOWN Ten creative warriors scale walls, climb fences and navigate tunnels throughout Los Angeles as they compete to bring their visions to life in the city’s public spaces for $100,000 in this new series overseen by the artist Justin Bua.10 P.M. (BET) BEING MARY JANE A second season in the life of Mary Jane Paul (Gabrielle Union) finds her struggling with her sparring family at home, delving into more stories about African-American experiences at work — and trying to conceive a child any way possible just as she is set to embark on a new romance. “Being Mary Jane” (2013), the movie from which this series was spun off, leads in at 9 a.m., followed by a marathon of the first season.What’s Streaming NowTHE THROWAWAYS (2015) A notorious hacker (Sam Huntington) is captured by the C.I.A. and given a proposition: Work for the C.I.A. or spend life in prison. He accepts the C.I.A. offer, on the condition that he can choose his own team. But instead of picking from the list of top agents recommended by the organization, he selects those considered expendable (played, among others, by James Caan and Kevin Dillon). Tony Bui directed this comedic spy thriller, which counts the actor Jeremy Renner (“The Hurt Locker”) among its executive producers. (crackle.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.