By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 2, 2015
Geraldine McEwan, a British actress who was best known for playing the Agatha Christie detective Miss Marple in 12 episodes of a BBC series based on the character, died on Friday in London. She was 82.A statement by her family announcing her death said she had been in a hospital since late October, when she had a stroke.Ms. McEwan played the title character in “Agatha Christie’s Marple” in its first seasons, from 2004 to 2007. The series was shown on public television in the United States.When she won the role, she told The New York Times: “I do enjoy playing very original and slightly eccentric characters. It is very amusing that Agatha Christie should have created this older woman who lives a very conventional life in a little country village and yet spends all her time solving violent crimes.”AdvertisementShe was succeeded in the role by Julia McKenzie. Margaret Rutherford, Angela Lansbury, Helen Hayes and Joan Hickson have all played the part in film or on television. Writing in The Times in 2009, Mike Hale called Ms. McEwan’s version “a steel fist in a white lace glove.”Ms. McEwan worked for many years in theater and films as well as on television. Her awards include a BAFTA Best Actress prize in 1991 for her performance in the television mini-series “Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She appeared on Broadway in a 1998 production of Eugene Ionesco’s “The Chairs,” playing the Old Woman to Richard Briers’s Old Man. She was nominated for a Tony Award for the performance.She was a British stage regular, appearing with Laurence Olivier, Albert Finney and other stars, and excelled in classic works by Strindberg, Sheridan, Congreve and Shakespeare, playing major roles in “Much Ado About Nothing” and “Hamlet.”Ms. McEwan was born on May 9, 1932, in Old Windsor, west of London, and made her stage debut at 14 in “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” at the Theater Royal at Windsor.Among her film roles, she played an evil witch alongside Kevin Costner and Alan Rickman in “Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves” (1991) and a steely Mother Superior in “The Magdalene Sisters” (2002).Ms. McEwan was married to Hugh Cruttwell, a former principal of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts. He died in 2002. She is survived by their two children, Greg and Claudia.The New York Times contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Geraldine McEwan, 82; Known for Miss Marple Role.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.