AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Nate ChinenFor much of the last decade, Marquis Hill fit the description of a prized local phenomenon. A dauntingly skilled trumpeter from the South Side of Chicago, he came up through that city’s jazz infrastructure, which extends to the classroom as well as the bandstand. He worked with a smart range of collaborators and made several albums, but the glowing reputation he’d earned was concentrated within a single metropolitan area.That situation had already begun to change when Mr. Hill, 27, won the Thelonious Monk International Jazz Competition last fall, impressing a blue-chip panel of judges with the sharp, expressive insight in his playing.Often pegged as some kind of golden ticket, winning the Monk competition is best understood as a springboard: Its benefit has a lot to do with the readiness of its recipient. And Mr. Hill is emphatically ready, as he showed in a supremely assured concert at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center on Saturday night.He was there courtesy of the Monk-in-Motion series, which presents the Monk competition’s top three finalists with their bands. (The other two are Billy Buss, on Feb. 14, and Adam O’Farrill, on Feb. 28.) The setting gave Mr. Hill a chance to show his seriousness not only as a trumpeter but also as a bandleader and composer, by way of the elite post-bop unit he calls the Blacktet, with Christopher McBride on alto saxophone, Justin Thomas on vibraphone, Joshua Ramos on bass, and Makaya McCraven on drums.On the surface, this band suggested a sleek update to the Young Lion aesthetics of the 1980s, with tight front-line maneuvers against a hard rhythmic churn. Mr. Hill scores his melodies in braided lines for trumpet and alto, and his coordination with Mr. McBride, on slanted sprints like “White Shadow” and “Return of the Student,” was impeccable. Where the analogy broke down was in the rhythm section, propelled by an earthy intensity. Mr. Thomas is a mallet virtuoso with a spillover of ideas and an appealingly liquid phraseology. And Mr. McCraven is an endlessly compelling drummer, whose interests include the more hypnotic properties of groove; certain tracks on his engaging new album, “In the Moment” (International Anthem), feature Mr. Thomas and Mr. Hill. Likewise, a few moments in the show, notably a ballad titled “I Remember Summer,” evoked the softer side of early-’70s jazz-funk crossover. Mr. Hill seemed to draw no distinctions; he has had the advantage of watching his predecessors, like the trumpeter Roy Hargrove, move in and out of a hard-bop mode. (He’ll join Mr. Hargrove on Saturday at the Jazz Gallery in “The Trumpet Shall Sound,” a program that has become a club tradition.) Chicago has been another obvious advantage for Mr. Hill: a laboratory and a proving ground, a place with its own energetic frequencies. All of which were evident in “The Color of Fear,” a highlight for both its frenetic ensemble cohesion and its brilliant solo turns. But during an intermission Q. and A., there came confirmation of a recent development: Mr. Hill has left Chicago for New York City. Which means there’s no excuse for one of the major jazz clubs not to book the Blacktet for a weeklong run. It should happen soon. Marquis Hill appears with Roy Hargrove on Saturday at the Jazz Gallery, 1160 Broadway, at 27th Street, Flatiron district; 646-494-3625, jazzgallery.org.Advertisement