By ALASTAIR MACAULAYFEB. 2, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The Mariinsky Ballet demonstrated on Saturday and Sunday that it is still one of the world’s supreme ballet companies. In the final week of its three-week visit to the United States, it produced its best dancing in the tour’s oldest ballet, the Grand Pas from “Paquita” (1881). In New York, the company’s way with classical style had seemed straitjacketed in its tempos and phrasing by its musical director, Valery Gergiev. He, however, stayed in New York to conduct the Metropolitan Opera and, at Carnegie Hall, the Mariinsky’s orchestra.With Mr. Gergiev out of the way, the company reverted to a far freer demonstration of its wealth of nuances. The company was not only at its most stylish but also its liveliest, dancing with a happy panoply of resources.The program, a quadruple bill, abounded in self-contradictions. If its choreography, spanning 1881 to 1913 and moving from classical virtuosity to radical modernism, had been staged in chronological order, we would have been astonished by the reforms attempted in those years.The three 20th-century works — “The Swan” (here dated as 1907) and “Le Spectre de la Rose” (1911), both created by Michel Fokine, and Vaslav Nijinsky’s “Le Sacre du Printemps” (1913) — show us successive stages of change. In these, musical and choreographic integrity come first, with no interruptions for curtain calls. Paramount attention is paid to communicating the subject matter of the work, and nothing is addressed principally to the audience. And “Sacre” features complex coordination of often asymmetrical groups, irregular rhythms, harsh neo-primitivism.AdvertisementThe Mariinsky program, though, opened with “Sacre” and moved backward in time, with the company dancing the 20th-century pieces as if the performers were quaint curios. The “Paquita” Grand Pas, by contrast, is the epitome of what the Russian ballet modernists opposed. And the Mariinsky performers, dancing it last, suggested that here, finally, they had come home.AdvertisementStylistic sophistication and virtuosity are topmost in “Paquita.” Its music is charmingly trivial; tutus, tunics and other ballet regalia are worn; there are more than 10 breaks for bows by individual dancers. Performers are presented hierarchically. In one adagio section, the corps de ballet becomes the orchestra to the ballerina’s solo voice; the corps members perform, on one flat foot, prolonged versions of steps and positions that the ballerina soloist, supported by her male partner, executes on point. For no logical reason, a pas de trois for one man and two women and then a series of solos for five ballerinas prolong the proceedings — or, rather, waft its celebration of high style up into the ether. The crisscross patterns in the coda of the pas de trois are the wittiest sequence in all Marius Petipa’s output, and the ballerina variations perfectly demonstrate his gift for coloratura brilliance.All four works were originally choreographed for Mariinsky dancers, though not all in Russia. “Spectre” and “Sacre” were given their premieres by Diaghilev’s Ballets Russes in the West, and all four of these current productions really count as reconstructions. The “Sacre” was recreated in 1987 by Millicent Hodson and Kenneth Archer. The “Spectre” is attributed to the reconstruction of Isabelle Fokine, the choreographer’s granddaughter; the company’s “Swan” has also been designated as her responsibility in recent seasons. And the “Paquita” Grand Pas is a 1978 production, credited with “Revised Choreography by Pyotr Gusev, Lidia Tiuntina, Georgy Konishchev.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I’ve seen the Hodson-Archer “Sacre” danced by three companies: the Joffrey Ballet (which performed its premiere), the Paris Opera Ballet and the Mariinsky. Though I find it musically frustrating — Ms. Hodson’s dances alternate, bizarrely, between step-for-note fidelity and anti-musical rhythms — its details look markedly different in each revival. The Mariinsky dancers made much of it look tentative and inauthentic, but there were occasional passages when the complex daring of Nijinsky’s imagination struck me powerfully. And Daria Pavlenko brought force and fervor in a solo as the Chosen Maiden.Ms. Hodson’s staging clearly suggests two important things. First: Though some have claimed that the famous audience first-night furor of the 1913 “Sacre” was a reaction to Nijinsky’s choreography rather than to Stravinsky’s music, this cannot have been so, since there are two extended passages with curtains lowered and no dancing. Second: that both Stravinsky and Nijinsky told the “Sacre” story poorly. Why is this Maiden chosen and not another? There’s simply too little music for the tribe to react to her death and for us to understand its implications; the ending is a merely melodramatic flourish.“The Swan” and “Le Spectre” have long since become clichés of neo-Romantic ballet soulfulness. But Oxana Skorik (on Saturday evening) brought to the Swan a rare and bleak simplicity, dancing it like a single thought. At the same performance, Kimin Kim danced the Rose Ghost with inspired exhilaration, opening out into the air like fragrance.The delectable nonsense of “Paquita” contains much of the quintessence of classical ballet. Nothing last weekend was more marvelously alive than the corps de ballet, with perfect brio and ravishing coordination of upper and lower body, and it grew only more exuberant at each performance. The subtle emphasis with which their torsos tipped and arched away from sheer verticality, while their feet carried them gleamingly across the stage, was intoxicating.I watched the lead role danced by Yekaterina Kondaurova, Anastasia Matvienko and Ms. Skorik. Ms. Kondaurova now looks to be the most glamorous and sensuously elegant of all current European ballerinas; her dancing abounds in gorgeous features. What’s holding her back from greatness? A dash of narcissism: She dances as if what gave her joy is not her steps but herself. Ms. Matvienko and Ms. Skorik, less sophisticated artists, proved yet more effective.A version of this review appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Spirited Journey Backward, From Modernism to Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.