



The Cold War spy drama on FX.Season 3, Episode 2: “Baggage”
Приветствую вас, дорогие товарищи! Что у вас в чемодане?
(Greetings, dear comrades! What do you have in your suitcase?)Could there be a more chilling juxtaposition of tenderness and cold practicality? In one moment, Philip, still in “Scott” mode, gently closes the unseeing eyes of Annelise, and in the next, snaps her arm at the elbow with a sick-making crack.He is cramming her into a rolling suitcase with the help of Elizabeth, who lays out a plastic tarp for the body with a practiced air. Their next conscripted cat’s paw, Yousaf (Rahul Khanna), must take part, too, grabbing a leg with Elizabeth and bending it so forcefully at the knee in the wrong direction that the bone protrudes almost through the skin. (Imagine a Barbie with her rubbery limbs flexed the wrong way.)Elizabeth shoves in the final bit, a foot, with savage precision, and Annelise is packed into the suitcase with her limbs and neck at such improbable angles that it’s hard to believe she was ever alive. The scene, horrifying and effective, was creepy enough that I tried to telepathically will Philip to wash his hands.As Elizabeth (Keri Russell) carts the bag out the door, she also carries other burdens, the backbreaking, invisible kind. Like almost everyone with any self-awareness on this show, she is bearing an overload of emotional, historical, familial and political baggage.History weighs on her — the inculcated Soviet patriotism as well as the memories of her own sacrifices and her mother’s before her. The future, especially that of her daughter, Paige, is always on her mind.We don’t know the motives of Elizabeth’s mother, who taught her to be tough and self-sufficient and unblinkingly agreed the K.G.B. could have her at 16. Perhaps Gabriel (Frank Langella) knows something. When Elizabeth’s father was shot as a deserter, was Gabriel on hand to help the widow? Or is he the officer who gave the order?Elizabeth doesn’t let any of these pressures bog her down. On the contrary, she seems energized. She makes a little visit to Gabriel on her own, one of many one-on-one encounters in this episode, some of them unexpected.In a dark alley. Stan trudges along in a daze now that he has lost his wife and son and given up Nina. He drags around his memories yet remains largely unaware of what a chump he has been.But when an armed and seething Oleg confronts him in the alley, Stan finally gets tough. Refusing to sink to his knees on command, he challenges Oleg to shoot him in the back and walks away.I thought these two rivals acquitted themselves well in their noirish face-off. Oleg got his point across, and his menacing moves with the gun defined the word “brandish.” And Stan gambled and won.Does anyone believe Oleg had planned to pull the trigger? Was he tempted when Stan declared his love for Nina? Surely killing an F.B.I. agent would be a bad career move for someone like who must daily balance his inner Heathcliff with his need to win approval from his apparatchik Papa.At the ex’s. After high noon in the alley, Stan quickly reverts to his usual self. As green and wobbly as Jell-O, he lets his emotions propel him to the home of his ex-wife, Sandra, where he shamelessly lays out his neediness, bargaining for a human connection.Sandra (Susan Misner) is pulled this way and that by his pleas, and her conflicting emotions flicker across her face. She wants to comfort Stan, but she won’t go back to him; she’s glad he’s alive, but it’s too late, but …Do you think there’s anything left between these two? Surely with Stan, what you see is all you get, so why does the show keep shoving them together as if hoping for a spark?In prison. On the other side of the world, Nina, once the sweetheart of the Rezidentura, whose empathy extended to dispensing sexual Band-Aids, has sunk to an almost feral level in Lefortovo prison, her pretty frocks replaced by mangy brown sweats and her always perfectly applied crimson lipstick long gone.What have they done to her? Her panic-stricken new bunkie tries to introduce herself, and Nina sullenly studies the crack in the concrete floor. The cellmate begins to hyperventilate and Nina rolls herself up like a burrito in her thin scratchy blanket, trying to shut out the noise.When at last Nina (Annet Mahendru) talks to the poor girl, she delivers her line with the gravity of a tragic Russian heroine: “This isn’t a prison for innocent people.”But how many scenes can be played out in a prison cell? Surely the showrunners haven’t strung us along this far with Nina only to execute her. So, we can entertain other options. Like the inevitable visitor.You knew he would come: Oleg’s father, the Minister of Railways. Papa Igor (Boris Krutonog) tells her that Oleg (Costa Ronin) has asked him to intervene in her case. He is careful not to commit himself, and is ethically opposed to the very idea of stepping in. Still, he shows up, and that must mean something.Nina gives Papa Igor a message for his son: With Oleg, she says, she wasn’t pretending. We believe in her sincerity … right? Doubters, leave comments below.On the runway. In a cargo container being bumped across the hangar (more baggage!) is a prize, the Soviet defector Zinaida Preobrazhenskaya. She is blue from face to fingertips from lack of oxygen despite the thoughtfully provided mask and tank.First impressions? She loves her Milky Ways, but did she come this far just for a candy bar (and product placement)? It’s hard to tell whether she is as valuable as the intelligence establishment believes. First, she appeared just a bit clueless when they trotted her out at the news conference where she denounced Russia’s actions in Afghanistan, and she tried to flirt with Stan, proposing a sightseeing expedition together. Maybe she doesn’t understand that defectors must earn their keep. Or maybe she’s a fake.When Stan stops in the boss’s office to quickly eyeball the F.B.I. sketch artist’s renderings of his attacker (Elizabeth, his next-door neighbor, in disguise) and just as quickly reject them as useless, his supervisor, Frank Gaad (Richard Thomas), always on top of things, reminds him, “Don’t let what’s-her-name get killed.”There are so many reminders of how critical Zinaida’s security is that she must be in imminent danger of … something.At the Rezidentura. Tatiana Ruslanova is exercising damage control to burnish the Soviet public image, which is besmirched daily by Zinaida (Svetlana Efremova) and her public condemnations of the war in Afghanistan. Tatiana puts Oleg on the case, and his intel shows high-profile public appearances on Zinaida’s agenda. He is dutiful but perplexed. “I work on science and technology,” he says to Tatiana (Vera Cherny). “Why did you ask me to do this?”“Propaganda is more important than anything,” she says pointedly, drawing very near. “I want you to start to understand this.” Hmm. Character assassination is, after all, a popular weapon in intelligence arsenals.Big red flags waving here.Jennings Relationship Status: Permafrost. Philip (Matthew Rhys), rattled by recent events and furious about the disagreement with Elizabeth over Paige (Holly Taylor), wants to pick a fight (again) over Elizabeth’s losing the names of those C.I.A.-Afghanistan people.“We wouldn’t be in this situation if I’d been handling Yousaf from the start,” she retorts, dragging the whole Annelise mess into the argument.Which is exactly what Philip wanted. She has inadvertently proved his point. Any assignment could go south for any agent. If Paige’s parents agree to deliver her up to the K.G.B., her life will be as spontaneous (and I mean that in the worst imaginable sense) as theirs. He most emphatically does not want that for his child.As Elizabeth protests, Philip, in her face, bites off every syllable: “It is unpredictable, and that is exactly why I never want Paige ever entering into this. I don’t want her putting people into a suitcase and I don’t want her ending up in a suitcase.”But, comrades, this debate will not be won or lost on rhetorical merit. It’s a matter for action, don’t you agree?Propaganda Point.  Elizabeth: “Paige, don’t worry. Your father is not having an affair.”Translation: “Well, Paige, it’s complicated. In our business, Dad and I have all kinds of sex with all kinds people, sometimes even with people we’re attracted to, and sometimes with partners we pretend to marry, which can be hugely inconvenient unless you really love your country — umm, job — and now I have to leave you and Henry alone all night again and take this giant suitcase to a hotel and stuff one of those people Daddy has been having sex with into it. I’ll explain later!”)Some more questions for you. 
Might Paige’s fretting about her father’s fidelity give Elizabeth just the leverage she needs to talk her daughter into a commitment that requires total trust and discretion?If Nina gets a peasant loaf with a hacksaw in it, what will she owe her benefactor?And what heartbreak has left Oleg’s father so disappointed?Readers, it’s gratifying to see that you are rabid Kremlinologists when it comes to dissecting the show and sharing your theories. Is anyone watching in Russia?Встретимся на следующей неделе! (See you next week!)