Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.CHOPIN: 24 Preludes (Op. 28); Selected Impromptus, Mazurkas and Other Preludes
Andrew Tyson, pianist
(Outhere Music, Zig-Zag Territories ZZT347)
The young American pianist Andrew Tyson, who has been picking up competition prizes and winning many admirers, proves a poetic, elegant and aptly impetuous performer of Chopin on this splendid recording, issued by one of the many new smaller labels. Mr. Tyson’s feeling for rubato and over-expressive freedom is balanced by his attentiveness to structure, clarity and inner details. In the 24 Preludes (Op. 28), he brings individual character to each one. Yet Chopin’s collection of preludes in all the major and minor keys emerges in this reading as a compositional entity. A beautiful recording. (Anthony Tommasini)MENDELSSOHN: ‘Songs Without Words’
 Javier Perianes, pianist
 (Harmonia Mundi) 
The pianist Javier Perianes offers an elegant survey of Mendelssohn’s piano works, including intimate, beautifully shaped renditions of selections from “Songs Without Words,” as well as expressive interpretations of the “Rondo Capriccioso” and a fiery performance of the “Präludium and Fuga.” (Vivien Schweitzer)MARTIN BRESNICK: ‘Prayers Remain Forever’
Various performers
(Starkland Recordings ST-221)
For years, the composer Martin Bresnick has been thriving as a teacher at the Yale School of Music, inspiring the students who work with him and writing a large, diverse roster of works that are admired by performers across America. But an academic life can be a little isolating; Mr. Bresnick, born in New York in 1946, has never been the kind of presence in major chamber ensembles and orchestras that he deserves to be. This exciting recording of chamber works and piano pieces, mostly inspired by literary texts, should be a revelation to those who don’t know his work. Take “Going Home — Vysoke, My Jerusalem” (2010) for oboe, violin, viola and cello, music that seems at once ancient, elegiac and awesomely new. Or “Ishi’s Song” for a sometimes-singing pianist, a joyous and spiritual piece, played beautifully here by Lisa Moore. In a program note, the composer David Lang writes that Mr. Bresnick’s “composition has always been the tool for converting the intellectual into the emotional.” Listen and you will hear. (Tommasini)‘PARIS’
 Alison Balsom, trumpeter; the Guy Barker Orchestra, Guy Barker, conductor
 (Warner Classics) 
The trumpeter Alison Balsom has been an evangelist for her instrument, commissioning new works and arranging a wide range of repertory for trumpet, often from the Baroque era. Here she goes further afield with a Parisian-themed disc featuring her arrangements (a collaboration with Guy Barker) of music by Satie, Piazzolla, Ravel and Messiaen: the arrangement of Messiaen’s “Baiser de l’Enfant Jésus” is a highlight. (Schweitzer)WORKS BY HAYDN, BEETHOVEN AND SCHUBERT
Gilbert Kalish, pianist
(Bride Records Bride 9428)
The respected pianist Gilbert Kalish has been essential as a performer of contemporary works and chamber music to ensembles in New York and across America. For decades, he has also been an influential teacher and coach. So his public profile in the major solo works of the piano repertory is not what it could be. Which makes this recording so valuable. Long known for his masterly Haydn, Mr. Kalish gives an elegant, insightful account of the Sonata No. 62 in E flat. He brings out both the playful and mystical elements of Beethoven’s late 11 Bagatelles (Op. 119). The album concludes with a sensitive, intelligent account of Schubert’s great, late Sonata in B Flat (D. 960), acutely revealing the strangely contradictory emotions of the music. (Tommasini)‘RETURNING PATHS’: Solo Piano Works by Janacek and Suk 
Ieva Jokubaviciute, pianist
(Victor Elmaleh Collection) 
The pianist Ieva Jokubaviciute offers a poignant, tender rendition of Book I of Janacek’s “On an Overgrown Path,” written while he was grieving the death of his 21-year-old daughter. Ms. Jokubaviciute plays with arresting fury and introspection in a powerful performance of Janacek’s dramatic Piano Sonata 1.X.1905 “From the Street.” The disc also includes Josef Suk’s nostalgic “About Mother,” a memorial to Suk’s deceased wife for his young son. (Schweitzer)MARIUS CONSTANT: “Turner,” “Brevissima,” “103 Visions of Water”
Riverside Symphony, George Rothman, conductor
Olivier Charlier, violinist
(Riverside Symphony Records)
For better or worse, the Romanian-born French composer Marius Constant (1925-2004) is best known by far for a 30-second piece: the theme music for the television show “The Twilight Zone.” Constant sent in the mini-piece in 1956 for a contest in search of a signature theme and won. But he was a significant composer in the entirety of his work, and he has no better champions than George Rothman and Anthony Korf, who are the music director and artistic director of the adventurous Riverside Symphony. This impressive recording of three fascinating Constant scores, including the unconventional, boldly modern violin concerto “103 Visions of Water,” on the orchestra’s own label, may bring welcome attention to Constant, whose music sounds influenced by two of his teachers — Messiaen and Honegger — but who brought his own feeling for color, texture and pulsing cinematic drama to his work. (Tommasini)SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)