By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 4, 2015
8 P.M. (WE) MATCH MADE IN HEAVEN Shawn Bullard, a real estate developer and former college football player, receives guidance from Ken Johnson, chaplain and spiritual adviser to the Indianapolis Colts, who is charged with discerning the authenticity and godliness of 24 women hoping to make a love connection with Mr. Bullard. But it may be Mr. Bullard’s opinionated mother, who, after moving into the house with the contestants, has the final say on her prospective daughter-in-law. And forget about roses: The women will each be given a white cellphone at the start of the show to which Mr. Bullard will text messages as to the outcome of their romantic encounters.10:30 A.M. (CUNY) CUNY TV PRESENTS ABNY Carmen Fariña, chancellor of the New York City Department of Education, discusses her priorities for improving public schools at an Association for a Better New York event taped on Jan. 22.12:05 P.M. (Starz Cinema) THE PAST (2013) An Iranian, Ahmad (Ali Mosaffa), returns to Paris to give his estranged wife, Marie (Bérénice Bejo, above with Mr. Mosaffa), the divorce she seeks — and in the process opens a Pandora’s box — in this drama by Asghar Farhadi. Tahar Rahim plays Samir, the man Marie has taken up with, whose wife is in a coma. Elyes Aguis is Samir’s son, whose presence in the house means a playmate for Marie’s younger daughter (Jeanne Jestin). And Pauline Burlet is Marie’s older daughter, who finds the situation nearly intolerable. “The narrative complications can be distracting, at times exasperating, but they’re finally irrelevant because Mr. Farhadi’s filmmaking is so fluid, and the performers, Ms. Bejo, in particular, are so attractive,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “As in ‘A Separation,’ Mr. Farhadi shows a masterly gift for moving his characters and camera through rooms that — with a raised voice, a violent exit — become stages in a ferocious domestic drama. But here, keep your eye on the littlest players, the small ones trembling in the wings.” In French and Persian, with English subtitles.9 P.M. (NBC) LAW & ORDER: SPECIAL VICTIMS UNIT A teenager (Haley Lu Richardson) says she was raped in a pizzeria bathroom by a man (Kamal Bolden) with a criminal record and a pending lawsuit against the New York Police Department. But with scant evidence, the unit is forced to release him — leading the girl’s father (Jamie McShane) to take the law into his own hands.Advertisement9 P.M. (13) EARTH: A NEW WILD The conservation scientist M. Sanjayan explores the connections between humans and wildlife as he travels to 29 countries in segments titled “Home,” “Plains,” “Forests,” “Ocean” and “Water.” He begins by witnessing the release of the first captive-born female giant panda into the wilderness of China; flying with vultures in the Himalayas; and visiting chimpanzees in Tanzania with Jane Goodall. At 10, he watches saiga antelope rut on the steppes of Russia and learns how people can mimic the activity of animals to restore grasslands to their original glory.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (ABC) NASHVILLE Rayna (Connie Britton) incurs the wrath of Luke (Will Chase) as well as that of her daughters (Maisy and Lennon Stella) after canceling her wedding. Meanwhile, Juliette (Hayden Panettiere) and Avery (Jonathan Jackson) adjust to the bumps in their own marriage. Gunnar (Sam Palladio) fights for custody of Micah (Gunnar Sizemore). Deacon (Charles Esten) receives devastating news about his health. And Sadie (Laura Benanti) decides to handle the situation with her ex by buying a gun.10 P.M. (FX) THE AMERICANS Elizabeth (Keri Russell, right) and Philip (Matthew Rhys) unite for a mission, despite their increasingly conflicting ideologies. Stan (Noah Emmerich) welcomes a Soviet defector to the United States amid suspicions. And Nina (Annet Mahendru) adjusts to her new living arrangements.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowTHE BEST OF SUNDANCE SHORTS Mike Plante, a programmer for the Sundance Film Festival, has compiled 12 of his favorite short films for SundanceNow Doc Club, ranging from “Born Sweet” (2010), about a teenager in rural Cambodia coping with chronic illness brought on by the arsenic-laced water in his village, to “Speed Racer: Welcome to the World of Vic Chesnutt” (1994), which follows that Georgia singer and songwriter as he records his second album. Six more films will be added later this month. (docclub.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCK A version of this schedule appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.