AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasOver the summer, Misty Copeland made history as the first African-American woman to be promoted to principal dancer at American Ballet Theater. But two years earlier, Nelson George, the writer and director, began filming Ms. Copeland who, at the time, was recuperating from an injury. They met at a dinner party held by the television personality Bevy Smith. “They had me seated next to an ex-basketball player’s wife,” Mr. George said. “I was like, that’s not who I want to spend the night talking to.”A fortuitous seat change helped spark the new documentary “A Ballerina’s Tale,” which opens in theaters and on demand Wednesday, Oct. 14. Mr. George, known for his work on hip-hop and about African-American culture, said he began with no agenda. “We didn’t know what was going to happen, but I knew she was going to get back onstage,” he said. He added: “I feel she’s the first big ballet pop star since Baryshnikov.”Ms. Copeland joined Mr. George for a conversation at a cafe near Ballet Theater. She was between rehearsals as the company prepares for its season at the David H. Koch Theater this month. Here are edited excerpts. What is this movie?Nelson George The movie is not a biopic. It’s a snapshot of an artist in a moment of crisis.Misty Copeland And also with the background of really speaking more in detail about the lack of diversity in ballet and of African-American ballerinas. That was something I wanted from the beginning.Do you have any career regrets about focusing so much on the fact that you’re a black ballet dancer?Copeland I have zero. I think it needed to happen. Dancers in the past have talked about it, but they haven’t had the platform that I’ve had, which makes a huge difference. I think that it’s forcing the conversation to be had, and it’s a part of me, and it’s a part of my experience in my life and my struggles. I feel like I didn’t have this easy or normal or typical path, and a lot of that was because I’m African-American, and so many have experienced this or are experiencing this. Just because I’ve received a certain amount of recognition or success doesn’t mean that I all of a sudden drop that because it’s still a part of me. Just because I’m a principal dancer now doesn’t mean that all goes away.George If she went, “Well, I’m a little black and I’m a little this,” people would have been like, oh yeah, she’s playing the game. But she didn’t play the game. She didn’t hide from the fact that it’s a point of conflict. I don’t think she would be perceived of as important if it wasn’t for her embracing that heritage.Did it feel like a daring move? Did you have to really consider it?Copeland No. It’s something that I’ve always felt very strongly about. I mean I didn’t realize I did until I stepped into an atmosphere where it was so clear to me how the ballet world works. It’s important for the ballet world to get it. I understand people wanting to say, “We don’t see color, and it shouldn’t be about that.” That’s lovely to say. But it’s not reality, and it’s not my reality. And it’s not so many people’s realities. So to stray away from that just because I’ve hit this level of success is not honest.In the film, we learn that people like Rachel Moore, American Ballet Theater’s former executive director, felt that you needed focus. Do you see it the same way?Copeland It’s hard to track the timeline of things, but it was definitely during that period of me being told to lose weight. I completely lost my focus because I was lost. I didn’t know how to take care of myself. I didn’t have anyone guiding me, and so at work, I just felt like I didn’t belong anymore and I started to drift. This is so many dancers’ experience. At some point, you have to crack or experience just not knowing what to do. We’re not adults. We never develop those skills as a child even, because we’re just so focused.With her promotion at American Ballet Theater, Misty Copeland joins only a handful of African-Americans at major companies who became principals. Here’s a look at a few of them.George I would say that her story is an ordinary story with an extraordinary frame. This happens to all dancers: the possibility of injury, “will I make it as a principal dancer?” But then you put race in, and it takes the ordinary and heightens the stakes of everything. And that’s really what the film kind of does. It’s about heightened stakes. I remember early on hearing: “Well she just got injured. That happens to all dancers.” Well, O.K., that’s true, but that’s also good because, in that respect, this is a normal story.Are there any dance films you’re drawn to?George “Pina.” I knew Wim Wenders’s work, but I just thought what he did was so amazing and intimate, and those interviews he did where the dancers aren’t really talking — it’s so bold. That was a big inspiration for me to try and do this. I’ve always seen a lot of dance. I dated a dancer when I was in college. I was very homophobic then, because I was from the projects. I was like, this is fun, but I couldn’t do it.Did you know about Misty when you met her?George I’d read about her a bit. Black ballerina, blah, blah, blah. Soloist.You started filming Misty after her surgery. What was the first thing you shot?George Really the first thing we shot was in January-February of 2013 at Steps [the dance studio Steps on Broadway].Copeland I can’t watch that.You become so frustrated during class. Did you start to feel, why did I agree to do this film?Copeland No I didn’t feel that way. Experiencing it was fine. I didn’t feel frustrated because he was there; it was just a frustrating process. There were several days where I would sit on the side at Steps and have tears in my eyes because I didn’t know what was going to happen. It just felt impossible.George I think that’s also one of the things that’s really weird. We have the most happy ending possible, but it wasn’t a guarantee.Advertisement