AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichIt was almost a toss-off, but telling.“Think bigger, not louder, all the time,” Christopher Martin, the principal trumpeter of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, said to a young player on Saturday afternoon during a master class in the new education wing atop Carnegie Hall. During the latter stages of Georg Solti’s tenure as that ensemble’s music director (1969-91), loudness seemed almost a fetish, especially among brass players.That changed some under Solti’s immediate successor, Daniel Barenboim, and to judge from the orchestra’s three Carnegie concerts last weekend, Riccardo Muti, who became music director in 2010, has expunged that quality almost completely with a new generation of players. Those brasses now blend into a deeply cultured overall sonority, plush and nuanced, not unlike the one Mr. Muti left behind at the Philadelphia Orchestra when he stepped down as music director there in 1992.Not that there was any absence of power or clatter where appropriate, as in Prokofiev’s cantata “Alexander Nevsky,” which ended the Sunday afternoon program. Increasingly these days, orchestras play this music in its original context as live accompaniment for a screening of Eisenstein’s 1938 film of the same title. But the film was hardly missed, so brilliantly did Mr. Muti, a master of musical drama, evoke the familiar screen images. The arc of the whole was compelling, and the wildly careening “Battle on the Ice” movement was a suspenseful, wordless minidrama in itself.Alisa Kolosova, a young mezzo-soprano, sang the haunting “Field of the Dead” beautifully, missing just the final touch of harrowing depth. And the Chicago Symphony Chorus, directed by Duain Wolfe, lived up to its glorious past, though it could have used a little more of the — alas, inimitable — Slavic basso profundo sound.The weekend’s programs had no unifying theme, but there were little ties back and forth. One was a commemoration of the centenary of Alexander Scriabin, a composer Mr. Muti has long championed, with two symphonies, the Third on Friday evening and the First on Sunday.The First is infrequently performed, partly, no doubt, because it calls for tenor and mezzo-soprano soloists and a chorus. But those very demands made it a fine logistical fit with “Nevsky” and its mezzo-soprano and chorus. In the First, the clarion-voiced tenor Sergey Skorokhodov filled out the forces.Completed in 1900, the First Symphony uses voices only in the last of its six movements, a paean to art. The chorus, in fact, sings only the last two lines of a Scriabin poem, “Glory to Art/Glory forever,” spinning them into a rousing fugue.The textless Third Symphony (“The Divine Poem”) is better known, if not exactly central to the repertory. More diffuse and mystical than the First, it is meant to represent “the evolution of the human spirit,” according to a note — presumably Scriabin’s — distributed at the work’s premiere in 1905. The titled movements (“Struggles,” “Exquisite Pleasures,” “Divine Play”) run together in a sort of endless Wagnerian fusion.Mr. Muti’s grasp of the work’s long span seemed complete, and the orchestra responded with like concentration. The musicians and Mr. Muti also made an excellent case for the First. The first half of Friday’s program made for another internal theme, offering two works, however disparate, about the ocean: Mendelssohn’s lovely overture “Meeresstille und Glückliche Fahrt” (“Calm Sea and Prosperous Voyage”) and Debussy’s “La Mer” (“The Sea”). And in the loosest and most commonplace of themes, both works on Saturday evening — Brahms’s Piano Concerto No. 2 and Schumann’s Symphony No. 3 (“Rhenish”) — hailed from the 19th-century Germanic repertory.Not surprisingly, Mr. Muti and the orchestra had all of these standards well in hand. My only disappointment with the Schumann was that Mr. Muti did not repeat what he had so theatrically done in Philadelphia more than two decades ago: give the opening downbeat on his way to the podium and let the sound burst unexpected into the hall.Yefim Bronfman, the burly soloist in the Brahms, is one of the few pianists who can make this bruising concerto seem like child’s play. Yet he supplied depth and delicacy where needed.There were many fine solo stints from orchestra members in all three concerts. The most prominent, again in the Brahms, were by Daniel Gingrich, the acting principal hornist, and John Sharp, the principal cellist.Until recently, a three-night stand of extraordinary concerts, complete with soloists and chorus, might have seemed enough for a major touring orchestra. But in today’s straitened economic climate, orchestras have been re-examining their missions: often expanding their activities to produce other sources of revenue, create good will among donors and patrons and demonstrate their social value to their communities — if not justify their very existence to a largely uncomprehending or indifferent public. The Chicago Symphony has been in the forefront of this, deploying players in its Citizen Musician program, so named by the cellist Yo-Yo Ma, the orchestra’s creative consultant. As part of its Carnegie residency, the orchestra put two elements of the program on display: those master classes in Carnegie’s Resnick Education Wing on Saturday and a visit by four players to the Bellevue Hospital Center on Friday.The master classes, for students and young professionals, were led by Robert Chen, the concertmaster; Alexander Hanna, the principal double bassist; Cynthia Yeh, the principal percussionist; and Mr. Martin, the trumpeter. They offered gems of homely wisdom, like Mr. Martin’s “Give it a loose feel, like you’ve had one too many.” Touching, sometimes shattering, moments occurred the afternoon before at Bellevue Hospital, where the four players — Yuan-Qing Yu, assistant concertmaster; Gina DiBello, violinist; Weijing Wang, violist; and Katinka Kleijn, cellist — played for seriously ill patients, with other patients or medical staff members gathered around.In one case, a patient seemingly in a coma managed to express appreciation, the medical attendants said, through a measurable increase in her heart rate. Others found more direct ways.“One more,” a patient burst out after Ms. Kleijn had played a movement of solo Bach. Ms. Kleijn played one more.Advertisement