By NEIL GENZLINGERFEB. 3, 2015
In the buildup to Wednesday’s premiere of “Fresh Off the Boat,” we’ve been hearing repeatedly that this ABC series will be different: a comedy centered on an Asian-American family, something network prime time hasn’t seen in years.So it’s disappointing that two of the first three episodes are little more than familiar reworkings of overused formulas and plots. But Episode 2 — showing on Wednesday along with the premiere — indicates the concept’s promise; the show stops trying to be too many things and, for a half-hour at least, finds a groove.The series is based on the restaurateur Eddie Huang’s memoir, specifically the parts of it that deal with growing up in Orlando, Fla., as one of three sons of Taiwanese immigrants. Mr. Huang’s book is brash — he “puts the crude back in crudités,” Dwight Garner wrote in reviewing it in 2013 in The New York Times — an edge that this show seems eager to avoid, which is too bad. Yes, breaking down the network barrier — Margaret Cho’s short-lived “All-American Girl” in the 1994-95 season was the last show to do it — is important, but “Fresh Off the Boat” might really have belonged on a cable outlet like FX, where it could speak its mind more bluntly.As the series opens, it’s 1995 and 11-year-old Eddie (Hudson Yang, appealing in his first TV role) and the rest of the family are moving to Orlando from Washington so that his father (Randall Park) can open a steakhouse. Mom (Constance Wu) is particularly unhappy about relocating to what seems to her a largely white world in Orlando, since she felt at home in Washington’s Chinatown.The premiere finds Eddie being picked on at his new school, building to a lunchroom confrontation that lands him in the principal’s office. Here a racial slur is the catalyst, but structurally the episode is a carbon copy of a zillion others: A student is mocked or bullied because of weight, clothes, disability, whatever; a fight breaks out; a clueless school administrator blames the wrong child. It’s as if the network were consciously aiming at the comfort zone of the racially mixed audience this and every show needs to survive: “Oh, that’s just what happened on [insert name of any Disney or Nickelodeon series]. This show is perfectly safe for me to watch.”Episode 3 (airing next Tuesday, on what will be its regular night) also works a trope: Eddie preposterously tries to impress the cool kids by going after a hot girl who is way out of his league. She’s not really a girl at all; she’s his neighbor’s wife. It’s moderately amusing, but it’s also a fantasy TV boys have been indulging in since the medium was invented.In addition to veering toward formulaic, the show has some point-of-view collisions that confuse the comic tone. Since it’s a child’s reminiscences, Dad of course has to be a doofus. (This one and the dad on “black-ish,” another recent attempt to broaden the TV spectrum, should form a support group.) But since it’s an Asian-American family’s story, practically every Caucasian also has to be a doofus: the neighborhood women, the principal, the employees at the restaurant. That’s a lot of doofuses, and it makes for unfocused comedy.Mr. Huang has expressed various displeasures during the making of the show, though he has been involved as both producer and narrator, and it’s easy to see why he might have trouble adjusting to this incarnation of his memoir. But in Episode 2, at least, some of the awkwardness is shed and the show delivers a rewarding story about report cards and parental expectations, with Ms. Wu getting most of the laughs. “Fresh Off the Boat” may traffic in as many Asian-American stereotypes as it busts, and her character might be one of them, but the relationship between Mom and the hip-hop-loving Eddie is the most genuine in the series.Fresh Off the BoatABC, Wednesday night at 8:30 and 9:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 7:30 and 8:30, Central time.Produced by 20th Century Fox Television. Written by Nahnatchka Khan; Ms. Khan, Jake Kasdan and Melvin Mar, executive producers; Eddie Huang, producer.WITH: Randall Park (Louis), Constance Wu (Jessica), Hudson Yang (Eddie), Forrest Wheeler (Emery), Ian Chen (Evan) and Eddie Huang (narrator).A version of this review appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: An Immigrant’s Tale, With All-American Tropes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.