AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy David AllenTwo dozen hardy souls made it through snow and ice to the Kosciuszko Foundation on Monday night. Small numbers make for acute listening, though, and often for rewarding experiences in chamber music. That was true of this brief, absorbing concert from the Manhattan String Quartet, presented by a venerable club for musicians and the musically inclined, the Bohemians.By day, the Kosciuszko Foundation promotes Polish culture. By night, its upstairs salon makes for a charming music room, one of those tiny places that contribute much to New York’s musical life. On a good evening, it might seat a hundred. Light wood paneling keeps the acoustics tidy, as do innumerable canvases hung on the walls, including, above the fireplace, a commemorative portrait of Tadeusz Kosciuszko, a military leader and friend of Thomas Jefferson’s who fought in the American Revolution and led an uprising against Poland’s Russian occupiers in 1794. There was nothing Polish about this program, or Bohemian, but there was a rarity: Edward Elgar’s String Quartet. Outside Britain, Elgar is still — and in my view, wrongly — cast as a parochial imperialist rather than as an explorer of paths beaten by Brahms, Wagner and Strauss, a fellow traveler for Arnold Schoenberg, Max Reger and Franz Schmidt. Hence we associate Elgar with regal marches, rousing symphonies and grand oratorios, not with the interior world of chamber music.Still, toward the end of World War I and before the death of his wife, Alice, in 1920, Elgar wrote a Violin Sonata, a Piano Quintet and this String Quartet. Set in E minor, its three movements have a familiar, winding lyricism and a quiet defiance, particularly in its slow movement’s gentle glow. But Elgar also pushes his means of expression, almost to a breaking point in the disrupted central section of the first movement, and with slightly unrooted, uneasy harmonies throughout. The Manhattan’s players amply conveyed that sense, and even if their performance needed a warmer blend of sound and a stronger structural sense, it had an affecting emotional arc.Haydn needs no introduction as a composer of string quartets. In the “Rider” Quartet (Op. 74, No. 3), named for its bucking finale, the musicians played with a relaxed give-and-take in their phrasing and an elegant poise. A few problems with intonation and a diffidence in the development of ideas never detracted from a performance that, as all Haydn should, made me smile.The next concert in the 108th season of the Bohemians is on March 2, featuring the pianist Daria Robotkina; the-bohemians.org. Advertisement