By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMFEB. 3, 2015
Conventional wisdom holds that a surplus of cooks spoils the broth. And surely the same is true for composition: Can you name a masterwork of classical music composed by committee?But lack of precedent never deterred the Knights, a self-declared “orchestral collective” that has its creative epicenter in Brooklyn and operates, according to its mission statement, on principles of “camaraderie and collaboration.” Last Wednesday, at Pace University’s Schimmel Center, the Knights gave an expressive and exuberant performance of “ ...The Ground Beneath Our Feet,” the title track of the ensemble’s new album. A musically polyglot reimagining of the Baroque concerto grosso, it was collaboratively written by six composers, including the horn player Michael P. Atkinson, the flutist Alex Sopp, the bassist Shawn Conley them. and the violinist Colin Jacobsen, one of the co-artistic directors of the Knights. It also encompasses arresting vocals by the singer-songwriter Christina Courtin, a violinist in the orchestra. “The Ground Beneath Our Feet” may be a group experiment, but in performance it felt personal more than anything else.Personal bonds also link many of the Knights players to Béla Fleck, the reigning star of the banjo, who teamed with the orchestra for an arrangement of “Big Country,” a bluegrass instrumental first written for his band, the Flecktones, and his own banjo concerto, “The Impostor.” In writing the concerto — his first venture into orchestral writing — Mr. Fleck had few precedents. Instead, there are echoes of Vivaldi’s concertos for mandolin in the opening movement, and a Mediterranean flavor to the dark-hued second movement. The final one, “Truth Revealed,” looks back to 1940s swing and film music. But while Mr. Fleck’s dexterity on his instrument is always technically dazzling and supremely musical, the orchestral writing is mostly pedestrian and the dramatic arc insufficiently taut.In “Big Country,” at least, the orchestra was clearly assigned a secondary role, allowing Mr. Fleck’s banjo to run free. In his delightful “County Clare,” performed as an encore, the Knights offered a zesty and idiomatic accompaniment to the breathless jig.Mr. Fleck slipped into the role of accompanist for a deeply idiosyncratic rendition of “Se il mio nome saper voi bramate,” with Ms. Courtin bringing a mix of gamin toughness and raw expressivity to this canzone from Rossini’s “Barber of Seville.”The Knights also offered a disciplined but cautious performance of John Adams’s “Chamber Symphony,” conducted by Eric Jacobsen. This, too, is a concerto grosso-like work showcasing individual virtuosity. Featuring a synthesizer and drum kit, it’s a difficult piece to balance. At times, the winds sounded washed-out, the strings harsh and frail. In remarks from the stage, Eric Jacobsen said the recent blizzard had cut into rehearsal time — too much so, perhaps, for the Knights to find their footing on such tricky ground.The Knights and Béla Fleck perform on Thursday at the Ford Center, University of Mississippi, Oxford; 662-915-2787; fordcenter.org.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.