By DAVE ITZKOFFFEB. 3, 2015
Having worked together on and off for more than 40 years, Catherine O’Hara and Eugene Levy can withstand almost anything one says about the other, unless it is complimentary.Speaking together in a recent telephone interview, Ms. O’Hara warned, “Don’t make Eugene say nice things about me, or I’m hanging up.”Mr. Levy agreed. “If this ever gets too syrupy, seriously, Catherine, drop the phone and leave the room,” he said.This kind of unsentimental give-and-take has served Mr. Levy and Ms. O’Hara well over the decades as they played comically flawed characters on the influential sketch show “SCTV,” and in films like “Waiting for Guffman” and “A Mighty Wind.”AdvertisementIt is a dynamic they revisit on “Schitt’s Creek,” a new scripted comedy series that has its debut Feb. 11 on the cable channel Pop and that casts these frequent collaborators as a miserable husband and wife.Advertisement“When you know that two actors are friends, you go in with something as an audience,” Ms. O’Hara explained. “Even if you’re thinking, ‘Ah, those two, I don’t like them.’ Or, ‘I wish they’d finally get it together.’ ”The series follows the Rose family, which made a fortune running a video-store chain, lost it and now has no choice but to live in the backwater town of its title.It is an offbeat flagship project for Pop, which was formerly the TV Guide Network and is now trying to rebrand itself as a pop-culture channel in the mold of E! or Bravo.The show is also a real-life family collaboration between Mr. Levy and his son, Daniel, who plays one of the spoiled Rose scions, and who created and produced it with his father.Despite Mr. Levy and Ms. O’Hara’s self-imposed modesty, Daniel Levy explained that he did not have to be bashful when his father suggested her for their series.“I was not going to say, ‘No, that’s not a good idea,’ ” said Daniel Levy, an actor and Canadian TV personality. “When he offers up Catherine O’Hara, you take it and run with it.”The elder Mr. Levy, 68, who lives in Toronto, and Ms. O’Hara, 60, who lives in Los Angeles, began performing together with other like-minded comedians at the Second City club in Toronto during the 1970s. Alongside the fellow troupe members Martin Short, Gilda Radner, John Candy and others, Mr. Levy and Ms. O’Hara honed their skills and even briefly dated (in the way that “everybody tried dating everybody,” Ms. O’Hara explained) before gaining wider attention on “SCTV.”AdvertisementWhen that series ended in 1984, she and Mr. Levy crossed paths on subsequent projects or at one of Mr. Short’s Christmas parties. “It wasn’t like, ‘Oh, no, I haven’t seen him in 30 years,’ ” Ms. O’Hara said. “It was, ‘Great, I’ll see Eugene again.’ ”Mr. Levy and Ms. O’Hara found comfort in each other’s comedic rhythms, and he specifically sought her out for the largely improvised documentary-style comedies Mr. Levy wrote with the director Christopher Guest, like “Waiting for Guffman” and “Best in Show.”Drawing from their Second City training, Mr. Levy said Ms. O’Hara innately understood “how you can improvise a scene and keep it going, and give it a legitimacy through good character work.”This alliance came to a poignant peak in “A Mighty Wind,” the 2003 comedy that cast them as a folk-music duo with a fraught romantic history.Ms. O’Hara acknowledged this on-screen pairing might not have been as powerful if not for her history with Mr. Levy. “My sisters and brothers still say it made them cry so much, because they’ve known Eugene for so many years,” she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Daniel Levy, who has been a host on MTV Canada and acted in “Degrassi Goes Hollywood,” a TV-movie spinoff of “Degrassi: The Next Generation,” said he was reluctant for many years to accept any career guidance from his famous father, wanting to prove he could make it on his own.But that changed, Daniel Levy said, when he contemplated a series inspired by the obscenely wealthy clans that audiences see on reality television. “What would happen if they lost everything?” he asked. “Would the family dynamic change?”Finally asked by his son to work together on an idea (which they first sold to the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), Mr. Levy said: “My heart was actually palpitating. You could see it over my shirt.”Their new series was filmed in Toronto with a cast that includes Chris Elliott as the town’s clueless mayor; Annie Murphy as the Roses’ pampered daughter; and Sarah Levy (who is Mr. Levy’s daughter and Daniel’s sister) as a waitress.AdvertisementMs. O’Hara said that she had concerns about stepping into a project in which a father and son shared the creative reins. “I’m getting into the middle of a family thing here,” she said. “This could go ugly. This could be scary.”But she said those fears were assuaged, in part, by the tender feeling of “looking at the two of them, with their similar eyebrows and their sweet faces.”Mr. Elliott, who worked with his father, the comedian Bob Elliott, on projects like the Fox series “Get a Life,” said he would not have been surprised if the Levys operated the way he and his father did — “we were just butting heads all the time.”But Mr. Elliott said Eugene and Daniel Levy “have a way of talking where they don’t have to pussyfoot around each other.”“They can pretty much tell it as it is,” he said, “which speeds things up.”Brad Schwartz, president of media and entertainment at Pop, said these behind-the-scenes bonds would be well known to the audience of 35-to-45-year-olds his channel is trying to reach.To viewers who came of age in the 1990s and know Ms. O’Hara from the “Home Alone” movies or Mr. Levy from the “American Pie” series, “these are two comedic legends that they grew up with,” Mr. Schwartz said.“In a funny, karmic way,” Mr. Schwartz said, the series “was perfectly tailor-made for this channel we’re trying to build.”The series made its CBC debut last month to positive reviews — The National Post said it made “a strong case for being the funniest Canadian show currently on the air” — and has already been renewed for a second season in Canada, though Pop has not committed to airing it.AdvertisementDaniel Levy said that working in close quarters for so long with his father “was a test — a test in patience, a test in keeping an open mind.”“I’m not going to say that Week 9 in a basement editing suite didn’t try everyone’s nerves,” he said. “But we’re alive and well, and we’re still talking to each other.”Whatever anxiety he and his son had been through, Mr. Levy said it was far outweighed by watching Daniel share a screen with Ms. O’Hara, a pleasure he already knows well.“It’s almost like seeing your entire life flashing before your eyes,” Mr. Levy explained. “And then it moves on without you.”A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Comedy Material Woven From Real Life.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.