AdvertisementSupported byExhibition ReviewBy Alice RawsthornROTTERDAM, the Netherlands — From the books lying open on a desk, to the linen towels hanging neatly in the bathrooms, the Sonneveld House here has long looked much as it did shortly after its original owner, the industrialist Albertus Sonneveld, moved in with his wife and their two children in 1933.Anyone visiting the house, which opened to the public in 2001, over the next few months will find the books and towels in their customary places, but will also see them from unexpected perspectives in the reflections on the mirrored floors installed by the Dutch interior and landscape designer Petra Blaisse. As well as creating exquisite visual effects from changes in the climate and light, the reflections expose things that are usually hidden from view, like the servants’ bell concealed beneath a dining table and the soundboard under the piano. They also remind visitors that they are not in a real home, but in a museological reconstruction, by revealing the sensors, alarms and other gizmos with which it is controlled.Ms. Blaisse’s project, which opened on Sunday and runs through Sept. 13, is part of a series of experiments with which Het Nieuwe Instituut (the New Institute), the cultural center that manages the Sonneveld House, is developing new ways of exhibiting design, architecture and technology. Inviting artists and designers to install their work in “house museums” like the Sonneveld is a proven means of encouraging more people to visit. But Ms. Blaisse has gone further by raising questions about the functions of such places and their presumed authenticity.“The key question for us is always how to set up a new type of discussion, and that’s precisely what Petra has done,” said Guus Beumer, the director of the institute, which was founded in 2013 by the merger of three government-financed bodies that focused on architecture, design and fashion, and digital culture.Other cultural centers around the world are also rethinking their approaches to these fields. Until recently, architecture museums tended to focus on that discipline, while their design equivalents concentrated on industrial design, and technology was generally neglected.There have been honorable exceptions, including the innovative curatorial programs run by Paola Antonelli at the Museum of Modern Art in New York and Jan Boelen at Z33, a cultural center in Hasselt, Belgium. Their work has encouraged other institutions to explore design’s increasingly expansive role in tackling social and environmental challenges, and to analyze technology’s impact on our lives.Among them are new museums under construction in Asia, including M+ in Hong Kong and the Shekou Design Museum in Shenzhen, China (its director, Ole Bouman, held the same role at the Netherlands Architecture Institute, now part of Het Nieuwe Instituut). Other museums with an existing commitment to design, architecture and technology are rethinking their curatorial strategies. In London, the Victoria and Albert Museum is expanding those programs at its historic site in South Kensington, and intends to devote more space to them in a new museum to be built in the Olympic Park. It will include galleries dedicated to the history of digital design. The New Museum in New York has opened New Inc. as an incubator where designers, programmers and artists can share resources and forge collaborations.So far most of the curatorial experiments have focused on contemporary developments. Het Nieuwe Instituut explores them too. One of its current shows, “Plastic,” running through April 6, uses a 3-D movie to describe plastic’s resurgence in 3-D printing and other digital manufacturing systems.But it is also testing new approaches to design and architectural history. In “1:1 Period Rooms,” which opened on Sunday and runs through April 6, the architect and artist Andreas Angelidakis investigates the Dutch fascination with the use of reconstructed historic rooms as museum sets. The centerpiece is the ornate Empire Room, originally a reception room in an early-17th-century house in Amsterdam, which will be reconstructed during the exhibition by the institute’s curators and conservation students from the University of Amsterdam, allowing visitors to see a usually private aspect of museum activity.Ms. Blaisse’s installation at the Sonneveld House is equally revelatory. One of Rotterdam’s modern architectural gems, the house was designed by Brinkman & Van der Vlugt, the architects of the nearby Van Nelle Factory, where Mr. Sonneveld had worked his way up from clerk to co-director. Like the factory, now a Unesco World Heritage site, the house is a model of the Nieuwe Bouwen, or New Building, school of early-20th-century Dutch architecture whose defining qualities were “light, air and space.” Working to the Sonnevelds’ brief, the architects used the latest construction techniques to create a steel structure with daylight flowing freely through generously sized windows.The Sonnevelds, who lived there from 1933 to 1955, furnished it from scratch in a color scheme chosen by the artist Bart van der Leck. Albertus Sonneveld instructed the architects to install goods lifts, heated towel rails, a speaker system and other mechanical innovations he had admired in hotels on business trips to the United States. Before opening to the public in 2001, the building was restored to its original condition with the addition of furniture donated by the Sonnenveld family.“I enjoy visiting house-museums like Charles and Ray Eames’s home in Pacific Palisades and Lina Bo Bardi’s in São Paulo and seeing their knick-knacks as if they’d just left them there,” Ms. Blaisse said. “But we wanted to trigger something different here by asking what it means in a museological sense to preserve a place like this.”Simple though it sounds, her design decision to cover the floors with sheets of acrylic mirror transforms the experience of visiting the Sonneveld House by exposing hitherto invisible details — like the beautifully fabricated metal bases of the chairs — and the systems that enable it to function as a museum and to appear frozen in time.“I am very curious to see how people will respond to seeing everything in the house, including things that are usually covered up,” Ms. Blaisse said.“Me too,” agreed Mr. Beumer. “But then some architectural historian will call saying: How dare you treat a cultural landmark in this way?”Intervention by Inside Outside/Petra Blaisse.  Het Nieuwe Instituut, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. Through Sept. 13.Advertisement