Season 1, Episode 4, “Bone May Rot”So, “Blindspot” has entered the realm of “things you thought you knew aren’t necessarily true.” That certainly opens up endless possibilities for the writers of this NBC series, though it might also make it more frustrating in the long run. More on that later in this recap of Monday’s episode. First let’s talk about what we learned Monday night from the main thread, which involved deadly biological samples: Never, ever write a script that results in your characters’ having a fistfight while they’re wearing hazmat suits. It just looks ridiculous.That’s what happened after a chain of events that began when one of the tattoos on Jane (Jaimie Alexander) led Kurt Weller (Sullivan Stapleton) and his crew to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. It seemed inevitable; deadly viruses and such are perhaps the creepiest threat of our time, implying as they do that science isn’t as all-powerful as we like to think.The team discovered that 10 vials of killer strains were missing and that a higher-up at the agency, someone named Rebecca, had apparently been spreading them around the world. That would make her one of the biggest mass murderers of all time, a fact that went curiously unremarked upon, but in any case she wasn’t around long, killing her poor husband and then herself once the team was on her trail.Anyway, Weller and company found themselves trying to contain an about-to-discharge biological bomb with a flimsy sheet of plastic. Yeah, right. Weller, in a hazmat suit, slugged it out with another rogue researcher, also in a hazmat suit. It looked so silly that finally Jane, not in a hazmat suit, had to come in and put an end to it.This whole series is, of course, an improbable fiction, but the C.D.C. plot line seemed especially to strain credulity, didn’t it? Once the biological threat was neutralized, though, the writers did sow some seeds. Zapata (Audrey Esparza) has a gambling debt that will no doubt be exploited. Patterson (Ashley Johnson) has been letting some guy look at confidential files. (A boyfriend, I guess? It wasn’t quite clear.) How much do we really know about this fellow?Then there was the bombshell near the end: Though the DNA test last week confirmed that Jane is Weller’s long-lost childhood playmate, Patterson’s tooth isotope test said she isn’t. “Both tests are conclusive, but both can’t be true,” Patterson said. So we, the viewers, are left wondering whether what we learned in one episode will be undone in another. Is this a good thing, or just annoying?Speaking of annoying, a reader wrote the other day saying that the accent, or dialect, or whatever it is being used by Mr. Stapleton (who is Australian) is driving her crazy. “Why is someone coaching him to spit his consonants out the roof of his mouth in this show?” she said. Weller doesn’t say much in this series; anyone else wish he would stop saying anything at all?