AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (E!) LANCE LOVES MICHAEL: THE LANCE BASS WEDDING In what is being billed as the first gay celebrity marriage to be televised, Mr. Bass of ’N Sync fame and his fiancé, Michael Turchin, look back on their relationship and their Dec. 20 ceremony, where they exchanged vows before 300 guests at the Park Plaza Hotel in Los Angeles. The actresses Jamie-Lynn Sigler and JoAnna Garcia officiated. Mr. Bass involved his former bandmates as well: J. C. Chasez performed “Can’t Help Falling in Love,” and Joey Fatone was the ring bearer.7 A.M. (NBC) TODAY Matt Lauer interviews Pete Carroll, the coach of the Seattle Seahawks, about his team’s play call that resulted in a game-ending interception at the Super Bowl.12:30 P.M. (FXX) WALL STREET: MONEY NEVER SLEEPS (2010) Michael Douglas returns as the reptilian Gordon Gekko who, after eight years in prison, has landed in the spotlight once again for writing a critical and prescient book about the state of the markets. Shia LaBeouf portrays the investment banker Jake Moore, one of Gekko’s fans and the live-in love of Gekko’s daughter (Carey Mulligan). Frank Langella is the old-school broker who has been like a father to Jake. And Josh Brolin is the newest snake in town. Let the games resume. “To the question ‘What went wrong?’ the film offers an answer that is both irrefutable and unsatisfying: human nature,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. And yet, he added, something vital here works. The director, Oliver Stone, “is not the man to explain Wall Street, or to stoke public indignation at its crimes,” he said. “But no one else could turn it into a show like ‘Wall Street.’ ”8 P.M. (CBS) THE BIG BANG THEORY Leonard (Johnny Galecki) and Sheldon (Jim Parsons) go after an online bully intent on taking them, and their physics paper, down. Penny (Kaley Cuoco-Sweeting), Amy (Mayim Bialik) and Bernadette (Melissa Rauch) face their embarrassing pasts on a girls’ night. In “Mom,” at 8:30, Christy (Anna Faris) tries to get Bonnie (Allison Janney) to discuss Alvin’s death with a professional. And in “Two and a Half Men,” at 9, Walden (Ashton Kutcher) worries about jeopardizing the adoption of Louis (Edan Alexander) if he dumps Ms. McMartin (Maggie Lawson). And Alan (Jon Cryer) doesn’t know how to respond when Lyndsey (Courtney Thorne-Smith) asks him to move in with her.8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY Arizona (Jessica Capshaw) begins testing on the baby of April (Sarah Drew) and Jackson (Jesse Williams). In “Scandal,” at 9, the team goes in search of Olivia (Kerry Washington). And in “How to Get Away With Murder,” at 10, the Keating Five face continued questioning as the campus buzzes with speculation about the missing husband of Annalise (Viola Davis), who tries to burnish her public persona by taking on a client with the mob.8 P.M. (Showtime) ROBERTA FLACK: KILLING ME SOFTLY (2015) Mike Connolly juxtaposes the life and career of Ms. Flack against the civil rights movement and her greatest hits, bolstered by interviews with Dionne Warwick, Johnny Mathis and Cissy Houston.10 P.M. (Pivot) FORTITUDE The police start to close in on their prime suspect in the killing of the environmentalist Charlie Stoddart (Christopher Eccleston) in this murder mystery set on a fictional Arctic island where the polar bears outnumber the people and crime is thought to be nonexistent. But then Ronnie Morgan (Johnny Harris), a miner from England who has discovered what seem to be prehistoric remains in the ice, starts behaving suspiciously.What’s Streaming NowINVESTIGATE ‘FORTITUDE’ This companion to the Pivot series, presented by Pivot and the EcoHealth Alliance, explores the science behind the show — and some of the effects of climate change — through interviews with epidemiologists, ecologists, evolutionary biologists and Arctic experts. (investigatefortitude.com)HIGH MAINTENANCE The married team of Katja Blichfeld and Ben Sinclair are behind this web series, which follows a marijuana bike delivery man as he serves Brooklyn and Manhattan. Three new episodes drop Thursday. (vimeo.com)Advertisement