Season 2, Episode 1: “Waiting for Dutch”What is “Fargo”? That’s a question worth asking up front, as we enter the second season of the unlikely TV series inspired by the great 1995 comic noir by Joel and Ethan Coen. The simple answer is this: “Fargo” the TV show, created by Noah Hawley, does not share any characters with the Coens’s film, but it does take place in same wood-paneled, snow-blanketed universe. (Oh ya? You betcha!) As Mr. Hawley puts it: “I always had this image in my head of some old, leather-bound book with hand-drawn illustrations that was published in the ’50s. It’s like ‘The History of True Crime in the Midwest.’ The movie was a chapter from it, and our first year was a chapter from it.” In terms of the overall timeline, the second season of “Fargo” is earlier in the book than the movie (which would be in the middle) and the first season (which would be toward the end). The only connective tissue on the show is the Solverson family: In the first season, detective Molly Solverson (Allison Tolman) received counsel from her father, Lou (Keith Carradine), who referenced a terrible case he worked when he was a cop. That case is Season 2, the year is 1979-1980, Lou is now played by Patrick Wilson, and Molly is an adorable, inquisitive daddy’s girl.  But what is “Fargo” in the abstract? Is it, as one critic suggested, FX’s stealth attempt to turn the Coens’s film into the next “Justified,” with the small-town Solversons squaring off against new sets of colorful bad guys every season? All cynicism aside, that’s not a terrible way to think about it and not an unwelcome concept for a TV series. But for as much as “Fargo” the TV show gets some distance from the Coens, Mr. Hawley seems determined to pay homage to the film with more than just callbacks. (Though there are plenty of those.) The entire “Fargo” universe — Fargoverse is regrettably awkward, but we’ll run with it — turns on the common noir theme of evil goings-on in a seemingly wholesome Middle American locale, but with a great regional specificity. That comes through in the German-Scandinavian peculiarities of the accents and its attendant insularity, which cuts in two directions at once: Here’s a region that’s forbidding to outsiders (such as a “funny-looking” guy like Steve Buscemi in the movie), where “Minnesota nice” smuggles a lot of suspicion and hostility, but it can also be warm, inviting and morally upstanding. There’s a core decency that’s being violated here.Those bedrock values are all on display in “Waiting for Dutch,” the busy first episode of the new season, but the most striking immediate difference is swagger. Where the first season tried — and occasionally labored — to function as an austere TV analog to the movie, the second displays the bravado of a show runner who has reason to feel confident. Split-screens! Montages! Rapid fade-ins and fade-outs! Bizarre references to nonexistent Ronald Reagan westerns! As it happens, that last one is the only case in which overconfidence becomes a problem. “Massacre at Sioux Falls” looks at first like a movie-within-a-movie, with title cards and an amusingly sped-up riff on the “Fargo” score, but then it’s revealed to be a long outtake where the director and his actors are waiting in the cold to get a shot off. Beyond that confusion, there’s the additional heavy-handedness of connecting the violence in the region to Reagan’s political ascendance, which is then folded into Jimmy Carter’s infamous “malaise” speech. The show needn’t try so hard to put its crime story in cultural context. That’s what the Fargoverse is there for. Fortunately, “Waiting for Dutch” proves thrillingly adept at establishing the players in its byzantine plot: The trouble starts with the Gerhardts, a Fargo crime family that’s been practicing ma-and-pa gangsterism for two generations and counting. The Gerhardts are facing a serious challenge from a Kansas City crime syndicate, led by Joe Bulo (Brad Garrett), for control of the region, and they’re having to confront it without their fearsome patriarch, Otto (Michael Hogan, of “Battlestar Galactica”), who’s laid low by a stroke. That leaves his three sons — the aggressive Dodd (Jeffrey Donovan), the passive Bear (Angus Sampson), and the screwup Rye (Kieran Culkin) — to scramble for power. But for now, it’s Otto’s wife, Floyd (Jean Smart), who’s holding the reins. Rye’s dim attempt to open a side business gives “Fargo” its inciting incident: At the Waffle Hut in Luverne, Minn., Rye tries to put the squeeze on a judge to relieve his partner’s debts and get them into the self-correcting typewriter business (“They’re not just for women anymore”), but she won’t let the pipsqueak intimidate her. (Shades of Wade Gustafson in the movie, refusing to agree to terms with the men holding his daughter ransom.) The bloodbath that results has widespread consequences for many, including Lou Solverson, a state trooper still shaken from Vietnam, and his father-in-law, Hank Laarson (Ted Danson), a sheriff, who have to sort through a messy and increasingly dangerous investigation. In addition to the three bodies at the Waffle Hut, a hairdresser, Peggy Blomquist (Kirsten Dunst), strikes Rye in a hit-and-run and drives home, leaving her beefy, earnest husband Ed (Jesse Plemons) to deal with the body and cover up the crime. And all of this is to say nothing of Mike Milligan (Bokeem Woodbine) and the Kitchen brothers (Brad and Todd Mann), chilling enforcers for the Kansas City mob, or Karl Weathers (Nick Offerman), a Luverne lawyer who holds courts in the V.A. hall, or the numerous other supporting players who are here now or will appear later. Season 2 is spilling out across a very wide canvas, but it’s already showing great balance across the ensemble. We get a sense of all the major players as individuals, but there are larger forces at play, too, particularly in the dust-up between the Gerhardts and the Kansas City mob, which Mr. Hawley stages as something like a corporate behemoth encroaching on a locally owned business. (Their conflict recalls the great “Alien vs. Predator” tagline: “Whoever wins… we lose.”) The corporate-friendly politics of the Reagan Revolution no doubt inform this scenario, and will likely figure in more explicitly as the season wears on. But like the first season, and “Fargo” the movie, the little guys stand to be crushed in the fight. For the Solversons, that means an investigation that puts Lou and Hank at risk while Lou’s wife, Betsy (Cristin Milioti), is weakened by cancer treatments. For the Blomquists, that means the extra misfortune of a hit-and-run cover-up on a person of great interest for all parties — the cops, the Gerhardts and the Kansas City mob. So far, this season is feeling like a more muscular extension of pre-established themes, with callbacks aplenty but a fresh set of characters who aren’t entirely set up as analogs to “Fargo” characters past. (Though there are parallels.) The keys will be in executing the plot cleanly and treading that difficult line between black comedy and regional caricature. Whatever happens, there will be plenty to talk about. Three-cent stamps: • The first and most subtle of callbacks: Rye shows up an hour late to a meeting with his brother, recalling William H. Macy getting the time wrong with his fateful meetup at the beginning of the movie. • It’s unfortunate that Rye meets a bad end so early, because his idiocy shows promise as a running joke. (“There’s two ways this thing can go.” “Is one of them ‘the hard way’?”)• The appearance of U.F.O. lights distracts Rye enough for him to wander onto the road, but this supernatural element is so conspicuously out of place in a crime drama like “Fargo,” the writers will need to do some work justifying it in the long-term. • Peggy hitting Rye with her car and continuing to drive home with him stuck in the windshield references the tabloid case of Chante Mallard, a nurse’s aide from Dallas who hit a homeless man in 2001 and left him to die in her garage. The case also inspired a movie by the director Stuart Gordon called “Stuck,” a little-seen but brilliant comic thriller that deserves the cult following of Gordon’s “Re-Animator.” • Jesse Plemons covering up another murder? Fans of “Friday Night Lights” will shudder at the thought. • One big theme that starts with Marge Gunderson continued with Molly Solverson and will recur here: The perils of underestimating powerful women. When Joe Bulo gives his Northern Expansion Strategy slide presentation to the board, he says the following of Floyd Gerhardt: “She’s tough, but… you know, a girl.” Careful, buddy.