AdvertisementSupported byTelevision ReviewBy Alessandra StanleyThe heroine of “Allegiance” has a brilliant son who works at the C.I.A. and has no idea that his mother is a Russian spy. In other words, this NBC drama that begins on Thursday is a nervy rip-off of “The Americans,” the FX series about Soviet spies posing as ordinary suburban parents in the era of Reagan and the Evil Empire. Imitations rarely improve on the original, and “Allegiance” is no exception: Russian characters sprinkle their conversation with Russian words, but this espionage thriller is still a fairly conventional network series and not nearly as subtle and complex as “The Americans.” That doesn’t mean the NBC version is unwatchable, though, just more homogenized and predictable. “Allegiance” is a contorted spy story with a Slavic kick to it, and it’s kind of fun. The most glaring difference is that the cloak-and-dagger action on NBC takes place not during the first Cold War but the current one. And Putin-era tensions actually work pretty well: Mistrust between Washington and Moscow is especially high due to Russia’s incursions in Ukraine; nobody thinks spies have gone out of business just because the foreign intelligence service of the K.G.B. is now known as the S.V.R. (Last month, the United States government announced economic espionage charges against three Russians in New York: a banker, a trade representative and a diplomat.) On “Allegiance,” Hope Davis plays Katya O’Connor, a former Russian agent who is a doctor in New York City with an American husband, a son and two daughters. Ms. Davis, a gifted film and stage actress, is quite persuasive and amusing as a Siberian Tiger Mom — she makes her children redo their homework and scorns the bland tastelessness of American potatoes. Katya has retired, or so she would like to believe. Her husband, Mark (Scott Cohen), an engineer and businessman who does work for military contractors, was an asset Katya was cultivating when they fell in love; he gave the Russians something they wanted in exchange for her freedom. Katya was allowed to marry, start a new life in New York and leave spying behind, but Russian intelligence sees her as a sleeper agent, a deep-cover mole to be left alone until she is truly needed. And it’s her son who triggers her reactivation. Alex (Gavin Stenhouse), a somewhere-on-the-spectrum savant with a perfect memory and stilted sociability, has joined the C.I.A. The family’s S.V.R. handler, Victor (Morgan Spector), lurks and smirks in the background of their lives like a Russian Rumpelstiltskin, taunting Katya with her obligations to Moscow. The Russians want Katya to turn her son and persuade him to act as a double agent, but she knows he would never betray his country and would instead turn his parents over to the F.B.I. And she is pretty sure the S.V.R. would kill the whole O’Connor family rather than allow that to happen. When Moscow sets in motion a major covert operation, Katya finds herself with no choice but to spy on her own son. During the Cold War, American movies and television often portrayed Russian spies as far more ruthless and efficient than real K.G.B. agents could ever be. Here, too, Russian intelligence officers are presented as disciplined, highly competent and coldblooded. In one episode, a would-be defector is burned alive in an incinerator while his colleagues look on in horror. In another, a Russian hit man who made a fortuitous mistake is nevertheless killed for disobeying orders — a colleague slits his throat. American intelligence services are more humane, but also more human: C.I.A. agents clash with the F.B.I. over jurisdiction and even investigation techniques. “Allegiance” isn’t the only NBC drama immersed in counterintelligence, and it’s not the only NBC drama to borrow heavily from an existing hit show. “State of Affairs” is an adulterated version of Showtime’s “Homeland.” In “State of Affairs,” Katherine Heigl plays Charlie, a C.I.A. officer who is both an analyst and a veteran field operative — she gives President Constance Payton (Alfre Woodard) her daily national security briefing and also heads a top-secret team assigned to find and kill a terrorist leader, who among other things is responsible for the death of Charlie’s fiancé, who was also the president’s son. (There is a further complication: The terrorist was a prisoner who was turned under duress and became Charlie’s asset.) “State of Affairs,” at first compared unfavorably with “Madam Secretary,” a CBS series that stars Téa Leoni as an idealistic secretary of state — in other words, an idealized Hillary Rodham Clinton. Ms. Leoni is the more charismatic actress, but her show has yet to shake loose of its predictable, paint-by-numbers plots. “State of Affairs,” is more purple but also more open-ended, and the focus has mercifully shifted from Charlie’s tortured inner life to plain old torture. Bad things keep happening: A recent episode revolved around a sleeper cell terrorist attack on a C.I.A. safe house that critically injured the C.I.A. director and killed a United States senator. “State of Affairs” still isn’t “Homeland,” but it has gotten better. “Allegiance,” too, improves after the first episode. It turns out shows don’t always have to be original to be good. “Allegiance” may not be the best show on television about Russian spies, but it could well turn out to be one of the better network dramas.AllegianceNBC, Thursday nights at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Produced by Universal Television, Keshet Media and Yes! George Nolfi, Avi Nir, Ron Leshem, Amit Cohen, Giyora Yahalom, Yona Wiesenthal, John Glenn and Rashad Raisani, executive producers.WITH: Hope Davis (Katya O’Connor), Scott Cohen (Mark O’Connor), Gavin Stenhouse (Alex O’Connor), Margarita Levieva (Natalie O’Connor), Morgan Spector (Victor Dobrynin), Kenneth Choi (Sam Luttrell) and Alexandra Peters (Sarah O’Connor).Advertisement