AdvertisementSupported byBy Graham Bowley and Robin PogrebinSeveral art galleries and dealers have received subpoenas from the Manhattan district attorney’s office requesting sales and shipping records, according to lawyers for the businesses, suggesting that investigators may be revisiting the issue of whether galleries and collectors are properly paying sales tax for art sold in New York, the lawyers said.The inquiries are reminiscent of an investigation started in 2002, when the district attorney conducted a large-scale review of potential fraud in sales tax payments on art purchases, both by galleries and the collectors they sold to. That investigation led to charges against nearly a dozen galleries and more than 300 customers and eventually resulted in prosecutors’ collecting tens of millions of dollars in state and city sales taxes and fines. But the extent of any current inquiry is unclear. The district attorney’s office has declined to comment, and more than half a dozen other galleries and the Art Dealers Association said they had not received notification of any investigation.“I’m surprised,” said Angela Westwater of the Sperone Westwater Gallery when asked if she knew of any inquiry. “I kind of thought we were beyond that with tax issues. I thought it was kind of over — I didn’t think people did it.”But lawyers in four separate firms said they had seen subpoenas sent in the past few months to galleries or dealers they represented. The first report of an inquiry was on the Artnet News site in an article by Georges G. Lederman and Thomas C. Danziger, both of whom are lawyers. Mr. Lederman said in an interview that he knows of several clients who have received subpoenas. Mr. Lederman, who worked in the district attorney’s office for 10 years, said the inquiry was being handled by the Major Economic Crimes Bureau of that office.“This suggests a broader scope,” he said.Ken Zemsky, a state tax specialist at Andersen Tax, said he had direct knowledge of a subpoena received by a major Manhattan gallery. He said from his experience investigators would seek a lot of data and look widely. “I suspect they are looking at many. It is very rare they would go after a one-off unless it was someone who was very well known,” he said.Two other lawyers who specialize in art law matters said they, too, had seen subpoenas sent to their clients by investigators, but they declined to be named because they did not want to risk their clients’ being identified. “This is a review of the art market that happens on a fairly regular basis,” said one lawyer whose clients had received subpoenas. Mr. Danziger, the lawyer who was the co-author of the Artnet article, said he was consulting with several galleries who had requested help in addressing issues raised by requests for records. “One would hope that the lessons would have been learned the last go-round and that galleries understand the way business is supposed to be run in this area,” he said.A spokesman for the district attorney’s office, Patrick Muncie, declined to comment.A spokesman for the New York state tax department would not comment on whether it was conducting any investigation into sales tax payments. “We wouldn’t disclose our audit strategy; and, given the privacy provisions of the tax law, we cannot discuss or disclose any particular audit involving a business or an individual,” said the spokesman, Cary B. Ziter.As the price of art escalates, the New York sales tax due can become a considerable sum. For example, on the sale of a $10 million artwork, the tax, which is levied by the state and the city, would be $887,500.Such high sums have led some collectors to devise strategies to exploit legal exemptions from such taxes, for example by arranging to exhibit works on museum walls in certain states before shipping their works back to residences outside New York, and so escaping use tax in other states. If the art stays in a residence in New York state, however, sales tax must be paid on the purchase. The 2002 investigation, by Robert M. Morgenthau, then the Manhattan district attorney, led to the indictment of L. Dennis Kozlowski, the former chief executive of Tyco International, on charges of evading sales tax on artworks he had bought from dealers in Manhattan and London. Mr. Kozlowski eventually agreed to pay $3.2 million in sales tax and interest as part of a larger settlement that grew out of the investigation. He was convicted in 2005 of grand larceny, conspiracy and fraud in the theft of corporate funds from Tyco and served more than eight years in state prison before his parole in 2013. That investigation spread to other Manhattan dealers and brokers, as Mr. Morgenthau subpoenaed the records of galleries up and down Madison Avenue and in Chelsea, Manhattan’s centers for the sale of art.Louis Tuchman, chairman of the tax group at Herrick, Feinstein, said he had no knowledge of an investigation, but said he would not be surprised if there was one. “When big sales get publicized, the tax authorities’ ears prick up and they want to make sure they are getting their fair share,” he said.William K. Rashbaum contributed reporting.Advertisement