AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Alastair MacaulayThe dancers of Nederlands Dans Theater — or rather its junior company, NDT2 — look individual, frank, unorthodox. As the company’s quadruple bill at the Joyce Theater proceeds, everything looks increasingly offbeat.   The opening work, “I New Then,” has the most depth. Choreographed in 2012 by Johan Inger to five numbers by Van Morrison, it’s an engaging portrait of loners who sometimes, as if by accident, find themselves dancing in pairs and threesomes. One woman goes on dancing the same way when a man picks her up — amid her flow of eccentric energy, she never stops even to look at him. At another point, two, then three dancers realize that they’re dancing in unison; this creates a good-humored bond between them, but it doesn’t last.Generally these people stay private, coming and going without pressure; only once or twice are unusual effects so aimed at the audience as if to confront us with their freakishness. In general, Mr. Inger’s view of these isolated characters is charitable, generous. The choreography’s connection to its Morrison songs is unpredictable: Sometimes a whole sequence takes its pulse keenly from the music, sometimes a movement seems to illustrate a word (“Fall”). But generally the relationship of music and dance is dreamlike — incidental rather than vital. The dancers invariably have their own lives and purposes. At Tuesday’s performance, I knew only once what would happen next, and that was on the peripheries. A male-female couple met, addressed each other at close quarters, undressed (down to underwear) and embraced, the only sustained human relationship in the piece. But the point here was how another man, center stage, unable to refrain from observing them now and then, danced and muttered his way through the quirkiest, tensest solo of the work: an unmistakable outsider figure, and convulsed by a far stronger neurosis than he seemed to realize. “Sara” (2013), made by Sharon Eyal and Gai Behar to music by Ori Lichtik, is a study in androgyny; the seven dancers wear uniform off-white allover tights that reduce gender distinctions to a minimum. The dancers keep their legs parallel and their movements mainly small. Though there are minor fascinations of groupings and geometry, the dance seems, deliberately, another study in oddity — a reductive one.“Shutters Shut” (2003), a bizarre-chic male-female (androgynous) duet choreographed by Sol León and Paul Lightfoot, was last seen in New York at Fall for Dance in 2012. Its wonderful central component is its aural accompaniment, Gertrude Stein’s 1923 recording of her “If I Told Him: A Completed Portrait of Picasso,” with its intricately rhythmic patterns of wordplay, assonance and minimalist repetition. In the dance, the couple — Imre van Opstal and Spencer Dickhaus on Tuesday — keep close and facing front as they gradually cross the stage, maintaining a supply of gestural movements timed to meet Stein’s words. But whereas Stein is playing with sense, the León-Lightfoot choreography stays merely nonsensical; it makes its dancers look — harmlessly, charmingly — crazy. Mr. Lightfoot  (who is British) is the artistic director of Nederlands Dans Theater; Ms. León (Spanish) has been his choreographic collaborator for 25 years. Showy eccentricity is their home suit, especially in their dealings with music: They love to give movement a jabbing, pouncing emphasis that proves anti-musical, making dancers look archly detached from their accompaniment.In their “Subject to Change” (2003), the score is Mahler’s orchestral arrangement of the second movement (Andante con moto) of Schubert’s “Death and the Maiden” quartet. Four bare-chested men in suits roll, unroll and rotate a red carpet; a bare-chested young man does ultrahigh leg extensions and other self-advertising moves; a young woman in a short petticoat gradually dances from the back to the front of the stage. He may be death at its cheeriest; she may be the maiden for whom to cross the red carpet is to move into the next world. But their antics make them both look both narcissistic and peculiar. This is choreography as mere flashy surface: a series of wow effects that trivialize music and human behavior.Nederlands Dans Theater continues through Sunday at Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-242-0800, joyce.org. Advertisement