AdvertisementSupported byBy Melena RyzikFor fans of a certain kind of animation, Monty Oum was the Wizard — and the King, the Knight and the Pawn, all rolled into one. Millions of people watched his web series “Red vs. Blue” and “RWBY.” At conventions, thousands of fans, sometimes dolled up in the outfits of fantasy characters he created, waited for hours just to meet him.Even in a scene known for its colorful personalities, Mr. Oum stood out. Clad in often over-the-top anime-style costumes — platinum wigs, rubber vests — with an unabashed energy and a robust work ethic, he served as an inspiration to audiences weaned on a D.I.Y. techno-culture.So when his death was announced on Monday, there was an outsize outpouring of grief online — heartfelt tributes and teary condolences on Tumblr, Twitter, Reddit, Facebook, YouTube, even Google Docs.“He changed my life and my outlook on work and creativity, on being a good person and a good friend,” said one, from the cartoonist Arin Hanson. “I wasn’t expecting to feel so crushed,” read another. Mr. Oum, had fallen into a coma last month after a sudden allergic reaction — news of that sent ripples of worry online — and died on Sunday at 33. At the gates of Rooster Teeth, the production company in Austin, Tex., where he was the director of animation, someone scattered rose petals in memoriam — a reference, perhaps, to the many flower images in “RWBY,” pronounced Ruby.Even for people familiar with Mr. Oum’s presence and his work, the volume of grief was unexpected. The actor LeVar Burton was introduced to “Red vs. Blue” through his daughter, Mica, an avid gamer and anime fan. Ms. Burton, 20, a student at the University of Michigan, had called her father, upset, when news of Mr. Oum’s illness broke. Mr. Burton happened to be visiting her on the day the death was announced. “When I arrived, she just fell into my arms, sobbing,” Mr. Burton said in a phone interview. She had met Mr. Oum briefly at a Rooster Teeth event, but “the depth of her grief was, and is, surprising,” her father said, a sentiment echoed by many parents this week. (He tweeted his condolences, too.)Mr. Burton, the “Roots” star and a childhood hero to many as a host of “Reading Rainbow,” had his own theories about why Mr. Oum proved such a moving figure to young people. “The world has changed to the point that you can create and distribute without gatekeepers, and Monty was a wonderful example of that,” he said. That Mr. Oum shared his idiosyncrasies, tastes and fears online also mattered. “He was somebody who was never cynical,” said Matt Hullum, the chief executive of Rooster Teeth. And he was considerate of all of his fans: “Fun fact,” he once wrote on Twitter, referring to players who like to dress in costumes. “I try to make sure all my characters are designed with pockets/pouches so cosplayers will have places to put their phones/wallets.” In the industry, Mr. Oum’s dedication was legendary. “He was just one of those people that was ferocious about the need to create,” Mr. Hullum said. “I used to say that he was on a ‘Men in Black’ schedule — he would work for 31 hours and then sleep for 12. He was just so excited about what he was doing.”Mr. Oum made his name on a self-released video called “Haloid,” a mash-up using characters from the video games Halo and Metroid, which circulated online in 2007. It was part of a burgeoning form called machinima, which merged video game characters and cinematic animation — fan art across two genres. Upon seeing it, “I remember thinking a) Who is this guy? and b) How did he do that?” recalled Carl Goodman, the executive director of the Museum of the Moving Image, which first hosted a machinima festival in 2003. As a relatively young art form, machinima was “still waiting for its first auteurs,” Mr. Goodman added, “and that was him.”When he joined Rooster Teeth, Mr. Oum worked for several years on “Red vs. Blue,” a wry machinima series based on Halo characters, now entering its 13th season. But he eventually moved on to his own anime-style show, “RWBY,” which focuses on four female warriors and in which he sought to blend Eastern and Western folklore and fairy tales with slick fight scenes. It was a quick hit, cementing his reputation. “You have a whole generation of creators who are even influenced already by ‘Red vs. Blue,’ ” Mr. Goodman said. Mr. Hullum said the company plans to continue and expand “RWBY,” soon to be a video game. “Everybody wants to see Monty’s legacy continue,” he said. In lieu of flowers or gifts, the company asked that mourners simply create something. “Use your imagination to make the world a better place in any way that you can,” Mr. Hullum wrote. That message reverberated online, where thousands posted tribute art, and off. In Corona, Calif., Adrian Valdivia, 17, a high school senior, heard the news at school. “It really, really hit me,” he said. “When I got home, I tried hard not to cry.” He thought of Mr. Oum’s hard-working ethos and his own aspiration to be an animator in his footsteps; for three years he has been working on a “Red vs. Blue”-like series. “Before, I was like, I have this whole time in the world, I could probably make this during my YouTube years,” Mr. Valdivia said. “But after hearing about him — he was working on things, he wanted to do stuff, but now he never got a chance to do it. Now I have to get this done while I have the chance.” He would dedicate the effort to Mr. Oum, he said, “to know that he’s the one that made me get past all my limits, and push forward.”Advertisement