By NEIL GENZLINGERFEB. 4, 2015
This is a Disturbing Nascent Trend Alert: Branson, Mo., appears to have discovered television.More specifically, it appears to have discovered reality television and a formula for making TV shows about its stage shows. In December, TruTV brought out “Branson Famous,” a series about the backstage goings-on at the Baldknobbers Jamboree, a long-running revue. And on Thursday comes the first imitator: Great American Country introduces “A Very Barry Branson.”It follows Barry Williams as he continues a lifelong quest to remind everybody that, almost half a century ago, he played Greg, the oldest son in “The Brady Bunch.” Oh, all right, it’s actually about Mr. Williams’s efforts to create a 1970s-themed stage show in Branson, that Midwestern mecca of country music and wholesomeness. But his “Brady” credentials are the draw, both in Branson and for any TV viewers who can’t get enough “Brady” in their lives.It’s amusing, as the series opens, to see Mr. Williams playing to an audience of about 15 people, but it’s also a little suspicious. Mr. Williams may be shameless in milking his “Brady Bunch” fame, but he’s also a seasoned performer who would know better than to open a stage show without properly promoting it. Could it be that the stage show was deliberately birthed prematurely so the TV show would have a reason to exist?The series seems as if it will focus on Mr. Williams’s efforts to build an audience and to see whether his Hollywood fame gets him any traction in meat-and-potatoes Branson. “Branson Famous” is drolly amusing because it laughs at itself; “A Very Barry Branson” doesn’t seem to have that sensibility.It’s mentioned here only because, as Mr. Williams says early in the premiere, “There are over 100 shows in this town.” That means 100 potential reality series with “Branson” in the title. “Fifty Shades of Branson.” “Say Yes to the Branson.” “Bransonpump Rules.” “The Big Branson Theory.” “It’s Always Sunny in Branson.” It could be a long year.A Very Barry BransonGreat American Country, Thursday nights at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time.Produced by Matador. Jay Peterson, Todd Lubin and Justin A. Tucker, executive producers; Leah Culton Gonzalez, executive in charge of production; Lauren Simms, co-executive producer.A version of this review appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: Reality TV’s New Capital Rests Deep in Missouri.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.