AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy David Allen“What is a human voice? What can it do?” Michael Barrett, the artistic director of the New York Festival of Song, asked this before the premiere of a work by the Navajo composer Juantio Becenti during the sterling opening concert of this year’s NYFOS Next series at Opera America’s National Opera Center on Tuesday.Mr. Barrett was talking specifically about the challenges faced by Mr. Becenti, 30, who is from Aneth, Utah (population, 501), as he takes his initial steps with vocal music. But these are fundamental questions for any composer, indeed any listener, and this smorgasbord of song had me coming back to them time and again.Now in their fifth year, the festival’s invaluable contemporary concerts used to be scattered throughout the season. This year, there is an experiment: a winter mini-festival. The composers Paul Moravec and Bright Sheng are hosting two programs in the next two weeks, and this first evening was a testament to the variety of ways composers today are treating the voice.A single Jonathan Dove work, “O Swallow, Swallow,” from “Three Tennyson Songs” (2010), was the most obviously in the lieder tradition. The baritone Theo Hoffman gave its imploring text a heft and a darkness, while the pianist Leann Osterkamp brought descriptive color to a piano part that evokes the rushing of feathers and twittering chirps. Mr. Becenti’s “The Obsidian Morning” (2015) may be his first song, but with a cosmic text by Renee Podunovich, it proved extraordinary. The soprano Ilana Davidson easily navigated the vocal line’s vertiginous leaps and amazed spoken passages, and Mr. Barrett aptly showed how Mr. Becenti’s sparkling, gestural figures at the keyboard’s extremes are of a piece with his more warmly lyrical writing.Gabriel Kahane’s “Three Vernacular Songs” (2013), also receiving their world premieres, were commissioned as a high school graduation gift for a young, gifted baritone. More folk song than bel canto, they set zany poems by Matthew Zapruder, including a jealous ode to Canada in the style of a barroom drunk. Flippant and profound in equal measure, with artful delivery from the baritone Jonathan Estabrooks, they proved perfectly matched to Mr. Kahane’s omnivorous musical character. He is the kind of irreverent talent who can turn lines like “I love baseball, it makes me angry and hopeful for justice” into eternal truths.Even with such riches, songs from musicals took up the bulk of the program. The precocious, charming boy soprano Luca Padovan, 11, starred in numbers from Adam Guettel’s “Millions,” a tale of two brothers — one holy, one a video gamer — wrestling with the death of their mother. And who knew that George Steel, the former director of the Miller Theater and New York City Opera, was a dab hand with the idiom? In excerpts from a show in progress by Mr. Steel, Mr. Estabrooks’s uppity way with a mock Princeton “Fight Song of ’49” worked hilariously, while the soprano Meredith Lustig found euphoric regret in a love song, “There’s You,” and an aptly dislocated ballad, “Am I Home?”NYFOS Next continues on Tuesday and Feb. 17 at the National Opera Center, 330 Seventh Avenue, at 29th Street, Chelsea; 212-796-8620, operaamerica.org. Advertisement