By MICHAEL COOPERFEB. 4, 2015
The inventive Polish director Mariusz Trelinski, whose eerie, film noir-influenced double bill of Tchaikovsky’s “Iolanta” and Bartok’s “Bluebeard’s Castle” at the Metropolitan Opera is winning praise, has received an even bigger assignment form the company: a new production of Wagner’s “Tristan und Isolde” that will open the Met’s season in 2016.The new “Tristan” will be conducted by Simon Rattle, the chief conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic, in a rare Met appearance, and will star Nina Stemme, one of the world’s most sought-after Wagnerian sopranos, as Isolde, Met officials said. The Australian heldentenor Stuart Skelton will sing Tristan, and the bass René Pape will play King Marke, they said.The production was originally scheduled to be directed by Willy Decker, who staged the Met’s boldly unconventional production of Verdi’s “La Traviata,” but the Met said he had withdrawn, citing health reasons.The new production of “Tristan” will be a coproduction with the Festspielhaus Baden-Baden and Teatr Wielki-Polish National Opera, and will premiere at the Baden-Baden Festival in March 2016 and then be performed in Warsaw before arriving at the Met in September.AdvertisementMr. Trelinski, who directs film, theater and opera, is the artistic director of Teatr Wielki-Polish National Opera. His double bill of “Iolanta” and “Bluebeard’s Castle” features a dreamlike landscape of uprooted trees, psychological imagery and dreamlike video.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Anthony Tommasini of The New York Times wrote that the many elements of his staging of the Tchaikovsky-Bartok double bill were “compelling.” The production was also described as “thrillingly staged” by Manuela Hoelterhoff of Bloomberg News.But some of Mr. Trelinski’s productions have gotten split decisions. The contemporary production of Puccini’s “La Bohème” that he did at Washington National Opera divided the opera-loving members of the United States Supreme Court. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg later said at an opera awards luncheon that she had not enjoyed it.AdvertisementThat prompted a dissent from Justice Antonin Scalia. “Ruth is a harsh opera critic,” he said at the time. “I’m supposed to be the stodgy one, but I loved it.”A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘Tristan’ to Open Met Season in 2016.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.