
FEB. 6, 2015

“Henri Matisse: The Cut-Outs” at the Museum of Modern Art in New York
Related Article
The elderly Matisse is often thought of as a bespectacled pasha propped up in bed and surrounded by doves and flowers. But in the years around 1940, he must have felt he was living a nightmare. He and his wife of more than four decades separated. He underwent surgery for cancer. During World War II, he fled south to Nice, only to have that city threatened with bombardment. Through everything, he worked on. It is this Matisse — the invalid, insomniac, night-worker and waking dreamer — we meet in “The Cut-Outs.”Surgery had left Matisse debilitated, basically chair- and bed-bound. Painting and sculpture had become difficult. His solution was almost child-simple. He picked up more manageable materials and tools: sheets of paper paint-washed by assistants, sturdy scissors and plain tailor pins.The exhibition includes a number of cutouts that were created with specific sites in mind. In 1948, a Dominican nun approached Matisse for advice on the decoration of a chapel. He offered to take on the interior work himself, designing ceramic panels of religious scenes from drawings, and stained-glass windows and liturgical vestments based on cutout paper patterns.For him, decoupage was labor-intensive, even when used for what were technically sketches for work in other mediums. Adamant, infuriated doggedness was his way. He forced models to sit for hours, days, weeks, to the point of collapse, as he painted and scraped. A few of his early cutouts look like the art of an outsider-style obsessive.It’s really been only over the past few decades that Matisse has attained rock-star celebrity, the enviable status that Picasso has long occupied. He has become untouchable, and can do no wrong, even when, as was often the case with Picasso, he veers toward kitsch.Yet if you look at the show attentively, absorbing the history of tense, unsleeping, comfort-hungry work it tells in pin holes, cut-marks, layerings, tearings and revisions, you’ll observe that Matisse’s softness comes out of toughness.On February 10, New Yorkers got their last chance to see the Museum of Modern Art's "Henri Matisse: The Cut-Outs," a show that gathered about 100 of the artist's painted-paper works — the largest and most extensive presentation of these works ever assembled. The exhibition set out from the 1930s, covering work Matisse started producing toward the end of his life. Didn't make it to the museum? Here is the wall-to-wall experience.“Henri Matisse: The Cut-Outs,” at the Museum of Modern Art, presents about 100 painted-paper works, produced during a difficult era for the artist.Advertisement“Henri Matisse: The Cut-Outs,” at the Museum of Modern Art, presents about 100 painted-paper works, produced during a difficult era for the artist.