Marlene Dumas: The Image as Burden
Tate Modern.
Feb. 5-May 10.
Although the South Africa-born, Amsterdam-based artist is consistently ranked as one of the world’s highest-selling living female artists, her name still remains relatively unknown to a wider public. This exhibition brings together a broad selection of eerie, liquid paintings from across her career, including early portraits and her more recent celebrity paintings, which depict figures like Osama bin Laden and Amy Winehouse. VAULT Festival
The Vaults.
Through March 8.
Audiences can take in improv, theater and concerts as trains rumble overhead during VAULT, a six-week performing arts festival set in the cavernous space below Waterloo Station. Highlights include a modern “Macbeth,” with live electronic instruments, and “True Brits,” Vinay Patel’s hit one-person play — though many come simply to soak in the festival’s subterranean atmosphere (a bar is open each night). A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Various shows
Museum of Contemporary Art Tokyo.
Through June.
The Mexican artist Gabriel Orozco focuses on large-scale, playful installations, like a Ping Pong table with a pond in the center, and a car with its middle third surgically removed. His work is showing here in one of several exhibitions celebrating the museum’s 20th anniversary. Others include a display of collection highlights and “Constellations,” which features work by seven artists who focus on the surreal and cosmic. Cindy Sherman
Sammlung Goetz.
Through July 18.
In 2008, the chameleonlike Ms. Sherman trained the camera on herself once again, snapping a series of portraits of fictional socialites. The exhibition includes work from throughout the career of the artist, who has photographed herself in guises ranging from clown costumes to Renaissance get-ups. The museum is also holding an exhibition by the artist Nathalie Djurberg that includes video works set amid a nightmarish rainforest installation. Haegue Yang: Shooting the Elephant, Thinking the Elephant
Leeum, Samsung Museum of Art.
Feb. 12-May 10.
George Orwell’s essay “Shooting an Elephant,” an extended allegory on colonialism, inspired this exhibition of installation works by the South Korean artist Haegue Yang (born 1971). A mix of her older installations are on view alongside new works — including a hanging sculpture dedicated to one of her major influences, the artist Sol LeWitt. IBT15: Bristol International Festival
Various venues.
Feb. 12-15.
Thick fog will engulf a pier in Bristol’s harbor for “Fog Bridge,” an installation by the artist Fujiko Nakaya that draws on the theme of climate change. Other works in this eclectic international lineup include plays, dances and concerts that challenge genre boundaries. On Feb. 14 and 15, the singer Patrick Wolf will take over Tyntesfield, a rambling Gothic estate outside the city center, leading an immersive concert and performance work in the mansion.Michael Chow: Voice for My Father
Ullens Center for Contemporary Art.
Through March 22.
The Chinese-born restaurateur Michael Chow studied art before turning to the restaurant business. (Mr. Chow restaurants are in London, Miami and New York, among other cities.) This exhibition — dedicated to his father, a renowned member of the Beijing opera who was persecuted during China’s Cultural Revolution and died in 1975 — includes several recent paintings by Mr. Chow, 75, as well as works from his collection. (For more on the exhibition, read Amy Qin’s interview with Mr. Chow at the show’s opening in Beijing.) Al Bustan Festival
Various venues.
Feb. 17-March 22.
Each year, Al Bustan brings an impressive array of highbrow classical music to a hotel here on the outskirts of Beirut. This year, the festival is adding some more populist offerings into the mix, including a concert in the city center by the ensemble Accentus Austria, which plays European instruments like the viola da gamba alongside Arabic instruments like the rabab. More traditional performances include concert showings of the opera “Norma” and several evenings featuring the pianist Oliver Poole. Degas, Cézanne, Seurat: The Dream Archive from the Musée d’Orsay 
Albertina.
Through May 3.
Cézanne still lifes, pastels by Degas and sketches by Seurat appear in this exhibition of works from the Musée d’Orsay. More than 100 pieces will be shown in all, including the French Symbolist Gustave Moreau’s lavishly painted renderings of religious and pagan myths. In addition to a number of major paintings, the exhibition includes some little-seen drawings, studies and sketches.Symphony Orchestra of India Spring Season
National Center for the Performing Arts.
Feb. 5-21.
More than 100 members of the British Bournemouth Symphony Chorus will hit the NCPA stage for a performance of Verdi’s Requiem — the first ever held in India, the center says. The death mass headlines the Symphony Orchestra of India’s short spring season, which also includes an opera gala and an evening of Max Bruch, Beethoven and the Kazakh composer Yerkesh Shakeyev. 