AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck9 P.M. (13) SHAKESPEARE UNCOVERED Morgan Freeman, who played Petruchio in “The Taming of the Shrew” in the Public Theater’s 1990 Shakespeare in the Park production, looks at some famous Petruchios (Richard Burton, John Cleese and Raul Julia) and Kates (Elizabeth Taylor, Fiona Shaw, Sinead Cusack and Meryl Streep) and reunites with his own sparring partner, Tracey Ullman (above with Mr. Freeman). Julia Stiles reflects on her role in the 1999 teenage comedy adaptation of the work, “10 Things I Hate About You.” And the Royal Shakespeare Company takes the play to a school near where Shakespeare grew up to find out what children make of the adult shenanigans. At 10, David Harewood, the first black actor to star in the title role of “Othello” at the National Theater in London, looks at the history behind the play; talks to Adrian Lester, the National Theater’s latest Othello, about the reaction to the 1825 performance of Ira Aldridge, the first black man to play the role in Britain; and ponders Laurence Olivier’s use of blackface in his acclaimed film portrayal in 1965.1:45 P.M. (TCM) SPLENDOR IN THE GRASS (1961) Natalie Wood, in her second Oscar-nominated role, and Warren Beatty, left with Ms. Wood, portray high school sweethearts struggling with their sexual urges in 1920s Kansas in Elia Kazan’s adaptation of the William Inge play. “There are times when the heat gets too oppressive, when Mr. Kazan lays the purple on too thick, when you get a sneaking suspicion he is playing to the mob for effect,” Bosley Crowther wrote in The New York Times. “In the end, however, the authority and eloquence of the theme emerge in the honest, sensitive acting of Mr. Beatty and Miss Wood.”6 P.M. (Fox Business) MAKING MONEY WITH CHARLES PAYNE In this live edition from Orlando, Fla., Mr. Payne speaks with investing experts, including Matt McCall of the Penn Financial Group, Hilary Kramer of A&G Capital Research, Scottie Nell Hughes of TPNN.com and Chris Versace of Fabian Wealth Strategies.6 P.M. (HBO) THE SECRET LIFE OF WALTER MITTY (2013) Ben Stiller, who also directed this adaptation of the James Thurber short story, stars as Walter, a dutiful drone in the photography department of Life magazine, who finds himself in a caper beyond his wildest imagination when the negative for the publication’s final print edition goes missing. Kristen Wiig plays the crinkly-nosed co-worker on whom Walter has a crush; Adam Scott is the leader of the new tech-jerk bosses who have Walter’s job on the line; and Sean Penn, above right with Mr. Stiller, is the mysterious photographer behind Walter’s travels to Iceland, Afghanistan and other stunning far-off places. “Though it is a celebration of modesty, there is also quite a lot of vanity in ‘The Secret Life of Walter Mitty,’ ”A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. There is also a contradiction: “An ordinary fellow should not have to be quite so special to win our admiration.”7 P.M. (Ion) IN GOOD COMPANY (2004) Dan (Dennis Quaid), a 51-year-old advertising executive, finds his life turned upside down when a young shark (Topher Grace) arrives to commandeer his department and his office — and his daughter (Scarlett Johansson). This “engagingly lightweight drama,” written and directed by Paul Weitz, “is a gently revisionist fairy tale about good versus evil set on the battlefield of contemporary corporate culture, a site of our leading blood sport,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. “Mostly, though, the movie is about men. Men without fathers, men without sons, men with wives who work and make them feel like less than a man and men with wives who, like Dan’s wife, Ann (Marg Helgenberger), give them the gift of both an exquisitely preserved figure and a fertile womb.”1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK Ayad Akhtar discusses his Pulitzer Prize-winning drama, “Disgraced,” now at the Lyceum Theater. Matt Doyle performs “I Am Not a Hero” from “Brooklynite,” in previews at the Vineyard Theater, and chats with the show’s authors, Michael Mayer and Peter Lerman.What’s Streaming NowEVER AFTER HIGH: SPRING UNSPRUNG (2015) The teenage sons and daughters of some fairy tale superstars try to create their own destinies in this animated movie, spun off from the Mattel franchise and the prelude to a new web series. (netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement