AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Zachary WoolfeThe bright-toned, openhearted tenor Matthew Polenzani, who returned to his native New York in recital at Alice Tully Hall on Wednesday, rose through the ranks at the Metropolitan Opera the old-fashioned way. He started in the late 1990s in truly tiny roles — remind me, who’s Khrushchov in Mussorgsky’s “Boris Godunov”? — then gradually moved into minor but noticeable parts, the likes of Arturo in Donizetti’s “Lucia di Lammermoor” and Jaquino in Beethoven’s “Fidelio.”His voice elegant and pure, but with a body to the sound and a robustness under pressure that penetrated the vast Met, he became the house’s go-to Mozart tenor and a favorite of the company’s music director, James Levine, singing Tamino in the 2004 premiere of Julie Taymor’s production of “Die Zauberflöte.” Mr. Polenzani’s appearances have since been of the highest profile, including the leads in recent new productions of Verdi’s “La Traviata” and Donizetti’s “L’Elisir d’Amore” and “Maria Stuarda.”He’s become a Met veteran, a valuable player without being a true star. In opera, Mr. Polenzani, 46, comes across as studious, sweet and earnest — not stolid, exactly, but square. His boyish, even bashful presence may be better suited to the human scale of a recital, and the one on Wednesday, performed with the subtle, stylish pianist Julius Drake, was arrestingly lovely. Mr. Polenzani’s voice has retained nearly all its freshness and poise, and he deploys it with affecting modesty, sounding graceful even when heartsick, as in the opening “Adelaide,” Beethoven’s setting of a narrative of nature and love.At the core of the program were Liszt songs: five German ones in a set assembled by the performers, and four in French to poems by Victor Hugo. Mr. Polenzani and Mr. Drake teased out the stark angst in “Die Stille Wasserrose” and gave the repetitions in the final songs, “Im Rhein, im Schönen Strom” and “Es Rauschen die Winde,” more than a hint of obsession, a quality that bodes well for Mr. Polenzani’s Met performances of Offenbach’s “Les Contes d’Hoffmann,” starting on Feb. 28.He was charming in Satie’s brief “Trois Mélodies” and particularly luminous in the prayerful selections in Ravel’s “Cinq Mélodies Populaires Grecques.” The feeling of tender frankness he radiates suited him well to Barber’s thoughtful “Hermit Songs.”Throughout the program Mr. Polenzani could have been more pungent in his approach to texts — his singing worked more on the level of general feeling than individual words — but his sensitivity was always appealing. In his encores, his voice’s resonance filled out the dusky melody of Reynaldo Hahn’s “La Barcheta,” and he soared, nearly trumpeting, through Frank Bridge’s “Love Went a-Riding.” His characteristic blend of dignity and sincerity, which can get lost in the Met, came through strongly.Advertisement