By LAUREL GRAEBERFEB. 5, 2015
BAMkids Film FestivalForget the Grammys. For the youngest New Yorkers, this weekend is all about the BAMmies.That’s BAM, as in Brooklyn Academy of Music, which will give these awards, based on children’s votes, to the best animated short and best live-action short in its BAMkids Film Festival. The 17th edition is about to unfold, and like many 17-year-olds, it’s going through changes.This year, the festival no longer has an individual curator. It is showing films — more than 70, divided into programs according to the recommended audience ages — selected by Animation Block Party, a festival based in Brooklyn; Northwest Film Forum, the organization responsible for Children’s Film Festival Seattle; and TIFF Kids International Film Festival, part of the Toronto International Film Festival.“We’ve sort of gotten the East, the West and now the North, with one fantastic film festival in Canada,” Steven McIntosh, the academy’s director of education and family programs, said in a telephone interview. Other developments: no more actors reading aloud subtitles (too distracting); more shorts and fewer feature-length films (an audience request); and no more attempts to court adolescents.Advertisement“We decided that what we did really well was to reach the 2-to-11-year-old demographic,” Mr. McIntosh said.AdvertisementAmong the highlights are Augusto Bicalho Roque’s “Cartoon Away,” a Brazilian film about an animated character trying to escape its creator; and “Sounds of Nature,” a Swiss live-action short by Simon Weber in which a boy obsessed with video games finally explores the outdoors. Mr. McIntosh also cited the power of Venetia Evripiotou’s “Counting Happiness,” a Greek and Indian live-action production about a 5-year-old who sells toy chicks on the streets of Delhi.American films have a presence, too: In Dice Tsutsumi and Robert Kondo’s Oscar-nominated short, “The Dam Keeper,” a pig operates a dam that keeps overwhelming darkness from flooding his town. Ostracized by other animals, he’s tempted to give up his guardian role. “It’s worth seeing for the beautiful, emotive animation and the challenging content,” Mr. McIntosh said.He added that the academy was emphasizing fun as much as film, with magic shows (the magician Max Darwin, a.k.a. the Amazing Max, will be the festival’s M.C.), face painting, balloon artists, animation workshops and readings by children’s book authors on both days.“The goal is that the moment you set foot in the Peter Jay Sharp Building, until you leave, you’re being entertained, guided, directed,” Mr. McIntosh said. “Even if you’re standing in line.”(Saturday and Sunday, 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene; 718-636-4100, bam.org/kidsfilmfest.) LAUREL GRAEBERMore for Children ‘The African Drum’ (Sunday through Tuesday) Shadow Box Theater’s multimedia presentation of traditional African tales features characters that include a talking leopard, a wise loon and a turtle that is just as resourceful as the hero of “The Tortoise and the Hare.” All are shadow puppets, manipulated behind a lighted screen so that the colorful animals appear to be frolicking in the grasslands. With story and music by Sandra Robbins, the production focuses on Kijana, a little girl who relates the narratives and has her own brush with danger. Sunday at 3 p.m.; Monday at 10:30 a.m.; Tuesday at 10 and 11:30 a.m.; National Black Theater, 2031 Fifth Avenue, near 125th Street, East Harlem. Wednesday at 11 a.m., Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street. Thursday at 11 a.m., Public School 3, the Bedford Village School, 50 Jefferson Avenue, between Bedford and Franklin Avenues, Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn (entrance at the back of the school, on Hancock Street). Information and tickets: 212-724-0677, shadowboxtheatre.org.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’  (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.Advertisement‘Can Do Duck: The Musical’ (Sunday) You’ve heard about the little engine that could — now comes the little duck. Arielle Sosland, writer and director of this musical, based it on “The Can Do Duck” series of children’s books by her father, Morton Sosland, a child psychiatrist. The hourlong show, for ages 3 through 11, focuses on a duck family and a human family as they learn to face challenges with self-confidence and optimism. (Through March 8.) At 11 a.m., Lynn Redgrave Theater at Culture Project, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, candoduckthemusical.com.‘Charlotte’s Web’ (Sunday) Love, death, sacrifice — weighty subjects for a children’s novel, but E.B. White expounded on them brilliantly in his 1952 tale of Wilbur, that extraordinary pig, and Charlotte, the even more extraordinary gray spider who saved him from the slaughterhouse. Theatreworks/USA has brought the enduring story of their friendship to the stage in this hourlong musical. At 1 and 3 p.m., Queens Theater in the Park, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, 718-760-0064, queenstheatre.org.‘Cinderella’ (Saturday and Sunday) Expect toeshoes as well as glass slippers at this hourlong production from New York Theater Ballet, part of its Once Upon a Ballet series for children. Choreographed by Donald Mahler to Prokofiev’s score, the show is lighthearted, with a four-legged dancing clock and stepsisters (men in drag) who are more buffoonish than cruel. At 11 a.m. and 1 and 3:30 p.m., Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, nytb.org.EcoCruises: Winter Seals and Waterbirds of New York Harbor (Sunday) A lot of tourists visit New York in the winter, but some of the most interesting won’t be found in the crowds at Times Square. These two-hour cruises from New York City Audubon focus on birds that migrate to this region at this time of year, like many ducks and geese. They also visit the harbor seals that can be found around Governors, Hoffman and Swinburne Islands. (Seal behavior researchers will take part in several of the tours.) An Audubon naturalist narrates the adventures, which include complimentary hot tea and cocoa and are conducted via New York Water Taxi. Warm clothing and binoculars are recommended, as is advance purchase. (Through March 8.) Sundays at noon, Pier 16, South Street Seaport, 89 South Street, near Fulton Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-742-1969, nywatertaxi.com/tours/audubon-winter.‘Everything About a Family (Almost)’ (Saturday and Sunday) It’s a pretty inexhaustible topic, but Tada! Youth Theater has captured much of the fun and frustrations of family life in this one-hour musical, which had its premiere in 2009. Now the show is being revived by the troupe, whose young members developed the plotline themselves and selected the songs from submissions by professional composers and lyricists. The humorous conceit is an adolescent given — wanting a different family — but the results, set at a couple of different reunions, are often unexpectedly poignant. (Through Feb. 16.) At 2 and 4 p.m., Tada! Theater, 15 West 28th Street, Manhattan, 212-252-1619, Ext. 5, tadatheater.com.Family Bird-watching (Saturday) Winter is an ideal time to catch up with some colorful neighbors: the birds in Prospect Park. The lack of foliage makes for easy viewing, and the cold months often bring some impressive visitors, like owl species that fly south for better feeding. Every month the Prospect Park Alliance offers these free tours, which begin with a lesson in how to use binoculars. Then naturalists lead the walk, helping to identify some of the park’s 250 species of avian residents. From 10 to 11 a.m. (the tour begins promptly), the Prospect Park Audubon Center, near the Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue entrance, Brooklyn, 718-287-3400, prospectpark.org/audubon.‘Fancy Nancy the Musical’  (Saturday and Sunday) One of the arts’ youngest divas has returned to the McGinn/Cazale Theater. This musical from Vital Theater Company focuses on a little girl who wants everything to be fancy — especially herself. Based on the book series written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, the production explores the predicament that ensues when Nancy finds out that she hasn’t been cast as the glamorous mermaid she’d hoped to be in the coming dance show. With a book by Susan DiLallo, a score by Danny Abosch, and lyrics by both, the musical humorously follows Nancy’s attempts to cope with a most unfancy role: that of a tree. (Through April 26.) At 1:30 p.m., 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.Advertisement‘Give Me Sound!’ (Sunday) Hayes Greenfield has been giving sound for years, and at this program, he’s encouraging children to give it back. A jazz musician, composer and educator, Mr. Greenfield will work with young audience members — the recommended ages are 3 through 7 — in sonic activities and games, with the goal of creating a “sound sculpture” at the end of the hour. While little enthusiasts will use their natural rhythm makers — voices and bodies — instruments from home are welcome, too. (Through March 22.) At 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-675-6677, 13thstreetrep.org.‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month; Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one will sprout indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which is reviving Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor will now star in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Weekdays, except Mondays, at 10:30 a.m. and noon (with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.); weekends at 1 p.m. (This Sunday’s show is sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.Jazz at Lincoln Center Family Concert: Who is Billie Holiday? (Saturday) A generation raised on Beyoncé will discover the powerful allure of an earlier musical idol in this concert, which heralds Jazz at Lincoln Center’s forthcoming Billie Holiday Festival. The vocalist Charenee Wade will sing the signature works of Holiday, whose centennial is this year, and the pianist Aaron Diehl will function as music director. Meant for school-age children, the event will include a discussion and preconcert art and music workshops. At 1 and 3 p.m. (workshops are at 12:15 and 2:15), Rose Theater, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-721-6500, jazz.org.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.La Mama Kids: Filipino Indigenous Dance (Saturday) La MaMa, the downtown theater famous for cultivating cutting-edge adults, has in recent years been turning its attention to cutting-edge kids, too. This series for families, which presents interactive workshops and performances, continues this weekend with Filipino indigenous dance. Potri Ranka Manis, founder and director of Kinding Sindaw, a nonprofit dance theater organization, will teach Philippine mythology and movement. Accompanied by live music, children will learn to tell these ancestral stories with hand gestures, footwork and colorful scarves. At 11 a.m., 74 East Fourth Street, East Village, 212-475-7710, lamama.org.Meet the Scientist: ‘Contemplating Dinosaurs’ (Saturday) Aki Watanabe may not recreate dinosaurs in the manner of Jurassic Park, but he does rebuild their brains. A paleontology student at the Richard Gilder Graduate School at the American Museum of Natural History, he uses 3-D printing technology to try to reconstruct the brains of extinct creatures and study how they evolved. At this program in the museum’s Discovery Room, part of a series for children over 7 (it’s free with museum admission), Mr. Watanabe will discuss his career and what its like to dig for fossils all over the world. At 2:15, 3 and 3:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.‘The Music in You’: A Third Street Anniversary Celebration With Laurie Berkner (Saturday) Little ones may hear a lot of lullabies in the East Village on Saturday morning, but that doesn’t mean they’ll fall asleep: A Laurie Berkner concert is likely to be way too exciting. One of the most popular performers for preschool music fans, Ms. Berkner will be celebrating the 120th anniversary of the Third Street Music School Settlement in this fund-raising concert. At 11 a.m., St. Mark’s Church in the Bowery, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 212-777-3240, thirdstreetmusicschool.org.AdvertisementNew Museum First Saturdays for Families: Surroundings (Saturday) Children are natural explorers of the world around them, and they’ll be encouraged to continue that investigation through art at this free program at the New Museum. Linked to the museum’s forthcoming 2015 Triennial: “Surround Audience” — a celebration of early-career artists capturing their own environments — the workshop will lead young visitors ages 3 to 8 in evoking sounds of the city and reimagining their urban worlds. From 10 a.m. to noon, 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org; tickets are limited, first come first served.New York City Ballet Family Saturday: ‘Beginner’s Guide to Balanchine’ (Saturday) Children who know New York City Ballet mainly for its “Nutcracker” performances can see other sides of the repertory — and of George Balanchine’s creative prowess — in this hourlong workshop, which introduces those 5 and older to classical dance. This program, to be hosted by the principal dancer Daniel Ulbricht, will include company members performing excerpts from Balanchine ballets including “Serenade,” “Harlequinade,” “Chaconne,” “Square Dance” and, yes, “The Nutcracker.” At 11 a.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com/publicprograms.Preservation Detectives: ‘Hidden Spaces and (Kind of) Creepy Places!’ (Sunday) The Museum at Eldridge Street, the 1887 landmark synagogue where many Jewish immigrants worshiped, offers “Preservation Detectives” tours in which children 4 to 10 can view artifacts, investigate neighborhood lore and sleuth their way into the past. This month the program is “Hidden Spaces and (Kind of) Creepy Places!,” giving young participants a chance to explore nooks and crannies that were untouched during the synagogue’s recent restoration. Using binoculars, flashlights and magnifying glasses, they’ll look for clues to the building’s history and later make an art project. Who knows what may be lurking? From 11 a.m. to noon, 12 Eldridge Street, between Canal and Division Streets, Lower East Side, 212- 219-0302, eldridgestreet.org/visit/family. Reservations are recommended.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through May 9.) Saturdays at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, 13thstreetrep.org.‘Sing Back, Brooklyn! With Lloyd H. Miller’  (Saturday) The Bronx, Queens, Manhattan and Staten Island are invited to sing back, too, in this free family program at the Brooklyn Historical Society. Lloyd H. Miller, a proud son of Brooklyn and leader of the band the Deedle Deedle Dees, known for its tunes celebrating science and history, hosts this event — with singalongs, stories and skits — the first Saturday of every month. February’s theme is black history, with music associated with the society’s exhibition “Brooklyn Abolitionists/In Pursuit of Freedom.” At 11 a.m., 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org; free.Special Day for Special Kids (Sunday) This special day comes courtesy of the New York Transit Museum, which will offer two hours of free programs specifically for children with disabilities, starting at 10 a.m., when their families will have exclusive use of the museum until it opens to the general public at 11. The plans include an art workshop to make a transit-themed snow globe, presented with Extreme Kids & Crew, an organization offering activities and support for special-needs families. The museum will also offer live music, refreshments and lots of opportunities to investigate vintage subway cars and exhibits. From 10 a.m. to noon, Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-694-1600, mta.info/museum.‘Things That Go Bang!’ (Saturday and Sunday) The Lolli-Pops concerts from the Little Orchestra Society, for ages 3 through 5, use friendly characters like Bang, Bow, Buzz and Toot to introduce music. This particular program is Bang’s favorite: It’s all about percussion. In addition to hearing Bizet, Britten, Gershwin and others, little listeners will learn that percussion instruments can be discovered almost anywhere (including the kitchen, but they knew that already). The New York Percussion Group will be guest musicians, and audience members will join in on tambourines during Britten’s “March of the Toreadors.” Saturday at 10 and 11:30 a.m.; Sunday at 11:30 a.m. and 1 p.m.; Kaye Playhouse, Hunter College, 68th Street, between Lexington and Park Avenues, 212-971-9500, littleorchestra.org.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 10:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Advertisement‘Tropical Discoveries’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) At least a little bit of New York resembles the tropics, even at this time of year. It can be found at the New York Botanical Garden, whose latest exhibition, “Wild Medicine in the Tropics,” investigates the medicinal use of rain forest plants. Visitors to the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden can explore this area through “Tropical Discoveries,” in which they’ll compare tropical and temperate plants inside the William and Lynda Steere Discovery Center and pot up a tropical species to take home. They can also take field notes on the hidden signs of life in the winter garden outdoors. (Through Feb. 26.) Weekends, 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; weekdays, except Mondays, 1:30 to 4:30 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.‘Under the Tangle’ (Sunday) Adolescence can certainly be a complicated thicket, and in this dance-theater piece from the troupe Treehouse Shakers, closing this weekend, it is literally so. The company, whose “Hatched” was for babies and preschoolers, presents this production for ages 8 through 13. Conceived and directed by Emily Bunning, it focuses on an orphaned girl trying to find her way through a wooded labyrinth filled with curious creatures and characters. At 1 p.m., Ailey Citigroup Studio Theater, 405 West 55th Street, Clinton, 212-715-1914, treehouseshakers.com.‘Viva N.Y.I.C.F.F.!’ (Saturday and Sunday) Those initials stand for the New York International Children’s Film Festival. And the Museum of the Moving Image is saying “viva” not just because it’s a great festival, but also because this program features some of the festival’s best films that are either from, or about, Spain and Latin America. Recommended for children 9 and older, all the shorts in this 75-minute collection, culled from five years’ worth of festival selections, are in Spanish with English subtitles. A couple of intriguing titles: “Inflatable Grandma” (Spain) and “Journey to Mars” (Argentina). At 12:30 p.m., 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Through Feb. 19, the museum features the exhibit “A-Maze N’ Shabbat,” whose activities include a challah-braiding workshop and a life-size maze that teaches about the Jewish sabbath. Hours: Mondays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; until 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.David Weinstone and the Music for Aardvarks Band (Sunday) Music for aardvarks is also music for children, as Mr. Weinstone, a former punk rocker, will demonstrate in two concerts at the Jewish Museum. His group specializes in tunes for city children, as you can tell from titles like “Subway,” “Taxi” and “Staten Island Ferry.” The band, which prides itself on audience participation, will also perform songs from its most recent album, “All I Want!” At 11:30 a.m. and 2 p.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org. LAUREL GRAEBERA version of this schedule appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page C37 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times for Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.