By JOSHUA BARONE and JONATHAN WOLFEFEB. 5, 2015
Museums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and other diseases? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out diseases. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Arsenal Gallery: ‘The Migration’ (through Feb. 24) During the early- and mid-20th century, about 6 million African-Americans left the Jim Crow South for cities in the north and on the West Coast. That demographic shift, called the Great Migration, left a lasting, rich cultural imprint on many places, like Harlem. In commemoration of Black History Month, the Ebony Society asked over 20 artists to interpret the events and effects of the Great Migration. Now their work is on display in this free show at the Arsenal Gallery in Central Park. It is open weekdays from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., at 850 Fifth Avenue, at 64th Street; 212-360-8163, nycgovparks.org.Grolier Club: ‘One Hundred Books Famous in Children’s Literature’ (through Saturday) Early editions of children’s literary classics printed from 1600 to 2000 — including “Robinson Crusoe,” “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland” and “Tom Sawyer” — are on display along with more than 50 artifacts. Friday and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., 47 East 60th Street, Manhattan, 212-838-6690, grolierclub.org; free.Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum: ‘Masters of Disguise: The World of Camouflage’ (through Feb. 24) The art of camouflage in nature and its appropriation by hunters and the armed forces are explored in this exhibition, which uses digital images, artifacts and interactive elements to showcase how color, shade and shapes can be used to deceive the eye. Daily, from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.AdvertisementNew-York Historical Society: ‘Chinese American: Exclusion/Inclusion’ _(through April 19) In his review for The New York Times, Edward Rothstein called it a “vigorous and imaginative new exhibition,” that includes a look at “how Chinese-American identity came to be, how immigration and discrimination were followed by recrimination and conflict, and how, finally, a people’s trials give way to celebration.” Tuesday through Thursday and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Friday until 8 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.AdvertisementNew York Public Library for the Performing Arts: ‘Emily Dickinson: Musician and Poet’ (through March 6) Emily Dickinson’s poems and letters as well as the library’s collection of her work provide the backdrop for this exhibition, which focuses on the musical side of her writing. Dickinson’s musical identity encompassed piano performances, the collection of sheet music and concert outings, and those experiences are detailed here. Friday, Saturday, Tuesday and Wednesday from noon to 6 p.m.; Monday and Thursday from noon to 8 p.m.; 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/lpa; free.New York Transit Museum Annex: Holiday Train Show (through Feb. 22) This free annual treat for model train enthusiasts, featuring vintage Lionel trains, is on display in Grand Central Terminal. Weekdays from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Saturdays from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Sundays from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; at Grand Central Terminal, near the Station Master’s Office; mta.info/mta/museum.EventsAthena Film Festival (through Sunday) This festival, now in its fifth year, features fiction and nonfiction films that highlight female leadership. This year’s lineup, which can be found at athenafilmfestival.com, includes last year’s art-house hit “Obvious Child” as well as the films “Beyond the Lights,” “Dear White People” and “We Are the Best!” There will be screenings, activities and discussions with producers, directors and actors. The festival will also honor Jodie Foster. At various locations on the Barnard College campus, 3009 Broadway, at 117th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-1264.‘James Baldwin: Harlem’s Own’ (Tuesday) The rhythm of James Baldwin’s writing was its own form of jazz, and some of his work dealt with jazz and the culture that developed around it. Robert G. O’Meally, the founder and director of Columbia University’s Center for Jazz Studies, hosts this discussion about Baldwin’s writing, with examples of the music that was directly related to it. At 7 p.m., National Jazz Museum in Harlem, 104 East 126th Street, Visitor’s Center, Suite 2D, 212-348-8300, jazzmuseuminharlem.org; free.Black Artstory: Hammerstep on Myrtle (Saturday) The Myrtle Avenue Brooklyn Partnership celebrates its third Black Artstory Month, a series of events that includes Hammerstep on Myrtle, presented by Irish Arts Center. In the late 1800s, Fort Greene was home to half of Brooklyn’s black population, as well as the Irish enclave nicknamed Young Dublin on Myrtle Avenue. To reflect those intersecting histories, Black Artstory is partnering with the dance troupe Hammerstep, whose performances blend traditional Irish dance, tap and hip-hop. At 3 p.m., Ingersoll Community Center, 177 Myrtle Avenue, at Prince Street, 718-230-1689, myrtleavenue.org; free.40th Annual Thunderbird American Indian Dancers Concert and Powwow (through Sunday) The oldest troupe of its kind in New York brings its annual concert and powwow to a close this weekend. Expect dances, storytelling and traditional music from the Iroquois and other tribes of the Northeast, Southwest and Great Plains regions. Money made from the event will go toward scholarships for American Indian students. Tickets are $1 for children 12 and younger at matinee performances. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 3 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Theater for the New City, 155 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village, 212-254-1109, theaterforthenewcity.net.‘Here’s to the Girls!: Hollywood’s Leading Ladies’ (Saturday through Monday) The 92nd Street Y’s Lyrics & Lyricists songbook series continues with performances by Broadway actresses about the women of Hollywood’s movie musicals from 1930 to 1960. Robert Osborne, host for the Turner Classic Movies channel, will make an appearance on Saturday and Sunday. Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7 p.m., Monday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org.Advertisement‘If These Knishes Could Talk’ (Thursday) As part of the exhibition “Mother Tongues: Endangered Languages in New York City and Beyond,” City Lore is screening the documentary “If These Knishes Could Talk,” about New York accents. Afterward, a contest to determine the best New York accent will pit five New Yorkers, one from each borough, against one another. At 6:30 p.m., City Lore Gallery, 56 East First Street, 212-529-1955, citylore.org.Karaoke Nights: Valentine’s Day Edition (Thursday) The Al D. Rodriguez Liver Foundation presents a karaoke night benefit, hosted by the TV personality Carson Kressley, to raise awareness about viral hepatitis and liver cancer. The main event will be a sing-off, but the evening also includes a silent auction and an appearance by the drag queen Bootsie Lefaris. Proceeds will support a declaration that Mr. Rodriguez, a stage and screen actor, made shortly before his death from liver cancer in 2008: to educate the uninsured about the diseases. At 7 p.m., Ryan/Chelsea-Clinton Community Health Center, 645 10th Avenue, near 46th Street, aldrodriguezliverfoundation.com.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pen Parentis Literary Salon (Tuesday) Networking over wine and hors d’oeuvres at the Hotel Andaz Wall Street will give way to readings from three authors at this event, which celebrates and supports writers who have children. Stephanie Lehmann and Siobhan Adcock will be joined by Andrew Lewis Conn. Martha Southgate, in her review of Mr. Conn’s 2014 novel, “O, Africa!,” called his prose “lovely and inventive.” At 7 p.m., 75 Wall Street, 212-941-9208, aaartsalliance.org.Spoken WordConversations With Yasmina Reza, Richard Ford, Lorrie Moore and David Axelrod (Monday, Tuesday and Thursday) Ms. Reza, the French writer whose works include “God of Carnage,” will talk about her new book, “Happy Are the Happy,” a collection of 20 interconnected stories, on Monday at 8:15 p.m. On Tuesday at 8 p.m., Mr. Ford and Ms. Moore will read from their latest short story collections. Mr. Ford’s, “Let Me Be Frank With You,” follows his character Frank Bascombe in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, and Ms. Moore’s “Bark” is full of wordplay and allusions to the animal nature of the human condition. Then politics will take center stage on Thursday at 7:30 p.m. during a discussion between David Axelrod, whose new book is titled “Believer: My Forty Years in Politics,” and David Remnick, editor of The New Yorker. 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org.David Duchovny (Wednesday) This actor, director and writer will read from his book “Holy Cow: A Modern-Day Dairy Tale,” about Elsie Bovary, a cow that looks through a farmhouse window and sees a documentary about factory farms on TV. She and other animals, including a Torah-reading pig who recently converted to Judaism, decide to flee the farm and search for a peaceful world. At 7 p.m., Barnes & Noble Union Square, 33 East 17th Street, 212-253-0810, barnesandnoble.com; free.Pamela Katz and Katherine Heiney  (Tuesday and Wednesday) On Tuesday, Pamela Katz will read from her book “The Partnership,” which describes the lively working relationship between the playwright Bertolt Brecht and the composer Kurt Weill, famous for “The Threepenny Opera.” She will be joined by Karen Kohler, a cabaret singer who will bring Mr. Weill and Mr. Brecht’s work to life with the accordionist Benjamin Ickes. On Wednesday, Ms. Heiny will discuss her short-story collection, “Single, Carefree, Mellow,” which came out on Tuesday, with Sari Botton, a writer and editor of the anthology “Goodbye to All That: Writers on Loving and Leaving New York.” At 7 p.m., McNally Jackson, 52 Prince Street, between Lafayette and Mulberry Streets, SoHo, 212-274-1160, mcnallyjackson.com; free.Allen Kurzweil (Monday) The @Macaulay Author Series begins its new season with Mr. Kurzweil, author of “Whipping Boy: The Forty-Year Search for My Twelve-Year-Old Bully.” Mr. Kurzweil will discuss his memoir, about investigating the life of his boarding school roommate, with Susan Morrison, articles editor of The New Yorker. At 7 p.m., Macaulay Honors College, City University of New York, 35 West 67th Street, Manhattan, macaulay.cuny.edu; free.Muldoon’s Picnic (Monday) Paul Muldoon, The New Yorker’s poetry editor, hosts the second installment of this monthly gathering, a pastiche of literature and music. The event features the authors Colm Toibin and Robert Sullivan, the singer-songwriter Aoife O’Donovan and musical performances by the Wayside Shrines, playing songs written by Mr. Muldoon. At 7:30 p.m., Irish Arts Center, 553 West 51st Street, Clinton, 212-757-3318, irishartscenter.org.The Soundtrack Series (Saturday) This live recording of the often humorous, nostalgia-driven podcast asks participants to talk about a song that has left a mark on them. The host, Dana Rossi, will be joined by four storytellers, Crystal Durant, Isaac Butler, Anne Rodeman and Damian Bellino, as they delve into their musical pasts. At 7 p.m., Q.E.D., 27-16 23rd Avenue, near 28th Street, Astoria, Queens, 347-451-3873, qedastoria.com.AdvertisementWalking ToursChelsea ‘Best Exhibits’ Tour (Saturday) Some blocks in West Chelsea are nothing but art galleries and apartments. Prioritizing all the neighborhood has to offer can be difficult; this tour narrows your options to seven shows. Among them are unique science-fiction projections of an all-female utopian society and sculptures that were granted a patent. The tour begins at 526 West 26th Street, at 3:45 p.m., 212-946-1548, nygallerytours.com.Flatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.Subway Art Tour (Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday) The art that lives underground in New York’s subway system is easy to miss during the morning and evening commutes. This tour gives participants a few hours to take in the mosaics and sculpture, read the poetry in subway cars and see live performances from musicians and puppeteers. It involves walking up and down stairs, so sensible shoes are recommended. At 1 p.m., Union Square Park, Union Square West and East 14th Street, 212-209-3370, walkaboutny.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org. JOSHUA BARONE and JONATHAN WOLFEAn entry in the Spare Times listings in some editions on Friday about “Here’s to the Girls!: Hollywood’s Leading Ladies,” at the 92nd Street Y in Manhattan, included outdated casting information. Mitzi Gaynor, who had originally been announced as a special guest, is no longer taking part. She has been replaced by Robert Osborne, host for the Turner Classic Movies channel, who will make an appearance today and tomorrow.Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events.A version of this schedule appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page C37 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Time.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.