FEB. 5, 2015
 Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ Auntsforcamera  (through Feb. 15) The New Museum hosts this exhibition of nine video works dispersed throughout the building, a project of the protean dance entity Aunts. The entries deal with everything from dancing with drones to mastering the original Harlem Shake. Grab a map and find your way among the monitors and screens, or take an artist-led tour, offered on selected days. Tours are free with a submission to Karl Scholz’s interactive experiment “#auntsforcamera.” Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Fridays through Sundays from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., Thursdays from 11 a.m. to 9 p.m., New Museum, 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Siobhan Burke)BalletNext (Tuesday through Feb. 14) Michele Wiles, the former American Ballet Theater principal, has directed BalletNext since its inception in 2011. This season, the troupe’s most adventurous yet, she makes her choreographic debut. The program, titled “Baroque’d” after its musical choices, includes three premieres: “Something Sampled,” a collaboration among Ms. Wiles, the flex dancer Jay Donn and the cellist Christopher Lancaster; the premiere of Ms. Wiles’s “Ushuaia”; and “Outswirl,” an experiment in spontaneity by the Canadian choreographer Peter Quanz. At 7:30 p.m., with a 2 p.m. matinee on Feb. 14, New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Burke)Suzanne Beahrs Dance (Friday and Saturday) The title of Ms. Beahrs’s new work, “Rise,” sounds like a grand call to action but she has a more internal revolution in mind. She, along with six other women, will tackle the conundrum of how to be yourself. In this evening-length work, part of Danspace’s Dance:Access series, the mission is to embrace the influences that shape an artist but also to let the dance reveal its own authentic self. At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Brian Schaefer)AdvertisementCedar Lake Contemporary Ballet (Friday and Saturday) The excellent violin and viola duo Charly and Margaux (also known as Chargaux) accompany this troupe’s latest kinetic installation at its expansive Chelsea theater. A collaboration among the company’s 16 impressive dancers and their new artistic director, Alexandra Damiani, the event does away with seating to let the audience explore on foot. At 7 and 9 p.m., Cedar Lake Theater, 547 West 26th Street, Chelsea, 212-244-0015, cedarlakedance.com. (Burke)AdvertisementNai-Ni Chen Dance Company (Saturday) Babies born between Feb. 19, 2015, and Feb. 7, 2016, will be born into the Year of the Sheep (also, Goat). They will be clever and polite, have an affinity for the arts, but may also be shy and indecisive. This troupe, which combines Western modern dance with Asian styles and aesthetics, presents its annual Lunar New Year Celebration featuring acrobats, dragons, traditional music and a nod to the nomadic sheep-herding tribes of China. At 12:30 p.m., New Jersey Performing Arts Center, 1 Center Street, Newark, 888-466-5722, njpac.org. (Schaefer)★ Douglas Dunn & Dancers (Wednesday through Feb. 15) Many a Greek deity has inspired choreographers, but Aidos, the goddess of shame and humility, doesn’t come up too often. In a new piece that bears her name, the mischievous Douglas Dunn refracts the goddess into dueling parts danced by two six-foot-tall women, Jin Ju Song-Begin and Jessica Martineau, amid a larger constellation of dancers. Mr. Dunn, who will also perform, sets the piece to Bach Suites, played live by the cellist Ha-Yang Kim. Wednesday through next Friday at 8 p.m., Feb. 14 at 3 and 8 p.m., Feb. 15 at 3 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 800-838-3006, douglasdunndance.com. (Burke)Fridays at Noon: Andy de Groat (Friday) The choreographer Catherine Galasso presents a selection of rarely seen dances by Andy de Groat, as part of the 92nd Street Y’s midday series. Mr. de Groat, who performed with Robert Wilson in the 1970s, mines complexity from simple, repetitive actions, often to scores by the composer Michael Galasso, Ms. Galasso’s father. That family tie inspired Ms. Galasso to reconstruct Mr. de Groat’s work, along with her keen interest in dance archiving and preservation. The program, an in-progress showing, will include “Fan Dance” (1978), “Rope Dance Translations” (1975) and “Stabat” (1990). At noon, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Burke)★ Gerard & Kelly (through Feb. 15) For Brennan Gerard and Ryan Kelly, pole dancing is less about titillation and more about intimacy and vulnerability. In “P.O.L.E.,” the duo’s new multidisciplinary project — which stands for People, Objects, Language, Exchange — poles are a catalyst to explore relationships and queer identity. In performance, film, project-based installations, classes and conversations, the duo find fantasy and meaning in their chosen symbol. Museum hours: 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., and Thursdays until 9 p.m., New Museum, 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Schaefer)★ Martha Graham Dance Company (Tuesday through Feb. 22) It’s been 85 years since Martha Graham choreographed “Lamentation,” her grief-stricken work for one woman in a tubular dress. As part of its two-week season at the Joyce Theater, the Graham company offers a new crop of “Lamentation Variations,” fresh takes on the classic by contemporary choreographers. Two of those, by Kyle Abraham and Michelle Dorrance, appear on the first of three repeating programs, alongside old and new repertory, including Graham’s bracing “Chronicle” and Nacho Duato’s “Rust” (Wednesday and Thursday). A gala program on Tuesday features Misty Copeland of American Ballet Theater, as well as visual contributions by Frank Gehry in honor of the season’s theme, “Shape&Design.” Tuesday at 7 p.m., Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday and next Friday at 8 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org; gala tickets can be purchased at marthagraham.org. (Burke)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ICKamsterdam (Thursday through Feb. 15) The stage becomes a boxing ring in “Rocco,” by Emio Greco and Pieter C. Scholten, the directors of the International Choreographic Arts Center (ICKamsterdam). Inspired by the 1960 film “Rocco and His Brothers,” the piece pits the men against one another in a dexterous fight that hovers somewhere between dance-theater and sporting event. Thursday and next Friday at 7:30 p.m., Feb. 14 at 8 p.m. and Feb. 15 at 3 p.m., Alexander Kasser Theater, Montclair State University, 1 Normal Avenue, Montclair, 973-655-5112, peakperfs.org. (Burke)Koresh Dance Company (Friday and Saturday) This Philadelphia troupe, directed by Roni Koresh, makes its New York debut with “Come Together,” an exploration of old rhythmic forms colliding with new. Blending jazz, ballet and Israeli folk dance idioms, this evening-length piece unfolds to a blend of Turkish and Israeli music with Beethoven, Chopin and Ravel. At 7:30 p.m., Schimmel Center for the Arts, Pace University, 3 Spruce Street, between Park Row and Gold Street, Lower Manhattan, 866-811-4111, schimmel.pace.edu. (Burke)★ Nederlands Dans Theater 2 (through Sunday) It’s been five years since this junior company of one of Europe’s finest troupes last visited. At that time they were under the direction of Jiri Kylian; now Paul Lightfoot is at the helm. Mr. Lightfoot and his artistic partner Sol León contribute two of their physically flamboyant works to the program, accompanying “I new then” by Johan Inger and “Sara,” a subtle, haunting work by the alluring Israeli team of Sharon Eyal and Gai Behar. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)AdvertisementNew Chamber Ballet (Friday and Saturday) Miro Magloire presents one of his frequent, polite and pared-down programs in City Center’s fifth-floor studio. In addition to three of his works, including a new version of last year’s “Entangled,” the evening showcases the resident choreographer Constantine Baecher with the return of his 2007 “Viduity.” At 8 p.m., City Center Studios, 130 West 56th Street, Manhattan, 212-868-4444, newchamberballet.com. (Burke)★ New York City Ballet (through March 1) This is the week to see City Ballet’s more contemporary offerings, with its “New Combinations” program repeating on Sunday, Tuesday and Wednesday. The triple bill features Alexei Ratmansky’s recent “Pictures at an Exhibition,” Christopher Wheeldon’s “Mercurial Maneuvers” and a new response to Aaron Copland’s “Rodeo” by the resident choreographer Justin Peck. Other exciting prospects include the pairing of Balanchine’s “Concerto Barocco” with Jerome Robbins’s “The Goldberg Variations” on Saturday night, as well as three Balanchine masterworks — “Agon,” “Serenade” and “Symphony in C” — on Thursday. Tuesdays through Thursdays at 7:30 p.m., Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m., Sundays at 3 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Burke)New York Theater Ballet (Saturday and Sunday) With its “Once Upon a Ballet” series, this company abridges classic ballets and fairy tales into colorful productions for children under 8. Next up is a one-hour rendition of “Cinderella,” choreographed by Donald Mahler. At 11 a.m., 1 and 3:30 p.m., Florence Gould Hall, French Institute Alliance Française, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, nytb.org. (Burke)★ ‘A Reading for Edwin Denby’  (Wednesday) Danspace Project’s latest platform, “Dancers, Buildings and People in the Streets,” is named for a lecture the dance critic Edwin Denby wrote but never delivered. (He was known for his shyness.) Later unearthed by a colleague, the lecture, with its insights on moving through life and looking at art, has since been widely read and admired. The platform, six weeks of performances and other events bridging the sometimes distant realms of ballet and contemporary dance, kicks off with a reading in Mr. Denby’s honor, presented with the Poetry Project. Guests include Eileen Myles, Yoshiko Chuma and the platform’s curator Claudia La Rocco, a New York Times contributor. At 8 p.m., Parish Hall at St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 212-674-8112, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)Soaking Wet (through Sunday) Soaking Wet, the annual showcase by the choreographer David Parker, offers two distinct programs this year featuring emerging and established artists. Program A welcomes Racy Brand, Tina Croll, Jennifer Edwards, Garnet Henderson and Hanna Q Dance Company in a collection of dances depicting abstract emotions, relationships to horses and much more. Program B is mostly dominated by Catherine Tharin, a veteran of Erick Hawkins’s dance company, and includes three premieres. Program A: Friday and Saturday at 7 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m.; Program B: Friday and Saturday at 8:30 p.m., Sunday at 4 p.m., West End Theater, 263 West 86th Street, 800-838-3006, thebanggroup.com. (Schaefer)Thunderbird American Indian Dancers (through Sunday) In 1963, 10 Native American men and women founded the Thunderbird American Indian Dancers to preserve the performance traditions of their heritage. The troupe’s annual concert, celebrating its 40th anniversary this year, features songs and dances of the Iroquois, Pueblo and many other tribes. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 3 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Theater for the New City, 155 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village, 212-254-1109, theaterforthenewcity.net. (Schaefer)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page C26 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Dance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.