FEB. 5, 2015
Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera‘Carmen’ (Friday, Monday and next Friday) When Richard Eyre’s gritty new production of Bizet’s classic opera had its premiere at the Metropolitan Opera on New Year’s Eve in 2009, the stars were the glamorous, sometimes chilly Elina Garanca and the warmly passionate Roberto Alagna. These experienced artists once again take on Carmen and Don José, joined by Ailyn Pérez as Micaëla and Gábor Bretz as Escamillo. Louis Langrée conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)‘Don Giovanni’ (Saturday and Wednesday) Into the Metropolitan Opera’s dull production of Mozart’s classic, originally directed by Michael Grandage, steps a cast led by the conductor Alan Gilbert, making the short trek across Lincoln Center Plaza. The charismatic Peter Mattei sings the Don and Luca Pisaroni, just as magnetic, is Leporello. Elza van den Heever, Emma Bell and Kate Lindsey are Giovanni’s conquests, and two singers make debuts: Dmitry Korchak as Don Ottavio and Adam Plachetka as Masetto. (Through March 6.) At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)★ ‘Iolanta’ and ‘Bluebeard’s Castle’ (Saturday and Tuesday) This intriguing pairing of two one-act works — Tchaikovsky’s fairy tale “Iolanta” and Bartok’s chilling psychological thriller “Bluebeard’s Castle” — opened at the Metropolitan Opera three days after it was scheduled to premiere because of a blizzard warning. The delay may have affected the performance on opening night, which seemed tentative. Still, the director Mariusz Trelinski, working closely with an inventive video production designer, has fashioned a dark, almost surreal production that draws out the grimness in both works. The soprano Anna Netrebko brings her charismatic voice and stage presence to the role of the blind, trusting yet baffled Iolanta, the daughter of a fiercely protective king. The tenor Piotr Beczala is the ardent, noble knight whose love helps heal her. In Bartok’s great opera, with its ingenious, haunting score, the formidable bass Mikhail Petrenko is riveting as the controlling Duke Bluebeard, and the impassioned soprano Nadja Michael excels as Bluebeard’s new wife, who yearns to know his ominous secrets. Valery Gergiev conducts. Saturday at 8 p.m., Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)Advertisement★ ‘Iphigénie en Aulide’ (Tuesday, Thursday and Feb. 14) Few composers benefit from the music industry’s obsession with anniversaries, but Christoph Willibald Gluck could have done with it. Despite his vital importance to the development of opera, his tricentenary went almost unnoticed last year. The Metropolitan Opera and the Juilliard School are finally putting that right with this joint production of Gluck’s 1774 opera for Paris, based on a tragedy by Racine. Jane Glover conducts the period ensemble Juilliard415 as well as a roster of singers from the Met’s Lindemann Young Artist Development Program. David Paul directs. Tuesday and Thursday at 8 p.m., Feb. 14 at 2 p.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, Lincoln Center, 155 West 65th Street, 212-769-7406, lincolncenter.org. (David Allen)AdvertisementClassical MusicCantata Profana (Friday) The young composers, instrumentalists and singers of this enterprising ensemble present an intriguing program titled “Reimadrigals.” Along with works by Monteverdi and George Crumb (that composer’s Madrigals, Book I), the program offers modern re-imaginings of old music, including works by Gesualdo and Brahms. At 7 p.m., Edith Fabbri House, House of the Redeemer, 7 East 95th Street, 917-699-8298, cantataprofana.com. (Tommasini)Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center  (Friday and Thursday) On Friday, the Orion String Quartet will be joined by the violinist Ida Kavafian and the flutist Tara Helen O’Connor for a program of works by Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven and Boccherini. During a one-hour program on Thursday at 6:30 and 9 p.m. in the intimate Rose Studio, musicians including the violist Paul Neubauer and the pianist Orion Weiss play Strauss and Mozart. (The later performance will be streamed live.) Friday at 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center; Thursday at 6:30 and 9 p.m., Rose Studio, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)Contact! (Monday) The New York Philharmonic’s adventurous contemporary music series continues its programming at SubCulture, the inviting basement performance space on Bleecker Street. On this one, titled “New Music From Israel,” members of the Philharmonic play works by Avner Dorman, Shulamit Ran and other composers. The series is a co-presentation with the 92nd Street Y. At 7:30 p.m., 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 212-533-5470, nyphil.org. (Tommasini)Danish National Symphony Orchestra (Wednesday) Scandinavian works unsurprisingly make up this touring ensemble’s program. Nielsen’s Symphony No. 4 (“The Inextinguishable”) will receive idiomatic treatment, but the main event will be the next installment of Anne-Sophie Mutter’s Perspectives series. She plays the Sibelius concerto; Christian Macelaru conducts. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Ran Dank (Sunday) As part of the Peoples’ Symphony Concerts series, which presents first-rate artists at wallet-friendly prices, this fiery pianist offers a program that includes Boulez’s “Douze Notations,” Beethoven’s Sonata Op. 27, No. 1, three Chopin mazurkas, and Liszt’s Sonata in B minor. At 2 p.m., Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, 212-586-4680, pscny.org. (Schweitzer)Carlo Grante (Tuesday) The noted Italian pianist Carlo Grante, who has a discography of more than 50 recordings, explores the pieces by Brahms written in theme and variations, a form the composer excelled in. The program offers four major Brahms works, including the Variations on a Theme of Paganini (Op. 35) and the Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Handel (Op. 24). At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-671-4050, lincolncenter.org. (Tommasini)Thomas Hampson  (Monday) A consummate recitalist, this stylish baritone (joined by the pianist Wolfram Rieger) brings to Carnegie Hall a program of Strauss, Zemlinsky, Mahler, Ives and others, along with the premiere of Jennifer Higdon’s “Civil Words.” At 8 p.m., 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Woolfe)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Janine Jansen and Itamar Golan (Tuesday) Ms. Jansen, a captivating violinist, and Mr. Golan, an excellent pianist, team up for a recital comprising works by Prokofiev and Ravel, including the flamboyantly virtuosic “Tzigane.” At 7.30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)Advertisement★ Met Orchestra (Sunday) James Levine conducts the orchestra in a program that will feature the soprano Anna Netrebko in “Song to the Moon” from Dvorak’s “Rusalka” and Richard Strauss’s “Cäcilie.” Other works include Elliott Carter’s “Three Illusions” and a pair of second symphonies, those of Beethoven and Schumann. At 3 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)Metropolitan Museum of Art (Friday) Flesh-and-blood muses rule at this museum. Parallel to its current exhibition devoted to Cézanne’s wife and muse, Hortense, the museum offers a concert highlighting the extraordinary creative flowering that came about late in Janacek’s career thanks to his passionate relationship with a younger woman. On the program, presented by the Attacca Quartet at 7 p.m., are his seething first two string quartets as well as Arvo Pärt’s ethereal “Fratres.” Earlier in the evening, at 5 p.m., the musically omnivorous string quartet Ethel continues its series of Friday concerts at the museum’s balcony bar, with a tango-inflected program featuring the violinist Eric Silberger. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)‘Music From Japan’ (Saturday) Juilliard’s “Focus!” festival of Japanese music has concluded, but Asia Society’s series is still going strong. This program explores ties between Japan, China and Korea with a premiere from Ned Rothenberg. The musicians include Mayumi Miyata on the sho (a mouth organ), Wu Man on the pipa (a Chinese lute) and Jin Hi Kim on the komungo (a Korean zither). At 8 p.m., Asia Society and Museum, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org. (Allen)★ Musicians From Marlboro (Tuesday) This indispensable chamber music series presents a colorful program with works for four-hands piano by Kurtag and duets (with the soprano Sarah Shafer and the mezzo Rebecca Ringle) by Dvorak and Brahms. Beethoven’s taut Piano Trio in D (“Ghost”) is also on the program. At 8 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)New York Festival of Song (Tuesday) This important organization continues its NYFOS Next series, which highlights contemporary vocal music. This installment features excerpts from Paul Moravec’s operatic take on the Stephen King novel “The Shining,” as well as music by James Primosch, Christopher Theofanidis and Paola Prestini. At 7 p.m., National Opera Center, 330 Seventh Avenue, at 29th Street, Chelsea, 212-796-8620, operaamerica.org. (Schweitzer)★ New York Philharmonic (Friday, Saturday, Wednesday through next Friday) The eminent American conductor David Zinman takes the podium on Friday and Saturday for a program of Christopher Rouse’s “Iscariot” (1989); Barber’s great Violin Concerto, with the brilliant violinist Lisa Batiashvili as soloist; and Rachmaninoff’s colorful Second Symphony. (The Rachmaninoff symphony, along with Dvorak’s Piano Quintet, are paired for a special matinee program on Saturday at 2 p.m.) On Wednesday and Thursday, the conductor Stéphane Denève leads an intriguing program of Fauré’s “Pelléas et Mélisande” Suite, Tchaikovsky’s Fourth Symphony and the New York premiere of James MacMillan’s Piano Concerto No. 3, (“The Mysteries of Light”), featuring the exciting pianist Jean-Yves Thibaudet. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Wednesday and Thursday at 7:30 p.m., next Friday at 2 p.m. Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Tommasini)Orchestra of St. Luke’s (Sunday) A chamber group drawn from the ranks of this excellent ensemble plays works by Mozart, Britten, Ginastera and Gabriela Lena Frank (a premiere) as part of its series at the Brooklyn Museum. At 2 p.m., 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Woolfe)Orpheus Chamber Orchestra (Saturday) For its program at Carnegie Hall, this excellent conductorless ensemble will be joined by the violinist Anne Akiko Meyers for Mendelssohn’s Violin Concerto. The lineup also features Schubert’s Symphony No. 5, a suite from Rameau’s opera “Les Boréades,” and the premiere of “Word of Mouth,” by the Brooklyn-based composer Timo Andres. At 7 p.m., 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)Riverside Symphony  (Saturday) Groundbreaking music across the ages is the focus of this interesting program, which brings together Haydn’s sparkling Symphony No. 62 and Wagner’s “Siegfried Idyll” with Ives’s “Washington’s Birthday” and a new double concerto for two bassoons, “Full Faith and Credit.” Marc Goldberg and William Hestand are the soloists. At 8 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, riversidesymphony.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)An earlier version of the entry about the Met Orchestra’s concert at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon included outdated information about the lineup. The mezzo-soprano Elina Garanca has withdrawn from the performance, citing illness, and will be replaced by Anna Netrebko. Ms. Netrebko will sing “Song to the Moon” from Dvorak’s “Rusalka” and Richard Strauss’s “Cäcilie,” instead of the originally scheduled “Seven Early Songs” by Berg. The rest of the program remains unchanged.A version of this schedule appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page C25 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.