FEB. 5, 2015
Full reviews of recent jazz performances: nytimes.com/jazz. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Tim Berne-Matt Mitchell Duo (Saturday) Over the last five years or so, Mr. Berne, an intensely focused saxophonist and composer, has struck an excellent rapport with Mr. Mitchell, a pianist — notably on a pair of albums featuring Snakeoil, Mr. Berne’s current band. Here they strip down to a duo, for a set at Michiko Studios. At 8 p.m., 149 West 46th Street, 212-302-4011, michikostudios.com. (Nate Chinen)Jane Ira Bloom Trio (Sunday) Jane Ira Bloom, a soprano saxophonist with an exploratory ken, has a long and fruitful history with her partners in this trio, the bassist Mark Helias and the drummer Bobby Previte. They present a piece called “Singing the Triangle” as part of the 2015 Composers Now Festival at Cornelia Street Café. At 8:30 p.m., 29 Cornelia Street, Greenwich Village, 212-989-9319, corneliastreetcafe.com. (Chinen)★ Ravi Coltrane Quintet (through Sunday) A tenor and soprano saxophonist with a dry tone and a sleek but undemonstrative style, Ravi Coltrane has lately cycled through a few iterations of his band; this one might just be too good to keep together on a regular basis. Along with one of his closest musical partners, the trumpeter Ralph Alessi, it includes Aaron Parks on piano, and a rhythm team with a lot of mileage in the rearview mirror: Bob Hurst on bass and Jeff (Tain) Watts on drums. At 7:30 and 10 p.m., with an 11:45 p.m. set on Friday and Saturday, Jazz Standard, 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-576-2232, jazzstandard.net. (Chinen)AdvertisementJon Davis Trio (Monday) “Moving Right Along,” the new album by the pianist Jon Davis, sadly has nothing to do with the Muppets, who once recorded a song by that name (give or take). But it’s a document of postbop precision, as delivered by Mr. Davis and the partners who rejoin him here: the bassist Yasushi Nakamura and the drummer Shinnousuke Takahashi. At 7:30 p.m., Smalls Jazz Club, 183 West 10th Street, West Village, smallsjazzclub.com. (Chinen)AdvertisementWayne Escoffery Quartet (through Sunday) Wayne Escoffery, a tenor saxophonist with an engaging and assertive style, brings an appealingly bullish rhythm section with him to this weeklong Village Vanguard engagement: David Kikoski on piano, Ugonna Okegwo on bass and Ralph Peterson on drums. At 8:30 and 10:30 p.m., 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, West Village, 212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com. (Chinen)George Garzone and the Fringe (Friday) A Boston institution for more than 40 years, the Fringe specializes in heroically sprawling free improvisation built on scraps of structure. As it has from the beginning, this trio conjoins the tenor saxophonist George Garzone and the drummer Bob Gullotti; the bassist John Lockwood, while not a founding member, goes as far back as 1985. At 9 and 10:30 p.m., Cornelia Street Café, 29 Cornelia Street, Greenwich Village, 212-989-9319, corneliastreetcafe.com. (Chinen)Victor Goines & Friends (Friday through Sunday) Victor Goines, a multireedist of professorial bearing, leads a group featuring Joe Temperley, his fellow member of the saxophone section in the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra. Their rhythm section, though it changes throughout the engagement, will be first-rate. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-258-9595, jazz.org. (Chinen)★ ‘The Trumpet Shall Sound’ with Roy Hargrove (Friday and Saturday) Mr. Hargrove, the indomitable hard-bop trumpeter, helps celebrate the 20th anniversary of the Jazz Gallery with this two-nighter. He welcomes a younger virtuoso each night, both finalists in last fall’s Thelonious Monk International Jazz Trumpet Competition: Adam O’Farrill on Friday, Marquis Hill on Saturday. The elite rhythm section will feature the pianist Orrin Evans, the bassist Ben Williams, and on drums, either Justin Brown (Friday) or Marcus Gilmore (Saturday). At 8 and 10 p.m., the Jazz Gallery, 1160 Broadway, fifth floor, at West 27th Street, 646-494-3625, jazzgallery.org. (Chinen)Allan Harris: ‘Black Bar Jukebox’ (Monday) Allan Harris is a jazz-cabaret singer of smooth but earthy projection, and on his new album, “Black Bar Jukebox,” he applies it to a hearty celebration of songbook populism. As on the recording, he works with expert accompaniment that includes the pianist Pascal Le Boeuf, the guitarist Yotam Silberstein and the bassist Leon Boykins. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-258-9595, jazz.org. (Chinen)John Hébert’s Bridge and Tunnel (Saturday) Mr. Hébert is a bassist with a deeply centered sound, and the trusted anchor to an impressive array of artists. Bridge and Tunnel (don’t read too much into the title) finds him working with several assertive peers: the tenor saxophonist Dayna Stephens, the guitarist Peter Bernstein and the drummer Eric McPherson. At 9 and 10:30 p.m., Cornelia Street Café, 29 Cornelia Street, Greenwich Village, 212-989-9319, corneliastreetcafe.com. (Chinen)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Eddie Henderson Quintet (Friday through Sunday) The well-traveled trumpeter Eddie Henderson has a compelling new album, “Collective Portrait,” that builds on his accomplishments in the frontier era of jazz-funk. Celebrating the album’s release this weekend, he reunited its distinguished cast of Gary Bartz on saxophones, George Cables on acoustic and Fender Rhodes pianos and Doug Weiss on bass. (Billy Drummond will be the drummer, replacing Carl Allen.) At 7, 9 and 10:30 p.m., Smoke, 2751 Broadway, at 106th Street, 212-864-6662, smokejazz.com. (Chinen)Hypercolor/Dither (Monday) Each of these bands has a new album out on Tzadik, which makes this a double release celebration. Hypercolor — a full-tilt jazz-rock band with Eyal Maoz on guitar, James Ilgenfritz on bass and Lukas Ligeti on drums — will play music from its often gripping self-titled debut. Dither, meanwhile, is a guitar quartet (as in: four guitarists, working in acoustic and electric modes) that recorded a batch of John Zorn’s early “Olympiad” game pieces. At 8 p.m., Jack, 505 ½ Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Chinen)AdvertisementJustin Kauflin (Tuesday) Mr. Kauflin, 28, is a jazz pianist who favors a clarity of touch and ideas, rarely spinning into an orbit he can’t control. (He’s also a subject of the fine recent documentary, “Keep On Keepin’ On,” about his mentorship by the trumpeter Clark Terry.) As on his new album, “Dedication,” Mr. Kauflin leads a combo with Matthew Stevens on guitar, Christopher Smith on bass and Billy Williams on drums. At 7:30 and 10 p.m., Jazz Standard, 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-576-2232, jazzstandard.net. (Chinen)André Matos 5tet/Two Miles a Day (Saturday) André Matos, a sensitive Portuguese guitarist, enlists some serious peers in his quintet: the saxophonist Tony Malaby, the pianist Jacob Sacks, the bassist Eivind Opsvik and the drummer Billy Mintz. They perform as part of the Sound It Out series, sharing the bill with Two Miles a Day, a collective featuring the same rhythm section, with Mat Maneri on viola. At 7:30 p.m., Greenwich House Music School, 46 Barrow Street, West Village, 212-242-4770, greenwichhouse.org. (Chinen)Matt Mitchell Quartet (Wednesday through Feb. 14) Matt Mitchell, a proficient and probing pianist, has had a hand in some of the better bands of recent vintage, like Tim Berne’s Snakeoil and the Dave Douglas Quintet. He holds a four-night residency next week with his own quartet, which recently recorded an album; his bandmates are the saxophonist and clarinetist Chris Speed, the bassist Chris Tordini and the drummer Dan Weiss. At 9 p.m., Seeds, 617 Vanderbilt Avenue, at St. Marks Avenue, Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, seedsbrooklyn.org. (Chinen)Clarence Penn and Penn Station (Tuesday and Wednesday) On his recent album, “Monk: The Lost Files,” the drummer Clarence Penn retrofits some Thelonious Monk tunes with new flourishes: stutter-step accents, gospel harmonies, hip-hop swagger. He’ll do the same here with his band Penn Station: the saxophonist Chad Lefkowitz-Brown, the pianist Luis Perdomo and the bassist Yasushi Nakamura. At 7:30 and 9:30 p.m., Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-258-9595, jazz.org. (Chinen)Ted Rosenthal Trio (Friday and Saturday) On “Rhapsody in Gershwin,” his most recent album, the pianist Ted Rosenthal interprets themes by an obvious musical influence, joined by the sterling team that backs him here: Martin Wind on bass and Tim Horner on drums. At 8 and 10 p.m., Jazz at Kitano, 66 Park Avenue, at 38th Street, 212-885-7119, kitano.com. (Chinen)Buster Williams and Renee Rosnes (Friday through Sunday) Mr. Williams is a bassist of granite purpose and soulful execution, and he has a longtime bond with Ms. Rosnes, an articulate pianist. They perform as a duo, in a room designed for that format. At 9 and 10:30 p.m., Mezzrow, 163 West 10th Street, near Seventh Avenue, Greenwich Village, 646-476-4346, mezzrow.com. (Chinen)★ John Zorn at the Vanguard (Tuesday through Feb. 15) The composer, alto saxophonist and ringleader John Zorn made his first Village Vanguard incursion last fall, with results encouraging enough to demand this sequel. Of course the particulars will be different: the first few nights have the guitarist Bill Frisell playing solo (Tuesday); the Gnostic Trio, with Mr. Frisell, Carol Emanuel on harp and Kenny Wollesen on vibraphone (Wednesday); and Electric Masada, whose ranks include Mr. Zorn and the guitarist Marc Ribot (Thursday). At 8:30 and 10:30 p.m., Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, West Village, 212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com. (Chinen)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page C25 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Jazz.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.