AdvertisementSupported by Prices may not reflect ticketing service charges. For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.American Songbook Series: Meshell Ndegeocello (Wednesday) Modern neo-soul would have a substantially different landscape without this singer-songwriter with a brazen alto. On this evening, Ms. Ndegeocello will perform selections from “Pour une Âme Souveraine (For a Sovereign Soul): A Dedication to Nina Simone,” her homage to that great singer and pianist. Also performing this week as part of this series: Megan Hilty (Friday), Danny Rivera and Nelson González (Saturday) and San Fermin (on Thursday). At 8:30 p.m., the Appel Room, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-721-6500, americansongbook.org. (Stacey Anderson)Best Latin Urbano With Plan B (Friday) On the heels of Calibash, the Latin music festival that recently returned to the Staples Center in Los Angeles, Madison Square Garden highlights reggaeton with this concert featuring the Puerto Rican duo Plan B, who celebrated carnal appetites in its crossover hit “Candy.” Other performers include Daddy Yankee, J Álvarez, Arcángel and others. At 8 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 212-465-6741, thegarden.com. (Anderson) Cuba to Brooklyn With Pepito Gómez  (Saturday) The World Music Institute’s World to Brooklyn series plays out like an abbreviated cultural immersion program: Each evening offers cocktails, dance lessons, music sets and D.J.s, all inspired by the region being spotlighted. This month the Cuban singer and bandleader Pepito Gómez brings his brand of timba and pop to the borough. DJ MaddMaracas and DJ Par will also spin Cuban party tunes, and Chris Rogicki will give salsa dance lessons. At 8 p.m., Roulette, 509 Atlantic Avenue, near Third Avenue, Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, 917-267-0363, roulette.org. (Anderson)★ Étiénne De Crecy  (Thursday) Rubik’s Cube fans and French electro aficionados alike are satiated by Mr. de Crecy, the D.J.-producer whose gleeful Super Discount and Commercial record series have ruled his native city, Lyon, for over a decade and who once performed inside a mammoth cube split into nine illuminated, shifting chambers. In his current, more stationary setup, the laser beams will still fly fast and furious. With All Dom Wrong and Luka Son of Wolf. At 11 p.m., Verboten, 54 North 11th Street, between Wythe and Kent Avenues, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, verbotennewyork.com. (Anderson)★ D’Angelo and the Vanguard (Thursday) In December, when the reclusive neo-soul star D’Angelo released his third album, “Black Messiah,” after a 14-year recording hiatus, it was hailed as a Christmas miracle by many a music fan. “Black Messiah” is a stunningly intricate reverie that calls for greater social conscience, exhibits vintage funk and teems with joyous orchestration. At 8 p.m., Apollo Theater, 253 West 125th Street, Harlem, 800-745-3000, apollotheater.org. (Anderson)EyeHateGod (Friday and Saturday) For devotees of torpid, detuned sludge metal, your ship has come in. These elder statesmen of the New Orleans noise-rock scene — highly visible and doubly audible since 1998 — make an appearance in New York, the latest in a steadily increasing number since their 2009 Rocks Off boat cruise. Masochistic attendees may wish to request the band’s 2012 single, the holiday heartwarmer “New Orleans Is the New Vietnam.” It performs on Friday with Mortals, Blackout and Scowl and on Saturday with Full of Hell, Cleanteeth and Clamfight. At 8 p.m., Saint Vitus, 1120 Manhattan Avenue, at Clay Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, saintvitusbar.com. (Anderson)Fleetwood Mac (Sunday) The most famous exes in ’70s rock, Stevie Nicks and Lindsey Buckingham, continue to tour with their “Rumours”-era bandmates — including the keyboardist-singer Christine McVie, whose recent reincorporation into the lineup was a watershed moment for fans. As with their mostly placid last outing, they’ll most likely rely on their arsenal of bewitching radio hits, including “Rhiannon,” “Go Your Own Way” and “Landslide.” At 8 p.m., Prudential Center, 165 Mulberry Street, Newark, 800-745-3000, prucenter.com. (Anderson)Frankie Cosmos (Friday) A former poetry student at New York University, and daughter of the actors Phoebe Cates and Kevin Kline, the young Greta Kline constructs preternaturally poised lo-fi folk-pop with thoughtful verses and echoing vocals. She leads this group, which released its debut, “Zentropy,” last spring. The art set has already sought to claim her, as evidenced by the band’s high-profile set at the Museum of Modern Art in August. With Porches, Krill and Sheer Mag. At 8 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)Hot 97 Presents: The Tip-Off With Puff Daddy and Snoop DOGG (Thursday) The rapper-producer Puff Daddy (formerly known as P. Diddy and several other fractionally different stage names) is a proven basketball enthusiast. In his mid-2000s reality show, “Making the Band,” Puff Daddy even forced his aspiring vocalists to battle it out in unnecessary basketball games. He joins Snoop Dogg, another fan of the sport, in this musical kickoff to the N.B.A. All-Star weekend. At 8 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)★ Jason Isbell and Damien Jurado  (Saturday) Last summer, at the Governors Ball music festival, Mr. Isbell tamped down his usual alt-country bravado and instead serenaded the sunny fields with elegiac ballads about terminal illness and ruptured romance. It was a rare, extended offering of his somber album “Southeastern,” released in 2013. Mr. Jurado is a snarling hard-core punk turned folk singer-songwriter with a rare delicacy and resilience. His 11th studio album, “Brothers and Sisters of the Eternal Son,” was acidly psychedelic with clear strains of religious philosophizing. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 212-465-6500, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)Bettye LaVette (Friday and Saturday) Her 2005 comeback album, “I’ve Got My Own Hell to Raise,” a collection of songs by women, was a soulful highlight of that year. A performer since the early ’60s who toured with James Brown and Otis Redding, Ms. LaVette has the steamroller magnetism to invigorate the night. “Thankful N’ Thoughtful,” released in 2012, celebrated her 50th anniversary in the business; she celebrates her 69th birthday with this Café Carlyle engagement. At 8:45 p.m., 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. (Anderson)Lil Jon (D.J. set) (Friday) More than any other single on the radio, DJ Snake and Lil Jon’s “Turn Down for What” perfectly captures the current rave generation. The song is one giant mass of hedonistic party cries, ebullient synths and a throbbing beat that rattles the bones and wipes clear the mind. Expect it to be played often, if not hourly, during this D.J. set. At 10 p.m., Stage 48, 605 West 48th Street, Clinton, 212-957-1800, stage48.com. (Anderson)Meek Mill  (Thursday) Every word from this Philadelphia rapper’s mouth seems boldfaced, underlined and italicized; the man is excitable, to say the least. He is a promising talent, as well: On “Amen,” the lead single from his debut album, “Dreams and Nightmares,” his screamed verses handily outshone those from his guest M.C., Drake. After that album’s release in 2012, he started his own record label, Dream Chasers Records, and is expected to release a new album, titled “Dreams Worth More Than Money,” this year. At 8 p.m., Best Buy Theater, 1515 Broadway, at 44th Street, 888-929-7849, bestbuytheater.com. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret (through Feb. 22) We know now that the Who’s famous cry of rock ’n’ roll defiance, “Hope I die before I get old,” hasn’t prevented countless veteran rockers from thumbing their noses at time. There’s no expiration date on raucous rock ’n’ roll fun. For proof you need only visit Café Carlyle, where, from Tuesday through Feb. 21, Buster Poindexter, left, the seedily attired, punkish lounge lizard, now 65, is returning with his band five months after his first extended engagement there. This alumnus of the New York Dolls and eternal high-school cutup with a crocodile grin is not to be missed. Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8:45 p.m., 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. Other highlights include the encore engagement, on Sunday and Feb. 22 at the Metropolitan Room, of the singer and dancer T. Oliver Reid, below right, whose revue of 1930s songs, “Drop Me Off in Harlem,” is being presented in celebration of black history month. (He continues once monthly through May 31.) Sunday at 9:30 p.m., Feb. 22 at 7:30 p.m., 34 West 22nd Street, 212-206-0440, metropolitanroom.com. Marilyn Maye, who is 86 going on 35, is presenting a string of Birdland performances emphasizing her jazz side, from Tuesday through Feb. 14 at 7 p.m., with Billy Stritch at the piano. With a voice like a blazing trumpet, she is at her peak, as is the ageless jazz pianist Barbara Carroll whose Saturday evening concerts at Birdland have been selling out. 315 West 44th Street, Clinton, 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com. (Stephen Holden)Parquet Courts (Monday and Tuesday) This ramshackle garage-punk clan from Brooklyn with geeky roots — including, for some members, past membership in the record-listening club Knights of the Round Turntable — delivers succinct hooks in a purely ’90s vein. Its newest album, “Content Nausea,” released under the somewhat pseudonymous name Parkay Quarts, speeds along with surf-rock guitar rolls and Gonzo spoken lyrics that is sure to please fans of Pavement. With Future Punx and Eaters on Monday and Laced and Digital Prisoners of War on Tuesday. At 8 p.m., Palisades, 906 Broadway, at Stockton Street, Brooklyn 877-987-6487, palisadesbk.com. (Anderson)★ Synth Nights: Eli Keszler  (Wednesday) The Kitchen is consistently brilliant in its booking of avant-garde performances, but it outdoes itself with this series, whose past curators include Laurie Anderson and Nico Muhly. In this installment, the hard-core rock-cum-experimental innovator Eli Keszler weaves performance art with his compositions in a new piece titled “Filtrations,” comprising exposed piano wires, sculptures and several musicians. At 8 p.m., the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org. (Anderson) Two Gallants (Thursday, next Friday and Feb. 14) Despite its size, this two-member rock band (think the White Stripes) from San Francisco manages to squeeze out surprisingly eclectic sounds. The duo’s fifth album, “We Are Undone,” released on Tuesday, features the churlish, oscillating vocals of its frontman, Adam Stephens, which are equally at home in the garage-rock single “Incidental” as in the folk-tinged “Katy Kruelly.” Bandmates and childhood friends, Mr. Stephens (guitar) and Tyson Vogel (drums) play three area locations next week. Thursday at 8 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 877-987-6487, babysallright.com; next Friday at 10:30 p.m., Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street, at Ludlow Street, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, mercuryloungenyc.com; Feb. 14 at 9 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, at Kent Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. (Jonathan Wolfe)Advertisement