By NEIL GENZLINGERFEB. 5, 2015
Every generation, it seems, has its animated space adventure series, and today’s pint-size set gets an enjoyable one beginning Friday morning when “Miles From Tomorrowland” has its debut on Disney Junior.The Callisto family lives on a spaceship and works for the Tomorrowland Transit Authority, which has a never-ending collection of maintenance problems that need fixing — an ice-cream shuttle that is tumbling out of control, a rover that has become icebound while exploring a frozen planet, and so on.This family is a foursome plus pet, but if “The Jetsons” was some kind of inspiration for it, everyone has received an upgrade. The show is named for the son, Miles (the voice of Cullen McCarthy), a boy with a somewhat reckless inventive streak, but his sister, Loretta (Fiona Bishop), is equally important. She’s also the brainier of the two children, but she likes to read the directions and follow the rules, which can be counterproductive during a deep-space crisis.As for the parents, Phoebe (Olivia Munn of “The Newsroom”) is the ship’s captain, while Leo (Tom Kenny) handles the engineering and such. And then there’s Merc, a “pet robo-ostrich,” as the show’s publicity material says. Merc comes in handy in all sorts of ways, so much so that you shouldn’t be surprised if ostriches begin being standard cargo on real-life spaceflights.Yes, it’s a bit creepy to think of two children being raised in the claustrophobic confines of a four-person spaceship, home schooling taken to an extreme. But the show is fast-moving enough to keep young viewers interested — two adventures are crammed into each half-hour — and it’s not shy about putting Miles and Loretta in gently life-threatening predicaments. Parents, meanwhile, might get a kick out of guessing who is providing the voices of some recurring characters. The cast list includes Mark Hamill, Bill Nye and George Takei.Miles From TomorrowlandDisney Junior, Friday mornings at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time. Created by Sascha Paladino; Mr. Paladino, executive producer; Paul Demeyer, supervising director; Nicole Dubuc and Greg Johnson, story editors; Lisa Schaffer, casting and voice director.WITH Cullen McCarthy (voice of Miles Callisto), Olivia Munn (Phoebe Callisto), Tom Kenny (Leo Callisto), Fiona Bishop (Loretta Callisto), Dee Bradley Baker (Merc), Adrian Grenier (Captain Joe), Mark Hamill (Gadfly Garnet), Bill Nye (Professor Rubicon), Brenda Song (Aunt Frida), George Takei (Spectryx), Alton Brown (Lysander Floovox) and Wil Wheaton (Commander S’leet). A version of this review appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page C17 of the New York edition with the headline: A Family on a Mission, Zipping Through Space.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.