AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Nate ChinenThere’s a set of qualities in Ravi Coltrane’s sound on tenor saxophone — dark, dry and cool — that extends to the character of his bands. That’s bands, plural, despite his decade-long run with one quartet in particular, which ended a few years ago. Mr. Coltrane has experimented with other lineups since, bringing in new partners who can acclimate quickly to the limber, even-tempered shadow dance of his style.One of those newer collaborators, the silvery but subtle pianist Aaron Parks, is on board with Mr. Coltrane at Jazz Standard this week. The engagement otherwise features acquaintances of longer standing, including two — the trumpeter Ralph Alessi and the drummer Jeff (Tain) Watts — who played on Mr. Coltrane’s 1998 debut album, “Moving Pictures.” Anchoring the quintet is the bassist Robert Hurst, who has a fair amount of collaborative history with Mr. Coltrane, and a great deal of it with Mr. Watts.During his sold-out first set on Wednesday night, Mr. Coltrane made it implicitly clear that this was neither a referendum on old allegiances nor a workshop for new material. He played just two of his own compositions; one was “Word Order,” a drifting meditation in an elliptical meter, first heard on his second album. It hit peak output during a solo by Mr. Coltrane, when his watchful, phrase-building approach briefly flared into incantation, and Mr. Watts quickly ratcheted up a polyrhythmic clamor.A hallmark of Mr. Coltrane’s leadership over the last decade or so has been the loose-jointed flow of his rhythm sections, but the foundation laid by Mr. Watts and Mr. Hurst — former bandmates, notably with the saxophonist Branford Marsalis — is, by nature, a more earthbound and forward-driving proposition. As if to acknowledge that reality, the set opened with “Detroit Red,” a vintage piece of Mr. Hurst’s, anchored by a stubbornly terse bass vamp that periodically uncoils into a deep, rattling swing. It was a good showcase for Mr. Watts and his bulldozer finesse, but the only other improviser who found a strong angle was Mr. Alessi, who began with a row of oblique intervals and gradually dug deeper into the groove. The longtime front-line rapport between Mr. Alessi and Mr. Coltrane was another power alignment in the band, but by definition a slippery one, the stuff of quick synchronicities and passing frictions. It figured prominently in Mr. Coltrane’s “Ballade,” a rubato theme that delivered the only real dose of abstraction in the set. At the other end of the spectrum was Mr. Watts’s hard-nosed arrangement of Thelonious Monk’s “Brilliant Corners,” which punched up the tune’s built-in convolutions. There was a throwback hip-hop beat during one part of the theme, and several abrupt shifts of tempo in a swinging mode. Mr. Alessi was jabbing and precise in his negotiations with the form, while Mr. Parks was stylish and shrewd. As for Mr. Coltrane, he was true to himself: moving briskly through his phrases, keeping his wits about him, unregulated but at no point out of control. The Ravi Coltrane Quintet appears through Sunday at Jazz Standard, 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan; 212-576-2232, jazzstandard.net. Advertisement