By ALESSANDRA STANLEYFEB. 5, 2015
Nobody wanted it to end, so the creators of “Breaking Bad” came up with a new beginning.“Better Call Saul,” which has a two-part premiere on AMC on Sunday and Monday nights, revolves around Saul Goodman (Bob Odenkirk), the shady lawyer of Walter White, the hero of “Breaking Bad,” and is set roughly six years before the two men meet.It’s common to dread a spinoff; some succeed, but plenty disappoint. There is absolutely no need to worry about this prequel to the “Breaking Bad” canon. “Better Call Saul” traces in loving, if corrosive, detail how Jimmy McGill, a debt-ridden, ambulance-chasing loser, changed his name to Saul Goodman and became a drug-lord consigliere.“Better Call Saul” is better than good: It’s delightful — in a brutal, darkly comic way, of course.Saul wasn’t a full co-conspirator, but he was critical to the criminal enterprise of “Breaking Bad,” a reasonably loyal and astoundingly glib legal adviser with louche connections, a disarming Midwestern accent and hilariously shameless local television ads with the punchy tagline “Better call Saul.” Those spots were so exquisite that AMC posted longer versions on its website.AdvertisementSaul was always a welcome walk-on, a secondary character who added a funny, piquant strain to the mix, a little like the snooty neighbor Phyllis on “The Mary Tyler Moore Show,” who wasn’t as important a sidekick as Rhoda, but like Rhoda had enough comic appeal in the mid-1970s to justify her own spinoff (“Phyllis,” 1975-77).There is plenty of material to work with on “Better Call Saul,” thanks to Mr. Odenkirk’s elasticity as an actor and also the inexhaustible ingenuity of Vince Gilligan, the creator of “Breaking Bad,” and Peter Gould, one of that show’s lead writers and producers. They have teamed up again to fill in Saul’s back story.AdvertisementEarly on in “Breaking Bad,” Saul told Walt that he had taken on a Jewish name for his legal practice, figuring that his clientele would prefer to be represented by what he called, a “member of the tribe.”It’s more complicated than that.“Better Call Saul” opens with an arresting black-and-white prologue, a glimpse of Saul after Walt’s death. In the turmoil at the end of “Breaking Bad,” Saul fled, disappearing into obscurity somewhere else under a new identity, a D.I.Y. witness self-protection program. That first sequence of the new show is shot in glossy 1930s style, and the music is wickedly apt: The Ink Spots singing “Address Unknown.” On the penultimate episode of “Breaking Bad,” he said, “If I’m lucky, a month from now, best-case scenario, I’m managing a Cinnabon in Omaha.” And that’s indeed where he is, not on the Riviera or in a glamorous Caribbean tax haven. In his shabby, bereft solitude, Saul drinks alone and watches an old VCR tape from his previous life: a collection of grandiose “Better call Saul” ads. That dip into nostalgia introduces color to the series — and sweeps the action back to Saul’s more colorful past.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And close up, that’s not a pretty sight, either. Six years earlier, he was using his real name, Jimmy, and scuttling around the Albuquerque courthouse trying to drum up clients and forced to take low-paying public defender cases to pay his bills. Jimmy has cunning and bravado, but he doesn’t really have a law practice.Showing the first two episodes on consecutive nights is helpful. Like “Breaking Bad” in its earliest episodes, “Better Call Saul” takes its time, teasing the viewer with enigmatic shots and oblique conversations. There is an odd tilt to characters and situations — much like the show’s cinematography. And the camera retains the restless, quirky spirit of “Breaking Bad”; there is one shot of Jimmy placing his keys, phone and wristwatch in a mailbox that is filmed from inside the mailbox; the point of view is that of a letter. Like spacecraft that shed their booster rockets to rise in a sudden swoosh of power, “Better Call Saul” really gets going in the second episode, especially in a scene in which Jimmy uses his verbal skills — a dizzying blend of humility, guile and volubility — to avert disaster.Best of all, this is a series that can stand on its own. Fans of Walter White have a leg up on the outcome, but there is so much to this offshoot that viewers who have never seen “Breaking Bad” won’t feel left out.Great as it was, “Breaking Bad” couldn’t be duplicated and certainly didn’t need a sequel. “Better Call Saul” is the next best thing — a prelude that needs no introduction.A version of this review appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Meth King’s Lawyer: The Early Years.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.