By MARTHA SCHWENDENERFEB. 5, 2015
On the one hand, Janice Guy’s photographs from the late 1970s, on view at Cleopatra’s, are similar to what other artists, particularly women, were doing at the time. Like Francesca Woodman, Ana Mendieta, Adrian Piper, Hannah Wilke, Urs Lüthi or Cindy Sherman, Ms. Guy turned the camera on herself. And like many of these artists, she photographed herself nude, assuming the position of both author and subject of the work.The nude body in these hand-tinted vintage prints is not the sexually available one that incited feminists, however. Instead, Ms. Guy photographed herself in mirrors and windows, wearing a sensible wristwatch and treating the body as a medium for meditating on photography, vision and subjecthood — although there are playful touches like the pink tint of a nipple or a lip. (The photographs are also reminiscent of Lotte Jacobi and a handful of artists working in early-20th-century Germany.)On the other hand, where Ms. Guy’s works are surprising is that she made them in Düsseldorf, where she had studied at the art academy with Klaus Rinke. Her work is very different from the so-called Düsseldorf School, students of Bernd and Hilla Becher, who produced large, slick color photographs that employed early digital techniques. (However, Ms. Guy was friendly with one of these artists, Thomas Struth, who kept her ’70s work in storage over the years.)And yet, most people in the art world know Ms. Guy as a co-owner of Murray Guy, one of the best galleries in New York for photography, film and video. In Ms. Guy’s works at this Cleopatra’s show, you can see the nascent sensibility of Murray Guy artists, from An-My Lê and Moyra Davey to Matthew Buckingham, Barbara Probst, Rosalind Nashashibi and Lucy Skaer. It’s a profound reminder that there are more ways to affect the trajectory of art than merely making it.Cleopatra’s 110 Meserole Avenue, Greenpoint, BrooklynThrough Feb. 23 A version of this review appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page C31 of the New York edition with the headline: Janice Guy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.