By ROBERTA SMITHFEB. 5, 2015
Originality takes a holiday in Devin Troy Strother’s latest solo gallery show in New York. Apparently after an impressive debut at the Monya Rowe Gallery in 2011 and an even better sophomore follow-up at Marlborough Broome Street in 2013, this young, talented artist just wants to have fun. He does, but he also stoops to entertain, mostly abandoning his quirky little tableaus and painted cutout figures for a more generic approach to appropriation and art-about-art-about-black-popular-culture.Basketball is the running joke here, right down to a colorful swath of painted court floor. The show takes its title and some of its zaniness from the 1996 movie “Space Jam,” an adolescent cult classic in which Michael Jordan joins the Looney Toons characters to fend off alien intruders by beating them at basketball.Little cutouts of a black basketball player wearing Mr. Jordan’s No. 23 jersey skid through colorful slurs of paint and relentless art references in paintings like “I Got 4 Michael Jordan’s and a Lynda Benglis All Over My Brand New Holograms.” Artists from Jackson Pollock to Cory Arcangel are vaguely mimicked and acknowledged with titles that are barely one-liners: “I Got a Barnett Newman All Over My Holograms.” He borrows liberally from Ellen Gallagher, David Hammons and Jeff Koons without mentioning them. Shiny black monoliths à la Tony Smith stand in for looming black athletes. Bo-ring. In contrast, a series of foam cups, carved with graffiti and cast in bronze, introduce additional Strother skills, while known ones are evoked in larger-than-life painted-wood cutouts of ball players. But generally Mr. Strother needs to get off the bench and live up to the standards he has already set for himself.Marlborough Chelsea 545 West 25th Street, Chelsea Through Feb. 14 A version of this review appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page C31 of the New York edition with the headline: Devin Troy Strother.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.