By MATT WOLFSEPT. 30, 2015
LONDON — There aren’t many actors besides Simon Russell Beale who scoop up roles with such avidity and to such splendid effect. It has been scarcely two months since this indefatigable performer finished his summer run at the Donmar Warehouse in “Temple” and here he is again, this time in “Mr. Foote’s Other Leg” at the Hampstead Theater through Oct. 17, eliciting hearty chuckles alongside the occasional tear. Does the man ever rest?Apparently not, his ready embrace of new plays sitting comfortably alongside a talent marinated in the classics: He remains the seminal Hamlet of my experience.For now, the pleasure comes from witnessing the unbridled brio that Mr. Russell Beale brings to the actor-playwright Ian Kelly’s portrait of the 18th-century comic actor and wit Samuel Foote, who had the  misfortune to lose a leg in a riding accident. (It should be noted for those of a squeamish disposition that Richard Eyre’s affectionate production simulates Foote’s amputation onstage.) Fashioning the play from his own 2012 book of the same title, Mr. Kelly has concocted a crazy quilt of a play that comes blessed with a leading man who can power through the excesses, shifting from roisterousness to rumination on a dime. However overstuffed the first act in particular may be, the play is worth it not least to hear its star utter the single word “woof.”A companion piece of sorts to Alan Bennett’s 1991 play “The Madness of George III,” “Mr. Foote’s Other Leg” grants the Hanoverian king a vivid supporting role that is played with stuttering conviction by Mr. Kelly himself. But the prevailing topic is less royalty or even illness than a full-on celebration of the theater as a place of freedom and fun that allows a  haven for the cross-dressing (and gay) Foote, even as he confronts the specter of insanity himself.AdvertisementIt’s true that Mr. Russell Beale came comparably bedecked to the feminine nines in the 2012 West End revival of Peter Nichols’s “Privates on Parade,” but I won’t soon forget one of the more extravagant sartorial creations of the designer Tim Hatley this time around. If you wanted to know what Little Bo Peep might look like were she to be summoned to Versailles, have a gander at Mr. Russell Beale en travesti and laugh — until the actor goes on to shed all pretense and makes you cry.The re-emergence on the London stage of the venerable Steven Berkoff constitutes the principal attraction of the premiere at the Menier Chocolate Factory of “Dinner With Saddam” — well, that and the playwright Anthony Horowitz’s provocative title, Saddam Hussein being one personage whom (unlike, say, Adolf Hitler) one doesn’t often encounter onstage. What’s more, the Iraqi dictator is played by, of all people, Mr. Berkoff, the English playwright, actor, and director who recently turned 78.AdvertisementIndeed, one can’t help but wonder what the renegade dramatist that was Mr. Berkoff in his prime (his plays include the career-defining “Decadence” and “East”) might have wrought from material that instead seems to want to be a Middle Eastern variant on the sort of British throwback previously represented at the Menier by the Ray Cooney farce “Two Into One” about 18 months ago.Set in Baghdad in March 2003 on the eve of the  American invasion, the play couples references to “the devil Bush” with copious gags, including ill-fitting trousers and a corpse lying inconveniently on the kitchen floor.The young actor Ilan Goodman (late of “Bad Jews”) is in terrific form, juggling dual assignments as a lovesick actor and  a doomed apparatchik of Saddam.The acting elsewhere in Lindsay Posner’s production tends to favor a go-for-broke broadness, the exception being Mr. Berkoff, who casts a forbidding chill from the moment he makes his belated entrance sporting eyebrows as pronounced as the McDonald’s arches. If the actor looks more like the infamous British newspaper mogul Robert Maxwell than a dictator dropping in on an ordinary family for dinner (and refuge), his authority at least acts as a counterbalance to multiple jokes on the topic of excrement and flatulence. Toilet humor, on this evidence, knows no borders.The limits pushed are sexual, not lavatorial, in “Tipping the Velvet,” the stage adaptation at West London’s Lyric Hammersmith of the Sarah Waters novel that spawned an acclaimed TV adaptation for the BBC in 2002. (The production transfers to the Royal Lyceum Theater in Edinburgh after this run.)Telling of the awakening into lesbian self-awareness of an oyster-seller’s daughter, Nancy (Sally Messham, making her professional stage debut), the story charts an erotic and social picaresque through both the high life and the low of Victorian-era London. The title itself refers to a sex act that gets explained on cue in the second act.AdvertisementDeterminedly saucy to a degree that one imagines Mr. Foote might well have admired, the playwright Laura Wade’s transposition of the book to the stage is also something of a slog. The narrative is prodded along in fits and starts by a so-called Chairman (a game David Cardy), who is forever banging a gavel to signal the next scene change. Near the end of the three-hour evening, the newly empowered Nancy sends this self-appointed  M.C. packing in order to claim ownership of her own story, and about time, too. I doubt I was alone in wondering why the second act begins with a recap of events — “Nicholas Nickleby” this isn’t, though the material’s affinities with the Daniel Defoe novel “Moll Flanders” have been remarked upon elsewhere.The director, Lyndsey Turner,  collaborated with Ms. Wade on the viscera-churning 2010 play “Posh,” an unbridled portrait of privileged young men behaving badly that exists at intriguing odds with the journey toward Sapphic discovery on view here. (Ms. Turner’s credits since then include the current Barbican Theater “Hamlet” with Benedict Cumberbatch.) Some of the adrenaline of the women’s earlier partnering wouldn’t go amiss here, nor would a degree of star wattage to firmly imprint upon audiences Nancy’s much-vaunted charisma that otherwise, I’m afraid, one has to take on faith.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As happens also to be true of Ms. Turner’s “Hamlet,” the visuals of “Tipping the Velvet” are ravishing even when the story-telling flags — the designer Lizzie Clachan whizzing us scenically from the floral splendor of the music hall to gritty East London, where Nancy finds both personal and political salvation in the company of the solidarity-minded Florence (the excellent Adelle Leonce). We get period-defying pop music as well as a synoptic history near the start of productions that have played this very stage. Could it be that “Tipping the Velvet” was more fun to put together than it is to watch?Mr. Foote’s Other Leg.  Directed by Richard Eyre. Hampstead Theater. Through Oct. 17.Dinner With Saddam.  Directed by Lindsay Posner. Menier Chocolate Factory. Through Nov. 14.Tipping the Velvet.  Directed by Lyndsey Turner. Lyric Hammersmith. Through Oct. 24.A version of this review appears in print on October 1, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.