AdvertisementSupported byArt in ReviewBy Martha SchwendenerIn the 1990s and 2000s, when celluloid film was being eclipsed by digital technology, there was an efflorescence of 16-millimeter film installations, with loud projectors and richly colored images, and a revival of interest in deceased pioneers like Paul Sharits and Hollis Frampton. One thing curiously absent — at least in galleries — was work by living artists revealing how they had (or hadn’t) made the switch from film to video.This show addresses that with three slow, beautiful installations of moving images by James Benning and Peter Hutton. Mr. Benning’s “Tulare Road” (2010) was shot digitally but includes repeating segments, the kind of structural elements determined in the past by looping film stock, but added here in post-production.Both an extension of, and a follow-up to, works like “The United States of America” (1975), made with Bette Gordon, in which the filmmakers shot through the windshield of a moving car, “Tulare Road” captures a quiet stretch of California highway shot under different conditions: fog, overcast, clear.Mr. Hutton’s three-channel installations were shot on 16-millimeter film and transferred to video. Deep-hued and expertly composed, the films are also subtle commentaries on labor and globalization.On Eldridge Street, shipping is the common theme. “At Sea” (2004-07) has footage of a ship being constructed in Korea; images taken from a ship at sea; and film of workers demolishing freighters in Bangladesh, which switches at one point to black and white.On Orchard Street, Mr. Hutton’s “Three Landscapes” (2013) depicts different forms of industry: salt miners in arid Ethiopia, farmers in the verdant Hudson Valley and repairmen in a familiarly bleak Detroit.Mr. Benning’s work is formally lean and austerely poetic; Mr. Hutton’s more humanistic, poignant and political. All three exhibit a mastery of the moving picture that is arresting, instructive and impressive.Miguel Abreu 88 Eldridge Street, near Grand Street, and 36 Orchard Street, near Hester Street, Lower East Side Through March 8Advertisement