By KEN JOHNSONFEB. 5, 2015
The British artist and two-time Turner Prize nominee Mike Nelson has filled the spacious 303 Gallery with a lively crowd of lyrical sculptural assemblages made of flotsam and jetsam collected from the coastal waters of British Columbia. (The exhibition’s title, “Gang of Seven,” refers to a collective of early-20th-century Canadian landscape painters known as the Group of Seven.) They’re made of bottles, driftwood, chunks of plastic foam, lengths of frayed rope, bald tires, pieces of rusted iron, animal skulls and many other sorts of detritus.In several instances Mr. Nelson put together figurative, totemlike constructions with heads made from gallon-size plastic bottles attached to various sorts of poles. Some pieces consist of weathered, partly charred lengths of wood screwed together to resemble bonfire remains with pieces of orange plastic added to represent low-burning flames.You might think Mr. Nelson was making an environmental statement about pollution of the world’s oceans, but the show is more romantic than political. It’s as if these works had been made by a shipwrecked sailor — like Robinson Crusoe or Tom Hanks in “Cast Away” — to allay loneliness and provide spiritual hope and courage.Mr. Nelson’s sculptures hark back to a modernist tradition of assemblage, from that of Picasso to those by contemporaries like Rachel Harrison and Isa Genzken. But while the signifiers in Mr. Nelson’s works have much to do with industrial and commercial culture, they also have another, metaphorical implication. The idea of the ocean engulfing, transforming and disgorging maritime refuse is analogous to how the artist’s unconscious creative mind processes ordinary experience into the stuff of visual poetry.303 Gallery 507 West 24th Street, Chelsea Through Feb. 21 A version of this review appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page C31 of the New York edition with the headline: Mike Nelson.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.