AdvertisementSupported byAntiquesBy Eve M. KahnDeborah J. Neff, a toy collector in suburban Connecticut, has acquired hundreds of antique cloth dolls depicting African-Americans. They were handmade from the 1850s to the 1930s, but little information has survived about their seamstresses and original owners. About 125 of Ms. Neff’s dolls, as well as vintage photos of white and black children holding the playthings, go on view Saturday at Mingei International Museum in San Diego.Many are dressed as prosperous adults, in outfits with lace trim and brass buttons. Embroidered and painted heads are reinforced with coconut shells and recycled parts from white dolls.Frank Maresca, a co-owner of the Ricco/Maresca gallery in Manhattan and editor of the Mingei show’s catalog (from Radius Books/Distributed Art Publishers), said that the Neff dolls “were made with dignity and love.”Ms. Neff wrote in an email that the collection came from about a hundred sources, including “flea markets, high-end antique shows and everywhere in between.” A few makers are identifiable. “One of my coconut dolls has an inked inscription on her torso from a St. Louis mother to her son dated Christmas 1879,” she wrote.Christine Knoke, the Mingei museum’s chief curator, said the display would have clusters of dolls with similar components, such as coconut heads. “They’re going to be in harmonious groups,” she said.Ms. Neff wrote that she hoped to keep the dolls together “permanently in a public collection.”“At this point, though, I am too attached to them to think about letting them go,” she added. “Even shipping them off temporarily to the Mingei has left me feeling like an empty nester.”Her suppliers of dolls and photos of children with dolls over the years have included two specialty dealers, Kathy Schoemer, in Walpole, N.H., and Pat Hatch, in Harvard, Mass. Ms. Hatch exhibited her collection in 2007 and 2008 in a traveling show, “No Longer Hidden.” She has researched abolitionists who made black dolls to sell at fund-raisers for Union troops, and black caregivers who sewed them for white children.In the children’s eyes, Ms. Hatch said, black slaves and servants “were the mother figures, the one that was there soothing them and fixing their wounds.”PRIZE OR PLUNDER?New books and exhibitions and forthcoming auctions are revealing the obsessiveness, and sometimes outright misbehavior, of Asian art collectors. “The China Collectors: America’s Century-Long Hunt for Asian Art Treasures” (due next month from Palgrave Macmillan), by the journalists Karl E. Meyer and Shareen Blair Brysac, draws on archives that include reminiscences about looting. One American museum executive in China described feeling “black despair” out of guilt for hammering away carvings and peeling murals to take home to the United States. Still, he wrote to a patron in 1916, “We must have some frescoes in this country for study.”The book describes a range of items, from teacups to columns, that foreign diplomats, merchants, soldiers, archaeologists and explorers funneled to private collections and museums. Excerpts from memoirs and letters mention Asian rulers and religious leaders who were bribed or forced to sell, expeditions mired in mud and illness, stonecutters told what to lop off for export, and forgers who produced pieces meant to look like fragments of sculptures broken off walls. Foreign connoisseurs cast aspersions on the authenticity of one another’s finds. A few objects they took, including marble columns and bronze animal heads from the Old Summer Palace in Beijing, have been restituted in recent years.Ms. Brysac and Mr. Meyer, who once worked for The New York Times, said in an interview that they had only scratched the surfaces of the lives of these neurotics and scoundrels. “There are these enticing threads” worthy of their own books, said Ms. Brysac, who has also written for The Times.Objects that passed through the hands of colorful acquisitors like J. P. Morgan, Arthur Sackler and the Frick family are on view through March 8 in “China Then and Now,” an exhibition at the Nassau County Museum of Art in Roslyn Harbor, N.Y. More will appear in five shows opening in the next few weeks at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, which is celebrating the centennial of its Asian art collections. On Friday, a conference at New York University will focus on the 19th-century tastemaker Lockwood de Forest, who stocked American museums with Indian and Himalayan objects, including architectural salvage. (He is also the subject of an exhibition through March 13 at the Debra Force gallery in Manhattan.)Next month, Christie’s in New York is devoting a half-dozen sales to the estate of Robert H. Ellsworth, who is described in the Brysac and Meyer book as “reputedly the richest dealer in Asian art.” Mr. Ellsworth, who died in August at 85, filled a 22-room apartment on Fifth Avenue with murals, screens, deities, textiles, jade and reference books. Even his utilitarian furnishings are luxurious. “Every single lamp is 18th century or earlier,” Athena Zonars, a Christie’s international director, said during a tour of the half-cleared apartment.University Press of Florida is publishing a series of essay collections exploring how Asian acquisitions have been amassed. Last year it released “Collectors, Collections and Collecting the Arts of China: Histories and Challenges,” and volumes on Korea, Japan and India are in progress. Jason Steuber, a curator of Asian art at the Harn Museum of Art in Gainesville, Fla., who has been editing the series, said that tales of objects spirited out of strife-torn countries can attract visitors not normally interested in the material.New databases like the Smithsonian’s World War II provenance projects and CARP (Chinese Art-Research Into Provenance) can help museums update their wall texts. Scrutinizing the origins of collections, Mr. Steuber said, “can get your hands muddied a little, but it’s healthy for the field.”More niche publications are in the works. Ron Fuchs II, curator of the Reeves ceramics collection at Washington and Lee University in Lexington, Va., is researching 1920s fakes of 18th-century Chinese porcelain painted with patriotic American patterns like eagles and flags. Daisy Yiyou Wang, a curator of Asian art at the Peabody Essex Museum in Salem, Mass., is completing a book about the philanthropist Charles Lang Freer, who built a pink granite gallery for his Asian art in Washington.Ms. Wang has found a 1910 letter that Freer wrote to a friend, describing his growing esteem for the Chinese as their artifacts were leaving for the West: “Someday they will again be what they were centuries ago — world-leaders in many ways.”Advertisement