LONDON – Certain plays allow you to crawl inside them in the way that good books do. You come to inhabit such productions so completely that when they end you experience that glazed resentment that arrives when you have to put down a novel that’s consumed you for the length of a plane or train ride.I was lucky enough to encounter two works of that rare stripe only a day apart this week: Tena Stivicic’s “Three Winters” — a time-traveling portrait of a contentious Croatian family, which just ended its run at the National Theater — and a sulfurous revival of “The Changeling,” Thomas Middleton and William Rowley’s 17th-century revenge tragedy, at the Sam Wanamaker Playhouse of Shakespeare’s Globe.Both plays left me happily replete, though neither could be said to be cheerful or even pleasant. “The Changeling” has always been notorious for its grisly depictions of civilized savagery, and “Three Winters” considers the moral price exacted for survival through decades of divisive political foment. They are hefty in length as well, each approaching three hours.Impressions of the theater scene from the critics of The Times.Yet I found myself feeling a bit deprived when they were over. That’s not just because each is, on some level, an engrossing soap opera (as, I might add, are the works of Shakespeare and Sophocles). They have also been given productions that create complete, internally logical universes, shaped by rhythms as hypnotic as those of authoritative prose on a page.In some ways, these works are very different, of course. “Three Winters,” which follows the zigzag fortunes of a single household in Zagreb from 1945 to the present, has the layered, quotidian naturalism of fat family sagas like Thomas Mann’s “Buddenbrooks” or Elizabeth Jane Howard’s Cazalet chronicles.“The Changeling” is a bloody slice of Jacobean noir, suggesting James M. Cain in the age of James I. Both plays, however, are also expressly theatrical endeavors that could have been realized as successfully as they have been only in their respective theaters here. It’s hard to imagine “Three Winters” being presented as richly or as fluidly as it has been at the National Theater, which has the resources to give great epic when the occasion requires. (In New York, only Lincoln Center Theater, which did proud by Tom Stoppard’s marathon “The Coast of Utopia” after the National production, comes close to being an equivalent.) Directed by Howard Davies, who has proved himself a dab hand at large theatrical canvases at the National (Gorky’s “Philistines,” O’Neill’s “Mourning Becomes Electra”), “Three Winters” juggles scenes from three different eras. We begin in the chaotic aftermath of World War II, when Rose King (Jo Herbert), a valued member of the Communist party, moves her small family into the stately home in Zagreb where her mother, Monika (Josie Walker), once worked as a servant.    The action shifts backward and forward between that time and 1990, when Yugoslavia is on the brink of civil war, and 2011, when a capitalism-driven Croatia is taking shape. In these sequences, Rose’s daughter, first seen as an unusually sedate infant, is now the put-upon family matriarch, played with resentfully self-effacing weariness by Siobhan Finneran (best known as O’Brien, the scheming lady’s maid on “Downton Abbey”).No matter the decade, the Kings are an argumentative clan. And both their personal relationships and political positions are shaped by the vicissitudes of a country that keeps redefining itself, with an ever-shifting class structure to match. Big questions, economic and ethical, are posed during family debates, including notions of entitlement regarding the old homestead, the ownership of which is repeatedly under siege. People make marriages for reasons both sentimental and practical. Love affairs founder on the shoals of social conflict. And older people keep insisting – as older people will – that life was so much more centered and secure in earlier days, though the evidence hardly supports such assertions.A large cast of characters, including a number who are embodied at different ages by different actors, inhabits “Three Winters.” And though much of it takes place in the same room, the look of that room keeps changing, no easy task when a play jumps among eras as this one does.Yet thanks to specifically defined performances – and a miraculous sliding set by Tim Hatley (with connective video projections by Jon Driscoll) – you never feel lost as you float through the different winters of the title. By the end, you have the illusion that you know the Kings as well as if they were your own relatives. And by a perfectly painless osmosis, you have also acquired a solid grasp of the complicated history of the mutable nation known today as Croatia.Though it sticks to one, relatively brief time period, “The Changeling” is as complicated as “Three Winters” in its permutations of plot. First staged in the 1620s, this bloody tale of love and death among Spanish aristocrats has so many levels of deception that even those doing the deceiving can’t keep them straight.Chief among the connivers is the ravishing noblewoman Beatrice-Joanna (even her name is double), played with thrillingly seductive willfulness by Hattie Morahan (a brilliant Nora in the Young Vic production of Ibsen’s “A Doll’s House,” seen last year at the Brooklyn Academy of Music). Finding herself betrothed to a man she doesn’t love, she enlists a household servant she loathes, the hideous-looking Deflores (Trystan Gravelle), to kill her fiancé.This collusion leads to all sorts of sordid inconveniences, including the loss of her virginity (to Deflores), before her wedding night to the man she really loves, or thinks she does. Love and revulsion have a way of changing places in “The Changeling,” which features a nasty subplot set in a lunatic asylum, run by a pompous old fool (Phil Whitchurch), who keeps his lust-inspiring young wife (Sarah MacRae) in a state of captivity there.Did I mention the severed finger that figures in the plot? Or the potion that proves a woman’s maidenhood, or lack thereof? Or Beatrice-Joanna’s passing off her maid (Thalissa Teixiera) for herself on her wedding night? Ah, the things a lady has to do to get her way while keeping her reputation in chivalric Spain.Such sinister doings are best carried out under cover of darkness. That makes “The Changeling” ideal for the Sam Wanamaker Playhouse – the Renaissance facsimile indoor theater that opened last year as the wintertime residence of Shakespeare’s Globe – which uses candlelight as its only illumination.Staged by Dominic Dromgoole, the Globe’s artistic director, with period-appropriate design by Jonathan Fensom and unsettling string music by Claire van Kampen, this “Changeling” makes maximal use of both the theater’s intimate scale and nocturnal shadows. The characters’ asides to the audience take on the aspect of confidences shared with us by compellingly creepy strangers.It seems perfectly natural when bloodied and fire-charred ghosts walk the stage. Darkness begets such phantasms. In this case, they include a specter that participates in a deeply creepy three-way copulation that seems destined to trouble my dreams. Even so, I was sorry to wake from the lurid nightmare so expertly conjured here.  A version of this article appears in print on 02/16/2015, on page C6 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Like a Novel You Don’t Want to Put Down.