AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck1:15 P.M. (Starz Cinema) BEFORE MIDNIGHT (2013) Nine years after rekindling a romance in Paris (“Before Sunset”) that began nine years before that in Vienna (“Before Sunrise”), Celine (Julie Delpy) and Jesse (Ethan Hawke) are in Greece, at the end of a vacation with their twin daughters (Jennifer and Charlotte Prior) and Hank (Seamus Davey-Fitzpatrick), the son Jesse left behind in Chicago. Jesse wonders if they could move from Paris to the United States to spend more time with Hank. Celine sees his question as a demand. And so they will fight about this — and the meaning of love, the nature of time and the difference between men and women — throughout the course of a day. “ ‘Before Sunrise,’ ‘Before Sunset’ and ‘Before Midnight’ are modest, charming movies that together add up to the great romantic epic of a generation defined, in the popular mind and our therapists’ offices, by hedged bets, easy ironies and perpetual confusion,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times of this trilogy from the director Richard Linklater. This final installment, he added, “is a wonderful paradox: a movie passionately committed to the ideal of imperfection that is itself very close to perfect.” “Before Sunset” will be shown at 8:40 a.m. on HBO2.10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY Bob Faw looks at efforts in Alexandria, Va., to reduce homelessness for female veterans. Deborah Potter reports on the ethics and religious implications of inoculating children against diseases, or not. 7:15 P.M. (Cinemax) THE LEGO MOVIE (2014) An ordinary figurine (voiced by Chris Pratt) is recruited by a rebel builder (voiced by Elizabeth Banks) to help stop a supervillain (Will Ferrell) from gluing the pieces of the snap-together Lego universe in place. “ ‘The Lego Movie’ captures both the delight and the frustration of this kind of play,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “The visual environment created by the filmmakers (Phil Lord and Christopher Miller of ‘21 Jump Street’ wrote and directed; the animation is by Animal Logic) hums with wit and imagination.” And the story “is a busy, slapdash contraption designed above all to satisfy the imperatives of big-budget family entertainment,” he said of the pop-culture jokes and sentimental goo.10 P.M. (Science, Discovery) WHAT COULD POSSIBLY GO WRONG? Kevin Moore, a metallurgist, and Grant Reynolds, a Marine Corps veteran, analyze the failures in some infamous viral videos on the Internet by using scientific principles to recreate these experiments with greater safety and success. They begin with a trash-can rocket, followed by a solar-powered death ray and a power slide.10:30 P.M. (E!) GET HIM TO THE GREEK (2010) Russell Brand reprises Aldous Snow, his British rocker from “Forgetting Sarah Marshall,” in Nicholas Stoller’s comedy about a record label drone (Jonah Hill) dispatched to transport Snow — a wreck after the failure of an album — from London to Los Angeles. As played by “the brilliantly unpredictable” Mr. Brand, Snow “is more than a pop culture museum piece or a MacGruber-like bit of sketch comedy nonsense,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times of this film, which has Judd Apatow among its producers. Mr. Hill “makes a fine visual and temperamental foil,” he added. “The two of them are like the Trylon and Perisphere of comedy.”What’s Streaming Now2 DAYS IN NEW YORK (2012) In a sequel of sorts to her “2 Days in Paris,” Julie Delpy directs and stars in this tale about Marion, a photographer; her partner, Mingus (Chris Rock), a journalist; and their two children from previous relationships, as her Parisian family members arrive and proceed to drive the couple crazy. Marion’s father (played by Ms. Delpy’s father, Albert) is detained at the airport for trying to fly with cheese and sausage taped to his body; her sister (Alexia Landeau) and her sister’s boyfriend (Alex Nahon) smoke marijuana in an elevator and have noisy sex. “The driving crazy part is hilarious and persuasive, partly because Ms. Delpy and her cast depart from the usual caricatures of Frenchness while still engaging in broad, silly satire,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. (netflix.com)Advertisement