AdvertisementSupported byBy Bruce WeberDon Covay, a singer and songwriter whose rhythm-and-blues compositions — among them “Pony Time,” “Chain of Fools” and “Mercy, Mercy” — became hits for a variety of performers and standards of rock ’n’ roll and soul music, died on Jan. 31 in a hospital in Valley Stream, N.Y., not far from his home in Queens. He was 78.His death was confirmed by his daughter Wendy, who did not specify a cause. Mr. Covay, who suffered a stroke some years ago, was known to be in declining health. Mr. Covay was among a handful of writers and performers, including Wilson Pickett and Otis Redding, who helped define the soul sound (male division) of the 1960s. His own recordings of songs like “Pony Time” (written with John Berry), “Mercy, Mercy” (a funky R&B tune sometimes known as “Have Mercy”) and “See Saw” (written with Steve Cropper) were modest hits, but other performers did even better with them: “Pony Time,” an up-tempo shuffle, was a No. 1 hit for Chubby Checker in 1961; “Mercy, Mercy” was featured on the Rolling Stones’ 1965 album, “Out of Our Heads”; and the soulful and lusty “Chain of Fools” was a No. 2 pop hit in 1967 — and No. 1 on the Billboard R&B chart — for Aretha Franklin, who won a Grammy Award for the recording. Mr. Covay wrote songs with and for Mr. Pickett (“I’m Gonna Cry”) and for Gladys Knight and the Pips (“Letter Full of Tears”). His songs were also covered by singers and bands not necessarily within the sphere of R&B and soul, including Steppenwolf (“Sookie, Sookie”), the Small Faces (“Take This Hurt Off Me”), Connie Francis (“Mr. Twister”) and others.In the late 1960s, Mr. Covay helped assemble a cadre of soul singers — Ben E. King, Solomon Burke, Arthur Conley, Joe Tex and others — called the Soul Clan, which recorded one single (“Soul Meeting” and “That’s How I Feel”) and then dissolved, a legendary supergroup flameout. They briefly reunited — with Mr. Pickett replacing Mr. Conley — for a series of shows in 1981. In an interview with The New York Times on the occasion of the reunion, Mr. Covay recalled the success that each of them had as individuals in the 1960s, and described their music. “We were singing rock ’n’ roll, but we were also singing our souls,” he said. “We all had a sound somewhere between gospel music, the blues and country music. We always said that soul and country were so close, if you could write a good country song you would have a good soul song as well.”He was born James Donald Randolph in Orangeburg, S.C., on March 24, 1936, one of nine children of John and Helen Randolph. His father was a Baptist preacher, and he and some of his siblings sang in a gospel group. Their father died when James was a boy, and in the late 1940s the family moved to Washington, where James later joined a doo-wop group called the Rainbows. It was around this time, his brother Thomas Randolph said in an interview on Friday, that James Donald Randolph became Don Covay. “He just made up the name,” Mr. Randolph said. “He felt his name was not right for a singer.” By the late 1950s, Mr. Covay was appearing as an opening act for Little Richard, who some sources say employed him as a chauffeur as well. By the early ’60s, he had moved to New York. Mr. Covay and his wife, the former Yvonne Darby, married as teenagers in the early 1950s. She died in 1981. They had five children, four of whom —Ursula Covay Parkes, Antonio Covay and the twin sisters Wendy Covay and Wanda Richardson — survive. Another son, Donald Jr., died in 2010. In addition to Thomas Randolph, Mr. Covay is survived by two other brothers, Leroy Randolph and Eddie Randolph, and six grandchildren. Advertisement