AdvertisementSupported byTelevision ReviewBy Mike HaleThe title of “The Jinx: The Life and Deaths of Robert Durst” appears to come from a short exchange in this six-part HBO documentary’s second segment. Mr. Durst, the very rich New York real estate heir with the very strange and violent history, is discussing children — or his lack thereof. “I didn’t want to raise children,” he says. “I — somehow I thought it would be a jinx.”Like many of Mr. Durst’s statements — delivered in a low, affectless monotone, accompanied by a series of tics and grimaces — this one is not entirely clear. Who or what is being jinxed? You might assume he means himself. But the film’s director, Andrew Jarecki, who’s conducting the interview, thinks differently. “That you might be a jinx for them?” he asks. Mr. Durst thinks for just a second and then agrees with this more selfless interpretation. “Yeah,” he says. “I knew I wasn’t going to be a good father.”It’s a small thing, but it made me wonder whether Mr. Jarecki was being played — a fair question when you’re interviewing a man who killed his neighbor, chopped the body into pieces, admitted it and yet got a Texas jury to acquit him of murder.In general, “The Jinx,” whose first 45-minute chapter has its premiere on Sunday night, has to be viewed in the context of Mr. Jarecki’s obsession with Mr. Durst and his story, which also includes the disappearance of his first wife and the unsolved murder of a female friend. Since making a splash in 2003 with “Capturing the Friedmans” — another documentary about bizarrely tragic events and father-son dysfunction — Mr. Jarecki has spent much of his time focused on the Durst saga. He has already made a pretty decent fictional feature (“All Good Things,” 2010) based on Mr. Durst’s life, that in an eerie way prefigures incidents, ideas and even dialogue in “The Jinx.”It’s probably safe to say that no one outside of the family members and detectives involved knows more about the life of Mr. Durst and its connections to death, violence, strange behavior and outlandish privilege. Does that make Mr. Jarecki the best person to tell it? At this point, it’s impossible to know because HBO has provided only two of the six episodes. It’s a “Serial” situation — the story so far is compelling, but, as with that true-crime podcast, our judgments will be heavily influenced by how the series plays out and what kind of resolution it provides (or doesn’t). One main selling point of “The Jinx” is that Mr. Durst sat for more than 20 hours of interviews with Mr. Jarecki, but those talks don’t figure greatly until well into the second episode, so their impact remains to be seen.What’s clear, and not surprising, is that “The Jinx” is a beautifully put together documentary in the Errol Morris mode — the influence of “The Thin Blue Line” is paramount — that’s as engrossing and easy to watch as any dark, high-class cable crime drama. Mr. Jarecki uses the entire toolbox, including extensive re-enactments and moody, staged scene-setting shots. His years of work on the story are reflected in the panoply of material he deploys: not just the usual crime-scene photos and TV news clips but also pages from the missing wife’s diary, tapes of Mr. Durst’s prison phone calls and video from a sealed deposition given by his brother Douglas, who refused to be interviewed by Mr. Jarecki. One demonstration of Mr. Jarecki’s technique: a sequence recounting the early days of Robert and Kathleen Durst’s relationship alternately, by his narration and passages read from her diary, as if they were sitting side by side telling the story together.While it’s hard to make any definitive judgments without seeing “The Jinx” whole, the most significant hurdle is Mr. Durst. You can be drawn in by the plot’s craziness and the Shakespearean family dynamics, but if there’s a cipher at the center, you’ve got a problem. Mr. Jarecki got around this in “All Good Things” by casting the charismatic Ryan Gosling in the Durst role. The question in “The Jinx” is how interesting it will be in the long run to watch Mr. Durst playing himself.The JinxThe Life and Deaths of Robert DurstHBO, Sunday nights at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time. Directed by Andrew Jarecki; Marc Smerling, cinematographer; Jason Blum, executive producer; Mr. Jarecki and Mr. Smerling, producers; Zachary Stuart-Pontier, editor and co-producer.Advertisement