AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Ben RatliffTinnitus, a new concert series organized by the editor and writer Brandon Stosuy and the producer Adam Shore, focuses on what it has called “composers of extreme sound.” What’s that mean? The series, so far, has some kind of relationship with volume and aggression, but not an exclusive one. And it has some kind of relationship with electronics, but not “electronic music” as a genre with settled values. Above all, it seems to mean music that lingers over its intimate material, its sound pressure and frequencies and signal-processing. It has programmed three concerts since October, all of them at the Wick, in Brooklyn, a warehouselike room large enough for the kind of music that itself implies a big physical space. The third, on Wednesday night, was a triple bill of one guitarist and two electronic musicians: Noveller, Container and Vessel. Noveller is Sarah Lipstate of Brooklyn (via Austin, Tex.), whose music both celebrates her instrument — a Fender Jaguar guitar, with its warm, thin and concentrated sound — and overrides it completely, getting it to become an orchestra, a synthesizer, an atmospheric-disturbance machine. She played a set of pieces, some from her new Noveller record, “Fantastic Planet,” as finished constructions; she layered her lines sequentially, with standard effects pedals to loop and expand the sound, and sometimes a bow across the strings, building upward from calm to haywire-crackle and then back to calm. (In its serene parts, it’s dream-motion, aquarium-gazing music, relatable to what the guitarist Robin Guthrie made with the Cocteau Twins in the 1980s and continues to make on his own.) Ms. Lipstate performed it with the physical drama it deserves, moving according to its waves and crests, giving you something to watch as your heart rate lowered.Container’s set was direct, overdriven, nonmelodic — a skeptical kind of dance music without a clear result, techno as an impulse but not a form. Container is Ren Schofield, from Providence, R.I., who came up as a drummer through the scabrous aesthetics of that city’s noise scene 10 years ago, which explains two things about his music: its emphasis on sampled drum sounds that punch right into your hearing and the ton of feedback. (Mr. Schofield seems native to feedback: He uses it with regular applications, the way other musicians might use reverb or sustain.) He stood behind a table on the stage, manipulating his gear nonstop — drum machines, mixer, pedals, analog hardware, no computer — building an unbroken, ill-tempered hour. It was Vessel, a.k.a. Sebastian Gainsborough, who brought the most urgency. Mr. Gainsborough, of Bristol, England, is part of the Young Echo collective, a network of producers making strange, dense, distressed, bottom-heavy variations on electronic dance music. He also doesn’t use computer software in his live sets; you’re hearing the sound of analog circuitry. But he’s gone a step further. To make the sounds on his recent record, “Punish, Honey,” he used instruments that he’d fashioned himself, striking sheets of metal or blowing through sawed-up bicycle frames. The record came out weirdly: slow and spacious, cerebral and almost seasick. This set felt different, hard and speedy and complex, aimed at the body, but with hidden surprises. He set up his table and gear on the floor, so that the crowd — which included Björk, in fan mode — pressed up around him. He used bullying low-end blots, wild arcs of pitch-shifting and intricately flickering background layers, barely audible under the braying or shattering top lines. He seemed to be playing with a desire to undermine himself, tailing away into pauses that could feel perverse after the fast tempos. The coolness of Ms. Lipstate’s music gave the bill unlikely contrast, which means that someone thought about the overall listening experience of the night. Someone also thought about contrast for the intermissions. In Wednesday’s concert, as with the first two Tinnitus events, the only sound heard between acts was pink noise, similar to white noise but different: It’s the random signal, with equal energy per octave, that audio technicians use to calibrate equipment, or their own ears. I don’t think I’ve encountered that at a concert before. I can’t imagine why not. Advertisement