By NEIL GENZLINGERFEB. 6, 2015
“Of Miracles and Men,” Sunday’s installment of ESPN’s “30 for 30” documentary series, is a much deeper, more thoughtful film than a pocket description might lead you to believe.The idea is to tell the story of the “miracle on ice” Olympic hockey game from the viewpoint of the losers. But the result is much more than a lament about a lost game. The director, Jonathan Hock, uses that singular moment in sports history to illuminate a watershed moment in world history.The game in question, of course, is the one in which the United States men’s hockey team beat the heavily favored Soviet team in February 1980 during the Winter Olympics in Lake Placid, N.Y. The Americans later won the gold medal, something virtually everyone assumed the Soviets would be carrying back to Moscow.The film spends a good bit of time on the game, but first it lays the groundwork with a detailed look at how the Soviets became a world hockey power. It’s a story of two coaches: Anatoly Tarasov, who brought the Soviet national team to prominence, and Viktor Tikhonov, who took over after Tarasov was ousted, coached the team in Lake Placid and had a dictatorial style that created tensions with his players.AdvertisementWhat is sometimes forgotten is that days before their Olympic meeting, the Americans were trounced by the Soviets in an exhibition game at Madison Square Garden.“This is where overconfidence started,” Vsevolod Kukushkin, a journalist, recalls in the film, which also draws on the reminiscences of a number of the Soviet players.AdvertisementThe film expertly captures the drama of the game, but it doesn’t dwell on the loss. Instead it follows the threads emanating from the game all the way to glasnost, focusing in particular on Vyacheslav Fetisov, a defenseman who was instrumental in breaking down the barrier that kept Soviet players from exporting their skills. He eventually played in the National Hockey League, as did other Soviet players. In the long view taken by this fine film, the miracle on ice, thrilling as it was, was just a hockey game; the broader forces of history were the bigger story.30 for 30Of Miracles and MenESPN, Sunday night at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time.Produced by Hock Films. Directed by Jonathan Hock; Maura Mandt, executive producer; Don Kempf, producer.A version of this review appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Beyond a Rink, a World.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.