AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Brian SeibertBen Munisteri, an accomplished choreographer with a reputation for formal invention, has been lying low for the past couple of years. On Thursday, he re-emerged with a short, self-produced program at the Actors Fund Arts Center in Downtown Brooklyn. It was a modest showing, less like a butterfly emerging from a chrysalis than like a groundhog peeking out from its burrow.It began with the work of a younger colleague, Angela Maffia, whose “Axis Obliquity” was a duet for her and Chris Bell. I found the tinkling music-box recording by Hung I Chan so grating that it was hard to concentrate on the dance. And that was before the track maddeningly repeated. The opening moments suggested a clock, with the two dancers moving staccato as if they were different parts of a timepiece. Later, the spatial relationship between them turned more astronomical, with shifting orbits, which was more interesting but too little too late.Even if the printed program had not credited Mr. Munisteri for “movement motifs” in “Axis Obliquity,” you might have sensed family resemblances between it and his two pieces. His “Smash Through to Sunlight” (1999), another duet, features an elaborate lighting plan by Kathy Kaufmann and a choppy collage score by Evren Celimli that evokes signals from Earth received in a distant galaxy. Among those signals is a snippet of dialogue from “Star Wars” about the Death Star and fear. But that hint of pop energy was muted in the performances of Katie Weir and Robert Maynard. The duet, structured in episodic fragments, plays informality — stopping to drink from bottles of water; abrupt, casual exits — against pulled-up, Merce Cunninghamesque rigor. But on Thursday, the contrast was so subdued that the work felt insubstantial.Mr. Munisteri’s new “Petrichor” was a better representation of his choreographic strengths. The score is by the electronic-music mash-up artist Pogo, and in a program note, Mr. Munisteri pointed to his own mash-up process, citing borrowings from Lar Lubovitch and Trisha Brown, among others. This sourcing, though, seemed less significant than the work’s larger number of dancers: nine. With more bodies at his disposal, Mr. Munisteri could construct above-average patterns out of average choreographic material. Although one section too closely resembled a classroom across-the-floor exercise, the alternation between decentralized activity and mirrored or linear formations was stimulating. The dancers’ bouncing to Pogo’s club beats felt tentative, yet some of the interlocking mechanisms of the choreography engaged a viewer’s attention fully.The word “petrichor” refers to the smell of rain after a dry spell. On Thursday, Mr. Munisteri’s distinctive talents could be sensed, if only faintly. Ben Munisteri runs through Sunday at the Actors Fund Arts Center, 160 Schermerhorn Street, near Hoyt Street, Brooklyn; 718-640-1845, actorsfund.org/afac. Advertisement