AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Gia KourlasIn yoga, the act of letting go is just as important as perfecting a downward dog. It’s a slippery sensation, but you know it when you feel it. A similar quality is found in “Rise,” a new dance by the choreographer Suzanne Beahrs that explores the idea of surrendering to one’s true nature — how, when you strip away the layers, you just might uncover your essence. Performed on Thursday at Danspace Project, “Rise” increases steadily in intensity but starts quietly in near darkness as Julie Seal and Celine Syslo hold hands facing each other while swaying to the sound of chirping birds. After they separate, ostensibly taking a first step toward independence, they still move in tandem, covering the stage in two-footed spins while making dreamy, almost loving eye contact with each other. It’s not the first time that these female dancers, wallowing in reverence, look as though they’re part of a cult. In her program notes, Ms. Beahrs writes that she made the dance “to better understand what it means to ‘be yourself.’ ” In her disciplined, efficient movement phrases, seven dancers touch on vulnerability and acceptance as they struggle to find balance, both physical and emotional. There is just as much falling in “Rise” as there is ascent, but mainly bodies swirl, surging from one direction to the next in measured abandon. Such repetitiveness increasingly turns the work into a numbing choreographic exercise; the dancers, while technically strong, emote to excess. The eclectic score, which ends with a piano performance by Daniel Colalillo, doesn’t help with the choppy pacing of “Rise”: Chopin, in a swooping, meditative section, is followed by LCD Soundsystem’s thumping “Pow Pow.” A dual voice-over reads Pablo Neruda’s poem “It Is Not Necessary”; later, Ms. Beahrs tries to lighten the mood with a vaudevillian solo — marked by wide eyes and sharp elbows — to the audio recording of a YouTube clip in which a boy encourages other children to ride a bike. He is endearing as he shouts: “If you believe in yourself, you will know how to ride a bike! If you don’t, you just keep practicing!”That might well be Ms. Beahrs’s mantra as a choreographer, but is it enough? “Rise,” with its pulsating mix of duets, trios and unison group dancing, washes over the stage yet never saturates it. Her choreographic stamp is as elusive as the idea of letting go. Perhaps the truth is that you can’t be yourself until you know yourself. Suzanne Beahrs Dance continues through Saturday at Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village; 866-811-4111, danspace.org. Advertisement