AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Vivien SchweitzerBeauty of tone proved one of many impressive elements that distinguished Lisa Batiashvili’s performance of the Barber Violin Concerto on Thursday evening with the New York Philharmonic, conducted by David Zinman at Avery Fisher Hall.In the Andante, her gossamer, silky sound in the soloist’s opening measures evolved into a richer, deeper timbre, enhanced by liquid trills. Her poise and emotional involvement were matched by the orchestra, which played with the full-blooded sound essential to this piece, which Ms. Batiashvili (who is Georgian) is performing for the first time in America. She has called it “the American violin concerto,” noting that playing it as artist in residence this season with the Philharmonic (with whom she has played some four dozen concerts) is a way of showing her admiration for American music. The oboist Liang Wang played the evocative second movement solo with finesse; Ms. Batiashvili rendered the melodic lines of the first movement with soaring commitment. Mr. Zinman led soloist and ensemble in an exuberant dance through the intricacies of the scampering Presto.The program opened with “Iscariot” (1989) by Christopher Rouse, who has produced a large catalog of colorful, imaginatively scored works and is composer in residence with the Philharmonic this season. Under the deft baton of Mr. Zinman, “Iscariot” proved intense, opening with a dramatic drumbeat that segues immediately into a radiant string section evoking Barber’s “Adagio.” A dark-hued wind interlude is interrupted by a string section of mournful savagery. The celesta adds eerie color throughout. The program concluded with Rachmaninoff’s Symphony No. 2. The premiere of his first symphony, in 1897, was a fiasco; Glazunov, who conducted it, was said to be drunk, and one critic compared the piece to the seven plagues of Egypt condensed into one work. Traumatized, Rachmaninoff took a lengthy hiatus from composition and required hypnosis to begin writing again. When he did, he didn’t hold back — completing the roughly 60-minute Symphony No. 2 in 1908. Retaining a sense of momentum and cohesion in such a sprawling work is always a challenge, but Mr. Zinman highlighted the many alluring sections within the meandering framework, like the sweeping string melodies in the opening movement, rendered here with passion. The orchestra played the agitated motifs of the Allegro Molto with nervous drive, and the final section unfolded with sizzling energy.The concert will be repeated on Saturday at 8 p.m. at Avery Fisher Hall; 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. Advertisement