By STEPHEN HOLDENFEB. 6, 2015
From father to daughter to grandson: The Lincoln Center American Songbook program “Judy Kuhn Sings Richard Rodgers, Mary Rodgers and Adam Guettel” on Wednesday evening convincingly portrayed the lineage of the composer Richard Rodgers as more than bloodline; it is a proudly romantic musical tradition. The performer making the connections was that top-of-the-line singer Judy Kuhn, whose approach to theater music might be described as one of passionate restraint.Ms. Kuhn conveys as much insight and empathy as more overtly dramatic singers without straining for a showstopping theatricality; her delivery is refined but not prim, her intonation impeccable. And the ensemble, led by the evening’s musical director and arranger Todd Almond, was flexible enough to embrace semiclassical ballads like an exquisitely wistful “Hello, Young Lovers” from “The King and I,” and Mr. Guettel’s bluegrass-flavored music from “Floyd Collins.”In devoting equal attention to the three generations, the program went out of its way to showcase obscure work by Mary Rodgers, who died in June, and is best known as the composer of the “Once Upon a Mattress,” with lyrics by Marshall Barer.The evening at Lincoln Center’s Appel Room began with two of the program’s most openhearted numbers, “Oh, What a Beautiful Mornin’ ” from “Oklahoma!,” which expanded like a glorious sunrise, as more instruments joined Ms. Kuhn’s voice, and “The Call,” the eerie, echoey cry from “Floyd Collins” that evokes a voice reverberating through a cavern.AdvertisementThe songs bounced off one another and sometimes interwove, as in a witty mash-up of “Song of Love,” from “Once Upon a Mattress” and “A Wonderful Guy,” from “South Pacific,” which Ms. Kuhn sang with Shuler Hensley.Malcolm Gets joined Ms. Kuhn for “We’re Gonna Be All Right,” a bitterly funny song about marriage from the Rodgers-Stephen Sondheim show “Do I Hear a Waltz?” with a jolly tune and lyrics so steeped in Sondheimian cynicism that Rodgers’s signature is barely discernible.AdvertisementRunning only 75 minutes, this compact performance is so well-made in every detail that it cries out for an evening-length expansion on stage or on television. As for that family tradition: Mr. Guettel’s extraordinary talent promises to extend it well into the 21st century.The American Songbook series runs through March 28; 212-721-6500, americansongbook.org. A version of this review appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Saluting the Rodgers Songwriting Dynasty.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.