By MICHAEL COOPERFEB. 6, 2015
Alan Gilbert will step down as music director of the New York Philharmonic in 2017, after eight seasons, the orchestra said on Friday, setting off what promises to be an intense search for a successor to lead the ensemble through the planned renovation of Avery Fisher Hall.Mr. Gilbert, 47, who has brought a spirit of experimentation to the Philharmonic and has been the first native New Yorker to lead it, said in an interview that he had decided to leave then to allow the next music director to build a relationship with concertgoers before construction begins on the hall, which is now expected to start in 2019 and to force the orchestra to perform away from its Lincoln Center home for two seasons.“It’s become clear that the next chapter, logically, has to carry the organization through to the opening of the hall, which is at the earliest 2021,” Mr. Gilbert said in an interview in which he praised the players in the orchestra and spoke of some of his innovations. “It’s a wonderful atmosphere, which of course I will be sorry to leave. But as I’ve thought about it, the next logical step — it’s just longer than I want to stay around. It’s actually that simple.”The departure of a Philharmonic music director, and the search for a replacement, is the classical music world’s equivalent of the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary rolled into one. As the orchestra organizes its search committee, handicappers and kibitzers will weigh the pros and cons of potential candidates. Another young American in the Gilbert mold? A wunderkind, like the young conductors who lead orchestras in Los Angeles, Boston and Philadelphia? Or an éminence grise?AdvertisementThomas W. Morris, who has served as chief executive of both the Cleveland Orchestra and the Boston Symphony Orchestra, said that he had always thought such choices were best approached by setting a direction for the orchestra and then deciding who could best execute it. “I always think it’s much more of a ‘what’ question than a ‘who’ question,” he said.It may not be easy. Major conductors tend to be booked years in advance, and many are spoken for — under long-term contracts to their own orchestras. So finding someone who is talented, exciting, acceptable to the musicians and available to pick up the baton in New York for the 2017-18 season could pose a challenge. The process has often been bumpy in the past.Matthew VanBesien, the president of the Philharmonic, said he was confident that the orchestra would be able to put a new music director into place by then. “We’ve got work to do, and we’re going to get to it, very quickly,” he said in an interview.AdvertisementThe departure of Mr. Gilbert, whose parents both played in the orchestra, adds a new measure of uncertainty to the Philharmonic, the oldest symphony orchestra in the United States, which was already facing upheaval and change.Th orchestra is just beginning a major fund-raising effort connected with the renovation project, while planning the renovations and making the preparations needed to help the orchestra survive two seasons away from its home. The Philharmonic expects to lead a nomadic existence during that time, playing elsewhere across New York City, which could help it reach new audiences but also threatens to hasten the erosion of subscriptions already faced by orchestras around the country.The ranks of the orchestra must be replenished as well: Retirements and defections have left the positions of several principal players, or section leaders, vacant — including that of the concertmaster, which is empty for the first time in more than three decades. Mr. Gilbert said that he expected to fill the major positions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Then there is the question of what will happen to Mr. Gilbert’s innovations.Mr. Gilbert has been credited with shaking up the Philharmonic. He collaborated with the director and designer Doug Fitch on several popular semi-staged productions, including a groundbreaking performance of Ligeti’s opera “Le Grand Macabre” and another of Stravinsky’s “Petrushka,” which starred ballet dancers and dancing and juggling members of the orchestra (the orchestra will repeat the production in London this year). He conducted daring productions like “Philharmonic 360,” in which the orchestra surrounded the audience in the cavernous Park Avenue Armory and played works by Boulez, Mozart, Ives and Stockhausen.And he championed new music, most notably by inaugurating the NY Phil Biennial, a festival modeled on the biennials of the contemporary-art world. Mr. Gilbert plans to return to help program the third Biennial in the 2017-18 season, after he steps down as music director.Mr. VanBesien said he expected many of the changes to last. “I think Alan has fundamentally changed the DNA of the New York Philharmonic,” he said.Mr. Gilbert’s departure after eight seasons will make his tenure longer than that of his immediate predecessor, Lorin Maazel, who stepped down at 79 after seven seasons, but shorter than that of the previous two music directors, Kurt Masur, who led the orchestra for 11 seasons, and Zubin Mehta, who led it for 13.Last spring, as Mr. Gilbert discussed some of the things he would like to see in a renovated hall, he seemed to indicate a desire to see the project through. “I’d be very proud if it could happen on my watch,” he said then.But as the timeline for the project extended farther into the future, with construction tentatively set to begin in the summer of 2019, it became clear that staying with the Philharmonic until the opening of the new hall would extend his tenure there longer than he had ever imagined staying. So he decided to leave when his contract was up, at the end of the summer of 2017.Mr. Gilbert, who still has two and a half seasons left with the orchestra, said that he hoped to be able to play more with some of the European orchestras he had been conducting in recent years. He said that he was enjoying conducting Mozart’s “Don Giovanni,” which opened at the Met on Wednesday, and that he hoped to do more opera.Advertisement“If anything,” Mr. Gilbert said, “I would certainly rather leave slightly too early than slightly too late.”A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Maestro Composes His Exit Plan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.