Season 1, Episode 1: “Uno”Gather ’round, all ye “Breaking Bad”-starved masses. Huddle up and let us appraise the prequel we have awaited since television’s finest New Mexico-set dark comedy/spaghetti western bid its adieu. Our beloved meth maestro Walter White, last seen bloodied and shuffling off this mortal coil, to the sweet arpeggios of Badfinger’s “Baby Blue,” is but a blissful memory. Ditto Jesse Pinkman, who escaped “Fast and Furious”-style, from the drug-production facility and cage where he’d toiled against his will at the merciless prodding of some tattooed white supremacists. Dearly beloved, they are gone. But hallelujah — their sleazy, fleet-witted lawyer is back. Yes, at long last, “Better Call Saul” is here. A whole series, built around an amoral defense attorney with a comb-over and a bag of cultural references that date to the early ’80s. It is brought to us by key players behind “Breaking Bad,” writer-director Vince Gilligan and writer Peter Gould. To put it mildly, the show arrives with high expectations. Not Harper-Lee-has-a-new-novel high. But high.Note to readers: this recap will assume “Breaking Bad” knowledge, so if any of you have wandered in without watching that show, do yourself a favor. Leave whatever screen you are staring at right now, and come back in about two days, which is the time it will take to watch all five seasons, uninterrupted.You can thank me later.It is too soon to know whether “BCS,” as it shall henceforth be known in this space, meets the standards set by the creators’ previous work. But it is certainly off to a dozier start, and the opening minutes of the first episode — in stark contrast to the frenetic beginning of “Breaking Bad” — are positively somnambulant. On purpose. We re-make the acquaintance of Saul Goodman, now living under a new name and identity and working at a Cinnabon in the food court of a Nebraska mall – a fate that Saul himself grimly predicted in the penultimate episode of “Breaking Bad.” (“If I’m lucky, a month from now, best-case scenario, I’m managing a Cinnabon in Omaha.”)The footage is black and white, which usually is a signal to viewers that we’re in the past. In this case, it’s a signal that we’re in the present, eavesdropping on Saul’s post-relocation life. The Ink Spots’ “Address Unknown” plays (Sample lyric: “Honey child, I ain’t even got a trace of you”), underscoring the total success of his vanishing act. The only hint that this particular Cinnabon employee is a fugitive comes when a burly, 20ish male customer appears to give Saul the stink eye, and starts walking purposefully in his direction. But the guy is just meeting family and friends, who happen to be in Saul’s line of sight. Saul heaves a sigh of relief. He is still a nobody. Anonymity and tranquility, however, do not come naturally to a man who once served as consigliere and asset manager to a multimillion-dollar drug trafficker. Cut to Saul – identified as Gene on his Cinnabon name tag — alone in his tiny, snow-surrounded house, watching a home shopping channel that is pitching Renoir prints. (I see here the handiwork of Mr. Gilligan, a man who loves art so much he once worked as professional art mover, and who must have been tickled by the crassness of mass-marketed Renoirs). In search of more invigorating viewing, ex-Saul rummages around for a hidden box that contains a VCR tape, one with a reel of commercials he cut for local Albuquerque television, pimping himself and his law practice.Thus, we learn in the opening minutes of “BCS” that our eponymous antihero has settled in, far from the sun-scorched excitement of his previous incarnation, peacefully and miserably.The question of how he wound up in Nebraska is explained in the last episodes of “Breaking Bad.” How Saul became Saul is the point of the first episode of “BCS.” Switching to color and leaping back about six years and a lot of hair in time, we meet him under the name he was given at birth, James McGill. Unlike Saul, who is self-assured and well off, James — or Jimmy, as he’s known by friends and potential clients — is broke and riddled with self-doubt. He is first seen in court, gamely presenting arguments on behalf of three 19-year-olds — “near honors students, all” — charged with performing a lewd act on a freshly separated human head, apparently after hours in a funeral home.“Oh to be 19 again,” Saul tells the jury, trying to cast this grim crime as youthful indiscretion. “Do you remember 19? Let me tell you. The juices are flowing, the red corpuscles are corpuscling.”For this doomed effort Saul earns a measly $700. As he leaves the courthouse with his check, “BCS” starts to remind viewers that the show is set in the same universe as “Breaking Bad.” Who is the parking lot attendant who tells Jimmy he’ll need five stickers, not three, to exit the premises? Why, it’s Mike Ehrmantraut, clearly no longer a Philadelphia cop, but perhaps not yet the professional fixer and assassin for meth overlord Gus Fring. And if you ever wondered how Saul came up with the idea of laundering Jesse Pinkman’s money through a nail salon, wonder no more. Jimmy’s office is in the rear of such a salon, although “office” seems too grand a term for a tiny space beside a boiler.The guy can’t even afford a secretary, so he affects a ludicrous British accent when he takes a calls on his cellphone. One of the calls is from a certain Craig Kettleman, a county treasurer who may soon be facing arrest and prosecution for embezzlement charges. Jimmy meets Kettleman at a cafe and suggests “a little proactivity may be in order.” But just as a letter of engagement is about to get signed, his wife, Betsy, whom Craig has brought along, stays her husband’s hand and asks for more time.Saul would have closed that deal, but this is James, who is tentative and defeatable. For esteem he has only his Esteem, which the Internet tells me is an actual model of car, made in India. This one is a yellow junker, and he leaves that cafe he accidentally drives it into a late 20ish skateboarder, who bounces off the windshield and lands on the pavement. The spectacle has been videotaped by the victim’s twin brother, who quickly threatens to call the cops. The brothers, both bearded, shaggy red-heads, demand an instant settlement of $500, which James is on the verge of paying. Until it dawns on him that this is a charade, a setup and a shakedown — one that, we later learn, reminds him of his own days as “Slippin’ Jimmy,” a professional plaintiff courtesy of the ice-coated sidewalks of his hometown, Cicero, Ill. He triumphantly announces that he knows the twins’ ruse and further that the only way his car is worth $500 is “if there is a $300 hooker sitting in it.”The lads flee. We shall meet them again.After a visit to his tiny, back-of-the-salon office, “BCS” pivots into what appears to be its central plotline. James visits the slick corporate law offices of Hamlin, Hamlin & McGill. (The McGill in the name has nothing to do with James, and the possible branding confusion, it is eventually hinted, is why will soon Jewish-ize his name.) James is unwelcome at the firm, for reasons that aren’t yet clear, but he buffaloes his way into a conference-room meeting of lawyers who seem to run the place.Saul is there to demand a $17 million severance package on behalf of Chuck McGill, apparently a founding partner of the firm, and certainly a guy on medical leave, McGill has told the firm that he plans to return after he recovers from an ailment related to an debilitating sensitivity to electromagnetic fields. The precise nature of this ailment becomes clearer when James leaves the firm, furious and empty-handed, and visits Chuck, played by Michael McKean. (Viewers may remember him from any number of movies, including “This Is Spinal Tap,” or as the 2010 champion of celebrity Jeopardy.) To enter Chuck’s home, you leave your watch and cellphone in his mail box and then tap some electrical switch to “ground yourself,” in the electrical sense.Chuck’s house has no lights or refrigerator and he works by lantern on a manual typewriter. He is a shut in, somehow afflicted by electrical currents — psychosomatic or not — but eager to overcome this torment and return to work.Maybe electromagnetic fields will do for “BCS” what chemistry did for “Breaking Bad” — serve as both plot catalyst and metaphor. Maybe Chuck is just going through a rough patch. Either way, Jimmy tells Chuck to  “cash out” of HH&M because Chuck is on the verge of bankruptcy and Jimmy can’t financially support him any longer. Chuck will have none of it. “You know I’m going to beat this,” he says. Plus, he reveals to Jimmy, HH&M has started sending him a weekly stipend.James leaves bereft and badly in need of a client. So he devises an elaborate trap, enlisting those skateboarding scammer twins. Their job is to get hit by Betsy Kettleman’s car, a Mercury Sable wagon, which drives the same route every day. The idea is that James will happen by soon after the moment of impact, and talk the brothers out of suing the woman. (The pair will later be paid $2,000 for their troubles.) In her gratitude, Betsy will convince her husband to hire James for that embezzlement case.What could possibly go wrong? A lot, actually. The brothers execute the collision perfectly, but moments after the “accident” occurs, the Sable peels off. The brothers give chase, hanging on to the back of a truck. The Sable pulls into a driveway, but the woman who exits isn’t Mrs. Kettleman. It’s an elderly woman, speaking Spanish and sounding confused, although her windshield is certainly busted. James frantically searches for the brothers — they were briefly in cellphone contact — and he happens across the parked Sable. (This seems like quite a coincidence but never mind.) He bangs on the front door. It’s opened by a man. We see only the huge silver gun he is pointing in James’ face. We see him yank James into the house by the shirt. Then the man pokes his head out of the door to look for witnesses. At last, we see his face. It’s Tuco, the violent and psychotic meth dealer who kidnaps Walter White and Jesse Pinkman in “Breaking Bad.”The door closes. And episode.The final seconds of this show are arguably its most promising. Nobody is better at dropping characters into lethal-looking pickles than Vince Gilligan, and this pickle looks pretty lethal. Put another way, the ending was the “Breaking Bad”est part of this debut. It suggests that “BCS” isn’t going to remain a drama about an aging, housebound lawyer and the slick law firm that may be trying to weasel him out of due profits. There will be blood, risk, drugs, weapons and stark moral choices. If this first episode has a flaw it is built into the architecture of the story. This is the tale of the origins of Saul Goodman, but that persona doesn’t really show up until the middle of the hour, as career anxiety produces the sort of illegal scheming and mordant dialogue for which he is loved. I knew our man had arrived, still un-rechristened, when he drives the twins to the home of the Kettleman’s, to show them what that Mercury Sable looks like. “Nice boat,” one of the brothers says, noting the incongruous vessel parked in the yard.“Yeah,” says James, “discreet. Like a stripper pole in a mosque.”Welcome back, Saul. You’ve been missed. And now that you’re in Tuco’s clutches, find that silver tongue of yours, lickety-split.Any guesses about how Jimmy/Saul will talk his way out of this one? And did I miss any “Breaking Bad” shout outs? 