Season 5, Episode 9, “What Happened and What’s Going On”After the devastating murder of the winsome Beth that closed the first half of the fifth season of “The Walking Dead,” some viewers might have expected the show to take a minute to gather itself, and perhaps let the refugees mourn the even-more-senseless-than-usual killing.Those viewers would be wrong, and perhaps relatively new to the show. Because when it comes to wrenching deaths, “The Walking Dead” doubles down like a drunk conventioneer at a blackjack table. And so at the end of a starkly artful, introspective episode on Sunday night that toyed with our emotions as it revealed itself in jagged shards, it turned out that the grave being dug in the opening image was not for sweet Beth but for even sweeter Tyreese, the wounded heart of the show for much of his freshly concluded tenure.We knew it was possible, of course — all of these characters live on the chomping block, regardless of what role or fate they might have within the comic book urtext. This makes “The Walking Dead” surprising and suspenseful in ways that other adaptations are not (take a note, “Gotham”). But it also tends to flatten the characters, with some exceptions, into binary switches — alive or dead, human or savage, living or merely surviving — while laboring to remind us that the distance between the opposing states is shorter than we think.Tyreese, portrayed with great delicacy by Chad L. Coleman, was one of the exceptions. It’s reductive to call Tyreese the conscience of “The Walking Dead” but it’s also mostly true. He was the one character always tabulating the human cost, on all sides, of whatever horrid act the group was called on to perform, whether it was putting down demented little Lizzie or executing a sanctuary full of murderous cannibals. He was also the caretaker — literally, in the case of baby Judith, but also emotionally with people like his sister Sasha (Sonequa Martin-Green) earlier this season and Noah (Tyler James Williams) on Sunday, gently helping them through their heartache even as the bloody landscape and other compatriots demanded them to toughen up.Paying attention to “the news”— meaning the suffering happening all around you — Tyreese told Noah early in Sunday’s episode, was “paying the high cost of living.” And for Tyreese the cost was high indeed, from the loss of his girlfriend Karen in Season 4, through the more recent deaths of the wee sisters Mika (Kyla Kenedy) and Lizzie (Brighton Sharbino) and the affable Bob, Sasha’s boyfriend. In a panel discussion last week at The New York Times, Scott M. Gimple, the show runner, reiterated that it was the survivors who are actually “the walking dead” because “for everybody that’s taken away from these characters, they die a little,” he said. You could see that decay in Tyreese, with Mr. Coleman, who brought a similarly soulful nuance to “The Wire,” wearing the weight of each loss like an existential millstone.Sunday’s episode broke from recent form by tracking a single plot: The reunited group’s trip to take Noah home to Richmond, Va. The journey was a tribute to Beth (Emily Kinney), who’d hoped to make it herself, but also potentially a means to a new home base for the survivors. Noah’s subdivision was once secure and is surrounded by a wall, Rick (Andrew Lincoln) tells the group.“It’s a long trip but if it works out, it’s the last long trip we have to make,” he says, which, considering the zombie roadshow that is “The Walking Dead,” was about as believable as someone on “The Big Bang Theory” saying “this is the last wacky nerd joke we have to make.”Sure enough, one look over said wall revealed that Noah’s neighborhood looked like pretty much every other place. After a few perfunctory walker beheadings the group fanned out, leaving Tyreese to mind a devastated Noah. “This isn’t the end,” he tells him. (Irony!) But Noah isn’t having it, and he gimp-sprints for his old house to see the carnage for himself. (This show loves to give its characters limps, I assume, to boost the visual parallels between the living and the undead.)The scene inside was terrible and it got even worse for Tyreese, who let his gaze linger too long upon photos of Noah’s brothers — attention must be paid — and missed the zombified one sneaking up behind him for a snack. Noah dispatched the boy with a model fighter jet but the damage was done.After Noah ran for help, the dead descended upon Tyreese – in more of a Dickensian fashion than the usual voracious one. In one corner we had Bob, Beth, Mika and Lizzie; in the other, the loathsome Martin (Chris Coy) and the Governor (David Morrissey).At issue was the final analysis of Tyreese’s refusal to abandon his morality in the face of the brutish post-apocalyptic world order. I showed you how things were different now, the Governor said, “but did you adapt? Did you change? No.”“I didn’t turn away,” Tyreese said. “I kept listening to the news so I could do what I could do to help! I’m not giving up.”The colloquy doubled, as such scenes tend to do on this show, as a discourse on a central idea of “The Walking Dead”: What good is survival if you lose your humanity in the process? At times the series can seem like a tedious seminar on its own themes and we occasionally got close to that here. But the director, Greg Nicotero, kept things surprising by crosscutting cleverly between Tyreese’s hallucinations and real world action. At one point the Governor leaned in to make a point and was, in a blink, revealed to be a walker on attack — Tyreese offered up his wounded arm like he was training an undead police dog and bludgeoned him into submission with the other. And the zombie blood ran all over a quaint image of home.Indeed, the episode was visually striking throughout — all oblique angles, filtered light and arresting imagery. The chronology was out of whack, as fractured as the perspective of a man constantly haunted by ghosts from the past, even when he isn’t being, you know, actually haunted by ghosts from the past. In a shattered world, real time is about as useful as that shattered grandfather clock Tyreese passed on his way into the development. (Symbolism!)In retrospect it became clear that much of the episode was shot from Tyreese’s perspective, from the initially puzzling shots of the railroad tracks and photos of the twins to the camera’s lingering gaze of a shining sun before it gently faded to black. In a stunner of a slow-motion sequence, we see a ferocious bout of walker extermination presented from the P.O.V. of a prone Tyreese. It’s a paradoxically graceful ballet of slashes, muzzle flashes and spurting blood, ending with an undead head bearing down on upon Tyreese only to explode, gun-blasted, mere feet from his face. It was one of the last things he saw, and it was more than enough.Back in the Suburban, the phantom news report of Tyreese’s fevered imaginings was back on the radio. The ghosts were back, too, and Mr. Coleman’s broad, expressive face was uncharacteristically blank, registering less the shock of Tyreese’s dire situation than exhaustion with everything. “Turn it off,” he said to Bob.“You sure?” Ghost Bob asked in reply.He was.A FEW THOUGHTS WHILE WE DO A QUOTA COUNT• So the season is barely half over and already we have a clear front-runner in the race for the Season 5 Misery Cup. That would be Sasha, last seen shellshocked at Tyreese’s grave mere days or weeks (it’s unclear) after saying sayonara to her beloved Bob.• Bob was played, by the way, by another African-American “Wire” alumnus, Lawrence Gilliard Jr. In other words, Seth Gilliam‘s Father Gabriel better watch his back.• While we’re on the topic, it’s worth noting that Tyreese’s death, coming shortly after Noah joined the group, will do nothing to discourage the longstanding complaint that “The Walking Dead” restricts the number of African-American characters in its primary cast. (Tyreese himself made his debut around the same time the show killed off Oscar.)• At The Times panel, Mr. Lincoln said the first two episodes of this new run resemble the “broken poetry” of Cormac McCarthy’s post-apocalyptic fable “The Road.” The comparison seemed a bit grandiose at the time, but Sunday’s installment, with its technical virtuosity and brutal emotional undertow, actually came pretty close to that mark. So who knows what fresh horrors await us next week.• So what did you think? Was Tyreese’s big send-off too much on the heels of Beth’s departure? Too overwrought? Just right? And what do you make of this apparent plan to head to Washington D.C.? Please share your thoughts on this or anything else in the comments.