Season 4, Episode 4: “Cubbies”
It was always more a question of “when” than “if,” but four episodes into an Iowa-heavy fourth season of “Girls,” the obvious happened  — and it can hardly even be considered a spoiler: Hannah Horvath (Lena Dunham) came home to Brooklyn. Goodbye, Hawkeye State! (By which we mean New Paltz and Ditmas Park, where the Iowa scenes were filmed.) The HBO comedy by Lena Dunham.Equally unsurprising on a show about chronic disappointment: Things in New York aren’t exactly as Hannah left them. Your recappers, Lydia Polgreen and Joe Coscarelli, on the other hand, have not changed. Joe: Let’s start at the end. After completely alienating herself from her classmates with one not-so-vaguely autobiographical BDSM story and one drunken roast at a poets’ party, Hannah has a heart-to-heart with her father, played by Peter Scolari, and hops two taxis and a plane back to her old apartment. There she finds her newly-long-distance boyfriend, Adam (Adam Driver), in the obviously intimate company of a new woman, Mimi-Rose (Gillian Jacobs of “Community”). Adam attempts to play it off, but delivers the stiffest of hugs to Hannah, and just like that, we have what’s likely to be the driving drama for the rest of the season. (Hannah just doesn’t seem like the type to make a clean break.) While communication has never been Adam’s strength as a partner, he has seemed stifled by his relationship with Hannah since he broke out as a stage actor last season. Can you blame him?Lydia: We knew this was coming, what with Jessa (Jemima Kirke) asking him about “whats-her-face” in last week’s episode. So here’s Mimi-Rose, the anti-Hannah if ever there was one, asking, “Wait – are you Hannah?” Adam is clearly trying to find some ballast in his post-Hannah life. Remember in the season opener, his riposte to Hannah’s dad’s toast of her impending Iowa adventure? “Taking the next step in a series of random steps,” he said, as much about himself as about Hannah. Though we know nothing of her yet, her name and conventional beauty are clear tipoffs that perhaps a girl like Mimi-Rose is what Adam needs. Joe: The show, too, maybe — fresh blood can’t hurt.Lydia: But let’s go back to the beginning of the episode, which was not necessarily funny but touched some nice notes, I thought, wrestling with the difficulty of making it in today’s world and the hypnotic temptation of the artist to just give up. We find Shoshanna (Zosia Mamet), looking like a little girl wearing her mom’s best ladies-who-lunch white suit, getting the brushoff from a brusque McKinsey recruiter. It is a far cry from last week, when an overconfident Shosh told a friendly interviewer at Ann Taylor who planned to offer her a job as an assistant jewelry buyer that she knew something better was out there. Joe: When Shosh said, “People always think I’m not going to fit in at first, but I always do — I always fit in, just very subtly,” it was the perfect description of her character’s role on the show. She’s not quite integral to the main cast, but her scenes are almost always fresh and energized. Who besides a new N.Y.U. grad could plausibly deliver a Chelsea Clinton/McKinsey joke?Lydia: After the interview, a deflated Shosh meets Jessa and Marnie (Allison Williams) for drinks. “I just don’t understand why nobody tells you how bad it’s going to be in the real world,” she pleads. Back in Iowa, Hannah struggles with writer’s block. Unaccountably, Elijah is still there, irritated at Hannah’s gloomy stuckness. I want to pause on Elijah for a second, because he has taken on a kind of artist-whisperer role this season. In the premiere, he lectured Marnie, whose artistic gifts seem pretty limited, on the need to toughen up like Judy Garland or Lady Gaga if she wants to be a star. But in the last episode, at the poet party, he tells Hannah, who the show seems to want us to see as a true artist, how it felt to give up his dream of being a dancer.“When you let that go, what was that like?” Hannah asked. “It was the biggest relief in the world,” Elijah replied. He is the siren singing out to the show’s artists: Give up! Who cares! Be happy! And Hannah seems ready to unleash herself from the mast: In her post-class talking-to with her writing workshop professor she says, “for a second I thought I was getting kicked out, and I was so happy.”Of course leaving Iowa doesn’t mean Hannah has given up on being an artist. After all, she “thrives on the streets.” Joe: We didn’t make it out of Iowa, however, without another dose of what I can’t help but see as meta-commentary about critics of the show and its creator. Unlike two episodes back, which was written by Ms. Dunham and her co-showrunner Jenni Konner, this one was penned by Bruce Eric Kaplan, a co-executive producer, so it’s not exactly coming straight from the author’s mouth. But it’s close!Since it began, “Girls” has had fun blurring, highlighting, smudging and then redefining the line between Ms. Dunham and her character. So after Hannah stuffs poorly conceived apology notes into the “cubbies” of her fellow workshop writers and the whole class turns against her, it was impossible not to think once again of the (often sexist and deranged, but also sometimes valid) criticisms thrown constantly at Ms. Dunham. Hannah calls the class “a minefield where anything I do or say can be misconstrued,” says she “cannot think or write clearly due to the overwhelming negative emotions around me,” and after being accused of getting defensive claims, “I can’t defend myself because you already called me defensive.”“They have put me in a box and now I’m suffocating,” Hannah says of her peers.Lydia: I know how Hannah feels — her time in Iowa was starting to have the same effect on me. Joe: But whereas the similar argument in the earlier episode, “Triggering,” felt sour and, yes, overly defensive, I liked this continuation of that conversation more because I really felt the futility of Hannah’s position and could sympathize, even though her immaturity and inability to truly apologize for her previous antics were what put her in that position. This time, I bought that she really was being ganged up on. But I still find the semi-autobiographical callbacks frustrating and, more important, not really fun, or humorous, to watch. It reminds me too much of how Ms. Dunham operates as a public figure on social media: getting into so many mini-skirmishes — and fielding so much abuse — that she announced she was scaling back her Twitter use only to promptly get into more Internet drama on Instagram. I want to judge the show only on its artistic merits, but at this point, I just cannot separate it from the real world subplots. Maybe that’s my problem. Lydia: One thing that was definitely missing for me in this episode was the funny. The closest was Desi’s late-night visit to Marnie’s shoe box apartment. Desi (Ebon Moss-Bachrach) shows up weeping and incoherent in an undershirt, banging on Marnie’s door, declaring, “I did it.” “It” was breaking up with his girlfriend Clementine. Or did she in fact break up with him? The one time when I genuinely laughed out loud in this episode was when man-child Desi sobbed incoherently into Marnie’s duvet, prompting her to pat his back like a confused babysitter dealing with a toddler midtantrum and say, “Sweetie I don’t know what you are saying.” Use your words, Desi! It seems that Marnie finally has her touchy-feely guitar man all to herself. Given her experience with Charlie, I am guessing that won’t end well. Joe: The mischievous look of contentedness on Marnie’s face when she realized she finally had another man-child in her grasp was truly chilling. Nearly halfway through this fourth season, I keep asking myself the same question: Have these people learned nothing?