After successfully returning the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles to the multiplex, Paramount has pulled off the same trick with another aging cartoon crew. “The SpongeBob Movie: Sponge Out of Water” soaked up a stellar $56 million at North American theaters over the weekend, demonstrating the power of nostalgia and the promotional strength of Nickelodeon, Paramount’s corporate sibling. But the weekend also brought two big-budget bombs, with the $200 million “Jupiter Ascending” shaping up as yet another misfire from Andy and Lana Wachowski – it managed only about $19 million in ticket sales – and the $100 million fantasy “Seventh Son” generating a feeble $7.1 million. “The SpongeBob Movie,” which cost about $74 million to make and benefited from light family-audience competition, was easily the No. 1 draw, dethroning “American Sniper” (Warner), which fell to second place after three consecutive weekends in the top spot. “American Sniper” took in about $24.2 million, for a new domestic total of $282.3 million, according to Rentrak, which compiles box-office data. “Jupiter Ascending,” from Warner and Village Roadshow, arrived in third place, suffering from poor reviews and a lingering stink created by a delayed release; Warner had initially planned a July debut. The Wachowskis have now delivered three mega-duds a row, following “Speed Racer” and “Cloud Atlas.” Warner said “Jupiter Ascending” took in an additional $32.5 million overseas over the weekend. “Seventh Son,” delayed at least three times in its release and receiving even worse reviews, arrived in fourth place. A decent $86 million in overseas ticket sales (and counting) for “Seventh Son” will help cushion the blow, but Legendary Entertainment has already taken a steep write-down on the movie, which was distributed by Universal. “Paddington” chugged along in fifth place, taking in $5.4 million, for a four-week domestic total for the Weinstein Company of $57.3 million.A version of this article appears in print on 02/09/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: SpongeBob Outguns ‘Sniper’ at Box Office.