LOS ANGELES — Clive Davis’s annual pre-Grammy party here is always the most star-chocked event connected to the awards, and this year’s gathering on Saturday night was no exception.If you looked around the ballroom of the Beverly Hilton Hotel, you would have seen Al Gore and Tim Cook over on the left, Joan Collins and Jane Fonda on the right, and in the middle Taylor Swift dancing, arms aloft, with two-thirds of the Haim sisters. But this year the growing tension over the economics behind online music spilled over into the festivities.The National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, the organization behind the Grammys, presented its president’s merit award at the party to Martin N. Bandier, chairman of Sony/ATV Music Publishing, whose catalog of millions of songs has Motown and Beatles classics as well as current hits by Lady Gaga and Iggy Azalea.And while Mr. Bandier is usually one of the industry’s most colorful and boastful characters — there’s no shortage of photographs of him grinning with a cigar in his mouth — he came out with sharp words in defense of music publishing, the side of the business that deals with copyrights for songwriting.“A songwriter doesn’t share lucrative touring revenue and they don’t do brand deals,” Mr. Bandier said. “Their entire livelihood is reliant on the income from the song and that proposition is now under threat in a way that it has never been before.”He spoke after some of the night’s performances by Smokey Robinson, Sam Smith, Mary J. Blige, Pharrell Williams, Carole King and Johnny Mathis, who sang a medley including “Chances Are” and “Misty,” to roars of applause from the assembled stars and music executives in tuxedos and sparkly gowns. The party, as always, was hosted by Mr. Davis, the 82-year-old music executive who has worked with artists ranging from Janis Joplin and Whitney Houston to Jennifer Hudson. Mr. Bandier — universally known in the business as Marty — has been one of the most vocal opponents of the way that services like Pandora pay songwriters, a topic that at the industry parties and meetings leading up to this year’s awards show on Sunday was constantly in the air.On Friday, Representative Jerrold Nadler of New York told a room full of music industry lawyers to get united on copyright issues, just a day after the United States Copyright Office made a series of recommendations for changes to copyright law as it relates to music. And on Tuesday, Pandora will square off against the licensing agency BMI in a federal trial in New York.Mr. Bandier was diplomatic enough in his speech not to mention any digital services by name, or cite minuscule royalty figures to make his point, as he and others have done plenty of times. But the musicians and executives in the room seemed to know exactly what he was talking about.“The music industry is changing in ways that I could never have imagined even just a decade ago,” Mr. Bandier said. “But it is also the case that songwriters are not being adequately compensated for their creations in today’s digital world. Their songs are the very reason these services exist; their songs are why we are all here tonight. As the saying goes, it all starts with the song.”When he finished his speech and sat down, Ms. Swift walked over to his table and quickly paid her respects. She is signed to Sony/ATV.