By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 8, 2015
8 P.M. (CBS) THE 57TH ANNUAL GRAMMY AWARDS L L Cool J (above) returns as host of this ceremony honoring artists in country, hip-hop, jazz, pop and rock and broadcast live from the Staples Center in Los Angeles. Leading the pack with six nominations each are Sam Smith, Pharrell Williams and Beyoncé, who, with 53 nominations now has more than any other female performer in the award’s history. Iggy Azalea, Jay Z, Sia, Usher, Jack White, Miranda Lambert, Beck, Drake, Eric Church, Gordon Goodwin and the engineer Tom Coyne follow with four. George Harrison, Buddy Guy and the Bee Gees will be honored as this year’s lifetime achievement recipients. After six years, Kanye West will return to the Grammy stage in a solo performance as well as in a collaboration with Paul McCartney and Rihanna on her new single, “FourFiveSeconds.” Paired performers include Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga; Hozier and Annie Lennox; Jessie J and Tom Jones; and Adam Levine and Gwen Stefani. Katy Perry, AC/DC, Common, John Legend, Mary J. Blige, Juanes, Ariana Grande, Madonna and Ed Sheeran are also scheduled to take the stage. Pre-event coverage begins at 4 on E!; Pop joins the red carpet at 5; and E! moves to the after-party at 11:30.10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn discusses the execution of the Jordanian pilot First Lt. Moaz al-Kasasbeh by the Islamic State. Dr. Ben Carson weighs in on the vaccine controversies and the 2016 presidential election.10:30 A.M. (CBS) FACE THE NATION The guests include Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases; Representative Michael McCaul, Republican of Texas; and Thomas E. Donilon, a former national security adviser. 8 P.M. (HBO) THE JINX: THE LIFE AND DEATHS OF ROBERT DURST In this six-part documentary, the director Andrew Jarecki uses 20 hours of interview recordings with Mr. Durst and extensive re-enactments to chronicle the troubled history of the New York real estate heir and the Shakespearean dynamics within his family. Writing in The New York Times, Mike Hale called “The Jinx” “a beautifully put together documentary in the Errol Morris mode — the influence of ‘The Thin Blue Line’ is paramount — that’s as engrossing and easy to watch as any dark, high-class cable crime drama.”Advertisement8 P.M. (13) TREASURES OF NEW YORK: THE LANDMARKS PRESERVATION MOVEMENT A look at 50 years of historic preservation in New York City and the 1965 Landmarks Law that made it possible.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters. 9 P.M. (ESPN) OF MIRACLES AND MEN In this “30 for 30” entry, Jonathan Hock tells the story of the 1980 “miracle on ice” hockey game at the Winter Olympics in Lake Placid, N.Y., from the perspective of the heavily favored Soviet team, which ended up losing to the United States.Advertisement10 P.M. (AMC) BETTER CALL SAUL Bob Odenkirk, left, reprises his role as Saul Goodman, Walter White’s shady lawyer in “Breaking Bad,” in this new series, set six years before the two meet, which recounts how Jimmy McGill, a debt-burdened ambulance chaser, changed his name and got tight with a drug lord. For those concerned about a disappointing prequel, Alessandra Stanley wrote in The Times, “There is absolutely no need to worry.” The show, she said, “is better than good: It’s delightful — in a brutal, darkly comic way, of course.”What’s Streaming NowALL GOOD THINGS (2010) Ryan Gosling portrays David Marks, a fictional character based on Robert Durst, a son of the New York real estate developer Seymour Durst, in this film by Andrew Jarecki. Kirsten Dunst is Katie (above, with Mr. Gosling), a stand-in for Robert’s wife, Kathie, who disappeared in 1982 in a case that remains unsolved. Frank Langella is Sanford Marks, the patriarch based on the older Mr. Durst, who seemingly drives his son to madness with his disappointment in David’s inability to be a worthy heir. Not that David cares about following in his father’s footsteps once Katie takes an interest in him. “Mr. Jarecki gets much right in this movie, his fiction feature debut, but he never invests it with urgency,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. (netflix.com)KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.