AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck5:50 P.M. (Encore) SIDEWAYS (2004) As Miles, a mopey divorced writer on a trip through California wine country with his narcissistic soon-to-be married friend, Paul Giamatti explains his love of pinot noir — a notoriously difficult grape to cultivate that can yield sublime delights — to Virginia Madsen’s sad-eyed waitress, and she falls hard. So do viewers watching this scene, which Manohla Dargis, writing in The New York Times, called “a small masterpiece.” It took guts for the director Alexander Payne to cast Mr. Giamatti as a leading man because he’s neither pretty nor a big star. But it works. “You need to understand that the truth of both a human being and a screen performance doesn’t exist only in grace and beauty,” she added, “but in small fissures and cracks, in the tiny vein on Miles’s forehead that throbs out the rhythm of his anguish.” (Image: Thomas Haden Church, left, and Mr. Giamatti)8 P.M. (CW) CRAZY EX-GIRLFRIEND Rebecca Bunch, a miserable corporate lawyer in Manhattan, runs into a hunky summer-camp crush who’s about to move back home to West Covina, Calif., and as fast as you can say case closed, she quits her job and follows him west. Only he doesn’t know. Rebecca Bloom stars in this TV musical, which she created with the screenwriter Aline Brosh McKenna of “The Devil Wears Prada.” Vincent Rodriguez III is Josh, the heartthrob in question. And Santino Fontana is Greg, the friend who helps Rebecca track her target like a heat-seeking missile. More “Avenue Q” than “42nd Street,” and originally shot for Showtime, “this is a show about willing yourself, even past reason, to hope,” James Poniewozik wrote in The Times. When last we saw our heroine in “Jane the Virgin,” at 9, she had just given birth to a bundle of joy she named Mateo — only to have him swept away by a nurse for a hearing test. But soon enough Sin Rostro lets it be known that they’ve kidnapped the baby for ransom. If only Rogelio would stop tweeting about it.8 P.M. (CBS) THE BIG BANG THEORY Sheldon learns that his living arrangements are about to change and decides to return to 2003.10 P.M. (NBC) BLINDSPOT This week’s clue sends the team scurrying to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, where Jane may be the only thing that can stop a pandemic. (Image: Jaimie Alexander)10 P.M. (FX) FARGO All-day breakfast, anyone? Season 2 of this delicious anthology series moves to 1979, where a triple homicide makes the Waffle Hut in Luverne, Minn., look more like a steak house. Kirsten Dunst and Jesse Plemons head up the cast as a nice couple with a body-disposal problem. Ted Danson is the sheriff, and Patrick Wilson is his son-in-law, a state trooper. And Jean Smart is the matriarch of a Kansas City crime syndicate eager to expand her territory into the great white north.11:30 P.M. (Flix) CITY OF GOD (2003) It was built as a housing project in the 1960s, the salvation of some of Rio de Janeiro’s impoverished residents. Twenty years later it had become a violent, drug-ridden favela. In this scorching Oscar-nominated drama, Fernando Meirelles uses children from the slum to tell the tale of two young men struggling to escape its lethal hold. Stephen Holden, writing in The Times, likened it to a birthday party run amok: “You watch in helpless disbelief as the apple-cheeked revelers turn into little devils gleefully smashing everything in sight.” (Image: Alexandre Rodrigues, left, and Alice Braga)11:35 P.M. (NBC) THE TONIGHT SHOW STARRING JIMMY FALLON Clive Owen. Enough said.What’s Streaming NowJANE THE VIRGIN This series’s first season, starring the Golden Globe-winning Gina Rodriguez as a would-be teacher saving herself for marriage who’s accidentally artificially inseminated, arrives on Netflix. (netflix.com)Advertisement