FEB. 6, 2015
PARIS —  The 20-year-old Díaz twins, who make up the Franco-Cuban duo Ibeyi, are almost comically different. Lisa-Kaindé, far right, with her dramatic halo of hair, is chatty and easygoing; Naomi is almond-eyed and enigmatic. They live with their mother, who is also their manager, but have never attended the same school and have different social circles. “People never called us ‘the twins,’ ” Lisa-Kaindé said. “We aren’t detached, but ...”Naomi interrupted: “We’re not best friends.”But their personalities intertwine in their haunting, otherworldly music. Lisa-Kaindé, the primary songwriter, sings and plays piano. Naomi sings backup and handles percussion, playing the Cajon and Bata drum. Sung in English, Yoruba and a smidgen of French, their self-titled debut album, with its spiritual Yoruba chants, hip-hop beats and minimal electronics, will be released by XL Recordings on Feb. 17. (Ibeyi performs at Music Hall of Williamsburg on March 25.)The sisters were born in Paris and spent time in Cuba, where their father, the well-known percussionist Angá Díaz, was from. He played with bands like Buena Vista Social Club and died when they were 11; their older sister, Yanira, died of a brain aneurysm in 2013. The album is dedicated to them. “It’s not just about death, but about love and hope,” Lisa-Kaindé said.As they chatted with William Van Meter in the garden cafe of the Hotel Amour here, a man tapped Naomi on the shoulder and said, “You look amazing.” Lisa-Kaindé laughed, hugged her and said, “Of course she looks amazing — she’s my sister!” These are excerpts from their conversation.AdvertisementQ. Did you start playing music because of your father? A. Naomi I started playing the Cajon the day my father died. It was unconscious.Lisa-Kaindé Our family never said, “You must be a musician because your father was, and you must take this legacy.” We were really free.Did you have disagreements when making the record?Lisa-Kaindé It wasn’t so much disagreements as confrontations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Naomi Lisa was sure what she didn’t want to do. I was sure of what I wanted. I said we’re doing this with only the two of us, with electronic sounds and hip-hop beats. At the end, we were in the same way of thinking. I’m more tough. She’s more calm. It was a balance between my world and her world.AdvertisementLisa-Kaindé I couldn’t make an album alone. It would be depressing — nobody would like it! And if she made one, it would be gangster rap and no one would like it. Naomi No, it wouldn’t.Lisa-Kaindé She’s a gangster! She will marry a rapper. She’s obsessed with them.What’s behind singing some songs in Yoruba? Naomi Yoruba is a language from Africa. When the Nigerian slaves were shipped to Cuba, the culture remained. It’s a dead language there, except for the religion, Santería.Lisa-Kaindé There is something special about Yoruba. Everyone gets it; you can feel it. We grew up listening to those chants. We are singing religious prayers. We went to choir with our mother.What do you think of the United States opening up relations with Cuba again?Lisa-Kaindé We go [to Cuba] once a year. It’s a complicated situation. It’s good, but it can be dangerous. I don’t want Cuba to be Miami! I don’t want rich people to buy the city. There is a vibe and culture. You go to Cuba, and you understand things. There are ghosts and energy everywhere.A version of this interview appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page AR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Finding a Balance Between Two Worlds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.