AdvertisementSupported byPlaylistBy Jon CaramanicaFifth HarmonyREFLECTIONDawn RichardBLACKHEARTFifth Harmony was formed on the second season of the American version of “The X Factor,” a collection of powerhouse singers sagely culled by Simon Cowell into a girl-group phalanx. They lacked a clear, unified identity, a problem answered with a curious solution on “Reflection” (SYCO/Epic), the group’s full-length debut album.On “X Factor,” these singers covered well-known songs. On this excellent album, they cover well-known styles. All of “Reflection” reads as a homage to the last two or so years of pop and R&B: “Top Down” sounds like an Iggy Azalea/Charli XCX hand-me-down; “Them Girls Be Like” and “Bo$$” are dutiful Beyoncé homage; “Worth It” is a Xerox of Jason Derulo’s “Wiggle”; “This Is How We Roll” is Calvin Harris club-pop.The pinnacle of this style, in which the group retells and amplifies pop’s signature gestures, ideas and lyrics comes on “Like Mariah,” a showcase of sassy vocals that’s anchored with a snippet from Mariah Carey’s “Always Be My Baby.” And yet this strategy works because all the women of Fifth Harmony — Ally Brooke, Camila Cabello, Dinah Jane, Lauren Jauregui and Normani Kordei — are impressive, flexible singers. They’re enthusiasts, not robots.That said, when making music in the context of a group formed on a television show, it might be difficult to see ideas outside the context in which you were born. That would explain why Dawn Richard — late of Danity Kane, formed on the third run of “Making the Band” — has lately been spiraling into unconventional styles and sounds.“Blackheart” (Our Dawn) is her latest solo album, a swampy, moody collection of songs that show her to be a conflicted songwriter and a vocalist willing to bury herself in the mix if it means drawing more meaning out. There are flickers of Ciara’s muscularity here but also of Björk’s eccentricity. Ms. Richard makes slow, deliberate movements; sometimes they undersell her talent, but just as often they showcase a different side of it. Listening to this, one might wonder which member of Fifth Harmony will snap first? Smart money is on Ms. Jauregui.PalisadesMIND GAMESAre we ready for a rap-rock reappraisal yet? In critical circles, that time may never come, though it should: For a stretch in the late 1990s and early 2000s, hip-hop effectively ate mainstream rock from within. It was messy and unwieldy, but also aggressive and inevitable. Now there’s a new chaotic, ambitious and bizarre hybrid. A few years back, bands like Attack Attack! began dominating the Warped Tour. Then groups like Falling in Reverse turned the style into gothic theater. Now Palisades is going for the pop heart. On its second album, “Mind Games” (Rise), this New Jersey band uses metalcore’s juxtaposition of smooth and screamed vocals, a hip-hop approach to production and the pneumatic-drill intensity of dubstep for a sound that will surely be maligned but no less effective for it.Years & YearsY & Y EPThe logical end to the revival of 2-step garage as a British pop force in recent years is a song like the blissful “Desire,” by the ascendant London trio Years & Years. It takes the template of a more faithful group like Disclosure and polishes it up a touch, emphasizing the synthesizer melody, flattening out the drums and adding a vocalist, Olly Alexander, with a burr-less voice. “I want desire/’cause your love only gets me abused,” he sings, though he doesn’t sound frustrated at all. This slice of Rick Astley-esque pop-soul appears on “Y & Y EP” (Interscope), the debut American EP by Years & Years, which consists of Mr. Alexander, the bassist Mikey Goldsworthy and the keyboardist Emre Turkmen. On this sharp EP — only the woozy “Memo” is a misfire — the trio is jubilant and propulsive, rewriting dance-floor rhythms into daytime funk.The JackaMore than most hip-hop scenes, the Bay Area has created its own ecosystem of local heroes. For more than a decade, until he was fatally shot on Monday night, the Jacka was one of those stars, a rapper who, with his somber, hardened lyrics, served as the scene’s de facto conscience. The Jacka got his start as a member of the Mob Figaz crew. A onetime drug dealer who converted to Islam, he made music that bridged the gulf between wisdom and the struggles it took to earn it; see especially his standout 2005 album, “The Jack Artist,” and also “Tear Gas,” from 2009. In recent months, he released a pair of strong albums — “Highway Robbery” (Team Early/The Artist), a collaboration with the wheezy Freeway, and “What Happened to the World” (The Artist), a characteristically low-key album that was, depending on how you looked at it, filled with either pride or sadness.Advertisement