By BRIAN SEIBERTFEB. 6, 2015
PHOENIX —  “If you love the warmth of the sun ... go.” These words, which you might find in a tourist brochure about this desert city, actually come from the 19th-century Danish ballet choreographer August Bournonville, recounting in his memoirs a trip to southern Italy, not the American Southwest. Yet there is a connection between those sentiments and him and Phoenix, or there will be on Thursday, when Ballet Arizona becomes the first American company to mount a complete production of the 1842 ballet inspired by that Italian journey, Bournonville’s “Napoli.”This connection can be explained by another one. Since 2000, Ballet Arizona’s artistic director has been Ib Andersen, who was born in Copenhagen and who trained in the Bournonville tradition at the School of the Royal Danish Ballet. After becoming the youngest principal dancer in that company’s history, he spent a decade with New York City Ballet, where he was the last man for whom George Balanchine created major roles.Attracted by the sun — he is also a serious painter — he has said he moved to Phoenix for the light, and when he took over the helm of the local ballet troupe, he imagined staying for three or four years.Fifteen years on, he is still far from Denmark and New York, having fashioned Ballet Arizona into a troupe with a national reputation. That renown derives largely from his stagings of works by Balanchine. Still, Bournonville is in his blood. “Napoli” was the first ballet he ever performed in, at the age of 7. “I think it is a great ballet,” he said last month in the skylight-equipped headquarters that Ballet Arizona opened in late 2013. “And I must say, after staging it, that it’s so much better than I thought it was. It’s extraordinary, actually.”AdvertisementWhy, then, has no other American company attempted it? “It’s damn hard,” Mr. Andersen said with a wry chuckle. Later that day, during “Napoli” rehearsals, he repeated the phrase to his dancers enough times that it seemed to define his approach, sympathetic to the dancers’ plight yet unflinchingly cleareyed about how the smallest detail should look.AdvertisementSome challenges arise from the steps and the style. Bournonville choreography can be exhausting — jump after jump — but it is not supposed to look at all difficult. As the feet are busy with tricky sequences, the upper body and arms are held modestly or carried softly, as if nothing much were happening below. The phrasing is also distinctively irregular and fluid. “You have to sing it,” Mr. Andersen said.“You need to keep doing it,” he continued, “until it’s not difficult — for you — anymore.” It helps that these dancers have some experience. Several have performed the third act of “Napoli,” an overflowing fisherman’s bounty of dance. That act, among the greatest encapsulations of joy in all of ballet, is often excerpted. (Soloists from the Royal Danish Ballet performed it recently at the Joyce Theater in Manhattan.) The first two acts, much rarer, pose different problems. They are where the story is told.The plot is both simple and contrived. It concerns a fisherman named Gennaro and his girlfriend, Teresina. He must win her mother’s blessing and rescue her after she is lost at sea. But there is much more action than such a summary suggests. The first act, which Mr. Andersen characterizes as “a masterpiece, unlike any other ballet,” recreates in romanticized form an entire bustling Italian village.“The flow is bang, bang, one thing after another, 30 seconds of this, 45 seconds of that,” he said. “Or there are three or four things happening at the same time, but it’s done in such a way that your eye is led to what you need to see. The construction is amazing.”This proto-cinematic storytelling is accomplished mostly through mime. “Bournonville mime is very different from what you find in ‘Swan Lake,’ ” he explained. “It has to be much more natural. For this generation, it’s very hard. It’s a kind of lost art. When I grew up, we had mime classes. I don’t think any of these dancers have ever been taught that way.”So he teaches them. In rehearsal, his corrections inclined to adjustments of musical timing, making the gestures at once more clearly enunciated and less stiff. Unaffectedness and believability were his watchwords. “Acting should not be acted,” he told the dancers. “You need to be the person. It has to come from your whole body.”Often he pushed for greater commitment, as when he teased the dancers about their unconvincing flashes of stereotypical Italian temperament. But no comment worked as well as when Mr. Andersen, still elfin in his early 60s, demonstrated. What had been vague suddenly snapped into focus. What had been mumbled instantly turned distinct.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The second act of “Napoli,” in which Teresina is transformed into a Naiad by a seductively pagan sea spirit in the Blue Grotto of Capri, is notoriously problematic. In the 1930s, it acquired a nickname from the cafe where bored audience members waited it out. Mr. Andersen acknowledges the trouble — he thinks it might stem from the “monotonous” music — and he admits to tinkering.AdvertisementThat does not mean, however, that he believes in updating, as others do. The Royal Danish Ballet’s 2009 production of “Napoli,” under the direction of Nikolaj Hübbe, was set in the 1950s, with cigarettes, a motorcycle, a cross-dresser and references to the Mafia; some of the music was new, and the power of Christian faith was replaced by the magic of love. To Mr. Andersen, changes this extreme are misguided and disrespectful.“Somehow people think that if ballets are that old, you can do anything with them,” he said. “I don’t agree. If you think the old version doesn’t work, you should bury it. Or the problem is that the people staging it are not good enough. Bad staging is usually a lack of information. If you give the dancers enough information, it becomes alive for them.”The historical authenticity of any new production of a 19th-century ballet is shaky. Most works of that vintage, even the most famous ones, have been so altered over the decades that no one can say exactly what the original choreography was. As Mr. Andersen concedes, this is true of much of “Napoli,” particularly the second act. Yet there is something special about the Bournonville legacy, an unbroken continuity preserved in the political and geographic isolation of Denmark and instilled in each succeeding generation there. Mr. Andersen was bred in that tradition, and he considers stagings of Bournonville by outsiders to be unidiomatic.About his own chances, he is sanguine. “It will be interesting to see how we do,” he said. “Will it be the way it would be if the dancers had been studying Bournonville since they were 7, as I did? No. But it’s not really like that in Denmark anymore.”When he returned to the Royal Danish Ballet a few years ago, after an absence of decades, to stage Bournonville’s “Kermesse in Bruges,” he found the dancers very talented, but Bournonville seemed no longer to be second nature for them.For Ballet Arizona’s “Napoli,” the link to Danish tradition is physical. The sets and costumes are being rented from the Royal Danish Ballet, flown in or shipped through the Panama Canal. But the crucial connector arrived quite a while ago, lured by the sun.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page AR27 of the New York edition with the headline: Striving for Steps That Look Effortless.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.