By WILLIAM ROBINFEB. 6, 2015
Thomas Adès almost broke up the Punch Brothers. “I wanted to be him,” Chris Thile, the frontman of that progressive bluegrass band, recently recalled of his first encounter with the surreal music Mr. Adès composed. “I was wondering if I should go back to the drawing board: put everything on hold for five years and figure out a way to do something more like that.”Mr. Thile ultimately kept the band together — and wrote a mandolin concerto to release some bottled-up creativity — but the experience had lasting repercussions.At 43, Mr. Adès (pronounced ADD-iss) is youthful by classical music’s standards, though it has been more than two decades since he was first hailed as Britain’s compositional messiah. And despite his young age, he commands a devoted if unexplored following among even younger American composers, as they disclosed in recent interviews. “He’s unlocked some sort of secretive, complicated rhythm, wherein your body is moved even if your mind is titillated,” Mr. Thile said.That has deeply informed the Punch Brothers’ sound, including that on the band’s newest album, “The Phosphorescent Blues.” “The boys and I have listened to a ton of Adès,” Mr. Thile added. “Particularly in the polyrhythmic department — that’s absolutely affected what Punch Brothers is up to these days.”AdvertisementThe composer Andrew Norman voiced similar enthusiasm for Mr. Adès’s oeuvre. “There’s something about his music that is particularly, so vividly imagined that people love stealing from it, myself included,” he said. On Feb. 22, the Calder Quartet will juxtapose Mr. Norman’s “Sabina” and Mr. Adès’s “Arcadiana” in a concert sponsored by Carnegie Hall at the Brooklyn Public Library’s Central Library.“Andrew really looks up to and respects Adès,” said a violinist for the Calder, Andrew Bulbrook.That fervor is pervasive among Mr. Thile and Mr. Norman’s generation. “Composers are a catty bunch,” said the composer Timo Andres. “That Adès is pretty widely adored, at least among my peers, says something.”AdvertisementMinimalism and pop are often cited as the foremost influences on this country’s eclectic younger composers. But Mr. Adès, with his strong commitment to both classical tradition and the avant-garde, complicates that narrative. Teasing out his place in American music reveals much about how today’s composers absorb influence and forge a dialogue with one another. Mr. Adès’s trans-Atlantic reach might hark back to the role Stravinsky once played in reshaping American music. But unlike that of Stravinsky (and his American acolytes), the impact of Mr. Adès has been felt across multiple aesthetics and even genres.For many musicians, his 1997 composition “Asyla” represents a singular fount of inspiration. A compressed symphonic masterwork, “Asyla” was the culmination of Mr. Adès’s omnivorous early style, and its 1999 recording entranced Mr. Norman and his college classmates. “We would just listen to that thing over and over again and discuss it — a lot of us stole quite liberally from it,” he said.Others attested to the persuasive grip of “Asyla.” “There was this moment where the third movement of ‘Asyla’ circulated in the new-music community almost like a hit single,” the composer Gabriel Kahane said. That movement, “Ecstasio,” masses swirling orchestral forces to summon the druggy techno of a London nightclub. Mr. Kahane cited the irregular rhythms of his pop song “Haircuts & Airports” as indebted to Mr. Adès.The composer Ted Hearne recalled a fervent debate among friends over the best new orchestral music: “I remember them being like: It’s ‘Asyla,’ Ted! It’s ‘Asyla!’ ”Christopher Cerrone described microscopic details he filched from Mr. Adès for his opera “Invisible Cities,” a finalist for the 2014 Pulitzer Prize in Music. “Asyla” acted as a textbook for unconventional but effective instrumental writing, he said: “A huge percussion battery? It’s in there. A quarter-tone piano? It’s in there. Weird, bass oboe solo? It’s in there.” When Mr. Adès attended a performance of “Invisible Cities,” Mr. Cerrone said, “I walked up to him — there was a scene with almglocken and quarter-tone harp — and I was like, ‘I stole this from you.’ ”Mr. Adès offers a model for composers “who want to write music which is not necessarily Minimalist and what is not necessarily avant-garde,” Mr. Cerrone added.Mr. Norman echoed that sentiment. “His music is riding a line between a Romantic sensibility and a more modern one,” he said, “and that is definitely something that I do.” That tension is palpable in Mr. Norman’s “Play,” a sprawling work recently recorded by the Boston Modern Orchestra Project, in which dense extended techniques undergird a dizzyingly hyper-Romantic vocabulary — an “Asyla” for the 21st century. Caroline Shaw, whose polyglot “Partita” won the Pulitzer in 2013, drew parallels between Mr. Norman’s music and that of Mr. Adès. “It feels organized and detailed and precisely engineered, and imaginative, with funny and profound surprises,” she said.Ms. Shaw was particularly inspired by Mr. Adès’s attraction to the modest harpsichord works of Couperin, which he has  recomposed for orchestra. “Being the giant of modern music that he is,” she explained, it “gave me permission to love some of the music that I love and to do some of the things that I do.”AdvertisementMr. Andres likened Mr. Adès’s aesthetic to that of Gyorgy Ligeti: “There’s the sense of the overarching,” he said. “Over all the obsessive detail — and the cool flashy orchestrations and all that stuff — is the sense of this huge object being mobilized in time.”Mr. Andres’s 2012 Piano Quintet mirrors Mr. Adès’s own Quintet, refracting Schumann into exquisite miniatures. A culinary enthusiast, Mr. Andres compared his own assimilation of influences to a sieve: “When it first comes in, there are big granules sticking out, and you can really tell what the thing is. And then over time, it filters into the lower substrate of my language and it’s still there — just as much — you just can’t hear it on the surface. It’s not in big, identifiable clumps.”Sharing this syntax bonds these younger composers, who borrow as much from one another as they do from Mr. Adès. Mr. Cerrone, Mr. Norman, Mr. Hearne and Mr. Andres belong to the collective Sleeping Giant, which has created a reimagining of the Mozart Requiem that will have its premiere with the Albany Symphony in March.“I’m influenced by music by my peers all the time; I try to steal from it as much as possible,” Mr. Cerrone said. That interchange is manifest in Mr. Hearne’s “Law of Mosaics,” a virtuosic pastiche recorded by the string orchestra A Far Cry. “Law of Mosaics” chops up and furiously reassembles pre-existing music by Mr. Norman as well as Barber, Vivaldi and Mr. Adès.“It’s not hearing Adès,” Mr. Hearne said. “But it might be hearing Beethoven, or it might be hearing the bygone world of classical music.”For Mr. Kahane, “the history of all art can also be expressed as a conversation between members of a community who are all stealing from each other.”“What’s so beautiful about ‘Law of Mosaics,’ he said, “is that it really just makes that conversation — which I think has always been part of how we’ve evolved artistically — front and center.”Though Mr. Adès and his enthusiasts move in the small, interconnected sphere of contemporary music, the Americans described only a handful of encounters with him. “God, I’d be like a little groupie: ‘Mr. Adès, Mr. Adès!’ I would love to meet him,” Mr. Thile said. “If Mr. Adès ever wants to write anything for the mandolin, I am all ears and fingers.”AdvertisementTo these composers, Mr. Adès is neither mentor nor friend; the crux of the rapport is not personal but musical. (It is bolstered by a minor black market of scores and samizdat live recordings traded by email.)“It’s completely news to me,” Mr. Adès said with a laugh when asked about his influence. In March, he is to conduct the New York Philharmonic in the American premiere of his work “Totentanz.” Based on a grim 15th-century frieze, “Totentanz” is far from the uproarious polystylism of “Asyla,” though it shares its balance of the lyrical and the unsettling.Mr. Adès spends much of his time in Los Angeles and expressed admiration for the vibrancy of American new music. But he hesitated at the idea that he represented a paragon. “The idea of having ‘followers’ is quite funny for me, because I’m a great non-follower in a way,” he said. Having emerged as a cage-rattling enfant terrible, he has a very different approach to musical influence. To truly imitate his path would mean rejecting his music.“I want to be shocked; I want to be outraged,” he said. “If I felt, ‘Oh, yeah, I’m familiar with this,’ I would think, actually in that case — perhaps this isn’t anything to do with me at all.”For an iconoclast who once actively courted controversy, Mr. Adès was flummoxed by a communally focused generation that so readily embraced his music: “I’m obviously rather stunned by the whole idea.”An article on Feb. 8 about the classical composer Thomas Adès, who has influenced many younger musicians in pop and classical music, included a misattributed quote referring to Mr. Adès’s “Arcadiana.” It was the Calder Quartet violinist Andrew Bulbrook who said, “Oh, wow, I’m on a concert with the greatest string quartet composed in the last 50 years!” It was not the composer Andrew Norman, though he is an Adès fan. (The error also appeared in a music review about the JACK Quartet and the Calder Quartet on Feb. 26.)A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page AR10 of the New York edition with the headline: They’re Always Borrowing His Stuff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.