AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave ItzkoffThe ninth-floor office of Lorne Michaels at 30 Rockefeller Plaza, overlooking the storied Studio 8H where “Saturday Night Live” is performed, is furnished with framed photographs of the current “S.N.L.” cast and ready supplies of popcorn and Tootsie Rolls and Pops. But it is also a war room where, on a recent Friday night, Mr. Michaels, the creator and longtime executive producer of the show, was simultaneously planning a new broadcast of this NBC sketch-comedy institution and a 40th anniversary special, to be shown Feb. 15, that will bring alumni including Bill Murray, Tina Fey, Eddie Murphy and Will Ferrell back to the studio. NBC will also re-air the 1975 debut episode of “S.N.L.” on Feb. 14.Asked how this was all coming together, Mr. Michaels said, with calmness and civility: “It’s a nightmare. I do wake up in the middle of the night, thinking about it.”When he is not stressing about the occasion, Mr. Michaels can be persuaded to reminisce about the many enduring television moments and lasting careers he has helped shape. “I wanted to see whether there were other people out there that felt the same way as I did,” he said of the show’s creation. “It just sort of found its way.”Mr. Michaels is also a participant in “Saturday Night Live: The Book” (Taschen Books), which contains 500 pages of behind-the-scenes photographs and details about the show’s history. Here, in these excerpts from a recent interview, he shares his recollections about some of the “S.N.L.” highlights featured in the book.Oct. 11, 1975: John Belushi and Michael O’Donoghue in “The Wolverines,” the cold-open sketch from the show’s debut broadcast.I’d never done a live show. There’d been no pilot. The biggest argument before the show was that George Carlin wanted to wear a T-shirt, and the network wanted him to wear a suit. So the compromise was that he wore a suit with a T-shirt. I toyed with opening with Andy Kaufman doing “Mighty Mouse,” but it didn’t use the cast members. And I agonized about opening with “Wolverines,” because I thought it was, as [the writer] Anne Beatts used to say, “a blow for surrealism.” But the set was cracked paint and rundown, and it reflected the city then. It was in harmony, both in its visual signal to the audience and in its sense of humor. [The NBC president] Herb Schlosser said to me later, “I thought you were going to do Rich Little and the Marine marching band.”Dec. 13, 1975: Chevy Chase and the guest host Richard Pryor perform “Word Association,” a sketch about race and racial slurs.In the original presentation that I did [for “S.N.L.” to NBC], I mentioned the people that I thought were the most important in contemporary comedy. They said you can’t have [Pryor], and I said, “Well, if I can’t have him then I’m not doing the show.” After a day or two of my not being there anymore, they came back and said, “We’ll allow it, but the show has to be on a seven-second delay.” So much of what we were doing in the ’70s was just what’s in the air, and there was a feeling that racism was just below the surface and always there. You can tell the intensity with which they’re performing it. The network was uncomfortable with my keeping it in when we ran it as a vintage show [this season], and I said, “You can’t not do it now.” They ran it. And nothing collapsed, we’re all still here.May 14, 1977: The guest host Shelley Duvall with Jane Curtin, Gilda Radner, Mr. Michaels and Laraine Newman, preparing for the musical number “Video Vixens.”The things that were massive hits then were more like “King Tut.” John Belushi’s samurai. Billy [Murray] and Gilda doing the nerds. But this was just as important, because it was the beginning of our doing production numbers, and it came from Gilda and reflecting on punk, in the same way that she did [the Patti Smith sendup] Candy Slice. [The show’s reputation as a] boys’ club came much, much later, more in the ’90s. I always thought, Really? Because the defining thing of what we had in the first five years was how great the women were and that Gilda was just as big a star as John or Chevy. Look how cute Laraine looks there. But they were just as fierce as the men, trust me.Oct. 27, 1990: Patrick Swayze and Chris Farley as two finalists vying to be a Chippendales dancer.That’s Jim Downey [who wrote the sketch with Al Franken and Rob Schneider] at his best. Farley was very comfortable with body stuff. His commitment was total. And Chris’s look of disappointment when he didn’t get it was just a wonderful moment. There’s a time when a thing coalesces, and we call it, later, a cast. Our audience knows that people are at the beginnings of things, so they watch them in the same way that they watch college basketball. They’re people you might see, later on, in a more professional way. But this is the time where they’re still growing, and you can actually see it before your eyes. So we get criticized because they’re not yet that group, and then later we get criticized because they were great and the new group isn’t living up to whatever. When people talk about what cast was the best, I go, that’s when you were in high school.Sept. 29, 2001: Paul Simon performs “The Boxer,” and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is flanked by firefighters and police officers in the cold open.I asked Paul to do “The Boxer,” which is a New York song, and deals with power and resilience and toughness. When the firemen and the Port Authority guys and the cops all showed up, they had come, literally, from ground zero, and it was a powerful moment when they walked in the studio. It was solemn. I said to Rudy: You have to give a speech about why it’s important to do the show, and I’m going to say, “But can we be funny?” And you’re going to say, “Why start now?” At dress rehearsal, I could see he’d already broken into a smile. He knew he was going to get a very big laugh. On air, I’m making direct eye contact with him. I’m saying the line but also: “You cannot start laughing. You cannot tip what we’re going to do.”Oct. 18, 2008: Alec Baldwin, Sarah Palin and Mr. Michaels watch Tina Fey, on a monitor, perform her impression of Ms. Palin.I told Alec, “We’re having Sarah Palin come on the show,” and he said, “I promised that I would introduce a documentary at the Hamptons film festival, and I can’t get out of it.” I go: “Alec, this is just absolutely the right call. They would never understand why you would come into the city and watch the show, standing next to Sarah Palin. You stay there, and you introduce that documentary. I’ll see you soon.” He called back: “All right. All right.” People never like hearing any of this, but Sarah Palin was incredibly gracious, and then John and Cindy McCain came and worked with Tina, doing Sarah Palin, the Saturday before the election. It’s a remarkable thing, because I can’t think of any other country which would embrace people for not taking themselves seriously, while going for the highest leadership job there is.March 9, 2013: A rehearsal for Justin Timberlake’s induction into the Five-Timers Club, with the fellow members Steve Martin, Chevy Chase and Martin Short.The Five-Timers Club started with Tom Hanks. It was his idea, actually, that there was this private club where only the people who had hosted five times just met up and spent time. Justin wanted to do it, so I called everybody. Chevy was here, and Marty was here. Steve was here. Danny [Aykroyd] was around. It was fun. I think the influences become part of the show, and you see that the traditions just live on. You see Bill Murray’s influence on everyone from Adam Sandler to Jason Sudeikis to Jimmy Fallon. Gilda and Laraine and Jane are huge influences on Tina [Fey], Amy [Poehler], Maya [Rudolph], Kristen [Wiig]. Chris Rock when he saw Eddie Murphy, and Eddie Murphy when he saw Garrett Morris. Somehow the boundaries were wide enough for very different people to thrive.Advertisement