Well, that didn’t take long.Twelve minutes into the second episode of “Better Call Saul” and we are back in that marvelous seam, found so often in “Breaking Bad,” where Quentin Tarantino meets Sergio Leone, a place where sadism is practiced by outlaws in empty, wide-open deserts. Jimmy McGill — still not yet Saul — and the skate-n-fall twins have scammed the wrong abuelita, the one who calls the easily incensed drug dealer, Tuco, her “mijo.” (It’s the very ironic name of the episode, often translated from Spanish as “sweetie.”) If Jimmy (Bob Odenkirk) flailed in the series opener as a debater and lawyer, “Mijo” is all about his finding his chops. His first case: those aforementioned twins, who Tuco (Raymond Cruz) decides should be skinned alive. A little excessive, Jimmy gently suggests, after he has been freed from duct-tape captivity thanks to the intercession of Nacho Varga (Michael Mando), the criminal superego to Tuco’s id. And so begins a negotiation, with Jimmy trying to spare not just the twins’ lives, but also their slow and excruciating deaths. It takes a few stressful minutes of talking, lying and flattery (“You’re tough but fair”), but the plea bargain ends with Tuco’s agreeing to snap one leg per lad.“You’re the worst lawyer, ever,” screams a twin, after Jimmy has driven him to the hospital.“Hey, I just talked you down from a death sentence to six months’ probation,” Jimmy retorts. “I’m the best lawyer ever.”That is an exaggeration, but the sweet, chewy center of this episode shows Jimmy at work, having re-embraced the low-paying life of a public defender, now with post-close-call dedication. The director of this episode is Michelle MacLaren, known for her masterly ability to dial up tension and orchestrate violence in “Breaking Bad” classics, as well as episodes of “The Walking Dead” and “Game of Thrones.” And watching Tuco assault the twins with a granny cane will remind you – the director can do bloodshed with the best of them.But my favorite part of “Mijo” is the elaborate, jaunty montage of Jimmy at court, which pays tribute to the elaborate, jaunty montage in Bob Fosse’s “All That Jazz,” complete with the same Vivaldi concerto and “It’s showtime!” catchphrase. In a fluid series of snippets, we see Jimmy greet his low-life clients, argue his long-shot cases, collect his meager paychecks and buy cup after cup of vending machine coffee. This is television executed at a level and degree of difficulty that is altogether too rare, with dialogue and inventive edits that suggest the showrunners Vince Gilligan and Peter Gould have assembled a crew whose members are at the top of their craft. The only person immune to Jimmy’s eloquence and endless gesticulations is Mike Ehrmantraut (Jonathan Banks), the parking lot attendant who we know from “Breaking Bad” will become a part-time employee and professional heavy for Jimmy once Jimmy becomes Saul. Watching this relationship evolve may be one of the pleasures of this show, and not because it’s headed for bromance. It isn’t. Even at the height of Saul’s career as a plaintiff’s lawyer and racketeer, Mike is invariably sneering. About Mike. We learned precious little of his biography in “Breaking Bad,” other than that he is an ex-cop from Philadelphia and a doting grandfather. We witnessed firsthand his ingenuity — he shorted out the lights in a building with a batch of balloons! — his courage and his (almost) unerring instinct for survival. What we don’t know is how he segues from a police officer in Philly to a parking-lot gatekeeper in Albuquerque, or from that menial job to the master of dark arts for the city’s meth king, Gus Fring. For a man of his talents, he seems to have taken a long slide down the status pole. How and why?“Mijo” ends with a client visiting Jimmy’s office-apartment, in the rear of the nail salon. Well, Jimmy thinks the visitor is a client. In fact, it’s Nacho, who has dropped by to find out if Jimmy will help him rob Craig Kettleman, the suspected embezzler of some $1.5 million in county treasure. “You point me at where they have their cash,” Nacho says, “and I’ll pay you a —  what do you call it? — a finder’s fee. Call it 10 percent, 100 large.”Never mind the shabby math (isn’t Jimmy being shorted 50 grand?). As an upstanding member of the bar, an officer of the court, Mr. McGill is suitably and genuinely taken aback. So he begs off and delivers the essential line of the episode: “I’m a lawyer, not a criminal.” Well, you’re going to become a criminal, Jimmy. A sometimes reluctant criminal, but a criminal nonetheless. “Breaking Bad” was the story of one bland-seeming, underachiever’s journey from chemistry teacher to thug. Something similar is shaping up in “Better Call Saul,” though Jimmy was never exactly a model citizen. We already know that he was an insurer’s nightmare in a youth filled with staged accidents. Still, it’s clear that, willing or not, he will soon become embroiled in illegal plots with dangerous people. Arguably, the greatest revelation of “Mijo” is that Saul Goodman’s first step into this netherworld — his original sin, if you will — can be traced to a mistake, and one that he did not make. His red-headed confederates crashed into the wrong Mercury Sable. That delivered Jimmy into Tuco’s clutches, which ultimately steered Nacho to his office, which is going to lead Jimmy to the dark side. Bring on the moral decay.A brief hat-tip to No-Doze (Cesar Garcia) and Gonzo (Jesus Payan), reprising their jobs as Tuco’s henchmen. You guys are doomed. Let’s hope that you two have a pleasant few years, because we have already seen your deaths in “Breaking Bad” and they are pretty gruesome.See you back here in six days, for episode three. Until then, I’m sleeping in my space blanket.Speaking of which: any theories about how Chuck McGill went from founding partner at a blue-chip law firm to cellphone phobic? Talk about difficult journeys — that could not have been a fun one.