The six-time Tony Award winner Audra McDonald will star opposite her husband, the Tony nominee Will Swenson, in a production of Eugene O’Neill’s drama “A Moon for the Misbegotten” in August as part of the Williamstown Theater Festival in Massachusetts, the festival’s artistic director, Mandy Greenfield, announced on Monday. Ms. McDonald will play the strong-willed Josie, a farmer’s daughter who plots against their alcoholic landlord, James Tyrone Jr. (Mr. Swenson), only to find charged emotional connections with him. Gordon Edelstein will direct the play, which will run Aug. 5-23 on the festival’s main stage.The two other main stage productions will be world premieres of “Off the Main Road,” a play by William Inge (“Picnic”) that was thought to be lost, and “Paradise Blue,” a drama by Dominique Morisseau about a trumpeter and his struggling Detroit jazz club. “Off the Main Road” will star the Emmy Award winner Kyra Sedgwick (“The Closer”) as an emotionally fragile mother on the run with her daughter. The play will run June 30-July 19, and Evan Cabnet will direct. Casting will be announced later for “Paradise Blue,” which will run July 22-Aug. 2 and be directed by Tony winner Ruben Santiago-Hudson.On the festival’s Nikos Stage, the Tony winner Cynthia Nixon will play a newspaper editor in a power struggle in Carey Perloff’s new play “Kinship,” directed by Jo Bonney. Daniel Goldfarb’s new play “Legacy” will star Eric Bogosian and Jessica Hecht as a married couple dealing with professional letdowns and personal trials; Halley Feiffer and Greg Keller will also star, and Oliver Butler will direct. The musical “Unknown Soldier,” about a woman trying to learn the truth about a soldier in a photo found in her grandmother’s house, will also have its world premiere, with book and lyrics by Daniel Goldstein, music and lyrics by Michael Friedman, and direction by Trip Cullman.The festival will also mount a double-header of two British plays: the solo work “Chewing Gum Dreams” by Michaela Coel, and “An Intervention” by Mike Bartlett (“King Charles III”), which will feature rotating pairs of actors.This summer’s 61st festival season is the first under Ms. Greenfield, formerly the artistic producer of Manhattan Theater Club. She succeeded Jenny Gersten in Williamstown.A version of this article appears in print on 02/10/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: McDonald and Swenson to Star at Williamstown.