A tattered copy of the Magna Carta has been discovered in the archives of the municipality of Sandwich, a sleepy seaside town in eastern England, according to the local government and a historian at the University of East Anglia.News of the find comes just as the charter, often regarded as England’s first step towards civil rights, marks its 800th anniversary. Events have been scheduled across the country to mark the occasion, including a recent reunion of the four surviving copies of the original version, issued in 1215, in London this month. Between 1215 and 1300, other copies of the Magna Carta were marked with a royal seal, only two dozen of which are known to exist.The copy found in Sandwich, in the county of Kent, dates to 1300, when King Edward I issued the final version of the charter marked with such a seal. The original version signed in 1215 was issued by King John, an unpopular ruler under pressure to check his own power in the interest of preventing civil war. The document affirms the king as subject to the law like any other citizen.Nicholas Vincent, a professor at the University of East Anglia, and Mark Bateson, a community historian, found the charter in December while delving into local archives. The discovery was not made public until now as local governing bodies planned the announcement and researchers verified the document’s origins, a spokeswoman for the Kent County Council said. It was filed inside a 19th-century scrapbook kept by a researcher, alongside a version of the Charter of the Forest, a document affirming average citizens’ (and not just the aristocracy’s) access to the country’s woodlands.In a phone interview, Mr. Vincent said he had seen all 23 of the other Magna Cartas. “I’ve held them all in my hands,” he said. About the recent finding, he added: “There’s just no question it’s the original Magna Carta.”The document will probably be placed on display in Sandwich, according to the spokeswoman for the Kent County Council.A version of this article appears in print on 02/10/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Townu2019s Archives Yield Copy of Magna Carta.