By NATE CHINENOCT. 11, 2015
Jack DeJohnette, who as a drummer-bandleader has rarely drawn hard distinctions between searching and finding, recently formed a trio of compatible ideals. Featuring Ravi Coltrane on saxophones and Matt Garrison on electric bass, it’s both earthy and elastic, capable of sneaking in and out of song form, disinclined to rush toward resolution.During the first of its two sold-out sets at ShapeShifter Lab in Brooklyn on Saturday night, this trio flowed through a small handful of compositions, connecting most of them with solo or duo interludes. The performance began with what felt like a spontaneous invention, nonlinear even though it had a tonal center; Mr. DeJohnette triggered electronic pings along with his cymbals, and Mr. Garrison used a sampler and a looping pedal to create trippy atmospherics on the fly.Next week the group will record its debut album for the ECM label. Then it will embark on a tour in Europe, where it has already made a strong impression, and not just because of its appealing back story, which boils down to lineage.Mr. Coltrane, 50, and Mr. Garrison, 45, are scions of important jazz artists whose lives were entwined: the saxophonist John Coltrane and the bassist Jimmy Garrison, who played in Coltrane’s epochal quartet of the 1960s. Mr. DeJohnette, who is 73, has often recalled the rare privilege he had to sit in with that band, when he was coming up in Chicago.AdvertisementMr. DeJohnette went on to work with the saxophonist Charles Lloyd and the trumpeter Miles Davis, among many others, and established his own admirable track record as a leader. He has been a bridge between the mainstream and the avant-garde — this year he helped celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, with several acclaimed, uncompromising colleagues — and a mentor to many younger artists.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He was responsible for bringing Mr. Garrison and Mr. Coltrane together musically, years ago. And his leadership of the trio feels subtle but clear. On Saturday he began one piece by playing a row of shimmery glissandos on the piano. Mr. Coltrane engaged him in a back-and-forth that gradually took the shape of “Blue in Green,” the impressionistic Miles Davis-Bill Evans ballad.Mr. Coltrane, who played much of the set on sopranino saxophone, provided the trio’s most heroic voice, its main source of impassioned exposition. Mr. Garrison, an owner and founder of ShapeShifter Lab, shared with Mr. DeJohnette the role of catalyst. With virtuoso command of his five-string bass guitar and electronic effects, Mr. Garrison was expressionistic with color and texture; one of his free-form interludes, linking pieces by Mr. DeJohnette, was a marvel.AdvertisementLate in the set there came a smart, slanted take on “Serpentine Fire,” the Earth, Wind & Fire hit: It began terse and snakelike, evoking Mr. DeJohnette’s jazz-funk shift with Miles Davis, and built to a spiraling fury. The closer was Charlie Parker’s “Segment,” and its breakneck swing brought a welcome jolt — as did the churning abstraction into which it dissolved.A version of this article appears in print on October 12, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Spontaneous Invention and Trippy Atmospherics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.