AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck7:15 P.M. (HBO Signature) BELLE (2014) The biracial daughter (Gugu Mbatha-Raw) of a British Navy captain (Matthew Goode) struggles to transcend life as a black woman in slave-trading England after being raised in privilege by her aristocratic uncle and aunt (Tom Wilkinson and Emily Watson), and alongside her white cousin (Sarah Gadon, above right, with Ms. Mbatha-Raw), in this biopic about the historical figure Dido Elizabeth Belle (1761-1804). Directed by Amma Asante and written by Misan Sagay, the film chronicles the challenging love life of Belle, an educated beauty — including a dashing suitor, John Davinier (Sam Reid), as well as several not-so-charming ones. The movie also covers Belle’s uncle, the lord chief justice who must decide on a case involving a Zong slave ship on which more than 130 Africans were massacred for an insurance payment. “The movie plays with the historical record for dramatic effect, as is often the case when the past is disinterred for entertainment, and its realism at times groans under the weight of too many passionate speeches,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “Yet the weave of the personal and the political finally proves as irresistible as it is moving, partly because it has been drawn from extraordinary life.”2:10 P.M. (Starz Cinema) HIGHER GROUND (2011) Corinne Walker, a freewheeling teenage mother turned fundamentalist Christian (played by Vera Farmiga as an adult; her sister Taissa Farmiga as a teenager; and McKenzie Turner as a child) comes to question her faith — and her marriage — when faced with a crisis in this adaptation of “This Dark World,” a 2002 memoir by Carolyn S. Briggs. Joshua Leonard and Boyd Holbrook share the role of Corinne’s husband, a rock guitarist who saves their daughter from death after a bus crash, leading the couple onto the path of salvation. Norbert Leo Butz plays the pastor of their cultlike church. And Dagmara Dominczyk is Corinne’s best friend, who speaks in tongues to God and makes her feel loved and listened to. “There is something remarkable — you might even say miraculous — about the way ‘Higher Ground’ makes its gentle, thoughtful way across the burned-over terrain of the American culture wars,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times about this film, directed by Vera Farmiga. “Focused with sympathetic intensity on the ordeal of a single soul, it illuminates, as though from within, a complex spiritual struggle.” But, he added, “what faith and doubt have in common is that both are hard work, and the hard-won wisdom of ‘Higher Ground’ is that human nature does not necessarily distinguish between saints and sinners.”8:30 P.M. (BBC America) TOP GEAR Jeremy Clarkson, Richard Hammond and James May try to build a better ambulance. The Formula One driver Daniel Ricciardo is the star, in a reasonably priced car.9 P.M. (Syfy) NEVER LET ME GO (2010) In this adaptation of Kazuo Ishiguro’s dystopian novel, directed by Mark Romanek, three friends enter a cruel world. Kathy (Carey Mulligan, second from left, with Domhnall Gleeson at far left), the film’s narrator, calls herself a “carer.” Tommy (Andrew Garfield), the boy she loves, and Ruth (Keira Knightley, third from left, with Andrea Riseborough at far right), who steals him, are her friends at a boarding school where the children, watched over by Miss Emily (Charlotte Rampling), learn about their futures as organ “donators.” Writing in The Times, Manohla Dargis said that the “cruelty is done so prettily and with such caution that the sting remains light, giving the entire enterprise the aspect of a tasteful shocker.”10 P.M. (13), 11 P.M. (49) A PATH APPEARS In the conclusion of this “Independent Lens” presentation, Nicholas Kristof, a columnist for The New York Times, and Regina Hall look at the work of the Women’s Resource Center and Men Stopping Violence, Atlanta-based groups that help combat domestic abuse. Later Mr. Kristof travels to Kenya with Mia Farrow and her son Ronan Farrow to visit Shining Hope for Communities, which works to effect change in Kibera, a neighborhood in Nairobi where 15 percent of girls have been sexually abused before reaching school age.What’s Streaming NowIVAN & IVANA (2011) A young couple from war-torn Kosovo head to the United States to rebuild their lives and settle in California at the peak of a housing bubble in Jeff Daniel Silva’s documentary about the immigrant experience. (vyerfilms.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement