By SIOBHAN BURKEFEB. 8, 2015
In “Cambuyón,” a percussive dance and music show that opened at the New Victory Theater on Friday, rhythm comes from many sources: wooden crates, metal buckets, matchsticks, glass bottles, kitchen utensils, feet slapping the floor and hands slapping the body. The concept bears more than a little resemblance to “Stomp,” but in this production by Enlace Servicios Culturales, a company based in the Canary Islands and in Barcelona, all of the tapping and clanging happens aboard a ship whose location in time and space remains open to interpretation.What century are we in? What hemisphere? Does it matter? Created with young audiences in mind — a solid under-12 contingent turned out for opening night — “Cambuyón” sets out to explore the cultural cross-pollination engendered by sea travel. This proves less a historical concern than an excuse to smash together lots of different styles — clogging, tap, hip-hop, salsa — in one rambunctious, fast-paced, frayed-around-the-edges hour.Rudimentary projections by Jonatan Rodríguez, who is also one of the seven performers, situate us, at the outset, somewhere along the coast of England. (The show’s title comes from the phrase “Come Buy On,” which, according to the program, British ships would display when selling goods at Spanish ports.) The first of 12 awkwardly linked scenes features a foot-music battle between two scruffy men: Thanos Daskalopoulos, who wears wooden slabs on the soles of his shoes, and Jep Meléndez, one of the company’s artistic directors, in tap shoes. As Raúl Cabrera, the cast’s most skilled vocalist, sings a hornpipe, Mr. Meléndez insists on breaking out of their upright routine with looser improvisations. Mr. Daskalopoulos, getting exasperated, eventually sheds his clunky footwear to keep up. Thus we zoom through the evolution of tap in a single costume change.Another contest goes down in the next scene between the sisters Clara and Berta Pons, who introduce popping, locking and other stop-motion snaking moves into the mix. These will resurface in the finale, when the deck of the ship is most like a playground.For all its roughness, “Cambuyón” is elegant in its commitment to simple means of generating complex rhythms. Mr. Cabrera supplies an entire jazz band with his vocal cords (he does a good trombone); Mr. Meléndez, in an intricate solo, juggles a polyrhythmic orchestra within his limbs. The show tries hard, sometimes too hard, to entertain, but that didn’t seem to matter to all the laughing, cheering kids in the audience.“Cambuyón” continues through Feb. 22 at the New Victory Theater, 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan; 646-223-3010, newvictory.org. A version of this review appears in print on February 9, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Play Space for Rhythm Set on the High Seas.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.