AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Brian SeibertCinderella, everyone knows, has to squeeze in as much fun as she can before midnight. But a ballet production of “Cinderella” intended for young children has to abide by an even more inexorable time constraint: the attention span of its audience. New York Theater Ballet’s  “Cinderella,” which returned to Florence Gould Hall over the weekend, succeeds in condensing the fairy tale and Prokofiev’s three-act score down to just over an hour without sacrificing all the fantasy. Donald Mahler’s choreography isn’t particularly inventive or poetically potent, but it does a good job of making the most out of limited time and a small cast. This is particularly evident in the ballroom scene, where three couples ably stand in for a whole party. The Fairy Godmother and two attending fairies, invisible to the other characters, prepare the way for Cinderella’s entrance, effectively imparting a sense of supernatural forces at work.Gillian Bradshaw-Smith’s set of painted flats on wheels and Sylvia Taalsohn Nolan’s costumes do similarly efficient work, effecting low-tech magic. The production moves smoothly and briskly in short segments, bogging down only and oddly in the ostensibly tense moments just before the clock strikes 12. Coming right before that flaw of pacing, though, is a nice assertion of values: the love pas de deux between Cinderella and her Prince isn’t rushed. On Saturday, Rie Ogura, sweetly innocent and clean-lined, and Steven Melendez, unaffectedly noble, made their duets tender. The comedy, in the form of a bumbling Major Domo (Dan Renkin) and the gentle slapstick of impolite stepsisters played by men (Mitchell Kilby and Michael Wells), was more functional than truly fun.Yet it was characteristic of the production that its most touching moments came during a preshow explication of basic stagecraft. After the troupe’s artistic director, Diana Byer, described the function of tape on the stage floor, five “dancing examples,” charming and elegant children from the company’s school, hit their marks with enthusiasm and aplomb. Those dancing examples were also examples of how to pay attention. Advertisement