AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimIn 1842 Charles Dickens published “American Notes,” a travelogue detailing impressions formed during a six-month journey up and down the Eastern Seaboard. “American Notes” is also the title of this season’s commissioning program by the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra, which invites composers to write works that take the temperature of the country today — not quite a State of the Union, perhaps, so much as a national selfie.On Saturday at Carnegie Hall, the orchestra, which performs without a conductor, presented the world premiere of one of these commissions. “Word of Mouth” by Timo Andres is an exhilarating chamber symphony suffused with optimism but also seemingly filled with the clamor of conflicting ambitions and egos. In fact two of the work’s five movements are fanfares, with the first made up of overlapping rising motifs that create a bright, eager, clamor. In the fourth movement these elements return in a more domesticated form, colored by some beautifully refined writing for winds.The music has a uniquely American neo-Classical flavor harking back to the fresh simplicity of shape note singing and Shaker furniture. The orchestra played with the kind of conviction and sensitivity usually accorded to standards.It was an otherwise uneven program that opened with a charismatic performance of Rameau’s Suite from “Les Boréades.” Two contredanse movements with idiosyncratic rhythms and instrumental colorings — and exuberant foot stomping — revealed an unexpected kinship with the contemporary piece by Mr. Andres.The Rameau had been programmed in a nod to the French violinist Augustin Dumay, who was to have performed Mendelssohn’s Violin Concerto with the orchestra. But he withdrew because of illness, leaving the elegant violinist Anne Akiko Meyers to step in at short notice.There is an old-world glamour to Ms. Akiko Meyers’s playing, with her high-gloss, singing sound and her liberal use of sighing slides from one note to another. Although this style suits Mendelssohn’s romantic concerto there is a danger of gilding the lily and reducing the music to salon entertainment. In the fast passagework, Ms. Akiko Meyers was sometimes at odds with the orchestra, but in the most hazardous tempo changes and transitions their interaction was impressively relaxed.The program ended with a somewhat mild-mannered reading of Schubert’s Symphony No. 5. There was a matter-of-fact briskness to the first movement and a sweet, but slightly diffident lightness to the andante. But the orchestra brought a joyful vigor to the menuetto, a movement that begins with a confident unison statement that individual instruments then pick apart and develop. Performed without a conductor, it became the musical expression of Orpheus’s ideals of common purpose and healthy pluralism.The Orpheus Chamber Orchestra returns to Carnegie Hall on April 11 with the pianist Fazil Say; orpheusnyc.com. Advertisement