By STEPHEN HOLDENFEB. 8, 2015
In the giddy, goofy history of the movie musical as traced in “Here’s to the Girls!: Hollywood’s Leading Ladies,” the 92nd Street Y’s Lyrics and Lyricists program on Saturday, each major studio had its own pantheon and signature style. One of the most clearly defined, identified as the Warner Bros. Dames, were brassy streetwise characters played by the likes of Ruby Keeler and Joan Blondell.Others were the 20th Century Fox Blondes, a lineage that ran from Alice Faye to Betty Grable to Marilyn Monroe. Leading the roster of the MGM Goddesses was Judy Garland, whom the evening’s host and artistic director, Charles Busch, called his all-time favorite.The studio-by-studio survey of the genre made for an effective organizing principle in a mildly entertaining show that otherwise might have run wild. Mr. Busch, a lifelong movie-musical fanatic narrated, in a script he wrote with Carl Andress, who directed. Mr. Busch even showed a picture of his younger self at a dinner flanked by his Hollywood dream girls.The next-to-impossible job of conjuring so many bygone movie personalities fell to five hard-working singers: Nancy Anderson, Andréa Burns, Cady Huffman, Erin Maguire and Zakiya Young. A quintet led by John McDaniel on piano supplied bland, functional arrangements that lacked the buoyancy and verve needed to bring the songs to life.A low point was a salute to the Andrews Sisters, sung out of tune and devoid of spunk or any sense of fun. Another was a Shirley Temple medley in which the cast members resorted to ungainly childlike contortions and mannerisms.Among the five singers, Ms. Anderson was the only one to inject some personality into her numbers. In her most amusing one, simulating Dorothy Lamour’s rendition of Frank Loesser and Alfred Newman’s slithery “The Moon of Manakoora,” she evoked the nonsensical side of a Hollywood tradition that reveled in silly artifice.The program will be repeated Monday at 2 and 7:30 p.m. at the 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; 212-415-5500, 92y.org. A version of this review appears in print on February 9, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: With Dream-Girl Stand-Ins, a Riotous Heyday Recalled.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.