By NATE CHINENFEB. 8, 2015
Past the midpoint of his second set at Smoke on Friday night, the trumpeter Eddie Henderson announced the first composition he ever wrote, a dose of drifting intrigue titled “Dreams.” His preamble almost could have seemed sheepish, coming from someone else: “I’m not really a composer,” he said. “I just write sketches, and let the band fill them in.”But then Mr. Henderson doesn’t do sheepish. A jazz-funk paragon, a hard-bop survivor and an inveterate swashbuckler on the horn, he also carries himself with a confidence born of other ventures, like his years as a doctor, and his youthful distinction as a trailblazing African-American figure skater. At 74, he exudes a self-secure authority rooted in experience on and off the stage.He has a strong new studio album — “Collective Portrait,” due out Tuesday on the Smoke Sessions label — that can be understood as a selective rumination on the breadth of his career. It makes no allusion to his roles in Mwandishi, Herbie Hancock’s lionized early fusion band, or the Cookers, a present-day postbop superhero squad. But its track list includes “Dreams,” along with several pieces from Mr. Henderson’s crossover albums of the 1970s, and tunes associated with his chief trumpet lodestars, Freddie Hubbard, Miles Davis and Woody Shaw.Perhaps more significant, its personnel features the impeccable pianist George Cables and the intently soulful alto saxophonist Gary Bartz, working colleagues of Mr. Henderson’s for about the last 40 years. Both were on hand for his weekend run at Smoke, in a quintet expertly anchored by Doug Weiss on bass and Billy Drummond on drums. (Mr. Weiss appears on the album, with another fine drummer, Carl Allen.)AdvertisementThis set opened with “Sunburst,” the title track of a jazz-funk album Mr. Henderson released on Blue Note in 1975. The only concession to that lineage in this new arrangement was a Fender Rhodes piano played, with chiming cool, by Mr. Cables. And the following tune — “Morning Song,” a funk ballad by Mr. Cables, first heard on Mr. Henderson’s 1977 crossover album “Comin’ Through” — was remade as an acoustic soul-jazz number, buoyant and bittersweet.On these and the other tunes in the set, including the Duke Pearson ballad “You Know I Care,” the older musicians in the band gave what amounted to a master class. Mr. Bartz played the seeker, turning most of his solos into fluttery expeditions, with a phrasing that conveyed momentum even when it sat behind the beat. Mr. Cables took an adaptable approach, flowing through the material with eloquent refinement and not a small amount of the blues.AdvertisementAnd Mr. Henderson kept his ironclad composure, whether he was charging through his postbop cadences or tracing a more delicate melodic arc. There was too much reverb on his microphone, and he occasionally reverted to trusted patterns in his improvising. But he cut a commanding figure whenever he played — and no less when he was just standing and nodding in the background, watching the action unfold.A version of this review appears in print on February 9, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Looking Back, a Horn Player Dips Into Every Mood.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.