By JON CARAMANICAFEB. 8, 2015
At the end of the night on Saturday, one by one, D’Angelo’s band members took leave of the Apollo Theater stage. They’d been playing “Untitled (How Does It Feel),” the solemn declaration of lust that had, thanks to its erotic video 15 years ago, transformed D’Angelo from soul music savior to something far trickier, and sweatier. It has become the song that, for many, defines this singer. And it has at times been the song that D’Angelo runs away from.Here, though, he luxuriated in it, turned it into an aerobics workout. He shouted, grunted, attacked and retreated. He smiled and grabbed the hands of the fans in the front rows as if it were a celebration, not a seduction.Anyhow, after about 10 minutes of that, the band started walking off — the guitar player, the keyboardist, the drummer, the backup singers. The song remained damp, as vital and urgent as blood pumping through veins, desperate for oxygen.Eventually it was just D’Angelo, behind his Yamaha keyboard, and his bassist, the durable and nimble Pino Palladino, cycling through the song’s elegiac conclusion. Mr. Palladino has long been the backbone of D’Angelo’s sound, as steady as the boss is mercurial. They played for a moment, relaxed, and then Mr. Palladino took his leave, too. After all the histrionics, D’Angelo brought the song to a reserved conclusion, thanked the crowd, then disappeared himself.AdvertisementAfter this, when the lights came on, there were no takers, only dazed fans chilled by what they’d just seen. Those 15 minutes were transcendent and raw, on par with the greatest performers in any genre, at any time.AdvertisementD’Angelo can do that, when he wants to, which isn’t always. The years between “Voodoo” — his second album, which featured “Untitled” — and his third album, “Black Messiah” (RCA), which was released in December, were dominated by personal and legal troubles and endless speculation over just how much time he was committing to music. D’Angelo, once the very heartbeat of modern soul, threatened to become just a memory.“Black Messiah” changed all that. Credited to D’Angelo and the Vanguard, it’s a viscous and aching album, marked by raunchy guitar and aquatic bass. By comparison, the sinuous “Voodoo” and his tender but rugged 1995 debut “Brown Sugar” feel skeletal.But there is an unsteadiness at times on “Black Messiah,” with the richness of the arrangements sometimes acting as a distraction. This album is both D’Angelo’s most resolute and also the one that gets away from him the most.That was true at this show, too, his first in this country since the album’s release. (He is also, as it happens, a former Apollo Amateur Night winner.) From the beginning, with the back-to-back pairing of “Prayer” and “1000 Deaths” from the new album, the grooves were murky and insular. His flexible band resisted slickness in favor of something earthier and more tensile.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Before long, he transitioned into a sumptuous run of moist love songs: “Feel Like Makin’ Love” into “Really Love,” in which D’Angelo showed off his upper register, into “One Mo’Gin.” His voice was scratchy and limber, full of Wilson Pickett shrieks and James Brown percussive stabs and Smokey Robinson tenderness. A traditionalist and a student, D’Angelo uses soul for all of its many purposes — the political, the psychological, the physical, the sensual. But it’s that last part that has always been his preferred milieu. During these songs, he was visibly loose.That continued into the final section of the main part of the show, full of oblong jams that at times slipped off the rails. There is a skill to knowing the difference between digressions that go for six minutes and those that go for nine, though it’s not often one D’Angelo chooses to employ. That was a distraction on songs like “The Charade,” which includes one of the new album’s most-discussed political moments, with D’Angelo singing, “All we wanted was a chance to talk/’Stead we only got outlined in chalk.”He played the majority of “Black Messiah” here, and at the end of the main part of the show, he looked slightly tired. He left the stage for an unusually long stretch, the audience uncertain whether he would return. But when he did, he was fully renewed. His first encore lasted almost half an hour — “Untitled” was the conclusion of the second encore — and it was mainly devoted to extended versions of three songs: the silky “Lady,” the crunchy, rowdy “Chicken Grease” and “Back to the Future,” which appears in two parts on the new album.That song is D’Angelo at his most humble, a blinding talent dreaming of a simpler past: “I just wanna go back, baby, back to the way it was/ I used to get real high, now I’m just getting a buzz.” It’s a simple conceit, and as far as D’Angelo is concerned, not a wholly accurate one. D’Angelo’s preferred modes are the old ones, yes, but he is at home in the now. And as he showed on his deconstruction and reassembling of “Untitled,” all he really wants is a chance to do it again, on his terms.A version of this review appears in print on February 9, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Basking in Past and Present, in Whimsical and Raw.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.