Season 6, Episode 4, “The Trash and the Snake”
In five seasons of “Justified,” we could reliably count on one thing in each episode: a murder, a macabre death or a shoot-out with Deputy U.S. Marshal Raylan Givens (Timothy Olyphant). The bloodletting always came with a jolt. So far, this season, there hasn’t been much — until this show. You probably never saw this death coming (or at least I didn’t). Boyd Crowder (Walton Goggins) and Wynn Duffy (Jere Burns), one of the so-called Dixie Mafia, meet with a high-strung, crazy safe-cracker played by Jake Busey, son of Gary Busey. He demonstrates how he can crack a safe — “16 inches of Youngstown steel”— like the one in the basement of the pizza parlor supposedly holding millions in cash. He puts their cellphones where they won’t set off the explosives, but forgets about his own, which rings as he is holding the detonator. His demise in a mist of blood is played for laughs, which we needed because there was an awful lot of threatening talk in this episode but not much action. And no Choo-Choo (Duke Davis Roberts), the best new character.Katherine Hale (Mary Steenburgen) is suspicious of Ava Crowder (Joelle Carter), even though they spend a day together, — all girltalk, pharmaceutical-grade cocaine and jewelry store shoplifting. Ava is convinced Katherine knows she was released from prison to rat on Boyd and it frightens her.The rest of the show confirms what we had suspected. Avery Markham (Sam Elliott) is buying up land in order to grow marijuana once the state legalizes it. Raylan deducts Markham and his crew are setting homes on fire to force people off their land — or if threats fail, they kill them.There is a lot of tension in the confrontation at the home of Loretta McCready (Kaitlyn Dever), the resourceful teen who already owns a lot of marijuana plots. A shootout between Raylan and Ty Walker (Garret Dillahunt) seems inevitable until Walker pulls out his cellphone not his pistol. It sure seemed liked Raylan was willing to give us a gun fight. (But doesn’t it seem like Walker gets a little petulant, hurt even, when his offers to buy land get turned down. But granted, selling is not really his main line of work.)Raylan’s arrival mucks up the negotiations for Loretta’s land. He explains to her:  “Sell or he kills you.” That interference seems to set Markham off.“Is there something else you are going to tell me I’m not allowed to do?” he growls at Raylan.  “What is next is entirely based on the next choice you make,” says Raylan, who can do smooth menace almost as well Markham. With a toke on a reefer, Markham is off and mayhem is put off for another episode. But by now, we know Markham is the snake Raylan wants to kill. I know that it can be risky to examine television plots for credibility, all that willful suspension of disbelief stuff, but I think we need to take a moment to look at Markham’s scheme. Something Boyd says to Ava at the end of the show is starting to bother me. He says “I’m going to steal his money. I’m going to steal his idea.” How good of an idea is this? Does it make sense that a businessman, criminal or otherwise, would go around buying land in Harlan County on the hope that Kentucky will legalize the sale, distribution and cultivation of marijuana? First, is Harlan such a good place to grow marijuana? Before coal became the county’s dominant economic driver, most people made a living growing things. And among the cash crops was hemp, a marijuana cousin used for rope and even clothing.  The Kentucky Department of Agriculture is even testing the cultivation of industrial hemp (and some fool stole several plants from a plot probably thinking it was pot.) So yes, pot would grow well enough and good farm land is cheaper than, say, California. But would a person lock up millions of dollars in real estate  —  paying twice what it is worth — on the chance that the state will legalize pot? Sure, four states have made its use legal. Public opinion nationwide is shifting toward legalization. But the Pew Center for Research noted last November that while nationwide public opinion over the past 25 years has shifted toward legalization, only a slim majority, 52 percent, favor it. It’s hard to imagine a state like Kentucky going the way of Colorado anytime soon.Couldn’t Markham easily find a better return for the millions he made as the pot king of Colorado?  And given that long horizon, is it wise to jeopardize his plan and himself by killing a bunch of clean-living locals for their land? (The farmer and his wife, the one who called Walker a peacock, died when their furnace “malfunctioned.” The plastic Walker was carrying towards the house wasn’t to wrap up bodies, like I first thought, but to seal the windows so the carbon monoxide could do its work.)It’s a good plot in so far as the bodies pile up, Raylan gets to do some detective work. And with Markham and his venomous crew exposed, I suspect the remaining episodes will have a little more gun slinging. Was anyone else bothered by the Hillary Clinton joke told by Katherine Hale? It wasn’t so much that it is an old often-told joke and certainly not that it made Ms. Clinton look good. But because the actress in real life is a close friend of the Clintons, it made me think Ms. Steenburgen was talking, not Katherine.  And finally:
The show drink. For a spell, I thought the only drinking we were going to get in this episode was the coffee in Art’s kitchen. But we got a little moonshine served by Loretta to Markham and a little frisson too. Like the rest of us, Markham suspected that the “apple pie” he was being served  – in a Mason jar — was the deadly kind that Mags Bennett distilled back in Season 2. “Stick your pinkie in there and have a lick,” he tells Loretta, which may be the best line of the night.   