Just over 16 years ago, Jon Stewart took over “The Daily Show,” which has served as a primary source of news and satire for a generation. His mission: to skewer, mock and fact-check what he saw as the inanities of American politics and media. In the process, “The Daily Show” served as a launching pad for some of comedy’s most notable talents to go onto other shows or projects. Jon Stewart must be a happy papa. Stephen ColbertMr. Colbert started on “The Daily Show” in 1997 and served as a correspondent there until 2005, when he left to anchor the spin-off “Colbert Report.” That show was “The Daily Show”’s late-night partner until last December, when Mr. Colbert left to take over CBS’s “The Late Show,” which will premiere later this year.Larry Wilmore
Mr. Wilmore served as the show’s “senior black correspondent” and later developed the ABC sitcom “Black-ish,” which premiered last fall. He took over Mr. Colbert’s 11:30 p.m. slot just under a month ago as the host of “The Nightly Show with Larry Wilmore.”Steve Carell

A “Daily Show” correspondent for five years, Mr. Carell left for movie and TV glory as the star of the long-running NBC sitcom “The Office” and comedic movies like “Anchorman” and “The 40-Year Old Virgin.” His appearance in last year’s “Foxcatcher” resulted in an Oscar nomination.John OliverHis success as the  show’s “senior British correspondent” led to an eight-week stint as host of “The Daily Show” when Stewart went off to direct his first movie in the summer of 2013. That assignment resulted in his own HBO show, “Last Week Tonight,” which has quickly surpassed “The Daily Show” in late-night buzz.Ed Helms

Before joining Mr. Carell on “The Office” in 2006 and starring in three “Hangover” films, Mr. Helms served as a “Daily Show” correspondent for four years.Rob Corddry
A correspondent from 2002 to 2007, Mr. Corddry went on to develop Comedy Central’s comedy show “Children’s Hospital” as well as star in films like “Hot Tub Time Machine,” the sequel of which will be released next week.