AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Siobhan BurkeThe typical Fall for Dance program offers four flavors in roughly equal amounts. If one doesn’t appeal, another isn’t far behind. The final bill in this year’s festival, seen on Saturday at City Center, was characteristically varied, featuring the Israeli company L-E-V, the flamenco dancer Jesús Carmona, four members of the Boston Ballet and the clown-meets-ballerina duo Bill Irwin and Tiler Peck. But it was unusually lopsided, with the first half devoted to a single work, L-E-V’s “Killer Pig.” At close to 45 minutes, this was the evening’s longest selection and its most ponderous.Sharon Eyal, one of L-E-V’s directors (the other is Gai Behar), descends artistically from Ohad Naharin. A longtime dancer and resident choreographer with Mr. Naharin’s troupe, Batsheva, she has developed a similar aesthetic, from the bone-collapsing movement to the menacing moods.“Killer Pig,” for seven sinuous dancers on a haze-filled stage, purports in the program notes to tell “the story of a troubled soul driven by a primal instinct to kill her dearest and die.” Synchronized tiptoeing, in relentless time with the thumping beat of Ori Lichtik’s score, fragments into crazed, conspiratorial solos. Beige leotards (for the women) and high-waisted trunks (for the men) lay bare the contours of pulsating chests and swiveling limbs, but the rawness is all surface. As the dancers hoot and scream and ultimately devour one of their own, surrounding the lanky Doug Letheren with clawed hands and clamping arms, their mania is hard to believe.The program perked up after intermission with “Time It Was/116,” in which Mr. Irwin and Ms. Peck, a New York City Ballet principal who’s about 40 years his junior, mesh their respective arts: clowning and point work. (They choreographed the duet with Damian Woetzel, who commissioned it for last summer’s Vail International Dance Festival in Colorado.)To a ticking metronome, the two swap styles, regarding each other with confusion that warms to affection. Ms. Peck, initially upright and prim, breaks out in an electric Charleston and a tap dance in point shoes. Mr. Irwin, dropping suddenly into a lunge, lends her a princely hand. She can be floppy; he can be courtly. The final moments, to Philip Glass’s “Violin Solo,” played live by Johnny Gandelsman, felt like the start of something new, as if the collaboration were just beginning.Leonid Yakobson’s 1971 “Pas de Quatre” — danced by the Boston Ballet’s Maria Baranova, Erica Cornejo, Ashley Ellis and Misa Kuranaga to excerpts from Bellini — displayed a more classical side of ballet. In long white tutus with garlanded hair, the dancers looked diaphanously at ease, first in an entwining quartet with continuously linked hands, then in fluttering, voluminous solos.There was a floridness, too, but a much different kind, in the American premiere of Mr. Carmona’s “Ímpetu,” a showstopping closer with gorgeous live music by Daniel Jurado. On top of brisk, cutting zapateado (percussive footwork), Mr. Carmona added voluptuous swerves of the torso, uncommon for men in flamenco. Fall for Dance, at its best, yields discoveries like this, new faces that leave us hoping they’ll come back soon.Advertisement