Newly discovered Jane Austen artifacts can always be counted on to cause a stir, as when a scholar claimed several years ago to have found a previously unknown pencil portrait of the Divine Miss Jane.Now, a team of researchers has unearthed a more subtle Austen discovery: two previously unpublished letters by Jane’s brother Charles, which they believe shed a suggestive and unexpectedly saucy light on the ways her literary reputation was kept alive in the decades after her death in 1817. The brief letters, written in 1828 and published this month in the journal Modern Philology, seemingly have little to do with the author of “Pride and Prejudice.”  In the first letter, Charles Austen, a naval officer then in Barbados, informs an acquaintance, the diplomat, travel writer and artist Sir Robert Ker Porter, that he is enclosing two jars of pickles, while also promising to carry some “Bottles of Cayenne” to Porter’s sister Jane on his next trip to England. In the second letter, written to Jane Porter, Charles expresses relief that a tin of goods has reached her, and promises to pay a visit in person soon.The Porters were no ordinary family. Jane Porter and her sister, Anna Maria, were celebrated novelists known to admire Jane Austen, whose popularity had ebbed following her death. The letters, Devoney Looser of Arizona State University and Ruth Knezevich of the University of Missouri argue in a paper published along with the texts, establish “previously unrecognized” connections between Charles Austen and the literary Porters. Considered together with other documents, the scholars argue, the letters demonstrate Charles’s “apparent willingness” to pursue a friendship with the Porter sisters, presumably for the sake of advancing his sister’s reputation. And what about those pickles? Ms. Looser and Ms. Knezevich argue that they may not have been pickles at all. In his first letter, Charles describes trying to procure them first from one “Miss Betsey Austin,” but then turning to “Miss Hannah Lewis” when Austin (no relation to the Austens) “proved false.” Austin and Lewis were prominent freewomen of mixed race who ran rival lodgings in Barbados. Charles frequently mentions them in his unpublished journals from the period, sometimes describing visits he made to each in the course of a single day. Austin and Lewis “almost certainly sold more than pickles and rooms,” Ms. Looser and Ms. Knezvich write in their paper, titled  “Jane Austen’s Afterlife, West Indian Madams and the Literary Porter Family.” The pickles themselves may well “imply a ribald joke” that might not have been so distant from Charles Austen and Sir Robert’s more high-minded bookish talk.In an email, Ms. Looser, who in addition to more traditional scholarly pursuits has skated in the roller derby as Stone Cold Jane Austen, summed up the point tartly.“These letters show that well-traveled Englishmen could discuss famous author-sisters and West Indian madams almost in the same breath,” she wrote. “It ought to make us wonder whether Charles Austen’s support of his sister’s literary career had an impact on his interactions with women who ran businesses of a very different kind.”