By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 10, 2015
6 P.M. (TCM) CHARADE (1963) A Parisian widow (Audrey Hepburn) tries to find her murdered husband’s hidden fortune with the help of a vacation acquaintance (Cary Grant) while eluding the killers who want it themselves in this romantic, Hitchcockian caper directed by Stanley Donen. And while this film includes scenes of “ghoulish humor” and “gruesome violence,” Bosley Crowther wrote in The New York Times, “there’s a lot to be said for it as a fast-moving, urbane entertainment.” Hepburn, he added, “is cheerfully committed to a mood of how-nuts-can-you-be in an obviously comforting assortment of expensive Givenchy costumes, and Mr. Grant does everything from taking a shower without removing his suit to fighting with thugs, all with the blandness and the boredom of an old screwball comedy hand.” Henry Mancini and Johnny Mercer received an Oscar nomination for their song “Charade.”7 P.M. (Oxygen) JUNO (2007) A precocious teenager (Ellen Page) goes in search of Mr. and Mrs. Right (Jason Bateman and Jennifer Garner) after deciding to put her unborn child up for adoption in this comedy directed by Jason Reitman. J. K. Simmons and Allison Janney play Juno’s father and stepmother; Michael Cera is Paulie, the adoring friend with whom Juno had unprotected sex. Diablo Cody, who wrote this coming-of-age tale, won an Oscar for best screenplay. “The film outgrows its own mannerisms and defenses,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times, “evolving from a coy, knowing farce into a heartfelt, serious comedy.”8 P.M. (ABC) FRESH OFF THE BOAT Louis (Randall Park) encourages his family to attend a block party and make new friends — while putting in a word about their Cattleman’s Ranch Steakhouse — in this series based on the restaurateur Eddie Huang’s memoir about growing up in Orlando, Fla., as a son of Taiwanese immigrants. But then Louis’s wife, Jessica (Constance Wu), bonds with a beautiful trophy spouse that the other rollerblading mothers don’t like. At 8:30, the Huangs glorify their financial status when Jessica’s sister, Connie (Susan Park), and her rich husband, Steve (Charlie Soong Lee), come to visit. Eddie (Hudson Yang), meanwhile, is excited to reconnect with his cousin Justin (Lance Lim), who introduced him to hip-hop, until he learns that Justin has moved on to grunge.8 P.M. (NBC) PARKS AND RECREATION Leslie (Amy Poehler) and April (Aubrey Plaza) go to Washington. In a second episode, at 8:30, Leslie and Ben (Adam Scott) are criticized for taking part in a Pawnee tradition, and April and Ron (Nick Offerman) embark on a scavenger hunt. In “Marry Me,” at 9, Jake (Ken Marino) conspires with Kay (Tymberlee Hill) to rid Annie (Casey Wilson) of some annoying habits. But then Annie figures out what’s up and turns the tables. And in “About a Boy,” at 9:30, Will (David Walton) tries to pick up women on Valentine’s Day.Advertisement9 P.M. (Fox) NEW GIRL Jess (Zooey Deschanel) and the gang go on a Valentine’s Day bar crawl arranged by Nick (Jake Johnson). In “The Mindy Project,” at 9:30, Mindy (Mindy Kaling) ends up eating dinner with the family of Danny (Chris Messina) before she can tell him her big news.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (Velocity) OVERHAULIN’ The season wraps as Chip Foose, Chris Jacobs, Arianny Celeste and the A-Team restore a 1957 Chevrolet Bel Air at the Specialty Equipment Market Association Show in Las Vegas.10:30 P.M. (TBS) COUGAR TOWN Jules(Courteney Cox) coaches Andy (Ian Gomez) in preparation for job interviews. Ellie (Christa Miller) seeks refuge in the boat of Bobby (Brian Van Holt) but discovers that Grayson (Josh Hopkins) got there first.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowTALL AS THE BAOBAB TREE (2013) A defiant teenager (Dior Ka) — the first in her rural Senegalese family to be formally educated — tries to save her 11-year-old sister from an arranged marriage to a much older man in this film conceived by its director, Jeremy Teicher, as a folk tale based on real events and using local, nonprofessional actors. Writing in The Times, Stephen Holden called the film spare and moving, while comparing it to “the plain neorealist style of Satyajit Ray.” (fandor.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.