
                New Music            By                     
 BEN RATLIFF and
 

 JON CARAMANICA
 
FEB. 9, 2015
RUDRESH MAHANTHAPPA“Bird Calls” (Act)“This album is not a tribute to Charlie Parker,” the alto saxophonist Rudresh Mahanthappa writes in the liner notes to “Bird Calls.” That’s about 50 percent disputable, or, to put it another way, just true enough that he could have made the album without any reference to Parker, in its titles or otherwise.The pieces on “Bird Calls” — a strong new record by a strong new quintet — are not versions of Charlie Parker songs. Nor are they new melodies based on their chord changes — a process that is such a normal part of jazz that it doesn’t need any explanation when other people do it on their records.Rather, those pieces include traces of a Parker composition or solo. Some of those traces are pretty far inside a song, folded into a compositional and improvising language that sounds native to Mr. Mahanthappa, played in a bright tone, with long, hard gusts of breath, and sometimes given tiny ornaments adapted from Indian music.One of the most explicit, “Talin Is Thinking,” uses a seven-note sequence you might recognize as the opening of “Parker’s Mood” — but it also suggests, in various little parts, some of the chordal movement of Henry Threadgill’s “Gateway” and the drone-dirge atmosphere of Ornette Coleman’s “Lonely Woman.” Some tracks use melodic material squeezed and stripped of its original rhythmic coding, so you hear a Parker song differently, as a set of intervals. And at least one — I think — uses a Parker solo purely as a rhythmic-phrasing proposition, as if it were beats played on a drum, with different notes.AdvertisementThat Mr. Mahanthappa went to the trouble of listing his sources makes the record, inevitably, a game. But the extent to which it’s more than a game is how quickly you cease to care about the connections, which in my case was pretty quickly. The album’s premise neatly erases itself, which proves something important: that Parker as sound or energy or strategy may be all-important for Mr. Mahanthappa, but the copyrightable or memorizable parts of his music are beside the point.AdvertisementSo you’re released to concentrate on the meshing tenacity of the rhythm section, with the drummer Rudy Royston, the bassist François Moutin, the pianist Matt Mitchell and the 20-year old trumpeter Adam O’Farrill, who all meet the demands of this music but also individually establish their own sounds within the group. Try Mr. Mitchell’s solo in “On the DL,” for the hunger in it, the index of ability and expression that it demonstrates; try Mr. O’Farrill’s solo on “Chillin’ ” to hear a poised and battling straight-ahead jazz musician, running variations on the unusual melodic material and attacking it with complete presence, in his own voice. BEN RATLIFFFATHER JOHN MISTY“I Love You Honeybear”(Sub Pop)Father John Misty hates himself. Loves hating himself. Hates loving himself. Saying he loves himself might be a stretch too far.“I Love You Honeybear” is his second album of drowsy, arched-eyebrow, storytelling soft rock — better than the first, because the contradictions run deeper. This time he’s in love, and he’s fighting hard to hold on to his cynicism, even as it’s melting. “I brought my mother’s depression/You’ve got your father’s scorn and wayward aunt’s schizophrenia,” he moans on the title track, reporting not on the union of star-crossed lovers but of two people whose flaws hold them together.Father John Misty is Josh Tillman, who for many thankless years toiled as J. Tillman, releasing dour solo albums, and then for some of those years also toiled a little less thanklessly as the drummer of Fleet Foxes, the steroidal folk band.All of which only proves that you can never tell what’s lurking under the surface.The new album goes on much like the title track — songs served at lounge tempo and temperature with Randy Newman verve and refracted in a broken mirror. Even its misfires are indulgent and intriguing. (And the one song that toys with electronic production, “True Affection,” isn’t one of them, oddly enough.)On “Bored in the USA,” he muses over people’s perceptions of commitment, wondering if anyone (else?) thinks, “Oh good, the stranger’s body’s still here, our arrangement hasn’t changed/Now I’ve got a lifetime to consider all the ways/I grow more disappointing to you as my beauty warps and fades.” This warped, lovely album suggests that a true longtime partnership isn’t two people who love each other even for their flaws, but of two people accepting decay — their own and each other’s — and choosing to ride it out nonetheless. JON CARAMANICA(Father John Misty performs Thursday at Rough Trade NYC in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and on Saturday at the Bowery Ballroom on the Lower East Side.)A version of this review appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.