By ALASTAIR MACAULAYFEB. 9, 2015
PHILADELPHIA — How fast does a ballet company change when it acquires a new artistic director? At Pennsylvania Ballet, changes are already apparent, only six months after the appointment of Angel Corella.On Saturday, I watched two performances of a triple bill at the attractive Merriam Theater (to be a century old in 2018). My particular interest was in “Shift to Minor,” a world premiere by Matthew Neenan, whose position as resident choreographer Mr. Corella recently extended by three years, and in a revival of George Balanchine’s “The Prodigal Son.” The audience loved both, as well as Christopher Wheeldon’s opening “Polyphonia.” But it is not from these pieces that we can judge Mr. Corella’s taste; for that, we’ll have to wait until he announces his 2015-16 season. The most immediate shifts of emphasis lie in dancers beneath principal level.In Philadelphia, the program was advertised with a poster image of a newly promoted soloist, Alexander Peters, as the Prodigal. Mr. Peters and a corps dancer imported by Mr. Corella this summer, Mayara Pineiro, were also prominent in “Shift to Minor.” And Saturday’s performances also gave important breaks to two other dancers added by Mr. Corella: the soloist Oksana Maslova and the corps dancer Etienne Diaz. Ms. Maslova and Ms. Pineiro have unusually glamorous presences, considerable poise and technical flair; Mr. Diaz has a boyish charm and athletic energy that somewhat recall Mr. Corella’s own.Stage morale among more experienced Pennsylvania Ballet dancers also looks good. In “Shift to Minor,” Lauren Fadeley and Jermel Johnson  (both principals), and Loris Mathis (a tall experienced corps dancer) delivered three central roles with happy panache.AdvertisementMr. Neenan’s creation, set to Mozart’s Violin Concerto No. 5, is a sophisticated meeting of alternating elements. There’s one small corps of five in red, another in blue, and the two are variously differentiated, opposed and subdivided; their body language is now spaciously formal, now comically tense.AdvertisementThe music’s outer two movements also feature an exuberant star couple in gold; the middle movement, a lone trio (one woman, two men) in orange, who return in the final movement. This trio varies between both men partnering the woman and one man partnering both his female and male companion. There are felicities of line, gesture, grouping and humor.Although Mr. Neenan has said that he hears in the music “really rapid and abundant and quirky shifts,” much of his invention for the corps is played more for laughs, and is more stylistically disjointed, than anything I hear in Mozart. Dancers suddenly walk heavily on their heels with a clownish emphasis, or stand flourishing clenched fists. I don’t object to these ingredients, but at neither performance could Mr. Neenan’s choreography help me hear what in the music prompted him to make so much of them. The effect instead is to distance the audience from the music by evoking laughter at the dancers’ apparent unease.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And there are many aspects of the score — its slower, longer phrases; its lightly sighing appoggiaturas; and, above all, its slow, soft, pileup of wind and brass chords in the second movement — that find no echo in this too busy choreography. It’s a very rare choreographer who doesn’t burn his fingers when setting movement to Mozart — the music is almost invariably more multilayered than the dance — and Mr. Neenan, who has made a wide range of admirable works to other scores, here joins a distinguished list of misfires.Ms. Pineiro and Mr. Peters in the outer movements make very bright impressions with their extroverted virtuosity. Their performing manners, however, are very different: Ms. Pineiro addresses almost everything out to the audience, while Mr. Peters’s changing focus does more to bring complexity to the world onstage.“Prodigal Son,” one of the enduring masterworks of choreographic narrative, always works remarkably well on smaller stages. Pennsylvania Ballet first danced it in 1989; this revival has been effectively rehearsed by Richard Tanner. Both Mr. Peters and Mr. Diaz traced the Son’s difficult long arc through the three scenes: forceful rebellion in the first, erotic discovery and humiliated misery in the second, then homecoming and repentance in the third.Mr. Diaz could not quite sustain the moment-by-moment drama through the tricky end of the second scene, but his open personality and muscular force are wonderfully right for the role. Mr. Peters succeeded by, above all, incisive attention to the music. I kept hearing anew all its various cues and changes of tone. In the opening scene, he catches the startling violence of the Son’s bent-leg pirouettes and proclamatory jumps, and from there he ties drama and music tightly together in one unbroken thread. Ms. Fadeley, opposite him, made the movement of the Siren marvelously lucid without persuading me that she has this character’s snakelike froideur; Ms. DiPiazza, with striking facial beauty, is more coldly enigmatic.Although I was among those who hailed the many compositional charms of Mr. Wheeldon’s “Polyphonia” when it was new in 2001, I don’t find it rewards many subsequent viewings; too often, it’s on a different wavelength from the marvelous Ligeti piano pieces that form its accompaniment. Nonetheless, it certainly challenges its dancers and makes them look good. In the two casts I saw, Ms. Maslova, Lillian DiPiazza and Harrison Monaco, were among the most eye-catching.A dance review on Tuesday about Pennsylvania Ballet, at the Merriam Theater in Philadelphia, misidentified a dancer who was prominent in the piece “Shift to Minor” along with Alexander Peters. She is Mayara Pineiro — not Lillian DiPiazza, another member of the company.A version of this review appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Exuberance and Panache, From Both New and Old.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.