By MICHAEL COOPERFEB. 9, 2015
As arts groups around the country grapple with their identities in the 21st century, Cal Performances at the University of California, Berkeley, said Monday it was dedicating itself to a new mission: promoting artistic literacy and diversifying the audiences of the events it presents.Cal Performances, the performing arts organization based at the university, is starting a program called Berkeley Radical — the name, an acronym of “Research and Development Initiative in Creativity, Arts, Learning,” evokes the university’s tradition of campus activism. The plan is to combine performances, artistic residencies, new commissions, academics partnerships, community outreach and digital distribution through iTunes.Gustavo Dudamel and the Simón Bolívar Symphony Orchestra of Venezuela will inaugurate the program in September when they take a Cal Performances residency that includes master classes, visits to Bay Area schools, performances of several Beethoven symphonies, campus talks and a screening of a documentary that explores efforts to teach music in the United States inspired by El Sistema, Venezuela’s youth orchestra program. The residency will culminate in an outdoor performance of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony at the campus’s Hearst Greek Theater, featuring local choruses and youth choruses.“What we’ve done is commit the organization to this grounding philosophy — that we do this kind of programing all the time, that the performing arts, when beautifully done, can powerfully shine a light on our world,” said Matías Tarnopolsky, the executive and artistic director of Cal Performances. “We want to make sure that you have that powerful moment when new thoughts emerge, when you open new doors to the world.”AdvertisementThrough the program, which is being developed with financial support from Ann and Gordon Getty, Mr. Tarnopolsky said he hoped to knit the performance hall into the life of the campus and the community and to promote the idea that artistic literacy is “as essential as any other literacy, including reading, writing, and arithmetic.”Mr. Tarnopolsky said that the new initiative would build on a program supported by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation that creates full-credit courses at Berkeley based on or inspired by presentations at Cal Performances. And he said that Cal Performances would receive a “boutique” in the iTunes store where it could distribute performance-related music or podcasts.AdvertisementFuture installments include, in 2016, a look at the intersection of art, culture and the environment through a multimedia presentation of Messiaen’s “From the Canyons to the Stars” pegged to the centennial of the National Park Service, performed by the St. Louis Symphony and with visuals by Deborah O’Grady.A version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: At Berkeley, a New Artistic Mission.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.