By ANTHONY TOMMASINIFEB. 9, 2015
The Met Orchestra’s concert at Carnegie Hall on Sunday, which packed the place, opened and ended with James Levine conducting excellent performances of second symphonies: Beethoven’s to begin, Schumann’s to end. He and his players were also inspired for Elliott Carter’s “Three Illusions,” a nine-minute work in three movements completed in 2004 when the composer turned 96.But the interesting program that Mr. Levine had planned was thrown off when the Met Opera announced last Thursday that the mezzo-soprano Elina Garanca had to withdraw due to illness. She had been scheduled to perform Berg’s “Seven Early Songs,” a work that would have complemented the Carter score.Coming to the rescue was the superstar soprano Anna Netrebko, who performed at Sunday afternoon’s concert even though the night before she had sung the demanding title role in Tchaikovsky’s “Iolanta,” part of the Met’s new double bill including Bartok’s “Bluebeard’s Castle.” It would have been fascinating to hear Ms. Netrebko sing the Berg songs, for which her dusky colorings and expressive intensity might be ideal. But stepping in at the last minute she performed two short, familiar pieces: the “Song to the Moon” aria from Dvorak’s “Rusalka” and the Richard Strauss song “Cäcilie.”For the audience, having Ms. Netrebko sing anything was more than enough. She conveyed the mix of Slavic longing and passionate stirrings in the Dvorak aria, and sent the impetuous phrases of the Strauss song, an unabashed plea for love, floating to the “blessed heights” the lyrics describe.AdvertisementThere had been concern at Carnegie Hall about security after the opening night of “Iolanta” at the Met, when a pro-Ukrainian demonstrator leapt on stage and held up a sign protesting Ms. Netrebko (and the conductor of the performance, Valery Gergiev) for their support of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. But Carnegie Hall had security guards stationed on the floor on either side of the stage and there were no disturbances. One sad note: As Ms. Netrebko basked in the ovation, two women with bouquets were prevented from approaching the stage and handing them to her. This may be the new norm when Ms. Netrebko performs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Garanca, by the way, performed as scheduled the title role in Bizet’s “Carmen” on Friday night at the Met. As the news release explained, she has been recovering from the flu and did not have the extra energy and time to rehearse and perform the Berg as well.Mr. Levine, who, as his countless admirers know, performs these days seated in a motorized wheelchair, has said that he has as much upper-body mobility as ever, and his work in the last couple of years has been impressive. On this day, though, his arm motions seemed a little constricted. The Beethoven performance, though not a model of precision, was elegant and insightful.AdvertisementEach of the three sections of the Carter piece has a literary inspiration: “Micomicón” (from “Don Quixote”), “Fons Juventatis” (a Roman myth), “More’s Utopia” (referring to Thomas More’s idealized society). Mr. Levine, a Carter champion, proved especially good at teasing out the discursive lyrical elements that thread through these shorts pieces amid the skittish bursts, frenetic rhythms and pungent modernist sonorities. The performance was dynamic, nuanced and confident. The program ended with the warm-textured and richly characterized account of Schumann’s Second Symphony.The Met Orchestra’s next concert at Carnegie Hall is on May 17; 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. A version of this review appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: The Show’s Singer Is Unable to Perform? A Superstar Soprano Saves the Day.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.