AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RatliffA Balinese gamelan orchestra is an intricate machine of connected parts, speaking in a highly articulated language built over many centuries. The music it plays is composed and vigorous, ceremonial and ritualized, intensely visual and movement-oriented when it includes dancers and singers, bright with the silver sounds of hammers striking metallophones, usually designed with five or seven notes to the octave. But it’s an aural tradition, and the surface of the music has possibilities for a folklike sponginess, or flexibility. Gamelan Dharma Swara, an ambitious and powerful ensemble based at Queens College, performed at Le Poisson Rouge on Sunday night, with 23 musicians and four dancers, and it demonstrated that flexibility in different ways. Some of those ways were built into standard practice. A gamelan group depends on great amounts of coordination — among sections, and among players in a section, especially during the sequences called kotekan, when two or more players build a fast, interlocked melody. Even with the best-trained musicians, this results in slight discrepancies of rhythm and tone. Customary, too, was the slight difference in tuning between pairs of the same instrument — one a few hertz sharper — so you hear a slight throb or pulsation when two of the same notes are struck in unison, a sound of interior life.Another way Gamelan Dharma Swara’s music becomes flexible is through its mission: It plays gamelan as a living language. The music in Sunday’s program spanned 500 years, including two recent works: “Synesthesia,” by Joel Mellin, a member of the ensemble, and “Geregel,” by Dewa Ketut Alit. Some of the program’s older music seemed to encourage stillness and meditation or trace a circumscribed space of movement. By contrast, Mr. Mellin’s piece felt geared more toward continuous movement, walking or marching or dancing, evoking samba parades or even the kind of highly detailed electronic dance music that stuffs rhythms inside rhythms.“Geregel” — being performed on Sunday for the first time by a non-Balinese group — was more complex, harmonically and structurally. There are five basic modes in Balinese gamelan music, each with a specific context, and this piece contained combinations of modes that wouldn’t traditionally be found in a single composition, as this group used them, both sequentially and — thrillingly, ear-stretchingly — one on top of the other. But some ear-stretching also happened during moments that were much more traditional. In “Palawakya,” the singer, dancer and musician Noopur Singha intoned a kind of sung poetry over the music in a keening voice, hovering above the note in long tones, delivering a narrow pitch range with an intransigent bite. And in “Jauk Manis,” the dancer Shoko Yamamuro, came out dressed as a demon figure in a mask and gloves with long, witchlike fingernails, setting off a chain of rhythmic command: dancer to drummer to metallophones. And then she started an improvisational duel with the drummer, dictating rhythms and expanding on them, creating a whole new kind of flexibility.Advertisement