AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleThe end of life. The very end. The worst-case scenario. What might happen down the road. The issue. The unfixable problem.“Being Mortal,” a “Frontline” report on PBS on Tuesday night, is about the need for doctors to talk to their terminally ill patients about death. And yet not once does a doctor say “die,” “dying” or “death” in a conversation with a patient. The one thing that happens to all of us is still the one thing they can’t name.Tuesday is a generally morbid night on PBS, beginning with “The Forgotten Plague,” an “American Experience” documentary written and directed by Chana Gazit. This absorbing history of tuberculosis in America gets right down to the business of death, painting a picture of a time — just a century ago — when one in seven people in the United States and Europe died of TB. “The Forgotten Plague” recounts the scientific effort that finally led to a cure for tuberculosis in the 1940s, but its main interest is social — how the disease spurred the development of cities in the American Southwest, and how the discovery in the late 1800s that it was contagious led to patients’ being stigmatized and sometimes losing their freedom. The disease’s influence was reflected in the introduction of Kleenex, Adirondack chairs and germ-avoidance measures like rising hemlines and shrinking facial hair.“Being Mortal” is a narrower but, in its way, more substantial film. It’s based on Atul Gawande’s best-selling book “Being Mortal: Medicine and What Matters in the End,” and Dr. Gawande is the reporter, interviewing other doctors, sitting in on their meetings with desperately ill patients and telling us about the death of his father, also a surgeon.There are no mysteries to solve or battles to win, just habits to overcome. Scene after scene is poignant and agonizing, and it’s the patients, finally, who are blunt about their situations.Flying to India to scatter his father’s ashes on the Ganges, Dr. Gawande asks the question that underlies his inquiry: How can dying ever be acceptable? He gives an answer, but the final shot of him sitting alone on the banks of the river tells its own story.American ExperienceThe Forgotten PlagueOn PBS stations on Tuesday night (check local listings).Produced by Steward/Gazit Productions for “American Experience.” Directed and written by Chana Gazit, based in part on the book “Living in the Shadow of Death” by Sheila Rothman; Ms. Gazit, producer; Kristina Cafarella and Kathryn Lord, co-producers; Mark Samels, executive producer for “American Experience.”FrontlineBeing MortalOn PBS stations on Tuesday night (check local listings).Produced by Frontline with 2over10 Media. Directed and written by Tom Jennings, based on the book “Being Mortal: Medicine and What Matters in the End” by Atul Gawande; Mr. Jennings, producer; Lauren Mucciolo, co-producer; Dr. Gawande, correspondent. For “Frontline,” David Fanning, executive producer; Raney Aronson-Rath, deputy executive producer.Advertisement