AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Brian SeibertThis season, New York City Ballet has been organizing some of its repertory programs by nationality of composer. American composers got their turn during the Saturday matinee at the David H. Koch Theater. Yet the American most heavily represented was a choreographer: Jerome Robbins.True, the program began very far from Robbins. Peter Martins’s “Hallelujah Junction” (2001) is neatly constructed and stylish, costumed in black and white, with two pianists stationed at the rear of the stage to play the John Adams composition of the title. But the choreography is almost anti-Robbins in its lustrous impersonality. As one of the work’s three principal dancers, Daniel Ulbricht has a role that capitalizes on his compact virtuoso talents. He quite literally runs (and leaps) circles around the central pair. He is impressive, though he fails to draw from the choreography any connective logic or meaning. When he trades off speedy spins and jumps with the other male lead, the one responsible for squiring the woman, his ease with tricks can emphasize the other guy’s struggle. That’s what happened with Chase Finlay on Saturday. Christopher Wheeldon, the choreographer of “A Place for Us” (2013), is British. But that duet is dedicated to Robbins, set in part to music by a composer associated with him (Leonard Bernstein) and studded with allusions to his dances. Built around the tension (both physical and metaphorical) between touching and almost touching, “A Place for Us” is a charm piece, with some of Robbins’s sweetness. It was created for Robert Fairchild and Tiler Peck, and on Saturday their individual loveliness and genial rapport made it a pleasure.“Interplay” (1945) is early Robbins, part of his attempt to Americanize ballet by presenting it as the horseplay of American teenagers. For today’s City Ballet dancers, it’s the 1940s jitterbugging moves rather than the classical steps that are a foreign language. Saturday’s cast was not quite convincing. The innocent verve was there (particularly in Joseph Gordon, who is having a breakout season), and the innocent tenderness (in Lauren Lovette and Taylor Stanley), but the moments that are meant to say, “This dance is ours” were closer to “Weren’t our great-grandparents cute?”“Glass Pieces” (1983) is late Robbins, part of his attempt to stay current with trends in American minimalism. The sound of its Philip Glass music isn’t that distant from “Hallelujah Junction.” When “Glass Pieces” debuted, some critics viewed its trendiness with skepticism, yet these days the work is looking like an American classic. Today’s City Ballet dancers can make all of it seem fresh and natural — both the New York City pedestrian traffic of the opening section and the ballet dancers who touch down like visiting aliens in the middle of it. In the second segment on Saturday, Maria Kowroski and Adrian Danchig-Waring had the requisite slinkiness to unspool vividly against the brilliant repetitions of the dancers silhouetted behind them. Aspects of the music and gestures in “Glass Pieces” point to Egypt, but the national origins of the style are as unmistakable as a jitterbugger’s snapping fingers. New York City Ballet’s winter season continues through March 1 at the David H. Koch Theater; nycballet.com.Advertisement