Season 3, Episode 3: “Open
 House.”

 Дорогие товарищи, надеюсь, что вы хорошо заботитесь о своих зубах. (Dear comrades, I hope you are taking good care of your teeth.) How convenient that a member of the C.I.A.’s Afghanistan team has a house on the market. It’s not surprising, though. When your wife dumps you for spending all your time working, dumping the home is the next step. The open house draws a lovely couple, the wife dressed like a Sunday school teacher and the husband in assistant-professor casual. The place needs a little TLC, and the husband, who looks a lot like Philip, has just the accessory for the second-floor home office: a big clunky listening device. He also stumbles on, and monkeys with, a black box the size of a small refrigerator, with an antenna and a keypad, while Elizabeth stands guard below, chatting up the real estate agent. She is powerless to stop the homeowner, Ted Paaswell (David Furr), from bounding up the steps and right into the office to retrieve some forgotten files.  Philip moves fast enough and possesses sufficient cool to engage him in chatter about the heating system. When Paaswell leaves, he takes that black box, carrying Philip’s handiwork with him. Close call No. 1. Exhale, but only a little.Moments later, Elizabeth and Philip (Keri Russell and Matthew Rhys) are tooling around in the Jennings-mobile (or some gas-guzzler from the K.G.B. motor pool) when a car they’ve seen before looms in the rearview mirror. Elizabeth keeps driving, with her usual steely resolve. Ultimately, there are 11 C.I.A. cars in pursuit and reinforcements too. Stan Beeman (Noah Emmerich) and his pals at the bureau are watching the C.I.A. watch the suspects. The F.B.I. boys are disgusted, a little pumped and ready to make an arrest, whereas the C.I.A. will give the suspects a long leash and probably lose them. Make that singular; once it gets dark, Philip executes a drop-and-roll exit, leaving Elizabeth alone, driving defensively but with eyes that reflect an almost animal fear — could those be droplets of sweat on her face? — and mascara and eyeliner running down her cheeks.  With the reluctant blessing of the still-bandaged Frank Gaad (Richard Thomas), Stan and Agent Dennis Aderholt (Brandon J. Dirden) move in on the C.I.A. operation.Thanks to Philip’s quick call, in code, a friendly “pedestrian”  tosses a radio to Elizabeth through the passenger window at a prearranged intersection. That happens just in time for Elizabeth to hear the voices of her pursuers counting down the seconds until they pull her over. She hears some confusion and a LOT of sudden static. Now, did my eyes deceive me? The light is about to change at the intersection (of Liberty Road, no less). Agents grip their steering wheels; they can’t hear one another with all that static; they stomp the gas and BOOM! F.B.I. and C.I.A. cars smash into each other with the screeching splendor of what they would call a multivehicle crash. Close call No. 2. We all exhale.But questions remain: Who was jamming who? Was the man with the unwieldy laptop static-producing device a K.G.B. agent? Or was this an all-American offensive?  And what led the feds to tail Elizabeth and Philip to begin with? Was it just normal security for the C.I.A.’s Afghanistan team? Was it Yousaf’s revenge? I hope they didn’t sign in for the open house with their real names.Favorite scenes:
Winding down after work. Close calls are an aphrodisiac, at least to this couple. A jam jar of the good whiskey to toss back, a pair of immense pliers and some elbow grease is all they need. They move together, eyes locked and wide open in extreme close-up on the big screen. Philip’s eyes are intensely focused. Elizabeth’s are ringed in black, pooling with tears. After that we hear and see jagged breathing, grasping,  gasping, sighing and then the shake of the head from Philip that says, “It’s not over yet.” He goes in again with the pliers. Did he pull a second tooth or the remainder of the first? And did he make Elizabeth, who has been suffering since her head was bashed against that car hood, feel better? Well, something did.This beautifully written, choreographed and acted scene mingled pain and relief, fear and resolution, sexual tension and release and, with Elizabeth’s bloodied lips, even a touch of “red in tooth and claw” savagery. But I had to actively shove dentists out of my mind and forget I had ever seen “Marathon Man.” For you, was it harder to bear than the suitcase scene? Or highly erotic?  On the board. Scrabble fans, would Gabriel cheat? Surely he would be pokerfaced, but with “P-H-L-O-X” and “S-T-Y-G-I-A-N” among his tiles, who needs to bluff? Were you waiting, like I was, for him to play “E-X-T-R-A-C-T-I-O-N”? With his command of the game, and his vocabulary, he neatly put Philip in his place. And torqued him off.Waking up to Martha. (Spinoff idea?) Has she even made Clark (a.k.a. Philip) a cup of coffee before she starts in on hubby about her favorite topic, babies? This time her plot is to ease Clark into temporary parenthood, and she has just the friend who can hook them up with a foster child. No way, says the look on Clark’s face. “But this is different,” she insists sunnily. “Why, because you get them from a catalog?” says the perturbed Clark.Sittergate.  The eavesdropping on Paaswell instantly yields potential blackmail material. He is employing  a young babysitter who has a bucketful of unsolicited and quite explicit suggestions on how he can get over his divorce. After several overt advances on her part, we hear him say sharply:  “Kimberly, this isn’t an appropriate conversation.”  He says he hopes he won’t have to talk to her father about this behavior. Kimberly’s father, it turns out, is Isaac Breland (Frank Deal), leader of the C.I.A.’s Afghanistan group. So that risky house-hunting jaunt was worth it.With the B-Man. Stan, what did you spy, or hear, that snapped your head around when you were watching the defector Zinaida P. (Svetlana Efremova) on the monitor during a television interview about Afghanistan? At the Rezidentura. Papa Igor can’t be a dictator if Oleg (Costa Ronin) won’t play. His father’s connections to the new Soviet leader, Yuri Andropov, notwithstanding, Oleg is defying his order and staying in the United States. So there! After all, there is a Stealth bomber to pursue.Follow my lead. Elizabeth is teaching Hans Hopley (Peter Mark Kendall) to be alert to enemy agents on his tail. He proves to be a willing, and terribly attentive, student. Nice touch: a meeting near a red-white-and-blue bunting draped bandstand in the park.’80s moments. Elizabeth’s off-white pantyhose under her slacks at the open house; Clark’s safari pajamas on his lazy morning with Martha. And a question: They did have waterproof mascara in the ’80s didn’t they? Comments on Comments
Oh, Comrades! I love your thoughts about the plot, the beers of the ’80s, Nina and blini and “Secret Agent Man” (“They’ve given you a number and taken away your name.”) Great handles, too (this means you, Harry Lime). The old cellmate plant trick, eh? And the idea of Paige (Holly Taylor) as an already indoctrinated spylet? She is certainly impressionable, but she is also suddenly so mature and responsible. Like a girl with a secret. Comment of the Week goes to the coiner of the term “suitcase material,” which may well be the best new addition to the espionage lexicon.  Let’s find more keepers.Questions for you:
Won’t some law enforcement type find the car Elizabeth left when she escaped? Or is there a K.G.B. parking valet who does away with these little messes? And as for Elizabeth and Hans, will they or won’t they exchange more than quotations? I am refraining from looking at future episodes, tempting though it is, so don’t ask. Everyone in favor of the stonewashed jeans say “da!”Запомните, за вами постоянно идет слежка. (Remember, you are always being followed).