Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.‘J. S. BACH: CONCERTOS FOR OBOE AND OBOE D’AMORE’
Gonzalo X. Ruiz, oboist; Portland Baroque Orchestra, Monica Huggett, violinist
(Avie AV2324)
 The mellow, soulful sound of the Baroque oboe and oboe d’amore is the star attraction of this quietly compelling album of arrangements of Bach keyboard concertos featuring one of the pre-eminent artists on those instruments. The Baroque violinist Monica Huggett, at the helm of the Portland Baroque Orchestra, offers sensitive, stylish support. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)MENDELSSOHN/SCHUMANN
 London Symphony Orchestra, John Eliot Gardiner, conductor; Maria João Pires, pianist
 (LSO Live) 
The Portuguese pianist Maria João Pires offers an insightful performance of Schumann’s Piano Concerto with the London Symphony Orchestra, which also plays with commitment in Mendelssohn’s “Hebrides” Overture and “Scottish” Symphony. (Vivien Schweitzer)‘THE YEAR BEFORE YESTERDAY’
Los Angeles Percussion Quartet
(Sono Luminus DSL-92180)
 A lullaby for percussion quartet? Well, there is more than an ounce of humor in this compelling recording by the feisty Los Angeles Percussion Quartet, along with colorful, atmospheric and, yes, supremely melodic music by an array of composers. The album’s crystal-clear sound brings to life the rich textures created from a rainbow of traditional and found instruments, especially in the mesmerizing title track by Shaun Naidoo. (Fonseca-Wollheim) ‘OUR WORLD IN SONG’
 Wu Man, pipa player; Luis Conte, percussionist; Daniel Ho, vocalist and string instruments player
 (Wind Music) 
The pipa player Wu Man has done tremendous work to bring her instrument to wider attention; among her achievements are collaborations with an eclectic array of musicians. Here she teams up with the Cuban percussionist Luis Conte and Daniel Ho, a native of Honolulu who performs on string instruments, including guitar and ukulele, and as vocalist, for vivid arrangements of traditional folk tunes. The selections, from Europe, Asia, South America and Africa, include the lively South African mining song “Shosholoza” and the melancholy “Sakura, Sakura,” a Japanese melody honoring cherry blossom season. (Schweitzer) ‘PLAY’
Jason Vieaux, guitarist
(Azica B00G9C27WW)
 “Play.” A world of 20th-century solo guitar music comes together under this deceptively simple title in Jason Vieaux’s delightful album, which has just won a Grammy. This is a collection of works of the kind, one suspects, that make a musician want to take up the guitar and, well, play: virtuosic, flamboyant, dashing and, sometimes ineffably lyrical. (Fonseca-Wollheim)‘BEETHOVEN: THE MIDDLE STRING QUARTETS’
 Cypress String Quartet
 (Avie; two discs) 
Having already proven their Beethoven credentials with an earlier recording of the late quartets, the gifted Cypress musicians turn their attention to earlier works — including the three “Razumovsky” Quartets, performed with rich tone, crisp ensemble work and expressive nuance. The two-disc set also includes potent renditions of the “Harp” and “Serioso” Quartets. (Schweitzer)SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)