Jon Stewart, who took over “The Daily Show” in 1999, announced on Tuesday night that he would leave the satirical news show sometime this year. Mr. Stewart had plenty of confrontations, hard talks and other memorable moments, both comedic and poignant, in his 16 years at the helm. Here are a few highlights.First ShowJan. 11, 1999Jon Stewart succeeded Craig Kilborn as host of the show in January. His first story was about President Bill Clinton’s impeachment trial and his first guest was Michael J. Fox, then the star of  “Spin City.”Bush Wins 2000 ElectionDec. 13, 2000Under Mr. Stewart, “The Daily Show” became more interested in politics and the media than it had been with Mr. Kilborn. This shift in focus, and its “Indecision” political coverage, specifically, gave the show more prominence in the cultural landscape.First Show After Sept. 11Sept. 20, 2001Though primarily a comedian, Mr. Stewart was not above being emotional on-air. In the show’s first episode after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, Mr. Stewart wept at his desk and praised first-responders; they would become a personal cause for him. “Any fool can destroy,” he said. “But to see these guys, these firefighters, these policeman and people from all over the country, literally with buckets, rebuilding, that’s extraordinary. That’s why we’ve already won.”‘Crossfire’ AppearanceOct. 15, 2004His arguably  most renowned moment wasn’t even on “The Daily Show.”  Appearing on the CNN political chat show “Crossfire,” he harshly criticized the show’s partisan format and its hosts, Paul Begala and Tucker Carlson, saying that they were “hurting America.” Less than three months later, CNN announced it was canceling the show. “I agree wholeheartedly with Jon Stewart’s overall premise,” said Jonathan Klein, the president of CNN.Writers’ Strike: Host ClashFeb. 4, 2008During the 2007-2008 Writers Guild strike, Mr. Stewart hosted what he called “A Daily Show,” as opposed to “The Daily Show,” in acknowledgment of his missing writers. He and fellow late-night hosts filled episodes largely with gimmickry, like this “tangle” between Mr. Stewart, Stephen Colbert and Conan O’Brien.Jim Cramer InterviewMarch 12, 2009Mr. Stewart was known for heated interviews with other media figures. In the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, he excoriated CNBC’s Jim Cramer for what he perceived as the financial news media’s failings in its coverage of Wall Street.Jon Stewart as Glenn BeckNov. 5, 2009The cable host Glenn Beck was another frequent target.Barack Obama InterviewOct. 27, 2010High-level politicians and candidates have been frequent guests on “The Daily Show.” In October 2010, Barack Obama became the first sitting president to appear on the show.Rally to Restore Sanity and/or FearOct. 30, 2010The satirists Mr. Stewart and Mr. Colbert became political leaders, of a sort, hosting a gathering of more than 200,000, by some estimates, at the National Mall in Washington.Backing Sept. 11 First-RespondersDec. 16, 2010Mr. Stewart was an outspoken supporter of first-responders who became ill because of their time working at ground zero. He made the James Zadroga 9/11 Health and Compensation Act a personal cause — on “The Daily Show,” he attacked Senate Republicans for blocking the bill. The measure passed several days later.Bill O’Reilly, ‘Daily Show’ FavoriteSept. 30, 2013The Fox News host, a frequent guest on “The Daily Show,” could be counted on to exchange rhetorical fireworks with Mr. Stewart. Eric Garner VerdictDec. 3, 2014Mr. Stewart again took a serious tack after a Staten Island grand jury declined to indict a white New York City police officer whose chokehold on Eric Garner, an unarmed black man, led to the Mr. Garner’s death.Announces His DepartureFeb. 10, 2015Mr. Stewart announced that he would leave “The Daily Show” sometime in 2015. “This show doesn’t deserve an even slightly restless host, and neither do you,” he said. Comedy Central said the show would continue after his departure.By DAVID CARRJon Stewart of “The Daily Show” is leaving on his own terms, while Brian Williams was suspended after an untruth was exposed.By DAVE ITZKOFFComedy Central said that Mr. Stewart, the longtime host of the satirical news show, was giving up his post, but would remain at the helm until later this year.