BERLIN — The Chilean director Pablo Larraín has a penchant for the dark side. His “Tony Manero” (2009) was about a serial killer, and “Post Mortem” (2012) and the Oscar-nominated “No” (2013) explored the complexities of Pinochet’s Chile. In “The Club,” which debuted at the Berlin Film Festival this week to strong reviews,  the director has mined another troubling theme: errant Roman Catholic priests and the system that has helped cover up their misdeeds.Set in a house for a handful of retired priests in a nondescript fishing town on the Chilean coast and filmed in the muddy purgatorial light of dawn and dusk, the film explores the weighty themes of crime and punishment, sin and redemption, but with a mix of subtle humor, seething anger and surprising compassion that brings out the ambiguities in each character.Mr. Larraín, 38, who was educated in Catholic schools but says he is no longer a practicing Catholic, said he got the idea for the film when he saw a picture in a newspaper of a house in Chile where a priest removed from the ministry had been sent. It looked as if it “came out of milk advertising, with cows and hills,” he said here on Wednesday. This prompted him to ask: “Why is this guy here?”Over the years, the Catholic Church often sent errant priests to live in homes to practice prayer and penance instead of handing them over to the civil authorities in cases where a crime had been committed. The priests in “The Club” spend their days drinking, staring out the window and training greyhounds for races. The plot unfolds in unexpected ways after a man, Sandokán (Roberto Farías), who as a boy had known one of the priests, arrives at the house.“They think they can only be judged in front of the eyes of God, even though they commit crimes that should be judged in regular courts like everyone else,” Mr. Larraín said of the way the Catholic Church has handled the abuse crisis. “The idea of redemption, the idea of forgiveness, it would actually make some sense if I had ever, ever, in all the 38 years of my life known that one guy, just one guy, who admitted that he did something,” he added.The film’s small Spanish-language cast includes Alfredo Castro, a regular in Mr. Larraín’s earlier films, who plays an ashen-faced, crypto-gay priest, and Alejandro Sieveking as a priest sent by the Vatican to investigate what has been going on at the house. With a sickly sweet anger, Antonia Zegers plays Sister Monica, who keeps house for the priests.Mr. Larraín said he spent three weeks finding the right tone and the music before shooting the film over two-and-a-half weeks, often giving the actors their script just before turning on the camera. He said he used lenses from the 1960s that the Russian director Andrei Tarkovsky favored in order to dim the light.The director said he had asked himself why the Catholic Church had only in recent decades begun to acknowledge an age-old problem of sexual abuse by priests. “That’s the fear, the media,” Mr. Larraín said. “I think those guys are more worried to be in the newspaper than to go to hell.”