Wisconsin is finally getting its own hip music festival.The Bon Iver frontman, Justin Vernon, a Wisconsin native, is organizing the inaugural Eaux Claires Music & Arts Festival in Eau Claire, Wis., on July 17 and 18, bringing acts like Boys Noize, Sufjan Stevens and Indigo Girls (performing their 1994 album “Swamp Ophelia”) to his hometown.“My only festival experience has been as a musician,” Mr. Vernon said in an interview. As a fan, “I never would have wanted to go to a festival — the idea of people jamming together and being uncomfortably hot or cold or wet and listening to a bunch of music put me off a lot,” he said. “But that was an influence on how we put together this one.”The gathering will take place at Foster Farm, a 20-acre plot on the Chippewa River, and promises to not “have 4,000 things happening at once,” Mr. Vernon said, in favor of experimental collaborations, more intimate performances, and quiet places for attendees to rest. Food will be locally sourced.“I don’t want to go too far and be like, ‘We’ve made the perfect festival,’ but I think we have, probably,” Mr. Vernon said. Tickets, including optional camping passes, go on sale Thursday at eauxclaires.com.Aaron Dessner of the National is another organizer of the festival, which is backed by Crash Line Productions (Boston Calling Music Festival). It will also feature the experimental noise group Melt-Banana, the country singer Sturgill Simpson and the Midwestern R&B singer Spooky Black. Bon Iver will perform live for the first time since 2012.Mr. Vernon also teased the possibility of a cameo from his frequent collaborator Kanye West. “We’ve talked about doing an acid-rock trio” featuring Mr. West and the producer Mike Dean, Mr. Vernon said. “We’ll see. It’s always on the table.”Most important in the planning, he added, was to inject some “character” that has been missing from more corporatized events. “I’ve played Coachella and had a fun time, but you don’t feel special there – you can pay to be a V.I.P.,” Mr. Vernon said.“Everything we hate about every festival we’ve ever done we’re not doing here,” he added. 