By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 11, 2015
7 P.M. (Reelz) INVICTUS (2009) This rousing drama from Clint Eastwood, based on the book “Playing the Enemy” by John Carlin, was inspired by a true story of reconciliation and athletic triumph. Morgan Freeman portrays Nelson Mandela, newly elected as South Africa’s first black president, and Matt Damon is François Pienaar, the captain of the Springbok rugby team, a source of Afrikaner pride despised by many blacks. Mandela views the team as a vehicle to bring the country’s races together, especially if it can win the Rugby World Cup tournament in 1995, which South Africa is to host. “ ‘Invictus’ has implications beyond its immediate time and place that are hard to miss,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “It’s an exciting sports movie, an inspiring tale of prejudice overcome and, above all, a fascinating study of political leadership.” In “Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom” (2013), Justin Chadwick’s biopic, at 6:35 on Showtime, Idris Elba portrays Mandela and Naomie Harris is his wife, Winnie. “Mr. Elba’s towering performance lends ‘Long Walk to Freedom’ a Shakespearean breadth,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “His Mandela is an intensely emotional man whose body quakes in moments of sorrow and whose face is stricken with a bone-deep anguish. The carefully chosen words in his eloquent declarations of principle, spoken with gravity and deliberation, are deeply stirring.”8 P.M. (NBC) THE MYSTERIES OF LAURA When a female impersonator is murdered, the team infiltrates the world of drag — only to discover that the victim was a member of an underground fight club. In “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit,” at 9, a video game developer (Mouzam Makkar) prepares to unveil her first product amid a barrage of online intimidation and death threats from male gamers. Then one of her employees is assaulted at a convention, forcing the squad to protect her when she refuses to delay the introduction.9 P.M. (Cooking) EXTRA VIRGIN The actress Debi Mazar and her musician husband, Gabriele Corcos, enjoy an afternoon exploring Red Hook, Brooklyn, before picking up their daughters, Evelina and Giulia, for a meal celebrating the last day of school.9 P.M. (Fox) EMPIRE Lucious (Terrence Howard) asks Cookie (Taraji P. Henson) to manage Elle Dallas (Courtney Love), Empire Entertainment’s first star, who hasn’t put out an album in years. Meanwhile, a mystery woman (Raven-Symoné) re-emerges from the family’s past and stirs up trouble.Advertisement9 P.M. (ABC) MODERN FAMILY Claire (Julie Bowen) and Phil (Ty Burrell) decide to reprise their alter egos, Juliana and Clive, for a bit of Valentine’s Day role-playing. But then Claire starts to worry that Phil may prefer Juliana to her. In “black-ish,” at 9:30, Dre (Anthony Anderson) tries to keep from having his usual Valentine’s Day argument with Rainbow (Tracee Ellis Ross). And Diane (Marsai Martin) learns how to give a compliment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (13, 49) EARTH: A NEW WILD In “Forests,” the conservation scientist M. Sanjayan journeys into an area of the Amazon known as the intangible zone, which is home to “uncontacted” tribes. He then travels to the Great Bear Rainforest in British Columbia; the cork forests of Portugal; and Sumatra, where unusual elephant battles are exploding on the edge of the wilderness.12:15 A.M. (TCM) THE BICYCLE THIEF (1948) An unemployed laborer (Lamberto Maggiorani) and his young son (Enzo Staiola) search for the stolen bicycle that the man desperately needs back to keep his new job in this classic neorealist study of poverty in postwar Rome, directed by Vittorio De Sica. Writing in The Times, Bosley Crowther called this movie, which received an honorary Oscar in 1950 for best foreign film, “brilliant and devastating.”AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowCALL FOR HELP (2015) Lior Etziony and Michal Hanuka follow five young volunteers from Global DIRT (Disaster Immediate Response Team) as they travel to Haiti after the 2010 earthquake and work to deliver aid by circumventing dysfunctional nonprofits or governments. “Plenty of young people are directionless, yet a disaster area is a poor place to be working out your personal issues,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times. “Although the aid-delivery system has many flaws, this film makes its subjects seem more selfish than selfless.” (iTunes.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 11, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.