AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Jason ZinomanIt’s hard to imagine a presidential election without Jon Stewart at “The Daily Show,” but we are going to have to get used to it now that the host of the landmark political comedy program of our era is leaving his desk before the first primary of 2016.In a stunning announcement during the taping of his show on Tuesday, Mr. Stewart announced that after more than 16 years of telling jokes at 11 p.m., he would do his final show before the end of this year, which represents the end of one of the most impressive and influential runs in talk-show history. Coming not long after Stephen Colbert concluded his virtuosic “Colbert Report,” it’s also the end of an era of incredibly sharp topical nightly television at Comedy Central. “The Daily Show’s” impact on late night was arguably as great as that of prestige HBO shows like “The Sopranos” and “The Wire” on television drama. Before Mr. Stewart, we didn’t expect much from nightly political humor. Late-night monologues were at best funny diversions, at worst toothless jabs pandering to the easiest stereotypes. Just as David Letterman raised the ambition of comedy on talk shows, Mr. Stewart proved that nightly topical humor could be hilarious while also being as incisive and passionate as the best news organizations. “The Daily Show” didn’t just offer insightful, cutting analysis, clever parody and often hard-hitting interviews with major newsmakers. For an entire generation, it became the news, except this report could withstand the disruption of the Internet far better than the old media. If anything, the web only made “The Daily Show,” with its short segments, more essential. Every time a political scandal exploded or a candidate made headlines or a cable fight went viral, the first thought for many viewers was: I can’t wait to see what Jon Stewart will say about this. Part of his success was introducing a much stronger, more overt point of view, a muscular liberalism with a wide patriotic streak that came to the fore in times of crisis or outrage. Mr. Stewart did away with the mealy-mouthed approach to political comedy. He was a harsh critic of the false equivalence that much political talk engaged in, famously lambasting the hosts of CNN’s “Crossfire” on their own show. Mr. Stewart did not present himself as a blow-dried anchor from televisionland. His perspective was honed during a New Jersey childhood and years in stand-up. He became a proud New Yorker and part of a long tradition of smart-aleck Jewish comedians adopting argumentative outsider approaches, while using a subway car full of ethnic voices to punch up jokes.He used anger and indignation, channeling the seemingly inexhaustible exhaustion that Americans have with our political system. Obviously there were many heated voices before him, but not on nightly television. Mr. Stewart managed to make this not only palatable, but also earned. This was evident in interviews in which Mr. Stewart was far more aggressive with politicians and commentators than late-night hosts before him. Occasionally this could harden into something that seemed like shtick, but rarely, in part because Mr. Stewart marshaled arguments the way great journalists do. He might have put a premium on getting a laugh, but he never let that get in the way of the logic of his case. He proudly went for dumb jokes, but not dumb positions. Mr. Stewart didn’t just respect the intelligence of his audience; he saw it as an asset that he could leverage for deeper, funnier jokes. As the years went on, he became more comfortable with esoteric subjects, and one of his many superb correspondents, John Oliver, has pushed the limits of complexity even further in his HBO show “Last Week Tonight.” That gets to one of Mr. Stewart’s most underrated legacies. Besides his skills as a performer, Mr. Stewart and his staff also had a stellar eye for talent, which is as integral to his influence as anything. “The Daily Show” has been a star-making factory of comedy second only to Lorne Michaels’s “Saturday Night Live,” producing a remarkable number of major talents including Steve Carell, Ed Helms and, most notably, Mr. Colbert, who will replace Mr. Letterman on CBS in what is turning out to be a tumultuous year in late night. Of course Mr. Stewart will not disappear — maybe he will work in more movies like “Rosewater,” his directorial debut. (I would love to see him return to stand-up, but don’t bet on it.) And Larry Wilmore has already had a promising start as host of a show replacing “The Colbert Report.” But it’s hard not to be glum about these two major exits from Comedy Central and pessimistic that whoever replaces Mr. Stewart will share his commitment to smart comedy. Advertisement