AdvertisementSupported byBy Graham BowleyThe Freer Gallery of Art, a Smithsonian Institution museum that houses one of the finest collections of Asian art, is closing for renovations in January, the Smithsonian announced.It will be only the second large-scale renovation in the gallery’s 90-year history and the first time the gallery has been closed since the last big renovation more than 20 years ago. That renovation added office space and storage under the gallery’s building, on the National Mall in Washington.The latest changes will focus on improving the lighting and updating the technology in the museum, in particular adding modern climate control systems to better protect the collection, most of which will have to be removed from the galleries during the work. The Smithsonian is also using the opportunity to return some of the building’s original features, like marble baseboards and flooring that matches the original and is now covered in places by carpet. The gallery is to close on Jan. 4 and reopen in the summer of 2017.“Some of it will be very subtle, but we are trying to take it back to the way it opened in 1923,” said Katie Ziglar, director of external affairs.The Freer, the Smithsonian’s first art museum when it opened in 1923, is named for the Detroit railroad magnate and collector Charles Lang Freer (1854-1919), a self-taught connoisseur of Asian art and culture.As well as his collection, he donated money for construction of the building, which was designed by the architect Charles A. Platt, with close oversight by Mr. Freer. Mr. Freer traveled and collected widely in Asia and the Middle East, and left funds for the building’s construction and for acquisitions, including important sculptures from South Asia and China, Ms. Ziglar said. Mr. Freer became a friend of the American painter James McNeill Whistler, and the gallery contains the world’s biggest collection of Whistler art.Whistler influenced Mr. Freer in the aesthetics of displaying art, Ms. Ziglar said, including using natural lighting from above and creating vantage points to see the views outside. Many of these principles are reflected in the Freer building, which has movable skylights and a center courtyard.It is also home to the Peacock Room. Once part of a London home, it was redecorated by Whistler. Mr. Freer bought the room and moved it from London to Detroit.As part of Mr. Freer’s bequest, he stipulated that the art could never travel outside the museum. This means that during the closing, the gallery’s more than 25,000 objects, 180,000 square feet of space and 18 exhibition galleries will be unavailable to the public. But museum officials said that images of the artworks would still be available online, and some would be on view as part of special exhibitions at its sister gallery, the Arthur M. Sackler, which is connected to the Freer and shares the same staff. The Freer and Sackler are the first of the Smithsonian museums to put all of their collections online through the Smithsonian’s recent digital initiative.The Smithsonian could not put a dollar estimate on the cost of the renovations because parts of the project are still up for bidding. But the cost would be met by a mix of federal funds, endowment and donations, it said.In May, the Sackler will host an art installation by Darren Waterston called “Filthy Lucre,” a modern reimagining of the Peacock Room.Advertisement