By STEPHEN HOLDENFEB. 10, 2015
“Grounded” is a word that doesn’t describe most cabaret performers. But it applies to Maxine Linehan, the fiercely talented, self-assured theatrical singer who appeared at the Metropolitan Room on Friday evening. Ms. Linehan, who was born in Ireland, exudes the comfortable rootedness of a performer who knows who she is and where she came from. At the same time, Ms. Linehan is an adventurer. On her latest album, “Beautiful Songs,” she takes favorites that you thought you knew and infuses them with an intensely personal point of view.In the show’s most revelatory moment, she transformed Irving Berlin’s wistful classic “What’ll I Do?” into a tearful memorial tribute to her parents, who brought her up in a home filled with music. The plea “What’ll I do with just a photograph to tell my troubles to?” inserted a note of anguished finality to a standard expression of romantic longing.The U2 anthem “One,” whose title leads many to assume it’s a hymn of unity, Ms. Linehan pointed out, is really a song about a couple breaking up, and she loaded it with emotional baggage along with another note of finality; there was no reconciliation in sight.An exceptionally versatile ensemble, led by Ryan Shirar on piano, with Joseph Brent on violin, mandolin and guitar; Mairi Dorman-Phaneuf on cello; and Justin Vance on reeds played arrangements whose sound varied from that of a European hotel orchestra to that of an Irish folk band.Ms. Linehan is a vocal traditionalist in the mode of Petula Clark, to whom she paid tribute in an earlier show. But unlike Ms. Clark, Ms. Linehan has a vocal brightness that comes with a jagged edge. “Je Suis Charlie,” she said while introducing a version of Cole Porter’s “I Love Paris” that took on a fervent, near-hysterical urgency. For the Edith Piaf signature song “If You Love Me (Really Love Me),” she assumed a Piafian all-or-nothing stance. It was all done with such confidence and good humor that even her riskiest decisions felt reassuring.Maxine Linehan performs again on Feb. 20 at the Metropolitan Room, 34 West 22nd Street, Manhattan; 212-206-0440, metropolitanroom.com. A version of this review appears in print on February 11, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Making the Popular Personal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.