By JAMES R. OESTREICHFEB. 10, 2015
With Japanese music still lingering in memory from the Juilliard School’s weeklong, storm-abbreviated Focus! festival last month, the New York presenter Music From Japan strutted its stuff with its own festival over the weekend. In two programs at Asia Society, Music From Japan, long a force in opening pathways for Japanese music in the West, was also celebrating its 40th anniversary.A chamber concert on Sunday afternoon, presenting five works commissioned by the organization, two of them new, seemed virtually a continuation of the Focus! festival’s exploration of Japanese music since 1945. But an intimate concert on Saturday evening, “East Asian Vibrancy,” plunged deep into the world of traditional instruments, which Focus! had mostly avoided, and expanded the range in both time and place, offering classical and contemporary music from Japan, China and South Korea.In a preconcert lecture-demonstration, Ralph Samuelson, a performer and scholar, spoke of the “energetic musical life” in those countries today but noted that “traditional, folk and classical music are still there, alive and well.” As proof, the concert presented three noted performers on traditional instruments: Mayumi Miyata playing the Japanese sho, a mouth organ; Wu Man, the Chinese pipa, a pear-shaped lute; and Jin Hi Kim, the Korean komungo, a large, deep zitherlike instrument. Each performed something from her instrument’s classical repertory and something contemporary.The solo demonstrations and performances were brilliant and fascinating, effectively staking out the individualities of the instruments. But you had to wonder how they would combine, in a sort of jam improvisation after intermission and in the premiere of Ned Rothenburg’s “Unkai” (“Sea of Clouds”), which followed.Not always well, it turned out. The hyperactive pipa and the spacious komungo, as string instruments, made relative peace with each other, but the unearthly, reedy sho seemed hard put to enter the conversation.Michio Kitazume’s “Distances III,” given its premiere on Sunday, was captivating. It played clarinet (Richard Stoltzman) against cello (Fred Sherry) in a shifting perspective, each instrument thrusting and receding. Dynamic contrasts suggested physical distance. Mr. Stoltzman’s ultra-pianissimos, at the very limit of audibility, were particularly remarkable.Yoichi Sugiyama’s “Two Verses by Du Fu” for voice, viola, clarinet and piano, was the other new work on Sunday. In English, it was elusive in its spare, angular melodies and slightly jarring in some fragmented phrasing. Wonjung Kim, a soprano, gave the songs a fine turn, as she did Joji Yuasa’s melodious “Oyasuminasai” (“Good Night”), from 2013, with Stephen Gosling on piano.Mr. Gosling and Mr. Sherry anchored Ichiro Nodaira’s “Quatuor en Hiver” (“Quartet in Winter”), from 2003, and the violinist Mari Kimura gave a stellar performance of Mari Takano’s “Full Moon” (2008-9) over electronic tracks on which she also played.The Music From Japan festival will travel to the Freer Gallery at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington on Tuesday; musicfromjapan.org.A version of this review appears in print on February 11, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: They May Be Neighbors, but They Don’t Always Play Together.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.