AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael WhiteLONDON — Wagner’s “Die Meistersinger” is a long opera about many things and, as hijacked by Adolf Hitler in the 1930s, those included a view of German cultural supremacy so welcoming to the Third Reich that it still bothers some of us. But more broadly it’s an opera about art at a moment of crisis, rooted in past triumphs but needing to move forward to future uncertainties. That makes it an appropriate piece for the English National Opera, whose new production, staged by Richard Jones, opened on Saturday at a moment of unsettling change and possible crisis for the company.The company’s problems were initially related to money — it was spending too much, according to the published judgment of Arts Council England, which last year sharply cut the company’s funding — but have spread to internal conflicts played out in the British news media.In recent weeks the chairman and executive director have resigned amid prophecies that the company is near collapse. Both were quickly replaced, with Anthony Whitworth-Jones, a former boss of the Dallas Opera and a much-admired safe pair of hands, emerging from retirement to assume the executive job on an interim basis. The artistic director John Berry was blamed for the financial problems in an email by the departing chairman. By comparison, the crisis in the opera house’s “The Mastersingers of Nuremberg,” as it’s billed, may seem teacup-sized: This is an opera about 16th-century German merchants squabbling over rules of creativity.But it’s a parable. The disputes illustrate how culture can define society for good or ill, how it gets stuck and how it finds renewal. Central to the story is a singing competition with a girl’s hand in marriage as the prize. (Nobody said that Wagner was a feminist.) The organizers know the kind of song they like; it must have a certain form and structure. But along comes an outsider with a new song that enlarges their horizons, opens up the old forms (without totally destroying them) and gets the girl: the just reward of measured progress.Wagner called his work a comedy. But, being a German comedy, it doesn’t have too many laughs, and Mr. Jones’s staging at the London Coliseum here didn’t force them. In fact, the joy of his keen, intelligent and happily unprovocative show was that nothing appeared labored. Unlike recent European “Meistersingers” — which have celebrated Wagner’s idea of Teutonic culture by immersing everything in swastikas — it had a light touch. And as tends to be the case with this director, the visual world he established onstage was simplified, presented in sharp outlines that relate to cartoon imagery.Paul Steinberg’s set revisited medieval Nuremberg in flat-pack terms. And Buki Shiff’s bright, pantomimic costumes smartly traveled time, morphing the 16th century into the 19th. There were inconsistencies: Act III presented a near photo-real interior, responding to a scene in which Wagner homes in on the inner lives of the main characters with a revealing intimacy that the grander, chorus-saturated scenes never allow.But generally the tone of the show was thoughtful levity, with something close to genius in the way it circumnavigated the uncomfortable associations of the hymn to cultural supremacy that ends the last act. Mr. Jones’s strategy was playfulness, established from the outset when the curtain rose on a vast scrapbook montage of the great and good of German cultural life, images crowded together like the Beatles’ Sgt. Pepper album cover. Checking them all out — from J. S. Bach to Joseph Beuys — made an absorbing diversion in the Act I Prelude. That Wagner wasn’t there himself was no doubt all part of the game. The images, and game, returned in the Act III finale. Yes, we were celebrating Germanness, but unobjectionably, with a vetted cast list and an element of charm.As for the cast, it was impressive, led by an outstandingly humane, warm and engaging Hans Sachs from Iain Paterson. He lacked the grandeur British audiences are used to from stentorian interpreters like John Tomlinson, but caught the weary wisdom of the role in an unfussy, modern way. Andrew Shore brought long experience of comic timing to bear on a meticulously low-key Beckmesser. Gwyn Hughes Jones wasn’t a charismatic Walther but sang “Prize Song” with appealing brightness. And there were assertive contributions from James Creswell as Pogner and Nicky Spence as David.A sprawling enterprise like “Mastersingers” is a company effort, and the company here — chorus, orchestra and lesser roles — was in superb form under Edward Gardner, who conducted with finesse and style. That he will soon be stepping down as the company’s music director — just one production left before he goes — is yet another loss the company faces. Eight years in the job, he hasn’t been a man for all repertory: There have been highs and lows. But this “Mastersingers” was a definite enough high to ensure he will be missed.The English National Opera’s staging of “The Mastersingers of Nuremberg” runs through March 10 at the London Coliseum; eno.org.Advertisement