By ZACHARY WOOLFEFEB. 10, 2015
Perhaps you had this professor in college: the learned, old-fashioned one, long settled in his post, whose lectures would emerge in a stream-of-consciousness ramble. The veteran baritone Thomas Hampson’s recital at Carnegie Hall on Monday felt like one of those lectures, sauntering from topic to topic.It was as if the nostalgia in the opening Strauss set had reminded Mr. Hampson of the opposite of nostalgia: World War I-theme songs of a similar vintage by Zemlinsky, Mahler, Hindemith, Ives and others. That specter of conflict in turn brought up the Civil War, and then the black American experience, which seemed to spark the thought of Walt Whitman settings.An ambitiously heady blend like that can quickly congeal, particularly when your guide is heavy-handed. As ever, Mr. Hampson, 59, brings an admirable quantity of ideas to his concerts. Why, then, did Monday’s program end up seeming livelier on the page than onstage?That may be because of the limitations of Mr. Hampson’s voice these days. His sound remains more than audible in the velvety Carnegie acoustic, but its richness has thinned, making it a bit distant. His tone sometimes hit on a warm, amber patch, but in some passages the color had grayed.AdvertisementThe Strauss was dotted by floated high notes that squeaked by. Elsewhere, called upon for volume, Mr. Hampson, as he did in a recent run of Offenbach’s “Les Contes d’Hoffmann” at the Metropolitan Opera, pushed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A song recital can survive an aging instrument — it can even thrive, if an artist is insightful and varied in his approach. But Mr. Hampson, for all his enthusiasms and undeniable intelligence, summons sturdiness onstage more than nuance. It was not only in Vaughan Williams’s setting of Whitman’s poem “A Clear Midnight” that his phrasing was too square to be truly moving.He is to be commended for introducing Jennifer Higdon’s solemn new cycle “Civil Words,” which sets texts from the Civil War, a period this composer is exploring in a coming opera based on the novel “Cold Mountain.” The pianist (here Wolfram Rieger) keeps returning to a haunting motif, muting a string while playing it, giving a somberly plucked effect. The vocal lines hover eloquently between conversation and melody.AdvertisementMr. Hampson’s gravity can appeal in the right songs. He infused a hint of jazz into the repetitions of Jean Berger’s stark “Lonely People,” set to a Langston Hughes poem, and captured the nobility of Bernstein’s “To What You Said,” another Whitman text. And, relaxed, he can be charming: His encores — Barber’s “Sure on This Shining Night” and Haydn Wood’s 1916 chestnut “Roses of Picardy” — may have been the evening’s highlights, lovingly handled and cozy, as if lit from within.A version of this review appears in print on February 11, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Conflict Resolutions Delivered in Baritone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.