AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil Genzlinger“Building Wonders,” a three-part series within the PBS show “Nova,” tries hard to take the miraculousness out of three formidable ancient structures but, happily, it fails. If anything, the programs leave you even more impressed with their subjects: the Colosseum, the stone city of Petra and Hagia Sophia. “How did they build/make/do that?” is, of course, a longstanding parlor game with all sorts of ancient structures, whether the pyramids of Egypt or Machu Picchu in Peru. Each program tries to go beyond the theoretical and explore practical aspects of the guessing game, beginning on Wednesday with the Colosseum in Rome.The concern isn’t so much the construction of the Colosseum, but the staging of the elaborate, gory entertainments supposedly held there. Could the ancient Romans really flood the arena and float ships in it? Did wild animals really materialize to devour unfortunate victims? To test the wild-animal possibilities, a research team builds a lifting mechanism like the Romans might have used to bring lions and such up from beneath the floor of the arena. Eventually the team gets it to work, but not without considerable difficulty. Obstacles are encountered in the experiments in the other two programs as well. The examination of Petra in Jordan, with its remarkable carved facades, includes an effort by present-day stone carvers to transform a rock face in similar fashion, but they quickly resort to a modern shortcut. In the episode on Hagia Sophia, the imposing domed structure in Istanbul that has been a church and a mosque and is now a museum, a crew has all kinds of trouble trying to build a miniature version to explore why the real thing has been so earthquake-proof over the centuries.None of the hands-on experiments are as revelatory as they want to be, but that only leads us to marvel at the structures all the more. That’s really what makes these amazing creations amazing: They defy efforts to analyze them. “We’re not meant to understand how the great dome is supported,” Robert Ousterhout, a University of Pennsylvania professor, says of Hagia Sophia. “We see only the weightless quality of the building.”NovaBuilding WondersOn PBS stations Wednesday nights (check local listings).Produced by Providence Pictures for Nova/WGBH Boston, in association with Zed and Arte France. Written, directed and produced by Gary Glassman. Paula S. Apsell, senior executive producer for “Nova.”Advertisement