By MIKE HALEFEB. 10, 2015
Has anyone given us more pleasure playing perfectly oddly matched couples than Eugene Levy and Catherine O’Hara? As the dog-owning Flecks in Christopher Guest’s “Best in Show” and the folk-singing Mitch and Mickey in his “A Mighty Wind,” they perfected a mix of barbed deadpan (Mr. Levy) and vibrant loopiness (Ms. O’Hara) that was crucial to those films’ special brand of warmly lunatic humor.So it’s nice to see them working together — for the first time since Mr. Guest’s “For Your Consideration,” in 2006 — on the Canadian series “Schitt’s Creek,” which has its United States premiere on the new Pop cable channel on Wednesday night. Nice for about five minutes. Maybe 10.Not that there’s anything wrong with their performances in this mild satire about a family of rich, clueless narcissists who lose their money (like the Bluths of “Arrested Development”) and move to their only remaining possession, a backwoods hamlet (sort of like the Loudons in “Newhart”). Mr. Levy, in particular, is as funny as ever, working his owlish outrage and bringing his meticulous, authentic approach to his portrayal of the patriarch, Johnny Rose.But he’s doing that in a losing cause, a show that’s drab and underwritten, with potentially amusing (if familiar) situations that never build to more than a chuckle or a nod of recognition: Yeah, that could have been funny. Comedy that wants to be over the top is at odds with a production that’s minor-key and pedestrian. Whatever energy was associated with the show seems to have been spent on thinking up the title.AdvertisementThe idea for “Schitt’s Creek” originated with Mr. Levy’s son, Daniel, who developed it with his father and wrote the pilot. There’s some capitalist-bashing cleverness in the opening setup: The Rose family made its money in video-rental stores, so losing it is a kind of digital-frontier justice, and Johnny has to be reminded that he owns Schitt’s Creek, which he bought for his son as a joke.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.From there, though, things don’t make much sense, comedic or real-world. Owning the town doesn’t appear to confer any privileges at all on the Roses, who are subjected to a standard series of how-the-mighty-have-fallen indignities: sharing rooms in a motel, looking for jobs, being condescended to by the local residents.AdvertisementThe general lack of inventiveness extends to the characters, especially the grown son and daughter played by Daniel Levy and Annie Murphy. The show sticks closest to the viewpoint of the son, David, who’s positioned as the kind of common-sense audience surrogate Jason Bateman played in “Arrested Development” but is mostly shrill and unlikable. It doesn’t help that the younger Mr. Levy, whatever his talents as a writer and producer, doesn’t appear to have inherited any of his father’s comic acting abilities.In the first five episodes, the show teases us with moments when Eugene Levy, Ms. O’Hara or both seem to be working into a rhythm, like a scene in which Ms. O’Hara’s Moira, a former soap opera star, offers an acting seminar for the town schoolchildren. And a few of the supporting players do good work, including Emily Hampshire (“12 Monkeys”) as the motel clerk, and the always funny Rizwan Manji (“Outsourced”) as a real estate agent.If you choose to watch, maybe some of that potential will be realized, or maybe you’ll just find yourself up 13 episodes without a paddle.Schitt’s CreekPop, Wednesday nights at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Produced by Not a Real Company Productions. Created by Eugene Levy and Daniel Levy; Andrew Barnsley, Ben Feigin, Eugene Levy, Daniel Levy and Fred Levy, executive producers.WITH: Eugene Levy (Johnny Rose), Catherine O’Hara (Moira Rose), Daniel Levy (David Rose), Annie Murphy (Alexis Rose), Jennifer Robertson (Jocelyn Schitt), Tim Rozon (Mutt Schitt), Emily Hampshire (Stevie Budd), Chris Elliott (Roland Schitt) and Sarah Levy (Twyla Sands).A version of this review appears in print on February 11, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: The High and Mighty, Penniless in Podunk.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.