AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony TommasiniA concert called “New Music From Israel” inevitably raises the question of what makes music Israeli. This was the title of the program that some impressive musicians from the New York Philharmonic presented on Monday night as part of the Contact! series at SubCulture, the popular basement performance space on Bleecker Street. Yotam Haber, the evening’s affable host, got right to this issue of musical identity in his introduction.What does it mean, he asked, to be an Israeli composer? Israel is a land of immigrants and multiple ethnicities, he said. If anything, Israeli music, much like American music, is characterized by its stylistic eclecticism, Mr. Haber said.As if to prove the point, the program, copresented by the 92nd Street Y, began with “Quasi Danza Macabra,” the extended first movement of the Georgian-born composer Josef Bardanashvili’s String Quartet No. 1, written in 1985. Though composed in a formal structure, the piece unabashedly draws from seemingly disparate styles: the tango, propulsive jazzy dance rhythms, Oriental-tinged melodic writing and even explicit references to the sacred Latin hymn “Dies Irae.” Played vibrantly by the violinists Michelle Kim and Yulia Ziskel, the violist Rémi Pelletier and the cellist Nathan Vickery, “Quasi Danza Macabra” begins with a curiously stern tango, unfolding through thick, gritty chords that keep sliding around. There are marching episodes and pensive passages of quivering sonorities. The stylistic blending that results seems less a musical melting pot than a feisty dialogue of contrasting voices.Mr. Haber’s “Estro Poetico-armonico II” (2014), scored for piano (played by the excellent Eric Huebner), violin, cello, alto flute and bass clarinet, was inspired by the music of the Italian Baroque composer Benedetto Marcello, who, Mr. Haber explained, was fascinated by the liturgical music of the Venetian Jews of his day. Mr. Haber used snippets of Marcello’s psalm settings in this alluring work, which evolves at first in short spans with breaths in between. The instruments play wispy filigree and milky harmonies run through with hints of tunes. Eventually things become agitated and fitful. Case Scaglione, an associate conductor at the Philharmonic, led a colorful and sure-paced performance.In a composer’s note, Shulamit Ran writes that in her 1990 work “Mirage,” scored for five players, she aimed for a free-flowing yet intense, “at times incantational style of delivery.” Though the work was written in five sections, that rhapsodic, flowing quality came through here, especially when sighing melodies evocative of Middle Eastern music pierced through spiky, frenzied textures.Mr. Haber’s comments about the eclecticism of Israeli music were best represented by the final work, Avner Dorman’s “Jerusalem Mix” (2007), for oboe, clarinet, bassoon, horn and piano. The title refers to a popular dish in that city of various grilled meats. This vibrant piece is written in six continuous sections, including a pileup of sliding melodic figures and heaving chords called “The Wailing Wall,” a riotously pulsing “Wedding March” and a mystical episode, “Adhan.” Mr. Haber said that earlier in the day he was at a Jewish deli in the Lower East Side that advertised “old standards and the newly invented.” It could have been an apt tagline for this program.The next Contact! concert, “New Music From Nordic Countries,” is on March 7 at the Metropolitan Museum of Art; 212-570-3949, metmuseum.org.Advertisement