AdvertisementSupported byBy Alessandra StanleyHarry (Zachary Quinto) is an adult bully with a scary temper. Hugo (Dylan Schombing) is a 5-year-old bully given to scary temper tantrums. And their collision at a birthday barbecue in Brooklyn is fateful. “The Slap,” an NBC mini-series that begins on Thursday, is a remarkable feat — a sophisticated, suspenseful comedy of ill manners that seems much more like a Showtime or Netflix drama than a broadcast network offering. For one thing, it’s only eight episodes long — the first season of “The Affair” had 10, and like that Showtime drama, “The Slap” is told “Rashomon”-style, with a different point of view presented in every episode, the first of which is directed by Lisa Cholodenko (“Olive Kitteridge”).It’s also very different in spirit from other NBC dramas, including “Parenthood,” which was also about family bonds and the pitfalls of everyday life. But “Parenthood,” which after six seasons ended last month, had a much more conventionally sweet, sometimes smarmy, sensibility beneath its screwball banter. “The Slap” is unsentimental, even cynical. It’s also imported: This is an American adaptation of a 2011 Australian series by the same name that was based on a novel by Christos Tsiolkas. Here, there is a wickedly amusing cultural clash between rich suburban New Jersey materialists and the Brooklyn bohemian-bourgeoisie, a narcissism of small differences that is reminiscent of Yasmina Reza’s play “God of Carnage.” The story and characters are the same as in the Australian version, but the settings and pace are different, and so is the class divide. The rich in the American version are richer, the artistes more artsy. But the creators wisely recruited Melissa George, who played Rosie, Hugo’s mother, in the original, to reprise that role in the NBC version. All the actors are good, but Ms. George is particularly beguiling. As Rosie she is absurd, infuriating, sad and very funny.As the title and promos suggest, “The Slap” examines how ordinary lives can be derailed in an instant by one rash, unplanned act. “The Slap” also shows how a single, seemingly spontaneous misstep stems inexorably from the learned behavior and personality flaws of the key characters. In their dispute, neither side is in the right — not Harry or the parents of Hugo — but both sides turn out to be equally wrongheaded. On this series, everybody has a point, but no one has an ironclad claim to the truth. An unseen narrator introduces the parties in a tartly amused voice-over that distances the viewer from the characters before they’ve had a chance to speak for themselves. The first episode centers on Hector (Peter Sarsgaard), a smart, mild-mannered city bureaucrat who lost a promotion and is having a hard time turning 40. His wife, Aisha (Thandie Newton), a doctor, plans a birthday party for him that mixes their hip friends and Hector’s loving, close-knit and suffocating Greek family. Hector is particularly close to his successful cousin Harry, an alpha male who made a fortune dealing in high-end classic cars. Harry has money, a beautiful wife, a sweet son he adores — everything but peace of mind. He is a brash, arrogant hothead, someone who can’t back down from a fight or take a joke. After many drinks, Harry clashes with Rosie and her condescending, argumentative artist-husband, Gary (Thomas Sadoski), who doesn’t hide his contempt for the nouveau-riche car dealer.Viewers know from the outset what happens at the party, but the journey to that moment and the road that follows are mapped out with wit and also compassion. People behave monstrously, but they aren’t monsters, just complicated and inconsistent. “The Slap” connects, but it’s not a harsh blow. It’s more of a bracing surprise. The SlapNBC, Thursday nights at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time.Produced by Parkes/MacDonald, Universal Television and Matchbox Pictures. Written by Jon Robin Baitz, based on the book by Christos Tsiolkas and the Australian television series “The Slap”; Walter F. Parkes, Laurie MacDonald, Mr. Baitz, Lisa Cholodenko, Tony Ayres, Helen Bowden, Michael McMahon and Chris Oliver-Taylor, executive producers.WITH: Peter Sarsgaard (Hector), Thandie Newton (Aisha), Zachary Quinto (Harry), Uma Thurman (Anouk), Brian Cox (Manolis), Melissa George (Rosie), Makenzie Leigh (Connie), Lucas Hedges (Richie), Thomas Sadoski (Gary), Dylan Schombing (Hugo), Penn Badgley (Jamie), Marin Ireland (Sandi) and Maria Tucci (Koula).Advertisement