MIAMI — Eyebrows were raised in art circles Wednesday at news that Suzanne Weaver had left as interim director of the Institute of Contemporary Art, Miami — just over four months after the new private museum announced her arrival, and not even three months after it first opened in its temporary home.With plans underway for a new 37,500-square-foot museum building with an adjoining 15,000-square-foot sculpture garden, to open in December 2016, it seemed to many an inopportune time for a sudden change in leadership.The Art Newspaper, which was the first to report the news, said that Ms. Weaver had resigned, but Tommy Ralph Pace, the museum’s associate director and spokesman, disputed that, insisting her job had never been intended to last more than six months. “She completed the scope of the work assigned to her as interim director,”  he said. He praised her “fantastic” leadership and credited her with establishing  “the basis of our program, the founding mission, and getting us in a strong financial position.” Mr. Pace said he anticipated announcing the new permanent director by late spring: “It’s a fast moving train.” Ms. Weaver was previously a curator for five years at the Speed Art Museum in Louisville, Ky., and a curator at the Dallas Museum of Art for 13 years before that, earning a reputation as a well-liked champion of contemporary artists. She declined to comment about leaving the Miami museum, but in December she said in an interview that she hoped the museum’s board would appoint her as permanent director — a move museum trustees had also floated publicly.“It’s a great loss for Miami,” said Mark Handforth, one of Miami’s most prominent internationally-known artists. He worked closely with Ms. Weaver in 2007 when she commissioned a sculpture by him for the Dallas museum. He cited her “innate” understanding of artists as well as her connections throughout the art world, adding that “she’s someone who has a sense of wisdom to her, and we need that in Miami.”
 “We have this huge art scene bubbling up here in a really crazy way, and we need people like Suzanne to make sense of it, to make it work, and to shepherd everything through,” he said.Ms. Weaver’s departure now leaves three major Miami art museums without directors: Thom Collins, director of the Pérez Art Museum Miami, announced in January he would be moving on to head the Barnes Foundation in Philadelphia, while the Wolfsonian Museum at Florida International University lost its director, Cathy Leff, last April. Neither museum has yet named a successor.A version of this article appears in print on 02/14/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Miami Museum Director Departs.