“Scream Queens,” Season 1, Episode 5: “Pumpkin Patch”Loved the snazzy new opening-credit sequence on Fox’s “Scream Queens.” Hated what came before it. Yes, I realize that whether you’re ready for jokes about John F. Kennedy’s assassination probably depends on when you were born.Chanel decreed that for Halloween the Chanels would dress as the wives of assassinated presidents. She herself would be Jacqueline Kennedy, and had the assassination-day outfit to prove it, making a reference to blood spatter to make sure everyone got the point. When one of the other Chanels complained about her designated assignment, Chanel agreed to expand the concept to include wives of presidents who were almost assassinated, which led to a Betty Ford alcoholism joke. Anyone find this sequence humorous? For me, it was the very definition of bad taste.But the rest of the episode was mostly bearable; in fact, it was often pretty funny. Chanel ended up in jail briefly, arrested in the Bean killing, which led to some amusing bonding with hard-core inmates. The scene should have gone on longer.Also pretty hilarious: Dean Munsch for some reason confessed to Denise the security guard that she had slept with Chad, which gave the two women some common ground: Turns out Chad and Denise had wrinkled the sheets a few times too. They like to role-play, Denise told the dean. “We do extensive character research,” she said. Ms. Nash cracks me up.“The Shining” got an extended shout-out, with (if I was counting correctly) the episode’s only death occurring in a re-creation of that story’s snowy maze.And eventually an impromptu posse went on a hunt for Zayday, who was kidnapped at the end of last week’s episode, which led to the apparent lair of the Red Devil. Zayday wasn’t there, but she materialized in time for the pivotal vote on who would lead the sorority.Whew. And just when we thought we were done for the night, a little teaser scene came along: Gigi had a secretive meeting with the Red Devil. “He’s got to go,” I think I heard her tell Red. Right? But who is “he”?Anyway, what does our suspect list look like, and is it longer or shorter than the list of women Chad has slept with? 