By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 12, 2015
8 P.M. (NBC) THE SLAP Hector (Peter Sarsgaard) is a public servant, a father and a potentially philandering husband who has just lost out on a big job promotion. He finds his life in additional turmoil on the day of his 40th birthday party when his hotheaded cousin (Zachary Quinto) slaps the bullying 5-year-old son of another couple, inciting legal action — and resurrecting some long-buried family secrets. Melissa George plays the boy’s mother; Thandie Newton is Hector’s beautiful wife; and Uma Thurman, Thomas Sadoski, Brian Cox and Makenzie Leigh round out the cast of this eight-part mini-series adapted by Jon Robin Baitz from an Australian series based on a novel by Christos Tsiolkas. Writing in The New York Times, Alessandra Stanley called the show “a remarkable feat — a sophisticated, suspenseful comedy of ill manners that seems much more like a Showtime or Netflix drama than a broadcast network offering.” “The Slap,” she added, “connects, but it’s not a harsh blow. It’s more of a bracing surprise.”9:30 A.M. (Pop) A MIGHTY WIND (2003) Christopher Guest chronicles the reunion of Mitch (Eugene Levy, who also wrote the screenplay with Mr. Guest) and Mickey (Catherine O’Hara), a famed 1960s folk-music duo and onetime lovebirds returning to Town Hall to perform their signature tune, “A Kiss at the End of the Rainbow,” for a tribute to a music impresario. Arranged by the impresario’s son (Bob Balaban), the concert features his father’s favorite acts, including the Folksmen (Harry Shearer, Michael McKean and Mr. Guest) and the New Main Street Singers, a cultish “neuftet” (including Parker Posey) whose leaders (John Michael Higgins and Jane Lynch) practice a spiritual discipline based on the vibratory power of color. “It is impossible to think of a group of people capable of being funny in so many different ways,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. Still, “of all of them, Mr. Levy and Ms. O’Hara are the two who have, historically, been the funniest. If I had a dollar for every kernel of popcorn they have made me aspirate, separately and together, since their SCTV days in the 1970s, I’d be rich.”2:30 P.M. (Sundance) TO ROME WITH LOVE (2012) In this Woody Allen tribute to Italian cinema of the 1950s and ’60s, a retired and overly psychoanalyzed music promoter (Mr. Allen) travels with his wife (Judy Davis) to Rome, where their daughter (Alison Pill) has lost her heart to a lawyer (Flavio Parenti). Also in this shuffled anthology, a young newlywed loses her way to the Trevi Fountain and falls into the arms of a movie star, while her befuddled husband (Alessandro Tiberi) tries to keep his relatives in the dark, substituting a prostitute (Penélope Cruz) for her at dinner. An ordinary Roman (Roberto Benigni) is plunged into a swirl of media celebrity. And a fledgling architect (Jesse Eisenberg) finds his relationship with his kind, if bland, girlfriend (Greta Gerwig) in shreds when her neurotic actress friend (Ellen Page) visits. Alec Baldwin plays the older architect — a ghost? a specter of the younger man’s self? — who witnesses the ordeal. “One of the most delightful things about ‘To Rome With Love’ is how casually it blends the plausible and the surreal,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. The movie’s limitations, “as frothy as the milk atop a cappuccino, are finally inseparable from its delights.”8 P.M. (Bravo) INSIDE THE ACTORS STUDIO Ten days before he hosts the Academy Awards for the first time, Neil Patrick Harris sits down with James Lipton to parse his career, from “Doogie Howser, M.D.” to “Hedwig and the Angry Inch,” and to speculate as to why no one can do an awards show the way he can.8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY April (Sarah Drew) and Jackson (Jesse Williams) make a difficult decision regarding their unborn child. In “Scandal,” at 9, Olivia (Kerry Washington) continues to outmaneuver her captors. And in “How to Get Away With Murder,” at 10, a startling discovery in Sam’s case proves a game-changer for Annalise (Viola Davis) and her students.What’s Streaming NowTHE MYSTERY OF LORD LUCAN In November 1974, the nanny to the children of John Bingham, the seventh Earl of Lucan, was found bludgeoned to death in the family home. The next day, Lord Lucan, by now the prime suspect, vanished and was never seen again. These two dramas — “Lucan” and “The Trial of Lord Lucan” — explore the tale from opposing angles. (acorn.tv)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Thursday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.