By ANTHONY TOMMASINIFEB. 11, 2015
The opera world often seems consumed with arguments over productions. A high-concept modern staging is at once condemned and cheered by various factions; a traditional production will be seen as either appropriately respectful or hopelessly timid.Then, something comes along like the concert performance of Gluck’s infrequently heard “Iphigénie en Aulide” that opened at the Juilliard School on Tuesday night, the first of three, and you are reminded that what matters most in opera is the music.The performance, presented by the Metropolitan Opera’s Lindemann Young Artist Development Program in partnership with Juilliard, was minimally staged by the director David Paul. The singers fully acted their roles in a clearing in front of the orchestra, minus sets and props though with some effective lighting touches by Paul Hudson. It could have been taken for a spare modern-dress production.Still, it is hard to imagine a full production pulling me more deeply into this great Gluck work than this concert performance did. The youthful cast, led by the beguiling soprano Ying Fang in the title role, was excellent. The superb British conductor Jane Glover, who was so impressive in Gluck’s “Armide,” a collaboration between Juilliard and the Met in 2012, drew a refined yet urgent account of the score from the impressive players of Juilliard415, the school’s period-instrument ensemble.Advertisement“Iphigénie en Aulide,” presented in Paris in 1774, was the first of seven operas Gluck composed for that city after moving there from Vienna. The poetically elegant and dramatically efficient libretto, by (and this is a mouthful) Marie François Louis Gand LeBlanc du Roullet, is adapted from a Racine tragedy that is itself based on Euripides. The opera tells of the obedient daughter of King Agamemnon, the commander of the Greek armies, in an earlier period of that royal family’s saga, which, as those who read Greek drama know, does not turn out well.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Agamemnon and his armies have been stranded in Aulis by the goddess Diana (here, Diane), who has deprived them of the winds they need to sail for Troy and meet their enemies. Diana has demanded that Agamemnon sacrifice Iphigénie, his daughter, to appease the gods and reverse his fortunes. Anguished, Agamemnon tries to prevent Iphigénie and his wife, Clytemnestre, from coming to Aulide by sending false news that Iphigénie’s beloved Achille, has betrayed her. For a brief time, the mother and daughter are duped. But the lovers reconcile, and preparations for the wedding commence, until it becomes clear what Agamemnon must do. Iphigénie accepts her fate until at the last moment Diana herself, moved by the young woman’s courage, rescinds her order and blesses the marriage.AdvertisementThe most miraculous quality of Gluck’s score is the fluidity he achieves between the shifting strands of this majestic music. Most all of the vocal lines set the words in various styles of melodically enhanced arioso (the midway point between recitative and melody). Though the score is filled with grand, complex arias, Gluck routinely interrupts the flow when the dramatic situation merits it, as when someone intervenes or the character singing is overcome with a sudden realization.Giving full dramatic urgency to these shifts while also conveying the majestic continuity of this score is the challenge, one that Ms. Glover excels at. Ms. Fang brought a sweet, penetrating voice to Iphigénie, singing with an aching blend of vulnerability and dignity. The robust baritone Yunpeng Wang was commanding yet tormented as Agamemnon. Virginie Verrez, a rich-voiced mezzo-soprano, was gripping as Clytemnestre, especially in her Act III aria, when the desperate mother calls upon Jupiter to rain thunderbolts upon the Greeks. The tenor Andrew Stenson’s bright, youthful voice and impetuosity were ideal for Achille.This performance feels like a gift to opera lovers. Who needs scenery?“Iphigénie en Aulide” will be repeated Thursday and Saturday at the Peter Jay Sharp Theater, 155 West 65th Street, Manhattan; 212-769-7406, juilliard.edu. A version of this review appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Pure and Unadorned, a Daughter’s Ultimate Sacrifice.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.