AdvertisementSupported byBy Alessandra StanleyBERLIN — Sometimes there are limits to the imagination. Luckily, reality is much more boundless. “Deutschland 83,” an eight-part German series set during the Cold War, about the Stasi from the Stasi perspective, is just one of the intriguing television dramas that made their international debuts at the Berlin International Film Festival this week. Joining it were series from Israel, Denmark and Sweden, each of which molds either a painful epoch in modern history or a recent political crisis into a thriller. These are fictional but realistic riffs on the distant and recent past that are more exciting than pumped-up American inventions like “Scandal” or “House of Cards,” two shows set in the White House that have sizzle but quickly ran out of steam. The rising prominence and quality of international TV is why American networks keep looking abroad for material to buy or borrow. It’s also why the Berlin festival this year stretched its mandate to showcase a variety of television series over two days. This stuff sells. On Monday, Sundance TV, which last year co-produced with the BBC and aired the smart espionage thriller “The Honorable Woman,” bought the American rights to “Deutschland 83,” the first German-language series to be picked up by an American television network. An ingenious, counterintuitive look at the Cold War, the show features a hero who’s an East German border guard. He is dragooned by the Stasi, that country’s secret police, to go undercover as an aide to a West German general attached to NATO.Viewers in the United States will be reminded of “The Americans,” the FX show about a pair of Soviet spies posing as a suburban couple in the Reagan era. But at the Berlin festival, “Deutschland 83” had a more contemporary and chilling resonance. Germans at the moment feel caught in the middle of a showdown between Washington and Moscow over Russia’s incursions into Ukraine. In “Deutschland 83,” Germans feel caught in the middle of a showdown between Washington and Moscow over the deployment of Pershing II missiles in Europe.An Israeli series taps more recent history. “Shkufim” (“False Flag”) is inspired by the real assassination of a Hamas leader in Dubai in 2010. In this fictional version, some ordinary Israeli citizens, including a bride on her wedding day, wake up to headlines that name them as prime suspects in the kidnapping of a top Iranian official in Moscow. Fox International Channels made a deal with Israel’s Keshet International, which previously brought “Homeland” stateside, to develop an American adaptation. The financial crisis of 2008 gave rise to “Follow the Money,” a Danish crime thriller set in the energy business. It’s by one of the writers of “Borgen,” a cult hit about a woman who becomes Denmark’s prime minister, but this is harder-edged: Corporate malfeasance costs lives, not just taxpayers’ money. And amusingly, given that the show is Danish, the greedy, cutthroat energy company at the center doesn’t deal in oil or gas, but windmills: The founder of the fictional, ecologically minded Energreen rides a bike to work, but his wind power corporation is as ruthlessly profit-driven as Enron or Gazprom. Though Scandinavia, home of Nordic Noir, has long led the European ascendance, Italian television is catching up: American rights to “Gomorrah,” a drama about the Neapolitan mafia that makes “The Sopranos” look like “Downton Abbey,” were bought by the Weinstein Company last spring. In Berlin, a new Italian drama was picked up by Britain and several other European countries. That show, “1992,” is a sexy drama centered on the bribery investigations of the 1990s that toppled members of Italy’s reigning political class and some of the top businessmen who paid them off. The main characters are fictional, but they work for and against real people like Antonio Di Pietro, the Milan magistrate who oversaw Operation Mani Pulite, or Clean Hands, as well as former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi. Leonardo (Stefano Accorsi) is a charming, slick advertising executive — an Italian Don Draper — who is one of the first to spot the political potential of his boss, Mr. Berlusconi. In what has to be a wry allusion to Mr. Berlusconi’s taste in television, Leonardo persuades an advertising client to sign on with a new programming format that shows young girls dancing in skimpy clothes.There is a sly, contrarian element to many of these new international shows: Just as “Deutschland 83” looks at a Cold War confrontation from the other side of the Iron Curtain, “Bla Ögon” (“Blue Eyes”), a Swedish-German whodunit, explores the theme of racism and discrimination in Sweden through the eyes of sympathetic characters who favor anti-immigration laws. The series has an anti-racist message — in the pilot, a right-wing cabal seems to be doing the Devil’s work behind the scenes — but the creators clearly want to upend expectations and give even their most wrongheaded characters a voice. Oddly, in a show about immigration, all the main characters are native Swedes; the two Muslims are kind, righteous secondary characters who are mostly there to prove the racists wrong.Most strikingly, none of these series revolve around the death or disappearance of a child. So many European series later adapted into American versions — from “Forbrydelsen,” the Danish show on which “The Killing” was based, to “Broadchurch,” a British series Fox remade as “Gracepoint” — hit the same doleful notes over and over. The past seems new again, and it is inspiring European television with fresh material. It won’t take long for American networks to either import the best, or copy it. Piracy isn’t always such a bad thing.Advertisement