By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMFEB. 11, 2015
New York fans of the Dutch violinist Janine Jansen have had it rough in recent years. Illness caused her to bow out of high-profile concerts with the Budapest Festival Orchestra in 2013 and the New York Philharmonic last year. On Tuesday, she was back, in radiant form, with a recital at Zankel Hall alongside the Israeli pianist Itamar Golan, which proved that she is an artist worth the wait.Also worth waiting for, within any one piece, is Ms. Jansen’s full-bodied, polished-wood sound. It’s one of astonishing power and beauty, and another violinist would lavish it generously on a grateful audience. But Ms. Jansen husbands her rhetorical powers carefully. During Tuesday’s program, of works by Prokofiev and Ravel, she reserved that particular sound for moments of high drama. The rest of the time, her playing was a tantalizing dance of colors and textures veiling the riches beneath.That approach made for an idiosyncratic and highly vocal reading of Prokofiev’s “Five Melodies for Violin and Piano,” a lyrical score adapted from wordless songs. Ms. Jansen’s readiness to make her sound almost translucent allowed the wonderfully nuanced playing by Mr. Golan to come through unforced. Even difficult-to-balance moments, like the final violin harmonic that floats like a lonely whistle above low piano chords, were rendered with eloquent expression.Ms. Jansen and Mr. Golan offered a film-noirish reading of Prokofiev’s taut Violin Sonata No. 1, with Ms. Jansen adding new shades to her palette. These ranged from the creepy trills in the opening movement to wispy scales seemingly played with a single bow hair. At one point in the dramatic finale, she produced a kind of existential howl on her violin — bone-chilling, and uncannily human-sounding.In Ravel’s seductive Violin Sonata, Ms. Jansen showed off softer contours, with soaring lyrical phrases and a raunchy sweetness to the bluesy slow movement. But even here the musicians took care to highlight little unsettling details, like the motif in the first movement that sounds like a startled bird.There was also an animalistic quality to the beginning of Ravel’s “Tzigane,” which Ms. Jansen attacked with ferocity, embracing this showstopping feat of virtuosity like a dare.A version of this review appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Balancing Power and Nuance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.