AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayDespite its live music and the admirable skills of most of its dancers, “Baroque’d,” BalletNext’s program at New York Live Arts, is always less than good. It varies from the blandly vague (the first two items) to the amateurishly pseudo-experimental (the last). That last dance, “Something Sampled,” is sufficiently irksome to be considerably more memorable than the first two. Baroque scores are played — well — for all three by Liv Heym and Beth Wenstrom (violins), Anneke Schaul-Yoder (cello), and Elliot Figg (harpsichord); but this isn’t much help. All the dances make rhythmic and structural connections to the music, but superficially; they never help you hear it better or make you feel it gives them life. “Something Sampled” takes its title from Chris Lancaster’s music for its long first half, in which the composer plays his own variety of uninteresting sounds with coarseness on an electric-acoustic cello; the second half is set to Antonio Vivaldi’s familiar “La Follia.” That Lancaster opening section is danced as a solo by Jay Donn, who messes around with a few movements, while heavily directing facial expressions of rictus or open-mouthed amazement at the audience. This Lancaster-Donn partnership wrecks the evening. BalletNext was founded in 2011. The program tells us that it “produces and performs new choreography with world-class dancers, set to live music” and that it “encourages risk-taking with a focus on the process of creating new work.” Sounds admirable — but the United States has several ballet companies that also use live music, have at least equally fine dancers, and feature new works that show considerably more evidence of risk-taking.The BalletNext artistic director is Michele Wiles, who was a principal dancer with the American Ballet Theater. Dancing in the first and third pieces, she remains calmly virtuosic and elegant. The other four women on stage (Gracie Huber, Tiffany Mangulabnan, Amy Saunder, Jessica Tretter) don’t resemble her, but they are not outshone; and the male dancer Landes Aris Dixon is strikingly individual. They all deserve better.Peter Quanz’s opening “Outswirl” never develops much pulse — unlike its music, Arcangelo Corelli’s Concertos No. 8 and No. 3 — or much by way of dynamic contrast. There are several pretty phrases; we get to know a few aspects of the dancers. “Ushuaia,” by Ms. Wiles, has more brio and more moments of spatial and quasi-dramatic tension; it’s set to the Partita No. 1 from Heinrich Ignaz Franz von Biber’s “Harmonia Artificioso-Ariosa.” The name “Ushuaia” refers to the world’s southernmost city, which the program describes as “the end of the world, the beginning of everything.” The choreography is far from either; still, this is the evening’s highlight.The concept, choreography and composition for “Something Sampled” are jointly attributed to Mr. Donn, Ms. Wiles, and Mr. Lancaster. But what does “composition” mean here beyond concept and choreography? The music is specifically by Mr. Lancaster and Vivaldi.Mr. Donn, described in the program as the creator of the sub-style “punchlines,” is a very poor performer. He toys with isolated effects on the cusp between ballet and hip-hop (sometimes on point in his plumed boots), never developing any serious phrase. His facial mugging, like his physical reactions to Mr. Lancaster’s horrid music, is hammy. Thanks largely to their collaboration, “Something Sampled” is dismaying. Neither Ms. Wiles’s attempts at chic (in long black-leather-look sleeves, gray tutu, and black-and-white patterned tights) nor the earnest contributions by the other dancers save it. BalletNext continues “Baroque’d” through Saturday at New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street; 212-691-6500, newyorklivearts.org. Advertisement