The Off Broadway company Second Stage Theater asked the New York State Supreme Court on Friday to prevent the owners of the Helen Hayes Theater, a Broadway house, from scuttling a $25 million deal under which Second Stage would buy the Hayes. In a legal filing, Carole Rothman, the artistic director of Second Stage, argued that the owners were trying to get a higher price, given that the theater’s value has probably grown since the deal was negotiated in 2007, but then faced multiple delays.The owners said on Friday that they were not seeking more money from another buyer; rather, they said, Second Stage does not have the $25 million for the scheduled closing on Tuesday. Ms. Rothman asked the court to grant a 90-day extension, moving the closing to May 18, “to allow Second Stage the necessary time to secure financing, among other important actions.” She said the extension was allowed under the original purchase agreement.Casey Reitz, the executive director of Second Stage, said in an interview that the company needed more time to finalize financing for the purchase, “one of 38 points on a checklist of closing-related items we have to deal with.” He and Ms. Rothman contended that the Hayes owners had not given Second Stage enough time to prepare for the closing because, in part, the owners had not given them any advance notice last fall that the musical “Rock of Ages” was ending at the Hayes, and therefore the closing date was on for February.The Hayes owners offered an extension to Second Stage in exchange for a six-figure payment; Ms. Rothman and Mr. Reitz negotiated over the sum, but a compromise couldn’t be reached.Jeffrey Tick, one of the Hayes owners, said in an interview that the contract calls for Second Stage to have the $25 million in place by Tuesday. “They don’t have the money,” Mr. Tick said. “That’s the truth. We have a closing set up, we followed everything according to the contract.” He denied that he wanted to sell the theater for a higher price.Should the Second Stage deal fall through, he plans to continue owning the Hayes, he said, explaining that he had a change of heart and wished that he and his partner, Martin Markinson, had not agreed to sell. The Hayes is one of only 40 Broadway theaters, which rarely come up for sale, and it is widely regarded as a beautiful playhouse in a prime location.A version of this article appears in print on 02/14/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Second Stage Fights for Theater.