AdvertisementSupported byFriday FileBy Mary Jo Murphy138 YEARS AGOIf the Westminster Kennel Club dog show that begins on Monday is the 139th, there was of course a first, and The Times was there to record it.The club, “an organization of gentlemen interested in the improvement of the strains of hunting dogs, in the use of which they find their best amusement, are preparing for an extensive bench show to be held at Gilmore’s Garden,” The Times reported on March 28, 1877. “It is designated the first annual show.” Gilmore’s Garden, which became the first Madison Square Garden, was an open-air arena at Madison Avenue and 23rd Street. “An exceedingly large number of dogs is expected, about 1,500 having been promised already,” The Times continued. “The largest number ever exhibited heretofore was at the Crystal Palace Exhibition, in London, in 1875, when only 1,358 were entered.” The article related that “society has quite taken the show up as a new means of amusement, and the attendance promises to be very select.”Among the entered dogs of note were those of a Mr. Edwin Thorne, “for they will include, besides his own fox-hounds, the pack of hounds owned by the late Gen. Custer.” (Custer had died the previous year.)But if the first show excited interest, things got serious with the second.“Last year being a first venture, a great deal of riff-raff was taken that this year has been summarily rejected,” The Times reported in 1878. “Owners of common-place dogs, after trying the many shows held throughout the country during the year, have begun to understand that their pets have no chance of winning prizes, and they consequently made fewer applications for stalls this time. They are getting tired of paying entrance money for nothing except to be laughed at. Another gratifying fact is that the professional dog-breeders, with their kennels of trash, who mustered in great force last year, have nearly all neglected to enter their animals this year.”So, absent the “trash” and “riff-raff,” what was there? “The main body of exhibitors will be individual ladies and gentlemen who keep dogs for pleasure or sport, and who are above the necessity of breeding for profit,” The Times reported.Seems it’s not just the well-bred bloodhound that can sniff. Some of the dogs for the second show:“Forman Taylor’s renowned One-eyed Sancho, from Colt’s Neck, Long Island, which is 11 years old, and long considered the finest specimen of the native setter in the country. Old Sancho is noted for having produced from one bitch a single litter of 21 puppies.”In addition, “a Chinese edible dog will be exhibited. It weighs about eight pounds, is built somewhat like an Italian greyhound, only stouter, has no hair on its body except on top of its head, between the ears, where there is growing a large, stiff top-knot of white hair.”No fewer than three articles anticipating the big event made much of the fact that “Mr. William Lort, the great English ‘all-round’ judge of dogs,” had been secured for the Westminster show. Under the headline “Arrival of the Great Dog Judge,” one article reported that he had crossed the Atlantic “and is now quartered at the Fifth-Avenue Hotel.” A description of his person and his plans was deemed worthy of reporting: “He is tall and spare in person, with gray hair and whiskers streaked with gray, and has the manners of an affable, cultured gentleman. He will not, he thinks, be able to prolong his stay in this country, but as he has brought his gun with him, it is fair to suppose that he may be induced to wait for a little Fall shooting, which, from the number of birds nesting in the woods and the mildness of the Winter, promises to be unusually good next season.”This second show was not without controversy. A different Mr. Taylor wrote a letter to The Times dated May 17, 1878, that he directed “to the managers” of the Westminster Kennel Club: “I claim the silver cup offered for the best pair of Japanese spaniels.” Mr. Taylor wanted the prize for his dogs Punch and Judy. “The sudden death of my Judy an hour or two before the judgment for special class,” he wrote, “did not morally invalidate my claims.” MARY JO MURPHYAdvertisement