Richard Mosse: The Enclave.
Louisiana Museum of Modern Art.
Feb. 5-May 25.
The photographer Richard Mosse shot his photo and video artwork — which focuses on soldiers and citizens in the Democratic Republic of Congo — using a form of military film that registers infrared light. The resulting installation, which won Mr. Mosse the Deutsche Börse Photography Prize in 2014, renders the arid landscape (and the continuing conflicts in the region) in vivid purple hues. His work is shown alongside an exhibition dedicated to the early expressionist painter Paula Modersohn-Becker.Afro Popera Festival
Artscape Theater Center.
Feb. 19-22.
Cape Town Opera kicks off its 2015 season with a weekend music festival. The African Angels will perform concerts that meld African, American gospel and opera sounds. On Feb. 22, the Cape Town Philharmonic Orchestra and the opera will perform a concert featuring around 150 performers, including youth singers. The festival kicks off a season that includes “La Traviata” and “The Merry Widow of Malagawi,” an update of Franz Lehár’s operetta that sets the action in contemporary Africa.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.American Encounters: The Simple Pleasures of Still Life
The Louvre.
Through April 27.
In the course of the 19th century, American still life painting transformed from a literal and provincial medium into a locus of visual metaphor and artistic experimentation. This small exhibition brings together work from across that period, by artists including Raphaelle Peale, whose circa 1813 “Corn and Cantaloupe” is shown here, and Martin Johnson Heade. The exhibition is the last show at the Louvre in the “American Encounters” series, a four-year collaboration between the museum and several American art institutions.Mika Ninagawa: Self-Image
Hara Museum of Contemporary Art.
Through May 10.
Ms. Ninagawa — who gained widespread popularity with candy-colored fashion photographs of teenage girls — has expanded her repertoire to include video art and feature films. This exhibition brings together a wide range of her work, including a series of distraught self-portraits; a new multiscreen video piece; and a series of c-print images of cherry blossom trees. Ms. Ninagawa has worked steadily on her photo series “Noir,” which focuses on dark, distorted images of flora and fauna, since 2010. It appears here with a number of new images.Aida; The Coronation of Poppea
Teatro Alla Scala.
Through March 15.
Milan’s opera house has a busy winter season in store as two major productions appear on its stage. The German director Peter Stein’s classical production of “Aida” will make its debut at the opera house, with the American soprano Kristin Lewis in the title role. And Robert Wilson’s characteristically-stylized production of Monteverdi’s tangled love-and- murder saga “The Coronation of Poppea,” a co-production with Paris’s National Opera, will also appear on dates through February.Jean-Michel Basquiat: Now’s the Time
Art Gallery of Ontario.
Through May 10.
The multimedia artist Basquiat ruled New York City’s art world through much of the 1980s. A savvy operator in the city’s social spheres, he was also hailed as the inventor of a new era of vigorous American painting that tipped its hat to art history, pop culture and the emerging hip-hop movement. This show brings together around 80 artworks that he created before his death from a drug overdose at 27.Yang Fudong: Filmscapes.
Australian Center for the Moving Image.
Through March 15.
Yang Fudong — whose sleek, elusive black-and-white films often focus on the tensions in China between traditional social mores and emerging capitalist trends — traveled into uncharted territory with “The Colored Sky: New Women II,” a new work created for this exhibition that mixes California beach bunny imagery with elements of surrealism. Older works like the brooding black-and-white short “Yejiang/The Nightman Cometh,” a dreamlike film about a warrior trapped in a modern snowscape, will also be shown. The exhibition takes place as part of a series at the museum that focuses on Chinese artists.Simon Faithfull. REEF 2: A Crossing
Calais Museum of Fine Art.
Feb. 21-June 22.
The artist Simon Faithfull sank a boat off the coast of France last summer and used cameras to record its transformation into a plant and shellfish-encrusted piece of the English Channel’s ecosystem. This exhibition includes a number of Mr. Faithfull’s ocean-inspired works, including documentation of the Channel project, and drawings and films from sea voyages he took across the Atlantic and into the Antarctic. In one room of the museum, Mr. Faithfull has arranged 20 works from the museum’s collection so that their shorelines align into one panoramic ocean view.6 Music Festival.
Various venues.
Feb. 20-22.
BBC Radio 6 Music, the corporation’s digital-first radio station for contemporary music, will host a three day-and-night lineup of pop acts on venues along Newcastle’s River Tyne. Sleater-Kinney, the newly reunited band associated with the 1990s riot grrrl movement, will visit the festival. Other acts include the New York-based Interpol and the dance-beat-heavy Hot Chip. Kate Tempest, who has gained unexpected worldwide popularity for her spoken-word poems in recent months, will perform a new collaboration with the fiddle player Eliza Carthy.