By NEIL GENZLINGERFEB. 13, 2015
Confused about love as Valentine’s Day weekend arrives? Not sure how to get into, improve, reinvent or get out of a relationship? You obviously haven’t been watching enough television. With all due respect to “Fifty Shades of Grey” on its debut weekend, it’s the “50 Ways” song that comes to mind here, with 50 TV shows standing ready to help you meet, retain, change, impress or leave your lover:LOSE THE KEY, LEE? The most educational relationship-related show on television is TLC’s outlandish “Sex Sent Me to the ER.” Last Saturday’s episode included an incident summarized in publicity materials as: “A doctor is perplexed by a man’s chastity-belt injury.”NOT IN THE TRUCK, CHUCK If it doesn’t get you hospitalized, sex will get you arrested: Investigation Discovery has just rolled out a series called “Sex Sent Me to the Slammer.” Friday’s installments include vignettes titled “D.U.I. Love You,” “Real Bad Lieutenant” and “Flatbed Floozy.”TAKE OFF YOUR PANTS, NANCE The VH1 show “Dating Naked” removes the mystery right from the get-go: Two strangers meet each other naked, then go on a date.GO INCOGNITO, VITO The opposite of “Dating Naked” is “Sexy Beasts,” which begins Saturday on A&E. Would-be couples meet in disguises so heavy there’s no clue what they actually look like, so that inner beauty can be the selling point. Hey, it’s more honest than most online dating profiles.AdvertisementTAKE THE GOOD WITH THE BAD, CHAD The Discovery Channel’s “Naked and Afraid” is a survival show, not a dating show, but when two survivalists meet each other nude, you never know what might happen. Or not happen. In an episode last season, almost as soon as naked Hakim met naked Phaedra, he got to watch her have an extended case of dysentery.STOP AT ONE, SON Speaking of shattered illusions, “Sister Wives,” TLC’s polygamy show, might make men with multiple-partner fantasies pause to consider the maintenance issues. On a recent episode, one polygamist husband told another, “If my wife feels jealous of my other wife, that’s my fault.”IT’S A TWO-WAY STREET, CLEET “Sister Wives” seem a bit sexist? For two seasons Showtime’s “Polyamory: Married & Dating” gave us a more equal-opportunity multiple-partner philosophy. Everyone got to dabble. But there was just as much whining, sulking and fighting as on any other show.AdvertisementHOW MUCH DO YOU KNOW, FLO? Polyamory, by the way, is one subject you can learn about on the peppy YouTube channel “Sexplanations With Dr. Doe,” featuring Lindsey Doe, who calls herself a clinical sexologist. Take her Sexplanations Quiz if you want to find out what ithyphallophobia is.HURL A LIMB, JIM Aviva Drescher made news last year on “The Real Housewives of New York City” when she threw her prosthetic leg across a restaurant. Last week her husband made news on “Marriage Boot Camp: Reality Stars” when he threw a fake leg at her during a role-playing exercise.SAVOR THE BLISS, CHRIS And, by the way, here is WE TV’s description of the original “Marriage Boot Camp,” in case your definition of “true love” and “hell” are the same: “ ‘Marriage Boot Camp’ features five outrageous Bridezillas and their husbands living together in the same house.”DON’T PITCH A FIT, BRITT What? You say the original “Bridezillas” was canceled after only 10 seasons? Where will our young women look for role models?MORE IS LESS, JESS Somehow, viewers have yet to tire of “The Bachelor,” ABC’s long-running hook-’em-up show. Headline on an Internet item about Monday’s episode: “Ashley I. Faces Off Against Kelsey on ‘Shocking’ 2-on-1 Date.”EXPECT TO FAIL, DALE Somehow, viewers also have yet to tire of “The Bachelorette,” ABC’s other long-running hook-’em-up show. Last season’s engagement lasted until January. “It’s family and friends who pick us up when we fall down,” Andi Dorfman, the platitudinous but still loveless Bachelorette, wrote on Instagram.TRUST IN GOD, ROD Last year GSN rolled out “It Takes a Church,” which turned houses of worship into dating parlors. The congregation helps pick a date for a loveless parishioner. Season 2 starts next month.KNEEL AND PRAY, FAY “It Takes a Church” was brought to us by a partnership with ChristianMingle.com, the online dating service. And on Sunday, in case you missed the point, the Up network (“America’s favorite network for uplifting entertainment”) broadcast the TV premiere of “Christian Mingle: The Movie.” GO TO CHURCH, LURCH Last week WE TV jumped on the love-and-religion bandwagon with “Match Made in Heaven.” It’s a basic bachelor’s-choice series featuring a guy named Shawn, with this wrinkle: Shawn is being counseled by “Pastor Ken Johnson,” the “spiritual adviser to the Indianapolis Colts.”TOO SÉANCEY, CHAUNCEY? Last month Oxygen brought us “Living Different,” profiling “women who are unrestricted by social norms.” One of them, explaining a failed relationship, said, “We broke up because I came out as a psychic medium.”AdvertisementBE A PILL, BILL On Saturday “Impractical Jokers,” the TruTV hidden-camera prank show, is offering a marathon of its dating-themed bits. It once did a gag in which a guy (the plant) hurled rapid-fire questions at a woman he had just met, speed-date style. His third question: “Do you give lap dances?”CLIMB IN A BOX, ROX If you think counseling and overexposure would help your relationship, WE TV has a show for you, starting Feb. 27: “Sex Box.” You and your partner get into a soundproof box and have sex while a studio audience waits, presumably in the world’s most awkward silence. When you come out, experts ask you questions and give advice, which may or may not include, Don’t have sex in a box in front of a live audience.BETTER HIT THE GYM, KIM A new season of TLC’s continuing chronicle of marital garishness, “My Big Fat American Gypsy Wedding,” begins Feb. 26, promising the most “bling-tastic dresses to date,” including one that weighs more than 100 pounds.DON’T FORGET THE VEIL, GAYLE Speaking of dresses, TLC’s “Say Yes to the Dress” returns for its zillionth season next month. Because never mind love, devotion, honesty, trust, affection. It’s all about the gown.AND THE LACE, GRACE Did we mention “Say Yes to the Dress: Atlanta”? Repeat: It’s all about the gown.AND YOUR POSSE, FLOSSIE Another spinoff: “Say Yes to the Dress: Bridesmaids.” Quote from an exchange seen in a trailer for the show: “You look like a huge heifer.”MAKE A TRADE, JADE Don’t bother watching ABC’s “Celebrity Wife Swap”; just savor the quirky pairings. Last season David Justice, the former New York Yankee, traded with the musician Dweezil Zappa; the comic Judy Gold swapped with the magician Penn Jillette; and the rapper DJ Paul switched with Plaxico Burress, the former football star.AdvertisementGOT A VISA, LISA? Politicians talk about immigration policy, but TLC is doing something about it. Its “90 Day Fiancé” looks at mixed couples — one foreign, one American — contemplating marriage as the 90-day immigration clock ticks.START WITH THE RING, BING Season 2 of FYI’s “Married at First Sight” begins next month. Yeah, it’s just what it sounds like.NOW WHAT DO YOU DO, SUE? If there’s a “Married at First Sight,” there of course has to be a “Married at First Sight: The First Year.” There is. It follows two couples who tied the knot in the original show as they come up to their first anniversary.TRY THE TILT-A-WHIRL, GIRL Last month an episode of the preposterous TLC series “My Strange Addiction” was promoted with this description: “For the past three years, 56-year-old Linda has been happily married to ‘Bruce,’ a 70-foot and 60-ton carnival ride.”USE THE APP, CAP The GSN network is developing the show “Face 2 Face,” which it describes as “a studio-based dating series for the 21st century, using an app to drive a tailored search for each contestant’s (dater) ideal physical ‘type.’ ” Swell, but isn’t that basically the way millions of people already date?TAKE IT SLOW, JO “Thicker Than Water,” a Bravo show about the religious Tankard family of Tennessee, is brimming with advice on romance, most of it aimed at the Tankard children. Last Sunday, in the Crossover Episode From Hell, Phaedra Parks of Bravo’s “Real Housewives of Atlanta” stopped by long enough to tell 18-year-old Cyrene, “Some girls don’t know the value of their vaginas.” Then she added: “It’s a powerful instrument. You just have to use it wisely.”EVERYONE HAS FLAWS, DAWES Among the more mind-blowing dating shows around is GSN’s “Baggage,” hosted by Jerry Springer. A dater gets to choose among three possible dates, but each has baggage. In one recent episode, a man has three women to choose from: one whose religion is Greek mythology, one who likes to chew her date’s food and one who claimed to need sex five times a day. That’s a choice?HOP ON THE BUS, GUS Last month came “Baggage on the Road.” Same as above, only Mr. Springer is in motion, to places like Austin, Tex., and Baton Rouge, La.AdvertisementDON’T JUDGE, PUDGE In the Feb. 27 season opener of “Unlikely Animal Friends” on Nat Geo Wild, we hear about Mr. G (a goat) and Jellybean (a donkey) at an animal sanctuary in California who are inexplicably close. “They graze all day together, they sleep in the sun together, they spend the entire day together,” a caretaker says. Oh, stop, you sickos. It’s a perfectly sweet story.MAKE SURE IT’S ALIVE, CLIVE Discovery’s adorable penguin documentary “Waddle All the Way” had a lesson for all would-be lovers. It used a penguin cam — a camera hidden in a lifelike penguin robot. Real penguins tried to hook up with the fake one.LEAVE IT TO THE KID, SID Last year NickMom introduced “Undercover Cupid,” a show in which teenagers set up their unsuspecting single parents on dates. Cue the “Forbidden Broadway” version of “Matchmaker” from “Fiddler on the Roof.”RECYCLE, MICHAEL On “The Challenge: Battle of the Exes 2,” an MTV series, onetime couples from other youthful shows are paired again, but as partners in extreme physical competitions. Why? Because young people and, apparently, reality-show viewers enjoy being tortured.PURPLE YOUR PROSE, ROSE On TLC’s new, moderately raunchy talk show “All About Sex,” a guest named Mistress Susan recently advised women on how to spice things up. “As soon as your man comes home,” she said, “just say one thing: ‘Hey there, nasty boy.’ ”STAY CLEAN, GENE “The Legend of Mick Dodge” on the National Geographic Channel has little to do with love — it’s about a hairy guy who has lived in the woods for 25 years — but that didn’t stop the show’s publicity arm from issuing Valentine’s Day advice. It suggested following Mick’s romance regimen, including “a mud and moss facial and, of course, a brush of the teeth with a pinecone.”DON’T STINK, LINC “Discovering Lucy Angel,” an AXS reality show about a family country music trio, also made a foray into advice-giving. Among its suggestions for making love last: “Be your best attractive self and always smell good.”THERE’S NO ROSE GARDEN, ARDEN The trailer for the new season of Bravo’s “Newlyweds: The First Year,” which follows assorted gay and straight couples, is 2 minutes 23 seconds long. Roughly half of that is devoted to clips of the couples arguing.AdvertisementCONSIDER REFORMIN’, NORMAN Scripted shows are not our interest here, but the Valentine’s Day promotional material sent out by “Bates Motel,” A&E’s “Psycho” prequel, cannot be ignored. It included a creepy valentine from Norman Bates to his mother, as well as candy hearts with phrases like “2gether 4Ever” on them. Season 3 starts March 9.CASH OR CHARGE, MARGE? The online store for the borderline-pornographic Showtime reality series “Gigolos” — guess what it’s about? — sells a women’s T-shirt emblazoned with the phrase, “They’re definitely worth it.”STRIVE FOR CLARITY, CHARITY TruTV’s “Breaking Greenville” concerns rival TV journalists in Mississippi, several of whom are looking for love. In the Feb. 26 episode, one of them, an older gent, is embarrassed to learn that at his age, when you ask a woman if she’s “available,” she thinks you’re talking about a job opening.ANY ROOM WILL DO, STU In the trailer for the new season of “Shahs of Sunset,” a Bravo reality show about some loud-living Persian-Americans that returns March 2, someone says, “There will be sex in the Champagne Room.”RETHINK THE WEB, JEB Cracked.com has just posted Season 2 of its hilariously droll web series “Rom.Com,” which is about a dating website and its employees. These dot-com clowns, though fictional, may just cause you to revert to old-school dating: i.e., hooking up with your co-workers or college professors.CHANGE YOUR ZONE, JOAN Bravo’s “Friends to Lovers” follows pairs of friends — opposite-sex and same-sex — who are thinking of becoming romantic. How can you tell if your gal pal wants something more? “So, I’m pretty much thinking that we’re out of the ‘friend zone’ right about now,” observes Stefan when his friend Marshana enters the room wearing only come-hither underwear.BE WARY, LARRY Sometimes a reality show’s title is a cautionary tale all by itself. Investigation Discovery’s “Who the (Bleep) Did I Marry” is now five seasons old.SHE HAS A BLADE, SLADE Sometimes a reality show’s title is a cautionary tale all by itself. Investigation Discovery’s “Wives With Knives” just completed its third season.AVOID FEDEX, TEX Sometimes a reality show’s title is a cautionary tale all by itself. Investigation Discovery’s “Mail Order Murder” had its premiere in December.AdvertisementJUST STAY HOME, ROME Sometimes a reality show’s title is a cautionary tale all by itself. Investigation Discovery’s “Dates From Hell” is — oh, never mind. Let’s just say that there’s nothing wrong with being unattached.A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page C34 of the New York edition with the headline: Tune In, Slim: 50 Ways to Be Entertained by Love.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.