By JOSHUA BARONEFEB. 13, 2015
Around TownMuseums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and other diseases? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out diseases. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Arsenal Gallery: ‘The Migration’ (through Feb. 24) During the early and mid-20th century, more than 6 million African-American people left the Jim Crow South for cities in the north and on the West Coast. This Great Migration resulted in a huge demographic shift that left a rich, lasting cultural imprint on many places, like Harlem. The Ebony Society asked more than 20 artists to interpret the events and effects of the Great Migration. Now, their artworks are on display at this Arsenal Gallery show commemorating black history month. Weekdays from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Arsenal Gallery, Central Park, 830 Fifth Avenue, at 64th Street, third floor, 212-360-8111, nycgovparks.org; free.Bartow-Pell Mansion Museum: Winter Chamber Music (Saturday) An eight-piece chamber orchestra performs in the Greek Revival double parlors of the Bartow-Pell Mansion as part of the museum’s Winter Chamber Music series. The one-hour concert features Valentine’s Day appropriate pieces by Mozart, Haydn, Boccherini and Beethoven. At 7 p.m., 895 Shore Road North, Pelham Bay Park, the Bronx, 718-885-1461, bartowpellmansionmuseum.org.Discussions at Brooklyn Historical Society (Tuesday through Thursday) On Tuesday, Eric Foner, a Pulitzer Prize-winning historian, talks about his new book, “Gateway to Freedom: The Hidden History of the Underground Railroad,” with Julie Golia, the director of public history at the Society. On Wednesday, the Emmy Award-winning writer Randy Cohen brings his podcast, “Person Place Thing,” to the Society. He will be speaking with Lev Grossman, the writer and author of “The Magicians.” On Thursday, the actor Wendell Pierce (“The Wire,” “Treme”) joins the journalist Soledad O’Brien in conversation about his latest role. He has joined the cast of the play “Brothers From the Bottom,” coming to the Brooklyn Music School Playhouse next month. At 6:30 p.m., 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.AdvertisementIntrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum: ‘Masters of Disguise: The World of Camouflage’ (through Feb. 24) The art of camouflage in nature and its appropriation by hunters and the armed forces are explored in this exhibition, which uses digital images, artifacts and interactive elements to showcase how color, shade and shapes can be used to deceive the eye. Daily, from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.AdvertisementNew-York Historical Society: ‘Chinese American: Exclusion/Inclusion’ (through April 19) In his review for The New York Times, Edward Rothstein called it a “vigorous and imaginative new exhibition,” that includes a look at “how Chinese-American identity came to be, how immigration and discrimination were followed by recrimination and conflict, and how, finally, a people’s trials give way to celebration.” Tuesday through Thursday and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Friday until 8 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., this Monday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Public Library: ‘Becoming the Man in the White Suit: The Tom Wolfe Papers’ (Friday through Feb. 27) The New York Public Library is exhibiting highlights from Mr. Wolfe’s archive. Included are his correspondences with John Glenn about “The Right Stuff,” a notebook he carried to “Black Panther Night” at Leonard Bernstein’s apartment, and notes from an interview with the Grateful Dead’s Jerry Garcia that would be used for “The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test.” Fridays, Saturdays, Mondays and Thursdays from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Sundays from 1 to 5 p.m.; Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/events/exhibitions; free.New York Public Library for the Performing Arts: ‘Emily Dickinson: Musician and Poet’ (through March 6) Emily Dickinson’s poems and letters as well as the library’s collection of her work provide the backdrop for this exhibition, which focuses on the musical side of her writing. Dickinson’s musical identity encompassed piano performances, the collection of sheet music and concert outings, and those experiences are detailed here. Friday, Saturday, Tuesday and Wednesday from noon to 6 p.m.; Monday and Thursday from noon to 8 p.m.; 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/lpa; free.New York Transit Museum Annex: Holiday Train Show (through Feb. 22) This free annual treat for model train enthusiasts, featuring vintage Lionel trains, is on display in Grand Central Terminal. Weekdays from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Weekends from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; at Grand Central Terminal, near the Station Master’s Office; mta.info/mta/museum.‘New York’s Underground Art Museum’ (Thursday) This book by William Ayres and Sandra Bloodworth, the director of M.T.A. Arts & Design, documents the nearly 100 artworks throughout the M.T.A. that have been commissioned since 2006. They will discuss the collection with Sam Roberts, a reporter for The New York Times, as well as the artist Andrea Dezso and Ronay Menschel, a former M.T.A. board member. A reception and book signing will follow. At 6:30 p.m., Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 917-492-3395, mcny.org.GardensGreat Backyard Bird Count (Saturday) The Queens Botanical Garden opens its doors for the public to participate in this event — part nature walk, part scavenger hunt and part data-collecting. The information will be used to help scientists track migrations and see how temperatures affect bird populations. The garden’s bird population includes red-tailed hawks, American robins and ring-necked pheasants. Registration is required. At 11 a.m., 43-50 Main Street, Flushing, Queens, 718-886-3800, Ext. 213, queensbotanical.org; free.Events‘Brown Butterfly’ (Sunday) The jazz musician Craig Harris performs his multimedia tribute to Muhammad Ali. In writing this work, Mr. Harris, who plays the trombone, tried to capture the essence of Mr. Ali’s physical language, the rhythms in his footwork and the melodies in his jabs. At 3 p.m., Mount Morris Ascension Presbyterian Church, 15 Mount Morris Park West, at 122nd Street, Harlem, 212-289-8096, eventbrite.com.AdvertisementLove, Redefined (Saturday) Poetic Theater Productions, as part of its Poetic License festival, presents an evening of new work from more than a dozen artists, directed by Dontonio Demarco and Andrew Willis-Woodward. The celebration aims to be a nontraditional take on love, with poets and playwrights reimagining and riffing on traditional sonnets and other love poems. At 8 p.m., Wild Project, 195 East Third Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, poetictheater.com.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Spoken WordDiscussions at Brooklyn Historical Society (Tuesday through Thursday) On Tuesday, Eric Foner, a Pulitzer Prize-winning historian, talks about his new book, “Gateway to Freedom: The Hidden History of the Underground Railroad,” with Julie Golia, the director of public history at the Society. On Wednesday, the Emmy Award-winning writer Randy Cohen brings his podcast, “Person Place Thing,” to the Society. He will be speaking with Lev Grossman, the writer and author of “The Magicians.” On Thursday, the actor Wendell Pierce (“The Wire,” “Treme”) joins the journalist Soledad O’Brien in conversation about his latest role in the play “Brothers From the Bottom,” coming to the Brooklyn Music School Playhouse next month. At 6:30 p.m., 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Foreign Affairs Literary Event (Friday) The magazine Bookforum presents a literary ode to St. Valentine. The writers include Paul Beatty, Laura Kipnis, Clancy Martin, Joseph O’Neill and Lynne Tillman. The event is free, but reservations are required; email foreignaffairs@bookforum.com. At 6 p.m., New Museum, 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-475-4000, bookforum.com.‘In Manchuria’: Michael Meyer and Ian Frazier (Tuesday) Mr. Meyer discusses his new book, “In Manchuria: A Village Called Wasteland and the Transformation of Rural China,” with Mr. Frazier, a staff writer for The New Yorker and a frequent contributor to The New York Review of Books. In the book, Mr. Meyer blends his experience as a teacher in rural China with the country’s history and politics. At 7 p.m., Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, New York Public Library, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/events; free.Stephen Kotkin on ‘Stalin’ Biography (Wednesday) Mr. Kotkin, a historian, discusses his newest book, “Stalin: Volume I: Paradoxes of Power, 1878-1928,” a critically acclaimed doorstop nearing 1,000 pages that tells the story of that leader’s rise to power. Mr. Kotkin will be joined in conversation by Keith Gessen, a novelist and editor at the journal n+1. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.Caroline de Maigret (Friday) Just in time for Fashion Week, Caroline de Maigret, author of “How to Be Parisian Wherever You Are: Love, Style and Bad Habits,” discusses the culture, confidence and irreverence that goes into being a true Parisienne. Ms. de Maigret will sign books after the talk. At 7 p.m., Florence Gould Hall, French Institute Alliance Française, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, fiaf.org.Readings by Willie Mae Brown (Sunday) To commemorate the 50th anniversary of Bloody Sunday and the voting rights march from Selma to Montgomery, Ala., Ms. Brown will read two selections from her forthcoming memoirs: “My Selma” and “A Defiant Leader.” While there are numerous media accounts of the events in Selma and elsewhere, Ms. Brown, a visual artist and storyteller, says she will recount the violent history that she heard about but that newspapers never published. At 2 p.m., Tabla Rasa Gallery, 224 48th Street, Sunset Park, Brooklyn, 718-833-9100, tablarasagallery.com; free.Walking ToursFlatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.The Ghosts of Grand Central (Saturdays) This tour offers shelter from the cold, though discovering the ghosts of Grand Central Terminal may bring a different sort of chill. There will be history of the Vanderbilts, as well as August Belmont, Franklin Roosevelt and his dog, Fala. The tour meets west of the M.T.A. information booth under the four-faced clock in the station’s Grand Concourse. (Through March 28.) At 7:30 p.m., 646-493-7092, ghostsofny.com.AdvertisementHistory of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.L.G.B.T. Chelsea Gallery Tour (Saturday) This tour will focus on gay and lesbian artists. There will be paintings, video installations and an exhibition featuring photography by Robert Mapplethorpe. At 1 p.m., 526 West 26th Street, Chelsea, 212-946-1548, nygallerytours.com.Revolutionary New York (Monday) Big Onion Tours celebrates Presidents’ Day with a guide to New York around the time of the American Revolution. Stops include the site where New Yorkers would have first heard the Declaration of Independence, Alexander Hamilton’s grave and Fraunces Tavern. The tour meets at Broadway and Murray Street, at a gated entrance to City Hall Park. At 1 p.m., 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org. JOSHUA BARONE An entry in the Spare Times listings in some editions on Friday about a discussion of the book “New York’s Underground Art Museum” by William Ayres and Sandra Bloodworth, at the Museum of the City of New York scheduled for Thursday, misstated the given name of an artist who will take part. She is Andrea Dezso, not Andrew.Information on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. A version of this schedule appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page C24 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.