By LAUREL GRAEBERFEB. 13, 2015
‘Meet the Breeds’If happiness really is a warm puppy, as Charles M. Schulz once proclaimed, then Pier 92 in Manhattan is about to become the happiest place on earth.Hundreds of dogs, many as young as 3 months, will appear there on Saturday for the sixth edition of “Meet the Breeds,” a celebration devoted to all canine types, from the diminutive Chihuahua to the mighty English mastiff.“It’s a great day, if you’re an animal lover, to interact with dogs you wouldn’t normally see,” said Gina DiNardo, vice president of the American Kennel Club, which this year will present the event along with the Westminster Kennel Club. Consider, for instance, two new breeds competing at the Westminster Dog Show on Monday and Tuesday: the coton de Tulear, a ball of fluff with roots in Madagascar, and the wire-haired viszla, a muscular hunting dog from Hungary.But even though “Meet the Breeds” has become partners with Westminster, it is not a competitive dog show. Until this year it also featured cats, but its new space can’t accommodate both species. And the atmospheres differ. If Westminster is the canine version of a debutante cotillion, “Meet the Breeds” is a crackling hoedown.Advertisement“We encourage people to get down on the floor, play with the puppies, touch the dogs and learn all about the breeds,” Ms. DiNardo said.AdvertisementThis makes the event a favorite with children, who can join a scavenger hunt (the prizes are goody bags) as they visit booths representing more than 140 breeds. “You might be asked to find a dog with a hypoallergenic coat,” Ms. DiNardo said, “or a dog that needs to be brushed every day.”Young visitors can also vote in a contest for the best booths, which exhibitors decorate to reflect their breeds’ history and origins. The booth for the cairn terrier — remember Toto? — often has a “Wizard of Oz” theme, while the one for the Newfoundland frequently emphasizes seafaring. Last year the top prize went to the Samoyed booth, “which had a demonstration of how you can take the fur from the Samoyed and spin it into yarn,” Ms. DiNardo said.On Saturday, anyone who wants to see dogs compete can go next door, to Pier 94, where Westminster will hold the Masters Agility Championship, in which dogs run obstacle courses. But give children a choice of that or petting puppies? No contest.(From 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., Pier 92, 12th Avenue and 55th Street, Clinton, akc.org/meetthebreeds.) LAUREL GRAEBERFor Children‘Amelia and Her Paper Tigers’ (Saturday and Sunday) Amelia Earhart faced challenges on the ground long before she conquered the skies. This hourlong production from Bond Street Theater, presented as part of the Midwinter Madness Short Play Festival, uses song, dance, puppetry and stilt walking to illuminate Earhart’s odyssey. Written and performed by Ilanna Saltzman and Heddy Lahmann-Rosen for children 7 and older, the play weaves a story around the Earhart artifacts two travelers discover. Saturday at 5:30 p.m., Sunday at 5 p.m., Roy Arias Studios, Stage 2, 300 West 43rd Street, fourth floor, Clinton, 866-811-4111, midtownfestival.org.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’  (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘The Bully’ (Saturday through Thursday) Vital Theater Company is reviving this ever-topical musical, by John Gregor and David L. Williams, which refreshingly avoids the trap of bullying its own audiences with heavy moralizing. Instead, the many pitfalls of the typical middle school relationship of victimizer and victim are revealed through wit, humor and a killer of a sly twist. (Through April 26.) At 3:30 p.m., McGinn-Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.Advertisement‘Can Do Duck: The Musical’ (Saturday and Sunday) You’ve heard about the little engine that could — now comes the little duck. Arielle Sosland, writer and director of this musical, based it on “The Can Do Duck” series of children’s books by her father, Morton Sosland, a child psychiatrist. The hourlong show, for ages 3 through 11, focuses on a duck family and a human family as they learn to face challenges with self-confidence and optimism. (Through March 8.) At 11 a.m., Lynn Redgrave Theater at Culture Project, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, candoduckthemusical.com.Celebrate Lunar New Year (Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Some call it the Year of the Ram, some call it the Year of the Sheep, and some call it the Year of the Goat, but everyone agrees that it’s the Lunar New Year, arriving officially on Feb. 19. The New-York Historical Society will celebrate it this winter and spring with family activities on selected days. They include story time on Sunday at 11:30 a.m., with a reading of Dawn Casey’s book “The Great Race: The Story of the Chinese Zodiac,” for ages 4 through 7; Chinese dance performances on Monday at noon and 2 p.m., and a 3 p.m. Chinese paper-cutting demonstration, for all ages; a reading of William Low’s picture book “Chinatown” and a workshop in making dragon finger puppets, on Tuesday at 3:30 p.m., for ages 3 through 5; and Chinese-themed performances by students of the National Dance Institute on Thursday at 2 p.m., for all ages. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.EcoCruises: Winter Seals and Waterbirds of New York Harbor (Sunday) A lot of tourists visit New York in the winter, but some of the most interesting won’t be found in the crowds at Times Square. These two-hour cruises from New York City Audubon focus on birds that migrate to this region at this time of year, like many ducks and geese. They also visit the harbor seals that can be found around Governors, Hoffman and Swinburne Islands. (Seal behavior researchers will take part in several of the tours.) An Audubon naturalist narrates the adventures, which include complimentary hot tea and cocoa and are conducted via New York Water Taxi. Warm clothing and binoculars are recommended, as is advance purchase. (Through March 8.) Sundays at noon, Pier 16, South Street Seaport, 89 South Street, near Fulton Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-742-1969, nywatertaxi.com/tours/audubon-winter.Engineering Week (Monday through next Friday) What can you create out of gumdrops and toothpicks? Or out of paper, wooden blocks and paper clips? Go find out at the New York Hall of Science this week, when the museum celebrates engineering. On Monday, Civil Engineering Day, the American Society of Civil Engineers Metropolitan section will lead projects with household materials that reveal the important principles behind buildings and bridges. Activities the rest of the week will center on engineering for space, with screenings of episodes of the animated preschool television series “Space Racers” (Tuesday); nanoengineering, with demonstrations involving nano crystals (Wednesday); wearable engineering, including high-tech clothes and accessories (Thursday); and motor machine engineering, in which visitors can make their own inventions (next Friday). A full schedule is on the hall’s website; 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.‘Everything About a Family (Almost)’ (Friday through Monday) It’s a pretty inexhaustible topic, but Tada! Youth Theater has captured much of the fun and frustrations of family life in this one-hour musical, which had its premiere in 2009. Now the show (it closes on Monday) has being revived by the troupe, whose young members developed the plotline themselves and selected the songs from submissions by professional composers and lyricists. The humorous conceit is an adolescent given — wanting a different family — but the results, set at a couple of different reunions, are often unexpectedly poignant. Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 2 and 4 p.m.; Monday at noon and 2 p.m.; Tada! Theater, 15 West 28th Street, Manhattan; 212-252-1619, Ext. 5, tadatheater.com.‘Fancy Nancy the Musical’  (Saturday through Thursday) One of the arts’ youngest divas has returned to the McGinn/Cazale Theater. This musical from Vital Theater Company focuses on a little girl who wants everything to be fancy — especially herself. Based on the book series written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, the production explores the predicament that ensues when Nancy finds out that she hasn’t been cast as the glamorous mermaid she’d hoped to be in the coming dance show. With a book by Susan DiLallo, a score by Danny Abosch, and lyrics by both, the musical humorously follows Nancy’s attempts to cope with a most unfancy role: that of a tree. (Through April 26.) At 1:30 p.m., 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Monday, and Thursday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Presidents’ Day at 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Thursday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘Give Me Sound!’ (Sunday) Hayes Greenfield has been giving sound for years, and at this program, he’s encouraging children to give it back. A jazz musician, composer and educator, Mr. Greenfield will work with young audience members — the recommended ages are 3 through 7 — in sonic activities and games, with the goal of creating a “sound sculpture” at the end of the hour. While little enthusiasts will use their natural rhythm makers — voices and bodies — instruments from home are welcome, too. (Through March 22.) At 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-675-6677, 13thstreetrep.org.‘The Greatest Pirate Story (N)ever Told!’  (Saturday through Monday) How do you describe a show whose script changes with every performance? A few reliable statements: Smooching, sword fighting and water spraying will occur. “Aaarr!” will be heard often. And, most important, it will provide more laughs than there are bones in Davy Jones’s locker. So it goes in this partly improvised hourlong family musical, created by Christopher Leidenfrost, in which a pirate crew is cursed by a sea witch and has to perform a Broadway-style spectacle to get its treasure. Revived for just this weekend, the show enlists young audience members to help write the scenes, in the style of the game Mad Libs. At 11 a.m., Snapple Theater Center, 210 West 50th Street, Manhattan, 212-921-7862, greatestpiratestory.com.AdvertisementGustafer Yellowgold’s Valentine’s Day Concert (Saturday) The friendliest of space aliens is back in town, ready to celebrate Valentine’s Day. Hailing from the sun and looking like an animated drop of butter, Gustafer Yellowgold is the creation of the illustrator and award-winning composer Morgan Taylor, who has returned for another multimedia show — incorporating hand-drawn images and music — about his hero. This concert, part of the Just Kidding series at Symphony Space, will include a full band, with tunes from Mr. Taylor’s latest release, “Gustafer Yellowgold’s Wisdom Tooth of Wisdom.” At 11 a.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org/family.Carla Hall’s Culinary Kids Week (Monday through Thursday) Everyone likes to eat during vacation, and this weeklong celebration, coinciding with the public school winter break, offers intriguing and healthful possibilities. Presented by the chef Carla Hall, co-host of “The Chew” on ABC, and the Ruth Rea Howell Family Garden at the New York Botanical Garden, the festival will feature a daily cooking demonstration with visiting chefs making child-friendly recipes. Ms. Hall herself will kick off the fun on Monday, greeting young visitors at noon and presenting a recipe at 12:30. In daily culinary workshops at 11 a.m., noon and 2 p.m. (registration is first come first served), young visitors will master kitchen skills and make dishes themselves. Other plans include food activity stations, a treasure hunt for edible rain forest plants and, on Monday through Wednesday only, farm-oriented singalongs. (Through Feb. 22.) From 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. (The museum is usually closed on Mondays, but is open on Presidents’ Day.) Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one will sprout indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which is reviving Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor will now star in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Friday at 10:30 a.m. and noon; Saturday and Sunday at 1 p.m.; Monday through Thursday at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m. Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.Kids ‘N Comedy: ‘Young Love’ (Sunday) The class clown gets applause, not detention, at this monthly series, in which tween and teenage comics perform stand-up. Here, in honor of Valentine’s Day, they offer a show focusing on young love and all its attendant foibles and embarrassments. The material is recommended for children 9 and older, but there’s no need to worry about appropriateness (profanity is banned) or knock-knock jokes (this crew is sophisticated). Reservations required. At 1 p.m., Gotham Comedy Club, 208 West 23rd Street, Chelsea, 212-877-6115, kidsncomedy.com.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday and Wednesday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.‘Love Is in the Air and Water’ (Saturday) Valentine’s Day is for couples, and this event will celebrate a particularly devoted pair: William and Coral, who follow each other through icy waters. (It’s not such a huge sacrifice, though — they’re harbor seals.) The New York Aquarium will honor them and other animal pairs in this hourlong children’s program, which will explain various species and their conservation. Young guests will also make Valentine cards with oceanic themes. At 11:30 a.m. and 2 p.m., Surf Avenue and West Eighth Street, Coney Island, Brooklyn, 718-265-3474, nyaquarium.com.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.AdvertisementNew York Night Train Soul Clap and Family Dance Off (Sunday) Vinyl records? What are they? Children cannot only look at and listen to them, but spin them, too, in this event featuring the soul dance party D.J. Jonathan Toubin. Presented by Rock and Roll Playhouse, this celebration will feature vintage 1950s and ’60s 45s, perfect for family dancing. Mr. Toubin will teach how to D.J. and execute some great moves, and after the dancing, Charlotte Holst Douglas will lead young guests in a guitar strap art workshop. At 11 a.m. (doors open at 10:30), Brooklyn Bowl, 61 Wythe Avenue, between 11th and 12th Streets, Williamsburg, 718-963-3369, brooklynbowl.com.‘The Pinkertonian Mystery’ (Sunday) Young detectives should get their notebooks and magnifying glasses ready. The DiMenna Children’s History Museum at the New-York Historical Society is asking them and their families to help solve a Victorian-era crime. Live In Theater, known for its interactive murder mysteries, will present the case, a premiere production that unfolds throughout the museum galleries. Young visitors will portray members of the Pinkerton National Detective Agency, out to capture a crook called El Diablo in 1875. (Also on March 8 and April 12 and 26.) From 3 to 5 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through May 9.) At 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, 13thstreetrep.org.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 10:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘Tropical Discoveries’ (Friday through Thursday) At least a little bit of New York resembles the tropics, even at this time of year. It can be found at the New York Botanical Garden, whose latest exhibition, “Wild Medicine in the Tropics,” investigates the medicinal use of rain forest plants. Visitors to the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden can explore this area through “Tropical Discoveries,” in which they’ll compare tropical and temperate plants inside the William and Lynda Steere Discovery Center and pot up a tropical species to take home. They can also take field notes on the hidden signs of life in the winter garden outdoors. (Through Feb. 26.) Weekends, 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; weekdays (the garden is usually closed on Mondays, but is open on Presidents’ Day), 1:30 to 4:30 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Through Thursday, the museum features the exhibit “A-Maze N’ Shabbat,” whose activities include a challah-braiding workshop and a life-size maze that teaches about the Jewish sabbath. Hours: Mondays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; this Sunday, 1 to 5:30 p.m.; open until 5 p.m. on Presidents’ Day; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum. LAUREL GRAEBERAn earlier version of the entry about Vital Theater Company’s production of “Fancy Nancy the Musical” misstated next week’s performance days. The show will be performed Monday through Thursday, because public school students are on break, not only on Saturday and Sunday. (After next week, the show, running through April 26, will return to its regular weekend schedule.)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page C24 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times for Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.