FEB. 13, 2015
 Museums and galleries are in Manhattan unless otherwise noted. Full reviews of recent art shows: nytimes.com/art. A searchable guide to these and many other art shows is at nytimes.com/events.MuseumsAmerican Folk Art Museum: ‘A Shared Legacy: Folk Art in America’ (through March 8) Drawn from a private collection, this beguiling show presents more than 60 choice objects including paintings, drawings, sculptures, furniture, painted chests and knickknacks made between 1800 and 1920. Altogether they embody a paradox for modern viewers: They evoke a world and a way of life that modernity has eclipsed, and yet they feel as vivid as anything you might desire in the art of today. 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 66th Street, 212-595-9533, folkartmuseum.org. (Ken Johnson)★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Killer Heels: The Art of the High-Heeled Shoe’ (through March 1) Whether you view extra-high heels with lust or horror, as objects of empowerment or objectification, this in-depth survey of elevating footwear from past and present, East and West, is a model of the curatorial craft. It examines its subject from several fruitful angles, including unflattering ones, interspersed with excellent labels, relevant objects of art and especially design, clips from famous films and videos both didactic and artistic. Its main flaw: dim lighting dictated by fragile materials means that some shoes are most visible in the catalog. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Roberta Smith)★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Judith Scott — Bound and Unbound’  (through March 29) Judith Scott’s mesmerizing sculptures sit like large, unopened bundles, contents mysterious, in the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art at the Brooklyn Museum. In a few, solid forms can be made out under wrappings of yarn, string and fabric strips; others suggest gift-wrapped boulders. You can call them abstract and stop there, or go further and connect them to art history, specifically the history of fiber art, or go further and consider them in the light of Ms. Scott’s history: She was born in 1943 with Down syndrome, started making art only in her early 40s and kept making it until her death at 61. However approached, the work is complex and brilliant. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Holland Cotter)Advertisement★ Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum (continuing) The stately doors of the 1902 Andrew Carnegie mansion, home to the Cooper Hewitt, are open again after an overhaul and expansion of the premises. Historic house and modern museum have always made an awkward fit, a standoff between preservation and innovation, and the problem remains, but the renovation has brought a wide-open new gallery space, a cafe and a raft of be-your-own-designer digital enhancements. Best of all, more of the museum’s vast permanent collection is now on view, including an Op Art weaving, miniature spiral staircases, ballistic face masks and a dainty enameled 18th-century version of a Swiss knife. Like design itself, this institution is built on tumult and friction, and you feel it. 2 East 91st Street, at Fifth Avenue, 212-849-8400, cooperhewitt.org. (Cotter)Advertisement★ Guggenheim Museum: ‘On Kawara — Silence’  (through May 3) The first retrospective of this Conceptual Art giant turns the museum’s spiral into a vortex suffused with the consciousness of time, life’s supreme ruler, in all its quotidian daily unfoldings, historical events and almost incomprehensible grandeur. The presentation of date paintings, “I Got Up” postcards and “I AM Still Alive” telegrams echoes Mr. Kawara’s exquisite sense of discipline and craft. This is an extraordinary tribute. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. (Smith)★ Jewish Museum: ‘Helena Rubinstein: Beauty Is Power’ (through March 22) The first museum show devoted to the life and art collection of the cosmetics magnate Helena Rubinstein is a master class in modernism-as-marketing — one that comes with a strong female perspective on 20th-century visual culture. It shows us how Rubinstein adapted Cubism, Surrealism and other avant-garde art and design movements for her personal brand, highlighting new and different standards of beauty and exhorting women to control their own images through makeup and grooming. Mixing biography, business, art, fashion and décor, it recreates rooms from Rubinstein’s salons and reassembles parts of her diverse collection, which included African, pre-Columbian and Oceanic artworks. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Karen Rosenberg)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Madame Cézanne’  (through March 15) Cézanne’s paintings of his wife, Hortense Fiquet, have long stonewalled would-be psychologists, offering few indications of intimacy or interior life. (The poet Rainer Maria Rilke, enthusing over “Madame Cézanne in a Red Armchair,” focused on the work’s color scheme and called the chair “a personality in its own right.”) But assembled at the Met, and supported by more tender and informal graphite sketches, these portraits are more forthcoming. They suggest that numbing familiarity was actually, for Cézanne, a form of intimacy; that he could connect with portrait subjects only when they were as reliable a presence in his life as Mont Sainte-Victoire. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Making Pottery Art: The Robert A. Ellison Jr. Collection of French Ceramics (ca. 1880-1910)’  (through March 15) Nearly all the 40 works in this show — from a collection recently donated to the museum — are in a traditional form of vases, bowls and platters. They represent a marvelous variety of styles and influences, including Art Nouveau, Arts and Crafts, classic Chinese traditions and European folk art. What they share is a love for processes and materials and a candid way with the human touch. Most intriguing of all is a curiously clunky small vase by Paul Gauguin, who might have been the George Ohr of European ceramics if he’d stuck with it. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Reimagining Modernism: 1900-1950’ (continuing) One of the greatest encyclopedic museums in the world fulfills its mission a little more with an ambitious reinstallation of works of early European modernism with their American counterparts for the first time in nearly 30 years. Objects of design and paintings by a few self-taught artists further the integration. It is quite a sight, with interesting rotations and fine-tunings to come. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Thomas Hart Benton’s “America Today” Mural Rediscovered’ (through April 19) The prickly American Regionalist Thomas Hart Benton had his share of detractors. But even they would probably acknowledge that his early mural “America Today” is the best of its kind, a raucous, cartwheeling, wide-angle look at 1920s America that set the standard for the Works Progress Administration’s mural program and has remained a New York City treasure. Now installed at the Met in a reconstruction of its original setting (a boardroom at the New School for Social Research), it captivates with period details (from the cut of a flapper gown to the mechanics of a blast furnace) and timely signs of socioeconomic and environmental distress (exhausted coal miners and hands reaching for coffee and bread). 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Warriors and Mothers: Epic Mbembe Art’ (through Sept. 7) If a dozen masterpiece Renaissance sculptures, done in an unknown and wildly unorthodox style, suddenly turned up in the Italian countryside, the find would make the news. You’ll encounter the equivalent of such a discovery in this show of spectacular weatherworn, wood-carved figures, some dating to before the 17th century, that were made by the Mbeme in southeastern Nigeria and taken to Paris by an African dealer in the early 1970s. They caused a sensation among collectors and scholars at the time, and you can see why. But the effort to find more of them proved fruitless. The examples at the Met, which include the original dozen, represent all the fully intact stand-alone Mbembe figures known to exist. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)AdvertisementMoMA PS1: ‘Bob and Roberta Smith: Art Amnesty’ (through March 23) Bob and Roberta Smith is the cognomen of a British artist who specializes in humorously mocking art institutions and the conventional attitudes they tend to promulgate. The ostensible idea of this show is to give people an opportunity to officially retire from making art and to ceremonially discard works of art they own but no longer want. Unloaded works are displayed along with jazzy signs painted by Mr. Smith on all kinds of surfaces. One proclaims, “Joseph Beuys conclusive proof not everyone is an artist.” 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Johnson)MoMA PS1: ‘Samara Golden: The Flat Side of the Knife’ (through Sept. 7) Standing at a railing where you look into the museum’s two-story-tall Duplex Gallery, you behold a confoundingly complicated interior architecture with furniture, stairways, musical instruments, wheelchairs and many other domestic items rendered in silvery, foil-clad foam board. The gallery’s floor is covered by a grid of large mirrors so that everything is doubled. What you think is up may really be down and what you take to be real might be a virtual reflection of the real. 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Johnson)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘The Forever Now: Contemporary Painting in an Atemporal World’ (through April 5) Despite being predictable and market-oriented in its choice of 17 artists, this museum’s first painting survey in decades is well worth seeing. About half the artists are exceptional and the rest are represented by their best work. Based on the premise that all historical painting styles are equally available today, the exhibition has been smartly installed to juxtapose different approaches: figurative and abstract, digital and handmade, spare and opulent. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Jean Dubuffet: Soul of the Underground’ (through April 5) “Look at what lies at your feet!” Jean Dubuffet wrote in a 1957 essay. “A crack in the ground, sparkling gravel, a tuft of grass, some crushed debris, offer equally worthy subjects for your applause and admiration.” In MoMA’s stimulating show, drawn entirely from its collection, we can see how Dubuffet’s earthbound gaze nourished his reinvention of the painted surface. On view are several canvases smeared with a mixture of oil, putty, sand and gravel, some of them with incised drawings that seem to equate painting with plowing. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Rosenberg)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Modern Photographs from the Thomas Walther Collection, 1909-1949’ (through April 19) Overflowing with prints by Berenice Abbott, Andre Kertesz, Edward Weston and other luminaries from the first half of the 20th century, this exhibition would seem to be a straightforward look at photography’s past. But the show, packaged with a book, a symposium and an engrossing interactive website, is really a bold attempt to visualize the future of photography inside the museum as it reckons with the unwieldy, image-saturated culture outside the galleries. With works by Aleksandr Rodchenko, Ms. Abbott, Alvin Langdon Coburn and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy that explore cities from unusual angles or abstract their infrastructure, the show’s largest section, “Dynamics of the City,” best encapsulates the Walther Collection’s distinctly urban, peripatetic take on Modernism. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Rosenberg)Museum of Modern Art: ‘The Paris of Toulouse-Lautrec: Prints and Posters’ (through March 22) In his printed works, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec chronicled and publicized the music halls, theaters, circuses, operas and cafes of Paris with terrific verve, sly wit and surprising subtlety. This enthralling show presents approximately 100 examples drawn from the museum’s permanent collection. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Johnson)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Sturtevant: Double Trouble’  (through Feb. 22) Among the first things you see in MoMA’s taut, feisty retrospective of the American artist Elaine Sturtevant is work by far better known figures: Joseph Beuys, Jasper Johns, Marcel Duchamp. In each case, however, the pieces are by Ms. Sturtevant herself, who spent much of a long career adopting and adapting the art and styles of others to create a body of work entirely her own, one which raises questions about the value of art, about the hows and whys of producing it, and about the degrees to which quasi-replication can be an exercise in flattery, parody, objectivity, originality and love. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Cotter)★ Neue Galerie: ‘Egon Schiele: Portraits’ (through April 20) Of the approximately 125 items in this terrific show, there are only 11 oil paintings, which is a good thing. Except for a large picture of his wife, Edith, in a colorful striped dress, Schiele’s works on canvas are dark and turgid. But his drawings are nimble and nuanced. Working on paper with pencil, charcoal, ink, gouache, watercolor and crayons, he portrayed himself and others with infectious avidity. There’s hardly a single sheet here that doesn’t warrant close looking for its virtuoso draftsmanship and psychological acuity. 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street, 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org. (Johnson)Advertisement★ New-York Historical Society: ‘Freedom Journey 1965: Photographs of the Selma to Montgomery March by Stephen Somerstein’ (through April 19) Almost 50 years ago, the picture editor of a campus newspaper at City College of New York assigned himself a breaking story: covering what promised to be a massive march in Alabama, led by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., to demand free-and-clear voting rights for African-Americans. On short notice the editor, Stephen Somerstein, grabbed his cameras, climbed on a bus and headed south. The 55 pictures of black leaders and everyday people in this show, installed in a hallway and small gallery, are some that he shot that day. The image of Dr. King’s head seen in monumental silhouette that has become a virtual logo of the film “Selma” is based on a Somerstein original. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org. (Cotter)New-York Historical Society: Annie Leibovitz: ‘Pilgrimage’  (through Feb. 22) No living celebrities are portrayed in “Pilgrimage,” but lots of celebrated figures from the past are indirectly represented, from Thomas Jefferson and Emily Dickinson to Eleanor Roosevelt and Robert Smithson. In the spring of 2009, Ms. Leibovitz set out on a two-year journey that took her to about two dozen historic sites in the United States and Britain. Most of these were house museums dedicated to famous individuals, where she photographed the rooms they inhabited and objects they owned and used. Though often poetically atmospheric, these pictures are disappointingly less lively than her portraits of famous entertainers. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org. (Johnson)★ Rubin Museum of Art: ‘The All-Knowing Buddha: A Secret Guide’ (through April 13) This show presents 54 paintings that illustrate step-by-step instructions for followers of Tibetan Buddhism. Delicately painted on 10-by-10-inch paper sheets, most of the pages depict a monk having fabulous visions in a verdant landscape. Thought to have been commissioned by a Mongolian patron and executed by unidentified artists in a Chinese workshop sometime in the 18th century, it is a fascinating and remarkably thorough manual for seekers of higher consciousness. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org. (Johnson)Sculpture Center: ‘Araya Rasdjarmrearnsook’  (through March 30) A pre-eminent artist in Southeast Asia, this Thai video maker addresses topics like death, the insane, East-West cultural differences, the disenfranchisement of women and the rights of animals, often in provocatively discomfiting ways. In a set of three videos, she gives professorial lectures about death to sets of real human corpses. Many of her most recent works have to do with dogs. In them, she protests the abuse of dogs and hints at a holistic vision of people in tune with nature and the cosmos. 44-19 Purves Street, Long Island City, Queens, 718-361-1750, sculpture-center.org. (Johnson)Galleries: Chelsea★ Mike Nelson: ‘Gang of Seven’ (through Feb. 21) This British artist has filled the gallery with a lively crowd of lyrical assemblages made of detritus collected from the beaches and coastal waters of British Columbia. They are cobbled from bottles, driftwood, chunks of plastic foam, lengths of frayed rope, bald tires, pieces of rusted iron and animal skulls. Several pieces consist of weathered, partly charred lengths of wood screwed together to resemble bonfire remains with pieces of orange plastic added to represent low-burning flames. 303 Gallery, 507 West 24th Street, 212-255-1121, 303gallery.com. (Johnson)‘The New York School, 1969: Henry Geldzahler at the Metropolitan Museum of Art’ (through March 14) This show revisits a large groundbreaking exhibition in 1969 organized by the Met’s first curator of 20th-century art. Its radiant works evoke the big-name movers and shakers of Abstract Expressionism, Pop Art and Minimalism, while also representing art history as unquestioningly orderly, monolithic and male. Paul Kasmin, 293 10th Avenue, 212-563-4474, paulkasmingallery.com. (Smith)‘Uche Okeke: Works on Paper, 1958-1993’  (through Feb. 21) Born in Nigeria in 1933, Uche Okeke was, in the 1950s, a founding member of the Zaria Art Society, a group of academically trained experimental artists who joined Western media — oil paint, pastel, pen and ink — and African content which, for Mr. Okeke, included a distinctive type of drawing associated with Igbo peoples in the south of the country. Unlike some of his colleagues who emigrated to Europe and the United States, he has spent almost all of his career in Africa, teaching until the late 1980s at the University of Nigeria at Nsukka. The result in this thumbnail survey of works on paper is art that, without looking specifically ethnic, is thoroughly and consciously African in its references. Skoto Gallery, 529 West 20th Street, fifth floor, 212-352-8058, skotogallery.com. (Cotter)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Diana Thater: ‘Science, Fiction’ (through Feb. 21) You might think you’ve walked into a Stanley Kubrick sci-fi movie. The main gallery is flooded by an intense blue light. In the center is a mysterious, room-size box, which appears to hover above a band of bright yellow light. A grainy video projected on the ceiling shows dung beetles slowly moving about in a thicket of brown grass. It has to do with the fact that dung beetles navigate at night by the lights of stars in the sky. David Zwirner, 533 West 19th Street, 212-727-2070, davidzwirner.com. (Johnson)‘Vis-À-vis’  (through Feb. 28) Organized by the artist Michael Mahalchick, this exhibition staunchly ignores the boundary between outsider artists and those of the insider persuasion — among them Willem de Kooning. A very good time, full of useful parallels and connections, is had by all 16 artists. Andrew Edlin Gallery, 134 10th Avenue, near 18th Street, 212-206-9723, edlingallery.com. (Smith)AdvertisementGalleries: SoHo‘Quiet Tremors’ (through Feb. 21) The Kate Werble Gallery’s somewhat Minimalist aesthetic is maintained by this svelte group show, which is nonetheless the first in its six-year history to feature paintings. Its six artists make a good case for an understated, and these days often overtouted, style of abstract painting based on unusual materials or processes, while also expanding the Werble worldview in promising ways. Kate Werble Gallery, 83 Van Dam Street, SoHo, 212-352-9700, katewerblegallery.com. (Smith)David Weiss: ‘Works, 1968-1979’ (through Feb. 22) This Swiss artist (1946-2012) is best known for the sly, jokey photographs, sculptures and videos he made with Peter Fischli under the name Fischli/Weiss. Before Fischli/Weiss started in 1979, however, Mr. Weiss published artists’ books. Included in this exhibition are more than 60 comics, abstractions and psychedelic landscapes peppered with anthropomorphic insects, plants and animals. What’s really on display here, though, is an ethos: call it post-’60s exhaustion or countercultural ennui. After this, Mr. Weiss and Mr. Fischli would make the work they’re known for, couched in photographic irony and humor rather than hand-drawn hippie existentialism. Swiss Institute Contemporary Art, 18 Wooster Street, near Grand Street, 212-925-2035, swissinstitute.net. (Martha Schwendener)Galleries: Other‘Call and Response’ (through Feb. 28) The unruly state of contemporary, often youthful painting is summarized by this boisterous effort: a crowded display of 59 painters, all of whom chose which of their works would be shown. The totality resembles a juried exhibition that still needs some jurying, but subtracting what you dislike in your mind’s eye still leaves quite a bit worth looking at. Gavin Brown, 620 Greenwich Street, at Leroy Street, West Village, 212-627-5258, gavinbrown.biz. (Smith)‘Looking Back: The 9th White Columns Annual’ (through Feb. 21) This overview of the 2014 exhibitions in New York galleries and museums has been selected by the four women of Cleopatra’s, a Brooklyn curatorial collective, and they have done their homework. Their sprawling, deftly installed effort ranks among the most ecumenical, visually rewarding surveys mustered at this venerable alternative space. It instills hope about art and the art world. White Columns, 320 West 13th Street, with an entrance on Horatio Street, West Village, 212-924-4212, whitecolumns.org. (Smith)★ ‘Respond’ (through Feb. 22) This large group show at a nonprofit alternative, Smack Mellon, is one of the few New York exhibitions to directly address the issues of racism, police violence and social justice that filled the news after the deaths of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo., and Eric Garner on Staten Island. Much of the work, solicited through an open call online, is installed salon-style, six pieces deep, in the gallery’s two-story-high front space. It ranges across generations, from a 1985 painting of a salivating police dog in South Africa, by Jerry Kearns, to entries by young artists like Faith Briggs, Elliott Brown, and Maya Mackrandilal, who are showing in New York for the first time. Much of what’s here is topically on message. But there are many subtleties, and the large amount of painting and drawing gives life to complaints about the underdog status of these forms. Smack Mellon has organized a strong program of panels, performances and poetry readings to supplement the show. 92 Plymouth Street, near Washington Street, Dumbo, Brooklyn, 718-834-8761, smackmellon.org. (Cotter)Jim Woodring: ‘You Drive!’  (through Feb. 27) Mr. Woodring is a giant in the world of comics and graphic novels. This show’s assortment of recent drawings and paintings displays his extraordinary gifts as a draughtsman, storyteller and creator of hilarious characters, including Frank, a hapless, accident-prone innocent. It includes 15 original pages from “Fran,” about a female version of Frank with whom he has a tempestuous love affair that ends badly early in the story. This propels him into a picaresque quest to retrieve his lost love in a psychedelic world populated by monsters, demons and bizarre objects and architecture. Scott Eder Gallery, 18 Bridge Street, at John Street, Dumbo, Brooklyn, 718-797-1100, scottedergallery.com. (Johnson)Public Art‘Archeo’ (through March) Shortening the word archaeology, this exhibition focuses on technology and obsolescence. Marianne Vitale’s sculptures made from steel components of railroad switches known as frogs are one highlight; Jessica Jackson Hutchins’s neo-hippie assemblages with found ceramics and a hand-woven hammock another. Across the bar from the Standard Hotel, Josh Kline takes the most activist stance, with smoothies made from prescription drugs and consumer products, while a mural by the veteran artist Ed Ruscha — a new commission separate from “Archeo” — announces “Honey, I Twisted Through More Damn Traffic Today,” perhaps capturing the ethos of the tourist-clogged High Line. At the High Line, enter at Washington and Gansevoort Streets, art.thehighline.org. (Martha Schwendener)Out of Town★ Dia:Beacon: ‘Carl Andre: Sculpture as Place, 1958-2010’ (through March 9) Minimalism was the late 20th century’s great hope for a heroic American art on the Abstract Expressionism model. Carl Andre was one of Minimalism’s founders. This career survey of his low-to-the-ground modular sculptures looks terrific in Dia’s sonorous, sunlight-washed spaces. It also poses the question of how such monument-minded art can feel so modest, intimate — even delicate. The real treat here is the chance to see dozens of manuscript pages of Mr. Andre’s 1960s poems, which he referred to as “typewriter drawings.” Carefully shaped on the page in lines and blocks, they are evidence of a sculptor-to-be at work. 3 Beekman Street, Beacon, N.Y., 845-440-0100, diaart.org. (Cotter)Advertisement★ National Museum of African Art: ‘Conversations: African and African American Artists in Dialogue’  (through early 2016) For its 50th anniversary, this museum has brilliantly thread together work from two sources: its own holdings in African material and the Camille O. and William H. Cosby Jr. collection of African-American art. The Cosby collection, weighted toward canonical figures like Romare Bearden and Charles White, will bring in the crowds, but it is the curators and museum itself, which is in a period of renaissance, that have made the show rise well above predictability. Smithsonian Institution, 950 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, 202-633-4600, africa.si.edu. (Cotter)Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts: ‘Peter Blume: Nature and Metamorphosis’ (through April 5) Though not well-known today, Blume (1906-92) was a famous American artist during the 1930s and ’40s. For many years his painting “The Eternal City” (1934-37) was one of the most memorable artworks displayed in the permanent collection galleries of the Museum of Modern Art. A weird, technically dazzling mix of Magic and Social Realism that envisioned Rome under the Fascist reign of Mussolini, it’s among the highlights of this exhibition of more than 150 works dating from 1924 to 1990. 128 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, 215-972-7600, pafa.org. (Johnson)Last ChanceCaroline Bergvall: ‘Drift’ (closes on Sunday) This installation of prints, sound works and a digital, algorithmic collage was inspired by a 2011 tragedy in which African migrants trying to reach the Italian island of Lampedusa in the Mediterranean were abandoned at sea, despite being sighted by officials; more than 60 people died. “Drift” is also the title of a book of poetry, prose and images that Ms. Bergvall published last year, and it refers to shifts in languages that occur over time — and to the experiences of Ms. Bergvall, who is half Norwegian and half French and has lived in several countries. This show, packed so full of references it’s easy to get lost in a sea of disconnected sources and allusions, demonstrates the difficulty of turning a book into an exhibition. Callicoon Fine Arts, 49 Delancey Street, near Eldridge Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-0326, callicoonfinearts.com. (Schwendener)★ Clark Art Institute: ‘Monet/Kelly’  (closes on Sunday) Love can be counterintuitive. If I were asked to pair up the artist Ellsworth Kelly with a historical soul mate, Claude Monet would not readily come to mind. The American painter of abstract pictures as clean as Shaker tables and the French Impressionist who piled on pigment as thick as mulch? I don’t think so. Yet here they are together in this small, crystalline show, and they make an utterly logical and mind-stretching match. With 18 drawings and two paintings by Mr. Kelly and nine late paintings by Monet, the exhibition is visually gorgeous, and it confirms Mr. Kelly’s status as a figure whose true breadth and depth have yet to be fully measured. 225 South Street, Williamstown, Mass., 413-458-2303, clarkart.edu. (Cotter)‘The Curve’  (closes on Saturday) In this elegant group show, recent paintings by Rebecca Morris and Monique Mouton, ceramic sculptures by Kristen Jensen and Zachary Leener, and painted wood-and-metal works by Matt Paweski all share an interest in color and abstraction. All gain resonance from something completely different: the exquisite black-and-white still-life photographs from the 1980s by Jan Groover (1943-2012). Wallspace, 619 West 27th Street, Chelsea, 212-594-9478, wallspacegallery.com. (Smith)‘Fetching Blemish’  (closes on Sunday) Eccentric self-portraits by nine artists in painting, drawing, photography and spray-painted ceramic hang salon-style on a single wall, with an initially charming effect that soon palls. Strange and unsettling visages and habits abound; abjection threatens. “Nicoles,” a drawing from the 1990s by Nicole Eisenman that portrays the artist in multiple, mostly male guises, is the still point of the comedic storm. Invisible-Exports, 89 Eldridge Street, between Hester and Grand Streets, Lower East Side, 212-226-5447, invisible-exports.com. (Smith)★ Jess Fuller: ‘Planet Without a Body’  (closes on Saturday) In this terrific show, the artist invents her own distinctive way to make paintings, flattening onto canvas two-sided shapes also made of canvas that evoke both enlarged brush strokes and the impure, suggestive geometries of modernism. Paint is applied every which way, in processes legible and inspired. The results are mock-ups of paintings, jokes about painting and, finally, paintings. Martos Gallery, 540 West 29th Street, Chelsea, 212-560-0670, martosgallery.com. (Smith)‘The Gentle Way (Judo)’ (closes on Saturday) Selected by the artist Zak Kitnick, this smart group show features a stunning, little-known blast from the past: Roelof Louw’s “Soul City (Pyramid of Oranges),” from 1967, a large, gorgeous pyramid of oranges free for the taking. In its formal clarity, modesty and generosity this astonishing prequel to relational aesthetics echoes throughout works by eight other mostly younger artists. Clifton Benevento, 515 Broadway, near Spring Street, SoHo, 212-431-6325, cliftonbenevento.com. (Smith)AdvertisementJoachim Koester: ‘Body Electric’ (closes on Saturday) Four films and videos address a persistent anxiety of modern life: that we are all cogs in a giant machine. The main attraction is “Place of Dead Roads,” which is projected in a darkened space partly enclosed by rustic wooden walls. In the film, a man and three women perform a kind of dance in a similarly barnlike space. Costumed like western movie characters, they appear possessed by a repertoire of stereotypical, gunslinger moves, as if they were puppets whose strings are being pulled by an unknown power. Greene Naftali, 508 West 26th Street, Chelsea, 212-463-7770, greenenaftaligallery.com. (Johnson)★ ‘Learn to Read Art: A Surviving History of Printed Matter’ (closes on Saturday) Printed Matter, a nonprofit producer and purveyor of artists’ books since 1976, reviews its own history in this exhaustive, chronologically ordered documentary exhibition, laying out a vast, dense archive of letters, posters, press clips and books in the galleries of New York University’s Steinhardt School. Much of the story covering almost 40 years of a determinedly alternative, politically quarrelsome and now hard-to-track New York art world is here. And it’s heartening to see that some of the era’s energy is still alive: the final room of the show is given over to artists and artist collectives (Mary Ellen Carroll, Josh Smith, Red76, Juliana Huxtable, Jesse Hlebo/Swill Children) working on publications in progress. 80WSE, New York University, 80 Washington Square East, Greenwich Village, 212-998-5747, steinhardt.nyu.edu/80wse. (Cotter)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Cubism: The Leonard A. Lauder Collection’ (closes on Monday) This no-strings-attached gift of 81 Cubist works more than lives up to expectations. Concentrating on the four horsemen of the Cubist apocalypse (Braque, Gris, Léger and Picasso), it outlines the style’s heady transformation of art while giving the museum a foundation in modernism commensurate with its holdings in other eras. It’s a stunning show and thrilling event. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ National Museum of the American Indian: ‘For a Love of His People: The Photography of Horace Poolaw’ (closes on Sunday) Horace Poolaw (1906-84) was born in a Kiowa community in Oklahoma on the cusp of dramatic changes in both Native American and mainstream American life. He started photographing as a teenager and caught those changes as they happened in his portraits of family and neighbors. In one, from around 1944, his son Jerry, home from the Navy, poses in an enlisted man’s uniform and an eagle-feather warrior headdress. Political commentary is built into the images, though his overall approach is closer to appreciation, fullhearted without nostalgia. First and last, this is the work of an artist who, like any artist, is out to make the very best pictures he can. 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, americanindian.si.edu. (Cotter)★ Laura Poitras: ‘9/11 Trilogy’ (closes on Sunday) Ms. Poitras is the filmmaker who made “Citizenfour,” the documentary about Edward J. Snowden that was released last fall. Along with three shorter pieces, this exhibition presents two absorbing feature-length documentaries that she made before she became involved with Mr. Snowden. Each portrays an individual at the intersection of historical events in the Middle East: a Sunni medical doctor who lives in Baghdad in “My Country, My Country” (2006) and a former bodyguard for Osama bin Laden working as a taxi driver in Yemen in “The Oath” (2010). Artists Space, 38 Greene Street, at Grand Street, SoHo, 212-226-3970, artistsspace.org. (Johnson)Tyson Reeder: ‘New Paintings’ (closes on Sunday) Mr. Reeder helped to found the Dark Fair, an art fair (or meta-art fair) where works were viewed in near darkness, and another art fair in a Polish beer hall and bowling alley in Milwaukee. For his current exhibition, Mr. Reeder’s subjects are suitably informal. Paintings feature pastel beach landscapes, a hippie-era van decorated with a palm tree and a glowing sun, and the interior of a shoe store selling flip-flops and sneakers. Lurking in the jokiness, however, is a soft spot for art history, with references harking back to artists like Renoir, Monet, Matisse and Bonnard, who celebrated “le bonheur de vivre” (the joy of life), as a famous Matisse painting described it. Canada, 333 Broome Street, between Bowery and Chrystie Street, Lower East Side, 212-925-4631, canadanewyork.com. (Schwendener)Devin Troy Strother: ‘Space Jam’ (closes on Saturday) Originality takes a holiday in this artist’s third solo gallery show in New York. More flash than substance, this basketball-themed concoction of objects and installations intimates his substantial skills with language, material and art-about-art-about-black popular-culture. But he does less than nothing with them. Apparently he just wants to have fun, but he stoops to entertain. Marlborough Chelsea, 545 West 25th Street, Chelsea, 212-463-8634, marlboroughchelsea.com. (Smith)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page C23 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Art.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.