AdvertisementSupported by Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ Auntsforcamera  (through Sunday) The New Museum hosts this exhibition of nine video works dispersed throughout the building, a project of the protean dance entity Aunts. The entries deal with everything from dancing with drones to mastering the original Harlem Shake. Grab a map and find your way among the monitors and screens, or take an artist-led tour, offered on selected days. Tours are free with a submission to Karl Scholz’s interactive experiment “#auntsforcamera.” Museum hours: 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Siobhan Burke)Ballet Rakatan (Wednesday through Feb. 22) This Cuban company makes its United States debut with “Havana Rakatan,” a hip-swiveling, skirt-tossing, action-packed show that traces the evolution of Cuban music from the 16th century through today. The eight-piece band Turquino joins the dancers onstage for an evening of salsa, rumba, jazz, bolero, mambo, son and cha-cha. The event is the first in “A Bailar: Dance at the Center,” City Center’s three-week festival of Spanish and Latin American dance. Wednesday and Thursday at 7:30 p.m., next Friday at 8 p.m., Feb. 21 at 2 and 8 p.m., Feb. 22 at 2 and 7 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org. (Burke)BalletNext (Friday and Saturday) Michele Wiles, the former American Ballet Theater principal, has directed BalletNext since its inception in 2011. This season, the troupe’s most adventurous yet, she makes her choreographic debut. The program, titled “Baroque’d” after its musical choices, includes three premieres: “Something Sampled,” a collaboration among Ms. Wiles, the flex dancer Jay Donn and the cellist Christopher Lancaster; the premiere of Ms. Wiles’s “Ushuaia”; and “Outswirl,” an experiment in spontaneity by the Canadian choreographer Peter Quanz. Friday at 7:30 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Burke)★ ‘Dancers, Buildings and People in the Streets’ (through March 28) Ballet and contemporary dance sometimes seem like estranged relatives, but with its latest platform, inspired by the dance critic Edwin Denby, Danspace Project collapses the space between them. The curator Claudia La Rocco, a critic and poet who contributes to The New York Times, paired artists from different choreographic traditions — those of Merce Cunningham, George Balanchine and Judson Dance Theater — and left them to their own devices. A program beginning on Thursday features two of those collaborations: the former Cunningham dancer Silas Riener with the New York City Ballet principal Adrian Danchig-Waring, and the choreographer Will Rawls with the freelance ballet dancer Kaitlyn Gilliland. On Saturday afternoon, a stellar group of Platform participants convenes for a discussion open to the public. At various times, Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)Carmen de Lavallade (Thursday through Feb. 25) An autobiography in movement, Ms. de Lavallade’s “As I Remember It” reflects on the venerable dancer’s six-decade career on screen and onstage. At 83, she is no less a star than the younger self whose image visits her throughout the show. The production’s national tour, dedicated to her husband, Geoffrey Holder, who died last year, returns to the Baryshnikov Arts Center, where Ms. De Lavallade developed the work. Thursday through Feb. 21 and Feb. 24 at 8 p.m., Feb. 25 at 1 p.m., 450 West 37th Street, Manhattan, 866-811-4111, bacnyc.org. (Burke)★ Douglas Dunn & Dancers (through Sunday) Many a Greek deity has inspired choreographers, but Aidos, the goddess of shame and humility, doesn’t come up too often. In a new piece that bears her name, the mischievous Douglas Dunn refracts the goddess into dueling parts danced by two six-foot-tall women, Jin Ju Song-Begin and Jessica Martineau, amid a larger constellation of dancers. Mr. Dunn, who will also perform, sets the piece to Bach Suites, played live by the cellist Ha-Yang Kim. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 3 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 800-838-3006, douglasdunndance.com. (Burke)Tess Dworman and Anya Liftig (Thursday and next Friday) What is “experimental dance television”? You can find out at “Liftig and I,” an hourlong show in which Ms. Dworman and Ms. Liftig, two mischievous dancer-choreographers, unpack a host of questions about the human body and performance art legacies. Their fount of inspiration includes “Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman,” Tennessee Williams and “Cheers.” At 8 p.m., Center for Performance Research, 361 Manhattan Avenue, near Jackson Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-349-1210, cprnyc.org. (Burke)★ Gerard & Kelly (through Sunday) For Brennan Gerard and Ryan Kelly, pole dancing is less about titillation and more about intimacy and vulnerability. In “P.O.L.E.,” the duo’s new multidisciplinary project — which stands for People, Objects, Language, Exchange — poles are a catalyst to explore relationships and queer identity. In performance, film, project-based installations, classes and conversations, the duo find fantasy and meaning in their chosen symbol. Museum hours: 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., New Museum, 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Brian Schaefer)★ Martha Graham Dance Company (through Feb. 22) It’s been 85 years since Martha Graham choreographed “Lamentation,” her grief-stricken work for one woman in a tubular dress. As part of its Joyce Theater season, the Graham company offers a new crop of “Lamentation Variations,” fresh takes on the classic by contemporary choreographers. Those homages — by Kyle Abraham, Michelle Dorrance, Liz Gerring and Sonyah Tayeh — appear in various combinations on Programs A and B, alongside Graham staples and newer additions to the repertory. (Program C features the original “Lamentation.”) In its efforts to aesthetically diversify, the troupe also presents Annie-B Parson’s “The Snow Falls in Winter,” a stirring response to Ionesco’s “The Lesson,” on Program B. Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m., Sundays at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday at 8 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)ICKamsterdam (through Sunday) The stage becomes a boxing ring in “Rocco,” by Emio Greco and Pieter C. Scholten, the directors of the International Choreographic Arts Center (ICKamsterdam). Inspired by the 1960 film “Rocco and His Brothers,” the piece pits the men against one another in a dexterous fight that hovers somewhere between dance-theater and sporting event. Friday at 7:30 p.m., Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Alexander Kasser Theater, Montclair State University, 1 Normal Avenue, Montclair, 973-655-5112, peakperfs.org. (Burke)★ New York City Ballet (through March 1) With Valentine’s Day on the horizon, City Ballet presents Peter Martins’s two-act rendering of “Romeo and Juliet” (Friday through Sunday). The most swoon-worthy lovers should be Sterling Hyltin and Robert Fairchild, who lead the cast on Friday, Saturday night and Sunday afternoon. The company’s more varied “Hear the Dance” programming returns on Tuesday with a quadruple bill saluting American composers. Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 and 7:30 p.m., Tuesdays through Thursdays at 7:30 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Burke)★ New York Theater Ballet (Wednesday through Feb. 21) Merce Cunningham aficionados will be flocking to the latest program assembled by this small but intrepid troupe. In addition to premieres by Pam Tanowitz (whose work draws closely on Cunningham’s technique) and Nicolo Fonte, the company presents Cunningham’s 1964 “Cross Currents,” a trio set to Conlon Nancarrow’s “Rhythm Studies for Player Piano,” arranged by John Cage. The eclectic evening also includes Keith Michael’s “The Alice-in-Wonderland Follies.” At 7:30 p.m., with an additional performance on Feb. 21 at 2 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Burke)Kate Weare Company (Thursday through Feb. 22) Ms. Weare celebrates her troupe’s 10th anniversary with excerpts from past pieces and the premiere of “Unstruck,” a trio created with the composer Curtis Macdonald. Passages from “Bright Land” (2010), “Bridge of Sighs” (2008) and “Drop Down” (2007) should reveal both the darkly emotional and daringly physical layers of her work. Her dancers will be joined by guests from San Francisco’s ODC/Dance and, for select shows, students from the Juilliard School. Thursday through Feb. 22 at 7:30 p.m., with an additional performance Feb. 21 at 2 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org/kateweareco10. (Burke)Advertisement