FEB. 13, 2015
 Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera‘Carmen’ (Friday and Thursday) With the rich-toned mezzo-soprano Elina Garanca delivering a blank performance in the title role, Bizet’s classic can’t make too much of an impact. But the dependably passionate tenor Roberto Alagna and the strong-willed, strong-voiced soprano Ailyn Pérez (in her Metropolitan Opera debut) do their best to spark intensity in this revival of Richard Eyre’s stony Met production. Louis Langrée conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)★ ‘Don Giovanni’  (Saturday and Tuesday) Although acclaimed for his adventurous work in England, the director Michael Grandage presided over a surprisingly tame new Metropolitan Opera production of this opera by Mozart in 2011. That staging, dominated by a three-tiered set, is back, and still lacks a strong point of view. But the cast, headed by the charismatic baritone Peter Mattei in the title role, is excellent, and Alan Gilbert, in his second appearance with the Met, conducts a vividly detailed, urgent and elegant performance. The soprano Elza van den Heever as Donna Anna and the bass-baritone Luca Pisaroni as Leporello are also standouts. Saturday at 8 p.m., Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)★ ‘La Donna del Lago’ (Monday and next Friday) The mezzo-soprano Joyce DiDonato, whose melting lyricism is as arresting as her vocal fireworks, plays Elena, Walter Scott’s Lady of the Lake, in the Metropolitan Opera’s first production of Rossini’s adaptation of that Scottish poem, the latest in the company’s recent flurry of bel canto operas. The tenors Juan Diego Flórez and John Osborn both love Elena, but she wants only the mezzo Daniela Barcellona, in the pants role of Malcolm. Drama ensues before a happy ending sealed with “Tanti affetti,” one of Rossini’s most stunning arias. Michele Mariotti, scrupulous and stylish at the podium for Bellini’s “I Puritani” last season, conducts Paul Curran’s staging, seen last summer at the Santa Fe Opera. Monday at 8 p.m., next Friday at 7:30 p.m., 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)Advertisement★ ‘Iolanta’ and ‘Bluebeard’s Castle’  (Saturday and Wednesday) This intriguing pairing of two one-act works — Tchaikovsky’s fairy tale “Iolanta” and Bartok’s chilling psychological thriller “Bluebeard’s Castle” — opened at the Metropolitan Opera three days after it was scheduled to premiere because of a blizzard warning. The delay may have affected the performance on opening night, which seemed tentative. Still, the director Mariusz Trelinski, working closely with an inventive video production designer, has fashioned a dark, almost surreal staging that draws out the grimness in both works. The soprano Anna Netrebko brings her charismatic voice and stage presence to the role of the blind, trusting yet baffled Iolanta, the daughter of a fiercely protective king. The tenor Piotr Beczala is the ardent, noble knight whose love helps heal her. In Bartok’s great opera, with its ingenious, haunting score, the formidable bass Mikhail Petrenko is riveting as the controlling Duke Bluebeard; the impassioned soprano Nadja Michael excels as Bluebeard’s new wife, who yearns to know his secrets. (Michaela Martens fills in for Ms. Michael on Wednesday.) Valery Gergiev conducts on Saturday, and Pavel Smelkov leads the orchestra on Wednesday. The Saturday matinee will be an HD simulcast to international movie theaters. Saturday at 12:30 p.m., Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)Advertisement‘Iphigénie en Aulide’ (Saturday) There is one more chance to take in the concert performance of this infrequently heard opera by Gluck, presented by the Metropolitan Opera’s Lindemann Young Artist Development Program in partnership with the Juilliard School. The eminent British conductor Jane Glover draws a stylish, urgent and elegant performance of this majestic work from an impressive young cast, headed by the soprano Ying Fang in the title role, and the excellent players of Juilliard415, the school’s period-instrument ensemble. The singers portray their characters fully, in concert attire. Gluck’s great opera is the star. Saturday at 2 p.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-769-7406, events.juilliard.edu. (Tommasini)★ ‘The Rape of Lucretia’  (Wednesday, next Friday and Feb. 22) Benjamin Britten’s dark, often painful chamber opera receives three rare performances from Juilliard Opera. Mark Shapiro conducts the Juilliard Orchestra and student singers, and the faculty member Mary Birnbaum directs in an intimate space. Wednesday and next Friday at 8 p.m., Feb. 22 at 2 p.m., Rosemary and Meredith Willson Theater, Juilliard School, 60 Lincoln Center Plaza, 212-769-7406, events.juilliard.edu. (David Allen)Classical Music★ Behzod Abduraimov (Wednesday) On the heels of his brilliant performance of Prokofiev’s daunting Piano Concerto No. 3 with Valery Gergiev and the Mariinsky Orchestra at Carnegie Hall, this energetic 24-year-old Uzbek pianist plays a recital at Weill Recital Hall as part of Carnegie Hall’s Salon Encores series. The program includes Chopin’s four Ballades, two of Schubert’s Impromptus and Ravel’s fantastical “Gaspard de la nuit,” a supreme challenge for any pianist. At 7:30 p.m., 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)Ariel Quartet (Tuesday) This acclaimed young quartet continues its journey through the complete string quartets by Beethoven with a performance of the dark-hued quartets in minor modes, the energetic Op. 18, No. 4 and the searching Op. 59, No. 2. At 8 p.m., SubCulture: Arts Underground, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 212-533-5470, subculturenewyork.com. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)Auryn Quartet  (Sunday) Mozart’s optimistic “Hunt” quartet opens the program presented by this seasoned string quartet, alongside Ravel’s high-color String Quartet in F and Brahms’s impetuous String Quartet No. 1. At 5 p.m., Frick Collection, 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, 212-288-0700, frick.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Jamie Barton  (Tuesday) This extravagantly talented young mezzo-soprano, joined by the pianist Bradley Moore, brings to New York a recital program with songs by Joaquín Turina, Chausson and Schubert, but focused on Dvorak’s dark-hued cycle of “Gypsy Songs” and the premiere of Jake Heggie’s “The Work at Hand.” At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Woolfe)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Composer Portrait: Stefano Gervasoni  (Thursday) Next up in the Miller Theater’s endlessly important series, which looks at single contemporary composers, is this professor at the Paris Conservatoire. He trained with Ligeti, Ferneyhough and Lachenmann, and brings together a wide range of influences in a voice thoroughly his own. Performers include the Yarn/Wire piano-and-percussion group, the Ekmeles vocal ensemble and the Mivos Quartet. At 8 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (Allen)Diabelli Variations Extravaganza (Tuesday) Pianists from Rutgers University’s Mason Gross School of the Arts perform the 50 variations written by various composers, including Czerny, Liszt and Schubert, on a waltz by Diabelli. The program also features excerpts from Beethoven’s “Diabelli Variations.” At 7:30 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)AdvertisementHèrmes Quartet (Saturday) As part of the Peoples’ Symphony Concerts series, which presents first-rate artists at wallet-friendly prices, this excellent young string quartet offers a program featuring Haydn’s Quartet in C (Op. 76, No. 3), Beethoven’s Quartet in G (Op. 18, No. 2) and Schumann’s Quartet in A minor (Op. 41, No. 1). At 8 p.m., Washington Irving High School, Irving Place at 16th Street, Manhattan, 212-586-4680, pscny.org. (Schweitzer)Juilliard Orchestra (Saturday) The French conductor Emmanuel Villaume is the latest to take the helm of Juilliard’s excellent student orchestra. Lifan Zhu is the soloist for Glazunov’s Violin Concerto, and the rest of the program is taken up with showpieces: Stravinsky’s “Feu d’artifice,” Ravel’s “La Valse” and Mussorgsky’s “Pictures at an Exhibition.” At 8 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, events.juilliard.edu. (Allen)Music Before 1800 (Sunday) The Boston ensemble Blue Heron delves into richly expressive secular and religious vocal music from the 15th century by composers including Johannes Ockeghem, Gilles Binchois and Guillaume Dufay. Scott Metcalfe directs and adds instrumental accompaniment on vielle and harp. At 4 p.m., Corpus Christi Church, 529 West 121st Street, Morningside Heights, 212-666-9350, mb1800.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)New York Festival of Song (Tuesday) This essential series concludes its NYFOS Next mini-festival of contemporary music with a program headlined by the composer Bright Sheng, who presents excerpts from a new opera, “Dream of the Red Chamber,” alongside works by some of his students and mentors. At 7 p.m., National Opera Center, 330 Seventh Avenue, at 29th Street, Chelsea, 646-230-8380, nyfos.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ New York Philharmonic  (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) It’s a busy week at the Philharmonic, with Stéphane Denève conducting Jean-Yves Thibaudet in a Friday matinee program featuring James MacMillan’s Third Piano Concerto, Fauré’s “Pelléas et Mélisande” Suite and Tchaikovsky’s Symphony No. 4. On Saturday evening the romantically inclined can enjoy a Valentine’s serenade featuring Broadway songs performed by Laura Osnes and Santino Fontana. The Sunday matinee highlights seldom performed chamber works, including Sibelius’s String Quartet in D minor “Voces Intimae” and Vittorio Giannini’s Piano Quintet. On Thursday, Alan Gilbert and the orchestra partner with Yo-Yo Ma and the Silk Road Ensemble for “The Silk Road” suite and works by Osvaldo Golijov and Strauss (through Saturday). Friday at 2 p.m., Saturday at 8 p.m., Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center; Sunday at 3 p.m., Merkin Concert Hall, Goodman House, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Schweitzer)Nathaniel Olson (Friday) Joined by the noted accompanist Kevin Murphy, this young baritone presents a varied program, including Schumann’s “Liederkreis” (Op. 24) and songs by Ture Rangstrom, Hanns Eisler, Stephen Foster, Aaron Copland, Ned Rorem and Samuel Barber. At 7:30 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Woolfe)Konstantin Soukhovetski (Tuesday) This Juilliard-trained, Russian-born pianist makes his debut at Le Poisson Rouge with an unusual program, featuring his own transcriptions of scenes from works including Massenet’s “Manon” and Strauss’s “Capriccio.” At 7:30 p.m., 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich Village, 212-505-3474, lepoissonrouge.com. (Schweitzer)Young Composers  (Tuesday) The Young Concert Artists series presents chamber works by composers starting to emerge onto the classical scene. A premiere of “Orgie Céleste,” by David Hertzberg, joins pieces by Benjamin C. S. Boyle, Kenji Bunch, and Chris Rogerson. At 7:30 p.m., Merkin Concert Hall, Goodman House, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, kaufman-center.org. (Allen)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page C22 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.