AdvertisementSupported by Prices may not reflect ticketing service charges. For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Marc Anthony  (Saturday) Tabloids in the United States unfailingly relegate the musical accomplishments of Mr. Anthony, one of the best-selling salsa artists of all time, as a footnote to his divorce from the actress and pop star Jennifer Lopez. His effortlessly melismatic ballads have been a highlight of his English-language albums. In 2013 he returned to the charts, and to his salsa roots, with the well-reviewed Spanish-language “3.0.” At 8 p.m., Prudential Center, 165 Mulberry Street, Newark, 800-745-3000, prucenter.com. (Stacey Anderson)Billy Ocean and Patti LaBelle  (Sunday) Get outta his dreams, get into his car. But first, get outta your apartment and get onto the train, then get outta the train and get above ground in Fort Greene. Then get into the spirit of seeing the Trinidad-born R&B singer Billy Ocean (purveyor of the ’80s hit “Get Out of My Dreams, Get Into My Car”). He performs a double bill with the prolific soul-pop star Patti LaBelle, who has sold more than 50 million records in her long career and released a powerhouse concert album, “Live in Washington, D.C.,” in 2008. She also died a gloriously campy death on the most recent season of “American Horror Story.” At 7 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Anderson)Matthew Dear  (Saturday) This experimental microhouse D.J. and producer channels Detroit techno in his reedy, subtly dystopian beats. His pop-friendly hand has made him a favorite in rock circles, too. With Derrick May and Ambivalent. At 11 p.m., Verboten, 54 North 11th Street, between Wythe and Kent Avenues, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, verbotennewyork.com. (Anderson)EMA: ‘I Wanna Destroy’  (Sunday) A technological prophet in her own time, this noise-rocker wrote the song “Satellites,” which rages against government surveillance, months before the National Security Agency scandal broke. It’s the opening song on “The Future’s Void,” her powerhouse second album. At MoMA PS1, she will perform a score to a new virtual reality installation, whose theme fits in with her own brand of futuristic anachronism. At 2 p.m., 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Anderson)French Montana  (Saturday) This Moroccan-born rapper traffics in short, repetitive hooks, delivered in a sluggish drawl. His debut album, “Excuse My French,” arrived in 2013; he is preparing its follow-up, which he has said will include collaborations with Lil Wayne and Rick Ross. At Stage 48 this weekend, he’ll head up an N.B.A. All-Star Game party with Vado, Funk Flex and others. From 4 to 10 p.m., 605 West 48th Street, Clinton, 212-957-1800, stage48.com. (Anderson)Ms. Lauryn Hill  (Tuesday) Ms. Hill seems to be warming to local showmanship. In recent years, she has had a handful of concerts at small clubs. Next week she’ll perform an acoustic set at Rough Trade NYC, which may be a more ideal setting for this talented singer and rapper. In his review of one of her outings last year, Jon Pareles lamented that she “was often buried in the mix of her band’s hyperactive funk.” At 9 p.m., 64 North Ninth Street, at Kent Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. (Anderson)The Hold Steady  (Friday) This lovable barroom rock band specializes in dense heartland odes of youthful abandon and down-and-out redemption. After the keyboardist Franz Nicolay left the group, the Hold Steady brought aboard a second guitarist, Steve Selvidge, formerly of Lucero. The band headlines a fund-raiser for the Rock On Foundation, an arts and athletics nonprofit, with an assist from DJ Windows 98, also known as the vampy Arcade Fire frontman, Win Butler. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)JMSN (Saturday and Sunday) This singer looks more like a folk oddity than an R&B crooner — knotty beard, plain T-shirts, long, unkempt hair. His music, though, could hardly be more slick or stylish. Following spots on Kendrick Lamar’s “Good Kid, m.A.A.d. City,” JMSN released “The Blue Album” in December, which sounds like what Part II of Justin Timberlake’s “The 20/20 Experience” should have been. Saturday at 8 p.m., Cameo Gallery, 93 North Sixth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-302-1180, cameony.net. Sunday at 9 p.m., S.O.B.’s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, South Village, 866-468-7619, sobs.com. (Andrew R. Chow)Billy Joel  (Wednesday) The piano man has achieved what the Knicks can only fantasize about: a yearlong winning streak at Madison Square Garden. His open-ended monthly residency, which began last January, has been billed by the arena as its fourth franchise. So far, it has included hearty appearances by Sting, John Mellencamp and Brian Johnson of AC/DC, as well as many euphoric singalongs to “New York State of Mind.” At 8 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)★ Valerie June  (Friday) On this charismatic singer-songwriter’s fourth album, “Pushin’ Against a Stone,” her quavering high register and succinct fingerpicking are straight from the 1950 and ’60s, the height of June Carter and the Carter Family’s Appalachian folk heyday. Her cheeky, down-home stage banter, in which she often mentions her native Tennessee, is also music to any Southerner’s ears. She performs at Carnegie Hall as part of its Late Nights at Zankel Hall series. At 10 p.m., 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Anderson)★ Lil Wayne (Sunday) A nasal, high-strung rapper with an out-of-orbit, stream-of-consciousness flow, Lil Wayne is as anomalous in the current hip-hop scene as he is one of its linchpins — enough so to be name-dropped by President Obama. He returns to New York to support “I Am Not a Human Being II,” the follow up of which is expected soon, if Lil Wayne’s recent tweets are to be believed. For this weekend outing, he is the captain of an after-party for the N.B.A.’s All-Star Game. At 11 p.m., Stage 48, 605 West 48th Street, Clinton, 866-777-8932, stage48.com. (Anderson)★ Theophilus London  (Monday) This Brooklyn rapper’s far-flung backing beats crib the most melodic aspects of New Wave pop, the meanderings of psych-rock and the occasional jazz curios. What’s more, the charismatic and sensitive rhymes on his second major-label album, “Vibes,” have the same fleet artfulness of a good bop riff that were exhibited in his debut, “Timez Are Weird These Days.” “Vibes” also features another highbrow aesthete, Kanye West (on “Can’t Stop”). With Father. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret (through Feb. 22) We know now that the Who’s famous cry of rock ’n’ roll defiance, “Hope I die before I get old,” hasn’t prevented countless veteran rockers from thumbing their noses at time as they reach retirement age. There’s no expiration date on raucous rock-and-roll fun. For proof you need only visit Café Carlyle, where Buster Poindexter, the seedily attired, punkish lounge lizard, now 65, has returned with his band five months after his first extended engagement there. This alumnus of the New York Dolls and eternal high-school cutup with a crocodile grin is not to be missed. Friday, Saturday and Tuesday through next Saturday at 8:45 p.m., 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. Other highlights include the encore engagement, on Feb. 22 at the Metropolitan Room, of the singer and dancer T. Oliver Reid, whose one-man revue of 1930s songs, “Drop Me Off in Harlem,” is being presented in celebration of black history month. (He continues once monthly through May 31.) Feb. 22 at 7:30 p.m., 34 West 22nd Street, 212-206-0440, metropolitanroom.com. Marilyn Maye, who is 86 going on 35, is presenting a string of Birdland performances emphasizing her jazz side, on Friday and Saturday at 7 p.m., with Billy Stritch at the piano. With a voice like a blazing trumpet, she is at her peak, as is the ageless jazz pianist Barbara Carroll whose Saturday evening concerts at Birdland have been selling out. 315 West 44th Street, Clinton, 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com. (Stephen Holden)Paul Van Dyk  (Sunday) Misanthropes, unite under the strobe lights: This globe-trotting, Grammy Award-winning D.J. from Berlin delivers a second annual extended set for all those suffering from Valentine’s Day hangovers, emotional or otherwise. This year’s festivities will kick off at 10 p.m. in an undisclosed warehouse in Brooklyn. Tickets and details are at 323-908-0607 or pachanyc.com. (Anderson)★ Swearin’ (Thursday) An uncommonly tight garage-rock band with textural guitars and the best assertive yet lilting vocalist since the Pixies’ Kim Deal (by Allison Crutchfield, twin sister of Waxahatchee’s Katie Crutchfield), Swearin’ is a boon to Philadelphia’s alternative scene. The band’s quirky second album, “Surfing Strange,” chronicled crumbling relationships with the musical equivalent of a matador’s defiant stare. With the Goodbye Party and Attendant. At 8 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 877-987-6487, babysallright.com. (Anderson)Two Gallants (Friday and Saturday) Despite its size, this two-member rock band (think the White Stripes) from San Francisco manages to squeeze out surprisingly eclectic sounds. The duo’s fifth album, “We Are Undone,” released on Tuesday, features the churlish, oscillating vocals of its frontman, Adam Stephens, which are equally at home in the garage-rock single “Incidental” as in the folk-tinged “Katy Kruelly.” The bandmates and childhood friends, Mr. Stephens (guitar) and Tyson Vogel (drums) play two locations this weekend. Friday at 10:30 p.m., Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street, at Ludlow Street, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, mercuryloungenyc.com; Saturday at 9 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, at Kent Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. (Jonathan Wolfe)‘A Valentine From Rosanne Cash’ (Saturday) The eminently cool daughter of Johnny Cash is a skilled singer-songwriter in her own right; she also has over 20 Top 40 country singles to her name. For Ms. Cash’s latest release, “The River and the Thread,” which arrived last winter, she nudged some gospel and rock into her twangy formula. She leads a Valentine’s Day performance with assistance from the folk bard and comedian Loudon Wainwright III. At 7 p.m., Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org/tickets. (Anderson)★ Sharon Van Etten  (Wednesday and Thursday) This pensive folk-rocker has based her career on a gorgeously vulnerable warble and such offbeat romanticism as “I’d rather let you touch my arm until you die” (which she stated in the song “A Crime,” from the 2010 album “Epic”). She extends those borders on “Are We There,” her fourth album, which expands her intimate melodies to gut-wrenching new extremes. At 9 p.m., Warsaw, 261 Driggs Avenue, at Eckford Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, 866-777-8932, warsawconcerts.com. (Anderson)★ Village of Love With the Jon Spencer Blues Explosion  (Saturday) For this cheekily named troupe of alternative rock aggressors, the blues are mostly alluded to. After breaking through in 1993 with the 1970s-style riffing on the album “Extra Width,” the band took an extended hiatus for much of the last decade. “Meat and Bone,” released in 2012, showed no waning in the band’s sweaty enthusiasm. Now it headlines a Valentine’s Day fund-raiser dance for Planned Parenthood, with DJ Jonathan Toubin, Lenny Kaye, Julianna Barwick and others. At 8 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)Advertisement