Chris Martin, the lead singer of Coldplay, has signed on as an ambassador for the anti-poverty group Global Citizen, and will serve as the curator of its international music festival for the next 15 years, said Hugh Evans, the chief executive of the Global Poverty Project, which oversees the campaign.In an interview, Mr. Martin said he hoped to use his celebrity contacts to bring attention to the organization’s causes, including issues of extreme poverty, gender equality and environmental sustainability. “I felt like we often do these events and ask everyone else to get involved in something and then go back on tour,” he said. “It’s nice to have something more concrete, for people to recognize that someone else is invested for the long haul.”The role “just entails going through my phone to work out who to ask what,” he added of his A-list contact list.For three years, Global Citizen has hosted a concert in Central Park — featuring artists like Jay Z, Carrie Underwood, Alicia Keys and Stevie Wonder — to coincide with the United Nations General Assembly. This year, in addition to the September show on the Great Lawn, produced by Ken Ehrlich, Global Citizen is organizing an Earth Day event on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., on April 18, and another in Germany on June 7, timed to the G7 conference of world leaders.The events are all free, with tickets rewarded through a “gameified” system, Mr. Evans said, in which users are asked to take various “actions,” like writing letters to politicians, volunteering or signing petitions.This year marks the end of the United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals, a 2000 blueprint to address international issues like the spread of AIDS and universal education. September will see the launch of a new set of goals agreed upon by the U.N.“The last 15 years have been the most successful anti-poverty push in human history,” Mr. Evans said. “It’s statistically possible to end extreme poverty in the next 15 years. Our job is to create the political and social will around that.”For his part, Mr. Martin said, “If Taylor Swift is on the same stage as some goals, more kids in school are going to say, ‘Well, what is that?’ The role of musicians is to just help that pill be swallowed a bit easier because of the glamour of song.”A version of this article appears in print on 02/13/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: A 15-Year Role for Chris Martin With Global Citizen.