By LORI HOLCOMB-HOLLANDFEB. 13, 2015
3:45 P.M. (TCM) THE BIRDS (1963) A flock of birds never looks quite the same after a viewing of Alfred Hitchcock’s classic horror film about a California town tormented by malevolent fowl. Tippi Hedren stars as a spoiled socialite who follows a handsome man (Rod Taylor) to the home of his mother (Jessica Tandy), where, for no apparent reason, the attacks begin. “Making a terrifying menace out of what is assumed to be one of nature’s most innocent creatures and one of man’s most melodious friends, Mr. Hitchcock and his associates have constructed a horror film that should raise the hackles on the most courageous and put goose-pimples on the toughest hide,” Bosley Crowther wrote in The New York Times.10 A.M. (CUNY) ARTS IN THE CITY Magalie Laguerre-Wilkinson hosts from the Studio Museum in Harlem, where she explores that neighborhood’s music and food scene. Also featured in the program will be an interview with Chita Rivera about the Birdland jazz club, a report about Kings Theater in Brooklyn, the history behind the musical “Fiddler on the Roof” and the “Art Amnesty” exhibition at MoMA PS1. Repeats at 3 and 8:30 p.m.4:55 P.M. (Starz) MONSTERS UNIVERSITY (2013) College can be scary, and at this particular school, horrifying, if you’re lucky. In Pixar’s prequel to the 2001 “Monsters, Inc.,” young Mike Wazowski (voiced by Noah Johnson and Billy Crystal) and Sulley (John Goodman) are students learning their craft. The curriculum may be different from our world, but many of the challenges are the same: oddball roommates, fraternity rivalries, social status and of course, passing class.5:30 P.M. (Oxygen) GHOSTBUSTERS (1984) This story of parascience eggheads turned saviors of mankind debuted to unenthusiastic reviews: “Its jokes, characters and story line are as wispy as the ghosts themselves, and a good deal less substantial,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times. But audiences seemed to disagree: Two sequels, a cartoon and countless Halloween costume tributes later, a new version featuring an all-female cast is in the works for 2016. Dan Aykroyd and Harold Ramis wrote and star in the comedy, along with Bill Murray. Sigourney Weaver is also in this paranormal-plagued version of New York City. Repeats at 9 p.m.Advertisement8 P.M. (CBS) UNDERCOVER BOSS Gigi Butler, the founder of the cupcake franchise Gigi’s Cupcakes, struggles with decorating a cake and loses patience with an employee who fails to properly ice cupcakes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (Fox) GLEE The members of New Directions try to help Rachel (Lea Michele) adjust to her new life after she discovers that her childhood home has been sold, and Will (Matthew Morrison) teaches a lesson of tolerance.Advertisement9 P.M. (13) SHAKESPEARE UNCOVERED The latest edition of this series explores “Antony & Cleopatra” with Kim Cattrall, who has twice played that Egyptian queen. In “Romeo and Juliet With Joseph Fiennes,” at 10 p.m., Mr. Fiennes, who portrayed Shakespeare in the movie “Shakespeare in Love,” begins with the story’s origin — an Italian poem — and examines why the tale of two star-crossed lovers is the most performed of all of Shakespeare’s plays.10 P.M. (VH1) STOMP THE YARD (2007) DJ (Columbus Short), a troubled street dancer from Los Angeles, bypasses juvenile hall by enrolling in Truth University in Atlanta. His past soon makes him a major part of his fraternity’s hopes of winning the national stepping competition, as well as a target for their rivals. Rachel Saltz, writing in The Times, said the movie “means to be a fable about finding your place in the group (a primal college story, after all) and succeeds most when it hews closest to genre formulas, showing a milieu rarely glimpsed on film, and least when it too warmly embraces fraternity culture.”WHAT’S STREAMING NOWBOSCH Based on Michael Connelly’s best-selling books, this series follows Harry Bosch (Titus Welliver), a homicide detective in the Los Angeles Police Department who gets pulled into trying to solve a cold case involving a missing 13-year-old boy while also standing trial for the shooting death of a suspected serial killer. (Amazon)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page C25 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.