AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasSome lonely children create invisible friends. As a solitary boy growing up in Taiwan, the choreographer Huang Yi pined for a robot. He had good reason: In his poignant artist’s statement for his show “Huang Yi & Kuka,” at 3LD Art & Technology Center, he reveals that when he was 10, his wealthy parents became bankrupt and suicidal. The family moved to a 40-square-foot room; Mr. Huang, feeling compelled to be a perfect child, masked his emotions to become the picture of obedience. In other words, a robot. In “Huang Yi & Kuka,” that childhood wish comes true. Kuka, his cranelike companion, has joints of steel instead of flesh, but this German-made robot, painstakingly programmed by Mr. Huang — it takes him 10 hours to produce one minute of movement — is oddly poetic, at least initially. In the opening moments, Mr. Huang and Kuka mirror or draw toward each other, as limbs and metal slice in and out of shadows. All the while, the robot’s whirring motor and ability to slow down and speed up lend it a muscular grace. When placed side by side in two sets of triangular light, their heads bowed, Mr. Huang and Kuka could almost be twins. Yet the piece, with several false endings, loses its grip after the first 30 minutes, and “Huang Yi & Kuka” becomes little more than a series of sluggish vaudeville acts. The music, which includes Bach and Arvo Pärt, pushes the action toward sentimentality. The production, in its current form, is more like a rough draft than a premiere, but Mr. Huang’s pas de deux between robot and human doesn’t seem as if it has much room to grow. The lighting, at first mysterious and later murky, renders the stage increasingly indistinct. Mr. Huang experiments with video that captures the performance, as well as the seated audience, on a screen at the back of the stage in real time. In the work’s random final scene, two other dancers, Hu Chien and Lin Jou-Wen face each other, raising and lowering their arms in jittery slow motion as Kuka shines a red laser beam on them, ostensibly controlling their movements. The laser pointer leads Ms. Lin to drape an arm around Mr. Hu’s shoulder; they rise, embrace and then slink back into their chairs with quivering shoulders. Finally, Kuka aims the laser between their bodies, forcing the couple to break apart. What happened to the story of the choreographer and his robot? It’s a perplexing way to end a dance called “Huang Yi & Kuka”: strange for all the wrong reasons. “Huang Yi & Kuka” continues through Tuesday at 3LD Art & Technology Center, 80 Greenwich Street, Lower Manhattan; 866-811-4111, 3ldnyc.org. Advertisement