AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerThe list of brooding, taciturn small-screen police detectives is already impossibly long, so you might think Amazon made a mistake in committing to “Bosch,” whose title character is yet another variation. But this 10-episode series, which is being rolled out Friday on Amazon Prime, proves gripping nonetheless. That has little to do with the title character, Harry Bosch, although Titus Welliver (the “Man in Black” in “Lost”) gets about as much out of the role as there is to get. The plotting and pacing are what draw you in. The series works like a good page-turner.Since the character and the show are based on Michael Connelly’s book series, that might not seem surprising. But not all efforts to translate crime thrillers from page to screen work well. This one does, despite assorted clichés that this genre rarely escapes.Bosch (his given name is actually Hieronymus, like the painter’s) is a rule-bending Los Angeles cop who, as the series begins, is facing legal troubles after killing a suspect during a chase. He’s in court defending himself in a resulting civil suit but still manages to catch a case involving the bones of a child found in the woods.The bones have been there for years, and they show evidence of chronic physical abuse, which gets Bosch’s attention because of his own childhood. Meanwhile, a present-day serial killer may be operating, and a suspect in that case becomes entwined in the bones-in-the-woods matter.Bosch has the usual run-ins with superiors. He also has the usual romance with an attractive and noticeably younger officer (Annie Wersching), because in these types of stories gorgeous women can’t wait to jump into bed with graying men with whom they have barely spoken.But the series, whose behind-the-scenes brains include the writer-producer Eric Overmyer (“Treme”), moves briskly enough that the tired devices don’t bog it down. A cast full of experienced actors like Jamie Hector (Marlo in “The Wire”) and Amy Aquino (“E.R.”) also helps.BoschStreamed on Amazon Prime, starting FridayProduced by Amazon Studios. Created by Michael Connelly and directed by Jim McKay; written by Mr. Connelly and Eric Overmyer, based on novels by Mr. Connelly; Henrik Bastin, Mikkel Bondesen, Pieter Jan Brugge, Mr. Connelly, Tara Duncan, Diane Frolov, Jan David Frouman, T. L. Lankford, Mr. Overmyer and Andrew Schneider, producers. WITH: Titus Welliver (Harry Bosch), Jamie Hector (Jerry Edgar), Amy Aquino (Grace Billets), Lance Reddick (Irvin Irving) and Annie Wersching (Julia Brasher). Advertisement