AdvertisementSupported byBy Siobhan BurkeThe Martha Graham Dance Company, founded in 1926, is always searching for ways to stay relevant: cleverly reinventing classics, commissioning new works from trendy choreographers. For its current season at the Joyce Theater, its artistic director, Janet Eilber, has enlisted even bigger, more recognizable names than usual, more determined than ever, it seems, to broaden the troupe’s appeal. Tuesday’s opening-night gala included four new “Lamentation Variations” — contemporary responses to that anguished, shrouded 1930 Graham solo — by four highly sought-after choreographers: Kyle Abraham, Michelle Dorrance, Liz Gerring and Sonya Tayeh. The American Ballet Theater star Misty Copeland made a cameo in “At Summer’s Full,” a new arrangement of excerpts from Graham’s “Letter to the World” (1940). The photographer Peter Arnell fashioned an introductory silent film from more than 2,000 stills of the company’s dancers. And most illustriously, Frank Gehry lent his hand to “Steps in the Street” (1936), putting animated sketches in conversation with Graham’s weighted, sculptural choreography. (This season’s theme — there’s always a theme — is “Shape & Design.”)These collaborations may draw people to the theater, but do they add real heft to the company’s repertory? Do they illuminate or build on Graham’s legacy? The answer varies. Of the new “Lamentation Variations,” the most moving and structurally sound — works that could stand on their own beyond a gala — came from Ms. Dorrance and Mr. Abraham.Ms. Dorrance, one of today’s most innovative tap choreographers, smartly decided not to put her cast of 10 in tap shoes. Her rhythmic inclinations, instead, found their way into the music, a collage of echoey footsteps and bass guitar. (Zoltan Kodaly wrote the original “Lamentation” score, but these interpretations don’t use it.) Simple, rectangular walking patterns surrounded a male trio, with Lloyd Knight, at its center, sinking incrementally to the ground. In Ms. Dorrance’s hands, even literal signifiers of grief — faces buried in hands, heaving chests — somehow don’t read as clichés. Mr. Abraham approached the prompt less directly with an incandescent duet for XiaoChuan Xie and Ying Xin. Aside from his characteristic whorls of motion (deployed sparingly), what struck the eye was the unity between the two female dancers, their shadowlike relationship.Ms. Gerring’s contribution, which played with the piercing angularity of the original “Lamentation,” was less thoroughly developed. Ms. Tayeh’s, by far the flashiest and most convulsive — with the leggiest extensions — resembled a good routine on “So You Think You Can Dance,” for which she has often choreographed.Had you not known that Ms. Copeland was a ballet celebrity, she might not have stood out in “At Summer’s Full.” To her credit, she blended right in with the company in this courtly meditation on friendship and love, inspired by Emily Dickinson poems. Mr. Gehry’s presence, on the other hand, was unmistakable. In the starkly militant “Steps in the Street,” two rotating thickets of wavy white lines, projected on the backdrop, moved toward and away from each other like jousting ships. Dissolving and recrystallizing, these highlighted spatial tensions among the 12 dancers, but I hope the addition is temporary. Graham’s architecture, in this bracing work perhaps more than any other, speaks for itself.The Martha Graham Dance Company continues through Feb. 22 at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-242-0800, joyce.org. Advertisement