By JAMES R. OESTREICHFEB. 12, 2015
Two recitals this week — one wonderful, one not — set a listener to thinking about keyboards, their composers and their players.It is surely good that pianists are no longer scolded for playing Bach, Handel and other Baroque masters on their modern instruments. But as a sad side effect, recitals by first-rate harpsichordists have become rare, at least in New York.So an evening of Bach and Handel by the excellent English harpsichordist Richard Egarr at Weill Recital Hall on Monday was most welcome. As added value, the amiable and scholarly Mr. Egarr supplied an entertaining tutorial on what certain numbers, letters and key signatures had meant to Bach.He performed three Bach works, starting with the French Suite No. 5 in G. “Bach is always happy in G major,” he said, the key representing “life, joy, contentment.” He played the work cleanly, fluently and with sparkling ornamentation.AdvertisementThen he offered “something completely different,” the Partita No. 6 in E minor, whose key signature has one sharp (“ein Kreuz,” in German, which also translates as “a cross”). E minor can be a tragic tonality for Bach, and this is a long, weighty and difficult suite, which seemed to wear on Mr. Egarr’s stamina.AdvertisementHis playing after intermission was less clean but no less shapely and spirited. He began with Bach’s Partita No. 1 in B flat (“genial, not challenging”). Then he switched to Handel: the Suite No. 3 in D minor. Handel, he explained, was a more awkward writer for the keyboard than Bach. “He doesn’t care whether it fits the keyboard or not,” Mr. Egarr said of a fugue in this work, so long as the notes come out right.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Egarr compared this trait in Handel to a certain ungainliness in Brahms’s writing for piano. And since one movement of the Handel suite was an Air with variations, this performance set the table for the second recital, on Tuesday, an ostensibly unrelated event at Alice Tully Hall.There Carlo Grante, an Italian pianist, played nearly all of Brahms’s variations for solo piano, the grandest being the Variations and Fugue on a Theme of Handel. Alas, the level of artistry was altogether lower. In the first half, Mr. Grante, playing from memory, banged out the Variations on a Hungarian Song and the Variations on a Theme by Paganini.In the second half, Mr. Grante read from the music, and the subdued Variations on a Theme by Robert Schumann were better. For the first time, he showed subtlety and sensuousness. But the great Handel Variations grew increasingly wayward.By and large, when pianists play Bach or Handel, you don’t want to hear an imitation of the harpsichord, much less with Brahms. But some lightness and clarity of touch are needed.Of those there was little here, but that proved the least of Mr. Grante’s problems in the final variation, where he seemed at sea even with the score before him, missing handfuls of notes. He recovered enough to make it through the fugue.A music review on Friday about a performance by the harpsichordist Richard Egarr, at Weill Recital Hall, and one by the pianist Carlo Grante, at Alice Tully Hall, referred incorrectly to Mr. Grante’s performance. He played all but one of Brahms’s variations for solo piano, not all of them. (Brahms’s Variations on an Original Theme (Op. 21, No. 1) was not on the program.)A version of this review appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Contrasts on Keyboards.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.