By STEPHEN HOLDENFEB. 12, 2015
There were moments of such intensity during Meshell Ndegeocello’s Lincoln Center American Songbook concert on Wednesday evening that she and her musicians seemed to be conjuring a supernatural trance. The show, “Pour Une Âme Souveraine — A Dedication to Nina Simone,” at the Appel Room, focused on material from Ms. Ndegeocello’s 2012 album of the same name. In her refusal to adhere to a style, or to stay within a genre, Ms. Ndegeocello is a direct descendant of Ms. Simone, who played by nobody’s rules and paid dearly for it.But unlike Ms. Simone, Ms. Ndegeocello is not driven by anger, outrage and an acute sense of injustice. Although she cut a forbidding figure in dark glasses and wool cap, underneath her protective armor is a gentle soft-spoken singer and songwriter. She rarely raised her voice on Wednesday as she exuded a cautious warmth and offered revealing biographical tidbits about Ms. Simone’s stormy life.It was left to the other musicians — the keyboardist Jebin Bruni, the guitarist Chris Bruce and the drummer Abraham Rounds — to stir a caldron through whose pungent steam Ms. Ndegeocello’s cool voice emerged. I have rarely heard sophisticated electronica deployed expressively enough to outfit each song in its own climate.Ms. Ndegeocello is the opposite of a histrionic drama queen. Although the lyrics for many Simone songs are charged with rage and sorrow, Ms. Ndegeocello let their words speak for themselves and left it to her special guest, the compelling folk-blues singer Toshi Reagon, to cry out.AdvertisementAn especially powerful moment was a hurtling rendition of “The House of the Rising Sun,” whose whiplash textures evoked a world of slavery and submission. The aura of magic in Leonard Cohen’s ballad of erotic sorcery, “Suzanne,” its melody revised so as to be unrecognizable, was deepened.Near the end of a concert of songs mostly associated with Ms. Simone, Ms. Ndegeocello performed some of her own material. “Good Day Bad,” from her latest album, “Comet Come to Me,” cut to the essence of life’s struggle: “I’m surprised every sunrise/The earth would have me back/Surprised my knees hold me up/That’s it not all gone black.”AdvertisementAmid despair, a tentative hopefulness wells up.A version of this review appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page C18 of the New York edition with the headline: A Singer Who Ignores the Rules.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.