By MARTHA SCHWENDENERFEB. 12, 2015
Assaf Shaham’s first solo show in the United States is full of ambitious gestures. Most of them concern the history of photography and its demise as a chemical medium, which as a subject for art making may be on the verge of exhaustion, although Mr. Shaham squeezes out a few more points.His “Full Reflection” series consists of scanograms that resemble photograms by artists like Man Ray, Laszlo Moholy-Nagy and, more recently, Lisa Oppenheim and Walead Beshty. Where those artists exposed photographic paper to light to make abstract, cameraless images, however, Mr. Shaham has stacked one flatbed scanner on top of another with the scanner-beds facing each other. Then he has hit the “scan” button. The results are vibrant and slightly surprising, recalling geometric paintings by Piet Mondrian as much as earlier photograms.For another series, Mr. Shaham took a book of August Sander’s early-20th-century portraits cataloging German citizens and cut out the figures. The ghostly outlines against a white background suggest an inversion of absence and presence in photography. Meanwhile, a slide show of smiling black-and-white portraits from the 1930s looks like a precursor to Edward Steichen’s universalizing project “The Family of Man.” Instead, the images were photographed from a book by Weston Price, a dentist and researcher who was really just interested in the effects of nutrition on his subjects’ teeth.Other works are much weaker: A blown-up photograph of a box of Ilford photographic paper is embedded with an image from Michelangelo Antonioni’s “Blow-Up” (1966), the go-to movie for art-photography references. A grid of inkjet prints with text explains an Israeli museum’s closing, because of “the current security situation.” But Mr. Shaham is young. Born in Israel in 1983, he’s a digital native fascinated with analog photography history but also testing the technology of his own era, with some good results.Yossi Milo Gallery 245 10th Avenue, at 25th Street, Chelsea Through Feb. 21A version of this review appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page C30 of the New York edition with the headline: Assaf Shaham: ‘Division of the Vision’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.