AdvertisementSupported byAntiquesBy Eve M. KahnMerrill C. Berman runs an investment firm in Rye, N.Y., that doubles as home to his collection of about 20,000 works on paper. With one full-time employee, he keeps track of prints, posters, drawings, collages, postcards, brochures, buttons, billboards, stationery and sundry graphics produced in the last two centuries. The pieces express strong opinions, whether protesting against capitalists or making ham and spark plugs look glamorous.On Feb. 28, Mr. Berman will begin culling his American political campaign memorabilia in a series of sales through Heritage Auctions in Dallas. For the first batch of 347 lots, estimates range from under $100 to $30,000 each. The items have slogans for and against winning and losing candidates, beginning with George Washington, and include largely forgotten also-rans at the conservative and socialist extremes.During an interview at his office, Mr. Berman, 76, kept checking a computer screen full of multicolored stock numbers while explaining how his visual interests evolved. His teenage interest in political campaigns, he said, “trained my eye in graphics.” His 1970s stint as a collector of postwar paintings, including works by Jackson Pollock and de Kooning, ended when his investments soured; he sold the canvases.After that, he said, “I started over with affordable small items.” If he had stayed in the collector mainstream of 20th-century paintings, he added, “I wouldn’t have had any fun.”The fall of Communism brought out entire archives from Eastern bloc graphic artists. “There was a flood of wonderful things,” he said, adding, “I scarfed up — I don’t like to use that word — I bought up as much as I was able to.”He brought out a boxful of Soviet diplomas printed with images of factories and rivers of grain. “I’ve never seen them on the market again,” he said. “It was one of those accidents of post-Soviet history.”With his collection manager, Joelle Jensen, and a part-time employee, the photographer Jim Frank, he is working on numerous books about his purchases; one will focus on the diplomas. Volumes and exhibitions have already been devoted to various aspects of the Berman collection, including Cuban movie posters, the German collage artist Kurt Schwitters and Japanese avant-garde design. In New York alone, his list of upcoming institutional borrowers includes the Jewish Museum, the New-York Historical Society and Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum.“The more I get known, the more people want to borrow from me,” he said, adding, “Maybe it’s fun to be courted when you’re old.”His office building was formerly a baking company’s headquarters; his treasure-filled storage space there has been nicknamed the Twinkie Room. Boxes and drawers are minimally labeled. (Only a third of the collection is cataloged so far.) They contain highlights of artistic movements from Dada and the Bauhaus to postmodernism, and bear the signatures of figures as influential as Rodchenko and Moholy-Nagy.In some crannies, he is no longer quite sure what is rolled up and stashed there.“I have tubes and tubes and tubes and tubes,” he said. As for Ms. Jensen, he added, “She tries to keep on top of it, but I constantly defy her.”His sources over the years have included the Manhattan dealers Michael Weintraub and the Reinhold-Brown Gallery, along with auction houses. He owns pieces that were stolen by Nazis and restituted to the owners’ descendants in the past few years. He jokingly said that he tried not to tell his wife, Dalia Berman, a ceramic artist, about his latest finds.He opened a few more drawers, bringing out ads for assorted politicians and a tattered placard announcing that “Robert F. Kennedy Will Pass This Point Monday at 5:00 P.M.”Kennedy lots in the Berman auction through Heritage include John F. Kennedy buttons that were handed out by shoemakers, Nebraskans and residents of Hoboken, N.J. A prototype promotion for a campaign that never happened is emblazoned “Jack Once More In ’64.”A LIFE OF ART NOUVEAU The author and publisher Louis Daniel Brodsky wrote odes to his Art Nouveau furniture and graphics. In one poem, he described himself as “wholly enchanted” with the nymphs, showgirls and odalisques in his posters and “in the process of losing himself to a movement that flourished a hundred years ago.”Mr. Brodsky died in June, at 73, and on Feb. 22 his family will offer the collection that filled his St. Louis apartment through Leslie Hindman Auctioneers in Chicago. Estimates range from $80 for a copper hand mirror molded with waterlilies to $20,000 for posters by Alphonse Mucha and Toulouse-Lautrec.He began hunting for antiques in the 1960s, while working as a summer camp counselor in Wisconsin. He looked for Victrola record players, among other bulky objects. “He would literally bring them back to the cabin,” his son, Troika Brodsky, said in an interview.He had many collecting phases over the years. He acquired Faulkner manuscripts in bulk and memorabilia related to the Eads Bridge, an 1870s engineering marvel that crosses the Mississippi on pneumatic supports. In a poem, he described the bridge as “spanning the rapid currents of my imagination.”His Art Nouveau material came from auction houses and dealers, including Ivey-Selkirk in St. Louis, the Colletti Gallery in Chicago and the Macklowe Gallery in Manhattan. He cared little whether the pieces were fashionable.“It had nothing to do with what the current ‘it’ thing was to go after,” Troika Brodsky said. The provenance records, he added, are “meticulously” put together. In the Hindman sale, batches of Art Nouveau reference books are estimated at $200 to $400 each.Troika Brodsky has formed and dispersed his own major collections, including comic books, “Star Wars” toys and movie props from “The Lord of the Rings” trilogy. With his father, he said, “We’d debate the merit, the cultural value, of what I was collecting versus what he was collecting.”The Hindman catalog, he said, “acts as an artifact of my father’s life.”Louis Daniel Brodsky’s collection of Faulkner material has been preserved at Southeast Missouri State University. His remaining archives, with a pocket watch and typewriter that belonged to Faulkner, will be incorporated into the university holdings.Advertisement