AdvertisementSupported byBy Roberta SmithAmong New York’s several alternative spaces, the Drawing Center often seems to do the least with the most. Its recently refurbished, overdone SoHo space regularly features exhibitions that end up looking academic, dutiful and dull, regardless of how interesting they may be in concept. They also can seem weirdly repressed, as if the Drawing Center wants to protect us from the deep thrill of perhaps the most intimate and irresistible — and the sexiest — of all art mediums.The Drawing Center’s current exhibition is a welcome exception: “Tomi Ungerer: All in One,” a survey of the fascinating life and work of that polymathic draftsman, writer, humorist and social critic.Mr. Ungerer, frequently described as a virtuoso and a renegade, was born in Strasbourg, in Alsace, the northeastern region of France, in 1931, and now lives mostly in Ireland. He arrived in New York in 1956 with $60, a suitcase of drawings and few illusions. He had endured the death of his adored father when he was barely 4. Then came the Nazi occupation of Alsace, with its special efforts to indoctrinate schoolchildren, during which he began making startlingly sophisticated satirical drawings of the occupiers and their leader.After the liberation, he watched the French echo the Nazis’ oppressions by trying to scrub Alsace clean of Germanness, including burning the German books in centuries-old libraries. Even so, a kind of optimism triumphed: It was as the creator of a string of award-winning children’s books that Mr. Ungerer first made his name in New York, beginning in 1957 with a story about the Mellops, an airplane-building family of pigs. After that, his activities diversified on several fronts, until 1971, when he abruptly relocated to Nova Scotia with his new wife, Yvonne. Some of these facts come from “Far Out Isn’t Far Enough,” Brad Bernstein’s gripping 2012 documentary about Mr. Ungerer that the Drawing Center plans to screen at 6 p.m. on Feb. 26, introduced by the children’s book writer and illustrator Peter Sis, who has also written one of the catalog’s essays.The exhibition has been organized by Claire Gilman, the center’s curator, and moves much more in the right direction than its usual fare. It presents a lively sampling of Mr. Ungerer’s styles and genres, whose restless variety contrasted noticeably with the consistency of his talented contemporaries in the graphic arts. All born within six years of Mr. Ungerer, they included his friends Maurice Sendak and Jules Feiffer, as well as Edward Gorey and Andy Warhol during his early commercial-art phase. In the film, Mr. Sendak characterizes Mr. Ungerer as “drowning in talent,” wildly influential and essential to Mr. Sendak’s own 1963 classic children’s book, ”Where the Wild Things Are.”The exhibition displays a few drawings for several of Mr. Ungerer’s children’s books. Those for “The Three Robbers” (1961), “Otto: The Autobiography of a Teddy Bear” (1999) and “Fog Island” (2013) are especially notable for their velvety colors, wry moral lessons and fluctuating degrees of realism. There are examples of his stark, still-powerful woodcutlike political posters, some of them self-published. One, from 1967, protests the war in Vietnam by picturing a business-suited arm, embellished with the command “Eat,” that is forcing the Statue of Liberty down the throat of a yellow figure. It has lost none of its vehemence and, with a slight change in ethnic type, could have protested the 2003 invasion of Iraq to uncover weapons of mass destruction while spreading democracy.Also present are examples of fey, slightly Victorian advertisements he designed for The New York Times and The Village Voice and the Hopper-esque drawings that illustrated his plain-spoken memoirs of the five years he and his wife spent farming in Nova Scotia before moving on to Ireland. More singular are his caustic, mostly pen-and-ink depictions of the perils and pretensions of modern life that appeared from 1962 to 1983 in small paperbacks like “Heart Attack,” “The Underground Sketchbook,” “Rigor Mortis” and “Symptomatics.” From “The Party” (1966), a skewering of New York’s elite, comes a memorably repellent image: a fat bald man in a morning suit with a piece of Swiss cheese in his open mouth and rats’ tails and rear ends protruding from his eye sockets. It’s worthy of George Grosz and Weegee at their most unforgiving.But this selection is too small and fast-moving to do justice to Mr. Ungerer’s multifaceted creativity. With a talent as polymorphous as this you want a cornucopia, not a tasting menu, which means it’s hard to know if he ever developed a style as complete as Mr. Feiffer’s or Mr. Sendak’s. The show needed to be bigger. The main gallery could have held more work. The failure to present all the original artwork for at least one of Mr. Ungerer’s children’s books and thus his amazing feeling for pace and economy is nearly criminal.The added material could also have spilled over into the second gallery, which is devoted exclusively to too many examples of Mr. Ungerer’s relatively realistic erotic drawings, usually in pencil, that emphasize his S-and-M fantasies, many of which he freely admits (in the film) that he fulfilled during his early years in New York. These drawings, like the Canadian images, are generic. Only the mechanized figures of his 1969 book “Fornicon,” which borrow from Aubrey Beardsley’s line and decadence, have any distinction. But generally everything in this section pales beside truly great erotica — Japanese woodblock prints, the drawings of Gustav Klimt and Tom of Finland — with its redemptive, universalizing combination of sensuality, beauty and originality.Mr. Ungerer’s erotica caused a furor in the world of children’s literature, especially after he responded bluntly and unapologetically to a verbal attack at a book convention in 1971. Still, it is shocking to learn that many American libraries, the main customers for children’s books, banned and often discarded Mr. Ungerer’s contributions to the genre, raising the specter of his European experiences. The quick exit from New York is hardly surprising.This show is at its best at the very beginning and very end. Opposite the entrance, two vitrines contain the knowing juvenile renderings of Nazis, as well as a school assignment to make drawings of Jews. These youthful works are in many ways the show’s richest and most riveting. You’ll find numerous sparks elsewhere, but rarely the same electricity.That is, until the final gallery, downstairs, where four short animations closely based on four Ungerer children’s books are continuously screened. “The Three Robbers” of 1961 is here, as is “Moon Man” of 1966. Even better are “The Hat” (1970) and “The Beast of Monsieur Racine,” more elaborate stories of which there is not a whiff in the show upstairs. Released between 1972 and ’82, the films are the work of another polymath, the American animator, musician and voice actor Gene Deitch.Especially if you’ve looked at the books themselves, several of which are on sale in the lobby, you’ll appreciate how true Mr. Deitch was to Mr. Ungerer’s art, a marvelous lesson in one art form furthering another. But mainly the films give you the only sense here of the wholeness of Mr. Ungerer’s genius at its best: his spare unity of word, image, color and design and his quiet open-ended arguments for the benefits of tolerance, generosity and imagination. The only bit of real noise occurs when Monsieur Racine’s monster is unveiled in Paris, causing a riot that recalls the sobering tribulations of France after the Nazis retreated.The Drawing Center has done a good thing by restoring Mr. Ungerer’s art to New York, though it could easily have done much better.“Tomi Ungerer: All in One” is on view through March 22 at the Drawing Center, 35 Wooster Street, SoHo; 212-219-2166, drawingcenter.org. Advertisement