AdvertisementSupported byBy Lori Holcomb-Holland4 P.M. (TBS) UN-VALENTINE’S DAY MARATHON Seven hours of disastrous dates, screwball romances and awkward moments come just in time for those looking to counter all the saccharine of Valentine’s Day. The marathon begins with four episodes of “Friends,” including the first date Rachel (Jennifer Aniston) had with Ross (David Schwimmer). In “Seinfeld,” beginning at 6 p.m., four episodes bring back some of Jerry’s most memorable girlfriends — including “Man Hands” and the one whose name he can’t remember. And major breakthroughs in science and love are the highlights of six episodes of “The Big Bang Theory,” beginning at 8 p.m.10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY This week’s episode features an interview with Jonathan Sacks, the former chief rabbi of Britain; a look at a Brooklyn church offering a $33,000 prize to the person who can best explain why the nation’s economy has affected so many; and a segment examining the traditions and celebrations of Losar, the Tibetan new year. Bob Abernethy hosts.7 P.M. (E!) FATHER OF THE BRIDE (1991) In an updated version of Vincente Minnelli’s 1950 film, Steve Martin plays George Banks, the devoted father of the 22-year-old Annie (Kimberly Williams), who returns from a trip abroad to announce she’s engaged. What George first pictures as a backyard barbecue quickly turns into an extravagant production — complete with swans, ice sculptures, awkward moments with the future in-laws and the requisite prenuptial nerves. In “Father of the Bride Part II” (1995), at 9 p.m., also directed by Charles Shyer, George is just starting to come undone at the idea of being a grandpa when he learns that his wife, Nina (Diane Keaton), is also pregnant. “The film juggles these comic possibilities without ever forgetting that the only real baby in this story is George,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times.9 P.M. (MoreMax) LONE SURVIVOR (2013) A four-man team of Navy SEALs is sent on a mission to kill a Taliban commander in rural Afghanistan in Peter Berg’s film based on a memoir by Marcus Luttrell (played by Mark Wahlberg). After being discovered by a group of goatherds, the soldiers are forced to either let the Afghans go, tie them up or kill them, knowing that each of their options could have dire consequences. “The defining trait of ‘Lone Survivor’ — with respect to both its characters and Mr. Berg’s approach to them — is professionalism,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “It is a modest, competent, effective movie, concerned above all with doing the job of explaining how the job was done. Afterward, you may want to think more about reasons and consequences, about global and domestic politics, but while the fight is going on, you are absorbed in the mechanics of survival.”10 P.M. (HBO) ROSIE O’DONNELL: A HEARTFELT STAND UP Not all heart attacks are obvious, as Ms. O’Donnell discovered in 2012, when two days passed before she realized she had suffered one. She returns to the stage for this comedic and educational special about heart disease awareness, peppered with her views on love, motherhood and a continuing obsession with Barbra Streisand.10 P.M. (Destination America) TRUE SUPERNATURAL This new series uses specimens and scientific evidence to figure out if certain creatures are fact or fiction. The first installment focuses on a surf-and-turf combination: the chupacabra, a bloodsucking animal thought to be responsible for terrorizing livestock in southwest Texas; and the kraken, a marine monster that has shivered the timbers of pirates and seafaring folk for centuries.11 P.M. (TNT) NEIGHBORHOOD SESSIONS WITH JENNIFER LOPEZ  The first episode of this series, which sends artists back to the communities where they grew up, features Ms. Lopez giving a concert in the Bronx and visiting the people and places that influenced her life and career.WHAT’S STREAMING NOWMIDDLE (ST)AGE Dating has practically become a full-time job for Marina Lippon (Stacia Fernandez). In this special Valentine’s Day edition of the series, Marina considers the six suitors she met through an online dating service. (stage17.tv)Advertisement