By MARGALIT FOXFEB. 13, 2015
Gary Owens, a television and radio announcer best known as the droll, deadpan voice of “Rowan & Martin’s Laugh-In,” died on Thursday at his home in Los Angeles. He was 80.His agent, Fred Westbrook, confirmed the death.Broadcast on NBC from 1968 to 1973, “Laugh-In” was a sketch-comedy series hosted by the comedians Dan Rowan and Dick Martin. It featured Ruth Buzzi, Goldie Hawn, Henry Gibson, Arte Johnson and Lily Tomlin as regular performers.Its antic segments were often linked via narration by Mr. Owens, one of the very few performers to appear in all 140 episodes of the show. He became known in particular for his on-camera pose of studied earnestness, one hand cupping an ear.Among the emblematic phrases Mr. Owens coined on the show was the enduringly memorable — and by all accounts highly oxymoronic — “beautiful downtown Burbank.”AdvertisementHe also narrated various segments on “Sesame Street,” and several animated series, including “Space Ghost,” on which he voiced the title character. In addition, he had voice roles on thousands of cartoon broadcasts, including “Dynomutt Dog Wonder,” “Eek! the Cat” and “The Ren & Stimpy Show.”Mr. Owens was born Gary Altman in Mitchell, S.D., and got his first broadcasting job at 16, when he became the news director of radio station KORN there. (The surname Owens would be bestowed on him later, by the owner of an Omaha radio station for which he worked in the 1950s.)After studying at Dakota Wesleyan University in Mitchell, he worked for radio stations throughout the Midwest, and in Dallas, New Orleans, St. Louis and San Francisco. In 1961, he became a disc jockey at KFWB-AM in Los Angeles, later moving to KMPC-AM there, where he worked for two decades.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Owens fell into television as a writer for several of the animated series produced by Jay Ward, the creative force behind the Rocky and Bullwinkle cartoons. Hearing his sonorous voice, the producers quickly conscripted him as a performer.He was soon voicing characters on Disney shows, as well. “Because of my voice, they usually had me playing someone in an authoritative way — a banker, psychiatrist, war correspondent, something like that,” Mr. Owens told The St. Petersburg Times in 1995.Mr. Owens’s survivors include his wife of more than 50 years, the former Arleta Lee Markell; and two sons, Scott and Chris.In 1971, in recognition of his work on “Laugh-In,” NBC conceived a tribute to Mr. Owens that was fitting in two respects. The tribute took a form of a print, in concrete, of one of Mr. Owens’s ears.AdvertisementThe concrete was in a parking lot in beautiful downtown Burbank.A version of this article appears in print on February 14, 2015, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Gary Owens, 80, ‘Laugh-In’ Announcer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.