AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon ParelesStars shine overhead, and rivers flow nearby in songs by Joan Shelley, who performed on Thursday night at Union Pool in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Her music is folky and pastoral, with a sense of scale that makes her humble about her place in mankind and the universe, and her songs are serene but never complacent. In “Electric Ursa,” the title song of her current album (No Quarter Records), Ms. Shelley sang, “Under your stars, your earthless movement/We are only feeble humans.”Ms. Shelley is from Louisville, Ky., where she has recorded in duos and groups; “Electric Ursa” is her second solo album. Her songs hold echoes of the area’s Appalachian heritage in their unhurried picking and Celtic-tinged melodies, and she sings with the centered clarity of a mountain balladeer. But her songs aren’t necessarily traditionalist. She also invokes another school of American and British acoustic music: the guitar meditations of musicians like John Fahey, Davy Graham and Vashti Bunyan, who found more hypnotic uses for elements of folk styles. Although Ms. Shelley leads a full band on her albums, at Union Pool, her backup was ample with just two acoustic guitars — her own and Nathan Salsburg’s — and the occasional vocal harmonies of Glen Dentinger. A few cyclical, undulating, fingerpicked chords were enough for each song, with Ms. Shelley pinpointing the rhythm and Mr. Salsburg entwining it with touches of filigree. Mr. Salsburg, also from Louisville, had started the evening with guitar instrumentals (including a folkified version of the Smiths’ “Reel Around the Fountain”); Nathan Bowles, a banjoist and singer who also shared the bill, joined Ms. Shelley’s group for one song.There’s a rare stillness in Ms. Shelley’s tunes. Her lyrics don’t tell stories; they contemplate places and situations, landscapes that can be geographical, psychological and sometimes both. She often uses simple language in elusive ways, though there are occasional flashes of directness: “I’ll be with you wherever you may go, sitting safely in your memory,” she sang in “River Low,” from the album. “Easy for you to carry/Take me with you wherever you may go.”Although “Electric Ursa” was released just last September, Ms. Shelley devoted much of her set to new songs that were no less resonant and, perhaps, a little more concrete. One, with a melody that would have suited the Carter Family, captured the moment in a breakup when the thought of freedom balances a sense of loss. In that song, and throughout the set, she was open yet composed, never pushing or overplaying the music; she let the songs speak for themselves. With its quiet purity, the music held the club audience rapt. Advertisement