AdvertisementSupported byBy Siobhan BurkeIn its season at the Joyce Theater, the Martha Graham Dance Company is presenting works by nine choreographers other than its founder, most of them acquired over the last two years. Next to this increasingly varied repertory, Graham’s work can stand out as drearily dated or intensely urgent. The mind jumps between asking, “Why does this still exist?” and “Can this please never go away?”Her 1936 “Chronicle,” an antiwar statement in three parts, is of the “never go away” variety. As the troupe’s most vital, enduring piece, it brought Thursday’s program (Program A) to an exhilarating close, eclipsing some of the less inspired offerings before it.Graham often designed her own costumes, fashioning fabric into extensions of (or restraints on) the body. In “Spectre — 1914,” the first section of “Chronicle,” the soloist (PeiJu Chien-Pott on Thursday) wears a long black dress lined with bright red. Like the movement — and the multitiered pedestal where the triumphant Ms. Chien-Pott began, seated upright and in profile — this garment is both freeing and grounding. Its heavy skirts, draped over the platform, give the illusion of a body inseparable from the earth. But the soloist, once on her feet, deftly takes that weight into her hands, flashing the red underside as if signaling danger.“Steps in the Street,” the second section, for a formidable all-female chorus, led here by Carrie Ellmore-Tallitsch, distills that kind of oppositional pull even further: the body reaching up and rooting down, twisting against itself, pressing through space as if against a harsh wind. Though meant to portray “the devastation of spirit” caused by war, this is as pure-form as Graham gets, and it’s thrilling. So, too, was the finale, “Prelude to Action,” in which Ms. Chien-Pott returned, now in white, her centrifugal force sweeping the other dancers into a circle around her. Maybe that abstraction is what allows “Chronicle” to resonate, while something more story-driven, like “Embattled Garden” (1958), feels like a postcard from modern dance’s past. (The taped music doesn’t enhance either one.) In this scene from the Garden of Eden, which unfolds on and around Isamu Noguchi’s skeletal set, the electricity resided mostly in the statuesque Natasha M. Diamond-Walker, who, as Lilith, flaunted her lithe prowess before Adam (Tadej Brdnik), Eve (XiaoChuan Xie) and the Stranger (Lloyd Knight). On the more contemporary end of the spectrum, the program included three “Lamentation Variations” — responses to Graham’s 1930 solo “Lamentation” — by Kyle Abraham, Sonya Tayeh and Larry Keigwin, and the New York City premiere of Nacho Duato’s “Rust.” Mr. Duato intends to critique torture, but he comes closer to merely illustrating it, setting sleek, aggressive moves for five men — including moments of mimed abuse — to slashing, shooting noises and operatic Arvo Pärt. The evening opened with “Satyric Festival Song” (1932), jubilantly performed by Ying Xin, in which Graham mocked some of her own histrionic conventions. The artistic director Janet Eilber introduced the work by explaining this. But if today’s audiences are to develop a deep relationship to Graham’s work, shouldn’t we be allowed to figure that out on our own?The company continues through Feb. 22 at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-242-0800, joyce.org. Advertisement