By ZACHARY WOOLFEFEB. 13, 2015
Some of the composer John Zorn’s earliest works, from the 1970s and ’80s, were rule-driven improvisations that he called “game pieces,” which coyly suggested sports while also evoking the little markers that are moved around the board in Monopoly or Candy Land.But on Thursday at Merkin Concert Hall, after Mr. Zorn sat down with the cellist Chris Gross and the percussionist Alex Lipowski for “Hockey” (1978), he started the squeaking, scratching, skittering music by blowing into the first of a series of hunting game calls (like kazoos crossed with decoy whistles).It was one more wrinkle in the definition of “game” — another wink, another trick. Even when Mr. Zorn’s works are serious or scary, their spirits are perhaps defiantly high, a quality that gave lightness and life to Thursday’s illuminating retrospective, offered as part of the composer Judd Greenstein’s Ecstatic Music Festival.A relatively short but satisfying and energizing immersion in Mr. Zorn’s myriad styles, the evening was organized by the dazzling Talea Ensemble. The chronology ranged from “Hockey” to the premieres of two 2014 works and touched on jazz, electronics, wild and woolly Modernist sounds, Beethoven, Wagner, Debussy, Stravinsky, elegy and horror.AdvertisementMost stimulating was the sustained sensitivity of Mr. Zorn’s instrumental writing. “The Prophetic Mysteries of Angels, Witches and Demons” (2007) for flute (Barry Crawford), amplified percussion (Matthew Gold and Mr. Lipowski) and ominous live electronics (Ikue Mori), joined a sinuous flute line to fanciful percussion effects, like the sound of writing and the slamming of a door. Hands rhythmically plopped in a tub of water; rustling white noise emerged from an old phonograph.AdvertisementThe whole spectacle is funny, but it’s also dead serious, and dead lovely, in the adroitness with which it balances quiet and loud, rough and smooth. Endlessly interesting, its drama is both elusive and omnipresent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Zorn has long had an interest in the mystical and occult, and witches pop up, too, in “All Hallows’ Eve: Satanic Counterpoint for the Witches’ Sabbath” (2012), a shivery string trio (Mr. Gross, the violinist Pauline Kim Harris and the violist Elizabeth Weisser) with jittery activity and hovering near-silence.The two new works both involve solo piano. “Divagations” (divided into two movements: “ravings” and “wanderings”) pairs the instrument (Stephen Gosling) with improvising bass (Shanir Ezra Blumenkranz) and drums (Tyshawn Sorey), a jazz band alternately frantic and suave. “A Prayer for Nossis,” played by Steven Beck, is surprisingly poised and polished, moving sleekly from the lush Romantic chromaticism of Liszt to diaphanous Debussyian textures.Works for slightly larger forces rounded out the program. Tiny details — a soft slide in the cello, a momentary clarinet riff — give the septet “Bateau Ivre” (2011) an aura of changeability. “Rugby” (1983), another of the game pieces, has five players and cues that come from both the conductor (Rane Moore) and the players themselves in a vivid mixture of misty whispers and guttural croaks.Mr. Zorn’s music is nearly always formed from extremes. But it’s never merely for effect or merely playful. If his work is a game, then, like Brazilian soccer, it’s a beautiful one.The Ecstatic Music Festival runs through April 16 at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan; 212-501-3330, kaufmanmusiccenter.org. A version of this review appears in print on February 14, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Playing Games.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.