AdvertisementSupported byBy David AllenBOSTON — When it comes to Harrison Birtwistle, the Boston Symphony Orchestra is cursed. Four years ago, James Levine resigned as the orchestra’s music director just two weeks before the world premiere of a Birtwistle work he had commissioned, the outstanding, inventive Concerto for Violin and Orchestra (2009-10). It went ahead successfully, with an assistant conductor, Marcelo Lehninger. Now this week’s first American performances of an impressive sort-of piano concerto, ornately titled “Responses: Sweet Disorder and the Carefully Careless” (2013-4) and representing both a summation and a step forward in Mr. Birtwistle’s unique, rewarding style, have had a tortured back story. As with the London premiere, the Russian conductor Vladimir Jurowski was booked to conduct, with the indefatigable Pierre-Laurent Aimard, for whom “Responses” was written, at the piano. First the program changed, to give the Birtwistle more rehearsal time. Then a few days ago a “miscommunication with his own management team” found Mr. Jurowski without a work visa — and the orchestra without a conductor for a new and difficult piece.Thursday’s concert, in a Symphony Hall left less than half full by poor weather, could have been chaotic. But by sheer coincidence, Stefan Asbury, who conducted the world premiere of “Responses” in Munich last October, was spending a few days in Massachusetts. Fortune clearly favors the brave — for programming Mr. Birtwistle’s complex works remains, alas, brave — and happily Mr. Asbury and Mr. Aimard coaxed a performance as dramatically acute as “Responses” deserves.I say “Responses” is a piano concerto, but Mr. Birtwistle has so thoroughly rethought the genre that it escapes the name. From “Verses for Ensembles” (1969) to “Theseus Game” (2003), this composer has long explored how instruments can work as characters, structurally, aurally, even visually. As he did in the Violin Concerto, with “Responses” Mr. Birtwistle reflects on what a concerto can do and what it is for, turning back to the idea of the orchestra as a Greek chorus and exploring the relationship between the individual and the community in this one-movement half-hour work, his typical form.“Responses” also feels more spontaneous and less purely ritualistic than much of Mr. Birtwistle’s work. Unlike the grand Romantic concertos of old, it’s not an argument between the soloist and the orchestra, or an effort to reconcile them. Nor is this like a chamber work for partners. Instead, it’s a work of call and response, a conversation among the piano and individual players, groups of instruments, even the full orchestra, with personalities shifting and bonds forming, then slipping away. Woodwinds hector and interject with insouciance; wah-wah trumpets bait and cackle; the low brass clusters with snark and support; the strings intone with gloomy sincerity. The piano sometimes leads, often follows. Finding order in all that chatter, “Responses” evolves in a way that much of Mr. Birtwistle’s earlier music did not. Perhaps it was just this orchestra’s plush, often garish sonority, but by smoothing Mr. Birtwistle’s more abrasive edges, Mr. Asbury and Mr. Aimard suggested that his late style is fusing the brutal geology of his igneous masterpiece, “Earth Dances” (1986) and the raucous energy of “Panic” (1995) with the more inward, darkly shaded world of “Night’s Black Bird” (2004). The result, in “Responses” and in the Violin Concerto, is still fiercely gestural, but newly fluid and softer in focus. Andris Nelsons, the exciting new music director here, would do well to maintain his orchestra’s relationship with this composer.Ken-David Masur, son of Kurt Masur and an assistant conductor here, took over the rest of the concert. An energetic, lanky podium presence, he led a languid reading of Debussy’s “Prélude à l’Après-Midi d’un Faune” — with Elizabeth Rowe ravishing in the flute solo — and vivid, slightly messy accounts of Liadov’s “From the Apocalypse” and Stravinsky’s omnipresent “Firebird” suite.Advertisement