AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertIt’s about halfway through Douglas Dunn’s “Aidos” that things get weird. This 75-minute work, which had its debut on Wednesday at BAM Fisher, is set to 12 movements from Bach’s six suites for unaccompanied cello, played live and out of their original order by Ha-Yang Kim. Much of the choreography is politely balletic, its decorum ruffled only momentarily by a rough outburst here, a flash of louche hip motion there.But then, after most of the small cast has sunk into crouches and made a scooting retreat toward the theater’s rear wall, Mr. Dunn arrives with two tall women in costumes of bright patchwork. He noodles around. He crawls through the legs of one of the women. The other dancers treat him and the women the way that members of a leper colony might treat rare visitors, climbing on their backs and then shaking in distress as Mr. Dunn and the two women belly-crawl away. Later, those women (Jessica Martineau and Jin Ju Song-Begin) return, wearing spiky headdresses and diaphanous capes. They sit on thrones that have human-shaped backs (costume and set design by Andrew Jordan). Mr. Dunn, who is in his early 70s, passes through their court, gibbering.What is going on here? In Greek mythology, Aidos is the goddess of shame or modesty, the kinds of emotions that are supposed to enforce correct behavior. It seems that Mr. Dunn, whose mind can work in delightfully eccentric ways, is poking under the vestments of propriety. But the points he is making are obscure, and “Aidos” is not quite strange enough for that obscurity to be fully compelling. Among many felicitous compositions, suggestions of chagrin do crop up: bodies bent over, those crouches, the quick and tiny steps of people ashamed to take up more space. In contrast, gazes often tilt upward in exaggerated courtliness. The choreography is sometimes fugue-like, and one of the recurring poses resembles a cello, yet the dance doesn’t engage very deeply with the Bach, which seems to function (despite Ms. Kim’s imperfect intonation) mainly as a symbol of well-ordered and famous beauty. Aspects of “Aidos” seem unintentionally embarrassing. Mr. Dunn’s wit is deadpan and subtle, and these dancers tend either to kill it through overemphasis or play it so limply that it loses any bite. That’s never a problem, though, with Mr. Dunn himself. His approximate old-man dancing manages to be both touching and sly. When he is carried off in an arabesque by three much younger men, the effect is wonderfully droll. And shameless. “Aidos” runs through Sunday at the Fishman Space, BAM Fisher, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, Brooklyn; 866-620-7509, bam.org. Advertisement