AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperBALTIMORE — It was a year ago that Marin Alsop, the music director of the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra, lost both of her parents, who were respected musicians themselves, within the space of 11 days. But whenever she takes the podium here to conduct the orchestra, she finds herself surrounded by audible, often quite mellifluous, reminders of them both.To her right, the principal cellist now plays the three-centuries-old cello by the Italian luthier Carlo Antonio Testore that once belonged to her mother, Ruth Alsop, a member of chamber groups and the New York City Ballet Orchestra. In front of her, the associate principal second violinist performs on the 1810 Nicolas Lupot violin that belonged to her father, K. Lamar Alsop, the longtime concertmaster of the City Ballet orchestra. And to her left, the associate concertmaster uses Ms. Alsop’s old Guadagnini violin, which dates to 1763 and which she often played with her parents when she was young. Ms. Alsop’s decision to lend her family’s instruments, along with some of her parents’ old bows, to the Baltimore musicians she conducts has helped the players, lifted the sound of the front row of the orchestra and kept the tones of her family’s instruments in her ears.“The sound is like their voice, in a way,” Ms. Alsop said here the other day at Meyerhoff Symphony Hall after leading a rehearsal of works by Rachmaninoff and Respighi. “When I grew up, every day they practiced hours and hours and hours. I probably heard more from their instruments than from them, in their own voices. I went to their concerts all the time, and the three of us played chamber music all the time. Hearing them now, it feels very comforting.”Her loan comes as collectors and speculators — and the law of supply and demand — have driven the cost of great instruments out of the reach of most musicians. Some orchestras own fine instruments and lend them to their members, or arrange loans on favorable terms to help their players buy them. But with instruments growing more expensive, and many orchestras closely watching their bottom lines, matching musicians and instruments can be a challenge.As Madeline Adkins, who plays Ms. Alsop’s old Guadagnini, put it, “There are not too many fields where the people at the top of the field can’t afford the best equipment.”The loan was also an indication that as many American orchestras face challenges, some of the more committed and engaged music directors have begun to step in to help out personally.Last year, when the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra’s tour to Carnegie Hall was put in jeopardy because of financial difficulties, its music director, Robert Spano, helped pay the way with a personal donation. Ms. Alsop has provided financial aid to her orchestra and community as well: She used some of the money from her 2005 MacArthur fellowship — sometimes known as a “genius” grant — to help start OrchKids, a program that now teaches music to hundreds of children in some of Baltimore’s poorest neighborhoods. And she recently donated $100,000 in her parents’ name to mark the orchestra’s centennial next year.“I really believe in trying to invest in what you believe in, and give back,” she said, adding that it was a lesson that her parents had tried to impart to her.Ms. Alsop has established herself as a force in Baltimore since becoming its music director in 2007. At the time, the history-making nature of her appointment as the first woman to lead a major American orchestra was partly obscured by a controversy that erupted when the orchestra players objected to her selection. Since then, though, she has made her mark with innovative programming — a few years ago Arthur Honegger’s infrequently performed 1935 oratorio “Jeanne d’Arc au Bûcher” (“Joan of Arc at the Stake”) was a critical and popular success — and by establishing deeper ties with the community with programs such as OrchKids and “Rusty Musicians,” which allows local amateurs to train and play with the orchestra.Now, although her contract in Baltimore extends through 2021, some critics are mentioning her as a possible successor to Alan Gilbert when he steps down as music director of the New York Philharmonic in 2017. “For what it’s worth, I think Alsop would be among the most exciting appointments for New York,” Tom Service wrote in The Guardian this week.A little over a year ago, Ms. Alsop experienced what she called the “nightmare double-whammy” of the death of both of her parents. In addition to the countless details that people must attend to when their parents die — including, in her case, arranging a memorial concert that was held last spring in New York — Ms. Alsop found herself thinking about what to do with their instruments. “I wanted people to play them, but the idea of selling them — it just didn’t feel right at all,” she said.Unlike other heirlooms, instruments are best not left in storage. The principal cellist Dariusz Skoraczewski, who called Ruth Alsop’s cello “the best instrument that I’ve probably ever played,” said that they need to be played to stay in shape. “There’s something about wood that needs to be exercised, like your muscles, a little bit,” he mused. “Or if you have a car and you don’t drive it for two years, it’s not going to be starting right. The same with instruments.”Ivan Stefanovic, the associate principal second violinist who is using Lamar Alsop’s old violin, said it projects better than his previous instrument. But he also marveled at the sound it is able to produce when played very softly. “Rather than get the wispy, non-sound, as is often the case with lesser-quality instruments, I can still retain a quality sound,” he said, calling the loans “a real gift to the orchestra.”For Ms. Alsop, having the instruments in front of her keeps alive the memories of her parents, and their playing. Her mother played the cello in trios, on recordings, at Radio City Music Hall and, for more than 50 years, with the City Ballet orchestra. And as City Ballet’s concertmaster, her father performed a host of ravishing solos — and, at the 1972 Stravinsky Festival, he was one of the two onstage musicians who played at the premiere of Balanchine’s “Duo Concertant,” which was danced by Kay Mazzo and Peter Martins.One particular night that stands out, she said, came in 1989, when City Ballet performed Mr. Martins’s “Barber Violin Concerto.” Her father was the featured violinist. Her mother played the cello. And Ms. Alsop was asked to conduct. “It was really very touching,” she said.Advertisement