Season 4, Episode 5: “Sit-In”Well, that’s it: Hannah and Adam are done, and all it took was a well-heeled RISD grad with a hyphenated first name to get in between them. On Sunday night, “Girls” marked the halfway point of its fourth season with a breakup bottle episode, set almost entirely in Hannah’s apartment and featuring the whole gang — plus Laird (Jon Glaser). Back again to sort through the wreckage of feelings are Joe Coscarelli and Lydia Polgreen.The HBO comedy by Lena Dunham.Joe: I don’t know about you, Lydia, but I felt a huge sense of relief after this one —  a student-debt-size weight off of my back, knowing that at least one of the broken relationships on this show is really, truly over. (Uh, right?)With the exception of Jessa’s blink of a marriage to a tech bro and Marnie’s stale, leftover-from-college thing with Charlie, relationships rarely end in a real and final way on this show. (Christopher Abbott, who played Charlie, actually left the cast, otherwise that co-dependency might have been stretched out too.) But this one seems wrapped up in a way befitting, dare I say … mature adults?Not that it didn’t take a while to get there: The episode picked up exactly where the last one left off, with Hannah (Lena Dunham) standing dazed in her old apartment alongside Adam (Adam Driver) and his new lady, Mimi-Rose Howard (Gillian Jacobs), who just wants a cold-pressed juice to cleanse her body of the bad-vibe toxins Hannah brought from Iowa.Lydia: Adam asking for an apple juice – is there any more childish drink?? – was the first of many funny lines in this episode for me. Joe: On a more emotional note, when they’re finally alone, Hannah tells Adam, “You were in love with me a month ago.” To which Adam replies of their ill-defined long-distance relationship, “I didn’t break any rules.” That is how selfish young men think and speak, in my experience, when they’ve done wrong but don’t regret it. “Except common human decency,” Hannah replies, perfectly.The rest of the episode feels like a fever dream, with a “Wizard of Oz”-style rotation of all the important people in Hannah’s life coming through the apartment to flex their compassion muscles. Some are better at it than others: Shoshanna (Zosia Mamet) means well, although she gets Hannah addicted to Google-and-YouTube-stalking that “rando hussie,” while Jessa, smoking and nonchalant, is callous as ever. But not wrong. Adam is happy, she says. What can Hannah even say to that?Lydia: This episode was about three of the show’s most important themes: friendship, love and real estate, not necessarily in that order. The breakup felt like the right way to end this doomed romance, with a lot of funny alongside the heartbreak. There were some great lines. On Adam’s new girlfriend’s name?  “That’s just a woman’s name and a man’s name with a flower stuck in the middle of it!” Hannah cries. Joe: I’d like to nominate Jessa’s unpublishable phrase that makes “twiddling” one’s “thumbs” about female masturbation. You know the line I mean.Lydia: And the delicate question of who keeps the apartment, never an idle question in a New York City breakup? “Actually, you left it to me,” he says. “Adam, I am not dead!” she replies. And the sheer physical humor was refreshing – Hannah peeing in a trash can in the corner rather than face Mimi-Rose and Adam was an inspired touch. Joe: Rock bottom, I think they call it.Lydia: Like all breakups, this one was experienced not just by the splitting couple but by their friends too, for whom the former lovebirds’ troubles become a screen on which to project their own insecurities, foibles and hobbyhorses. For Shosh, it is the fear that she is always the last to know. For Ray, it is another audience for his increasingly unhinged anger about the traffic light on his block. For Laird, Hannah’s neighbor and an ex-junkie who long pined after her, it is a chance to show off his father-to-be status with Adam’s sister, Caroline (Gaby Hoffman). For Caroline, ever the troublemaker, it is a chance to stir the pot. “Well, Adam’s very happy,” she said, dressed in virginal white, stroking her baby bump. “There’s that. But like everything else in life it could just be illusory.” And finally, Marnie (Allison Williams) shows up, after being AWOL for much of the episode. Turns out she was “woodshedding” with Desi (Ebon Moss-Bachrach) – I had to Google it – who has moved into her minuscule apartment following his breakup with Clementine. They have some “nibbles” from a record company, she reports. Whatever Marnie’s follies might be in her own romantic and artistic life, she has some good, honest advice for heartbroken Hannah: “Just trust me.” Marnie said. “You have to let him go.” “Letting go doesn’t come very naturally to me,” Hannah replies, in what is possibly this series’ biggest understatement. The next morning Adam comes in to find Hannah packed and ready to go. She asks where Mimi-Rose is, and when Adam says she is probably at her studio, Hannah begins with sarcasm but loses her venom. “Wow, she has her own studio, that’s … really cool.” They share a tender moment while Adam re-bandages Hannah’s burned hand, realizing that they are really over. Hannah heads to Fort Greene to visit the storage unit Adam generously paid for — probably with his pill commercial money —  where she is reunited with her couch and the rest of her crap, and left to contemplate what comes next. Joe: Not to do the annoying New York fact-check of a “Girls” scene, but when Hannah got off of the subway (at my old stop, hence my nitpicking),  she was not walking toward Fort Greene. Anyway.Lydia: Yeah, isn’t that Clinton Hill? I don’t know where the show will take us next, but I can’t help hoping that Adam’s happiness will in fact be short-lived, and these two will find their way into one another’s lives again very soon. Joe: I’m the opposite. In a series about cycles of self-sabotage and repeated mistakes, I am really hoping Adam and Hannah can both move on — but without losing Adam Driver as the show’s grunting soul. When Season 2 ended with his shirtless rom-com run to literally sweep Hannah off her feet, I hoped “Girls” wouldn’t become a repeat of the “Sex and the City” ending, in which the show regressed to being about a man and a woman “meant to be,” obstacles be damned, instead of a more complicated story (see also: “Homeland” Seasons 2 and 3) about female friendship and relationship failures. I’d rather just get a YouTube montage of Hannah and Adam’s lovely moments, set to Bon Iver or something, and call it an early-20s learning experience.In what was my favorite episode of the season so far — the final breakup talk was super real — I even found myself liking Marnie for a minute when she brought takeout, proved to be wise counsel and suggested that maybe she and Hannah were the actual “great, artistic love story.” It was heartening to have such clarity from characters and a show that don’t always see so clearly. 