By LORI HOLCOMB-HOLLANDFEB. 15, 2015
7 P.M. (CBS) 60 MINUTES Bob Simon’s career at CBS spanned 47 years and included 27 Emmy wins. Mr. Simon, above, filed his final assignment on the day he died, Wednesday, in a car accident in Manhattan. That segment, a report on ZMapp, a promising new drug to fight Ebola, airs tonight. Also included in the episode will be a report on the French neighborhood and prison that gave rise to the terrorists who attacked the Charlie Hebdo offices in Paris last month; and Steve Kroft interviews Bradley Cooper about his role in the Oscar-nominated movie “American Sniper.”9 A.M. (CBS) CBS SUNDAY MORNING Charles Osgood hosts this “Love Matters” episode. Stories include a portrait of couples who met early in life, split up, then eventually fell in love with each another again; a couple married for more than 81 years; the effectiveness of supposed aphrodisiacs; and a school that teaches people to kiss. 9 A.M. (CNN) STATE OF THE UNION Leon Panetta, the former director of the Central Intelligence Agency and former secretary of defense, will join the guest anchor Jim Acosta to discuss the War Powers Act, the Islamic State and national security.10 A.M. (ABC) THIS WEEK The host George Stephanopoulos, left, talks about the fight against the Islamic State, including President Obama’s proposal authorizing force, with Representatives Adam Kinzinger of Illinois, a Republican member of the House Armed Services Committee and Iraq war veteran, and Adam Schiff of California, a Democratic member of the House Intelligence Committee.Advertisement10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Chris Wallace will interview the house speaker, John A. Boehner of Ohio, about the Republican Party’s congressional agenda, the Affordable Care Act and his invitation to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel to address Congress. Also on the program will be Roy S. Moore, chief justice of the Alabama Supreme Court, speaking about marriage rights for same-sex couples.Advertisement3:45 P.M. (Starz) QUIGLEY DOWN UNDER (1990) Tom Selleck stars as Matthew Quigley, a sharpshooter from Wyoming who travels to Australia to work on a cattle ranch, in this Simon Wincer-directed western. When Quigley discovers that his new boss expects him to turn his cross hairs not just on dingoes, but also on the aboriginal population, Quigley becomes a target as well.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.7 P.M. (ABC) AMERICA’S FUNNIEST HOME VIDEOS For a quarter of a century, this show has allowed viewers to laugh at themselves (but mostly other people). To commemorate the milestone, the host Tom Bergeron will be showing the best clips of the show’s history.8 P.M. (NBC) SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE 40TH ANNIVERSARY SPECIAL Former cast members, guests and musicians return to Studio 8H to celebrate four decades of history.9 P.M. (21) ITALIAN AMERICANS OF NEW YORK AND NEW JERSEY The journalist Maria Bartiromo hosts this two-part series examining the Italian experience in New York and New Jersey, an area that is home to the country’s largest population of Italian-Americans. Features include interviews with experts and prominent Italian-Americans, including Mayor Bill de Blasio, the chef Lidia Bastianich, the singer Tony Bennett, the actress Susan Lucci and Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey.9 P.M. (HBO) GIRLS Friends try to help Hannah (Lena Dunham, far left, with Jon Glaser and Gaby Hoffman) cope after she returns from Iowa to find Adam (Adam Driver) has moved on without her. In “Togetherness,” at 9:30 p.m., Michelle (Melanie Lynskey) plans a day of fun with old friends, which leads to a brutal game of “kick the can” with a group of hipsters.What’s Streaming NowMAKO MERMAIDS The trio of mermaids who guard Mako Island are back for Season 2, and their lives have been thrown into upheaval by a threatening merman. As they fight, they begin to realize there is more to his connection to the island than they realized. (Netflix) LORI HOLCOMB-HOLLANDA version of this schedule appears in print on February 15, 2015, on Page SP13 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.