AdvertisementSupported byBy Margalit FoxIt was only after he entered Dante’s Inferno — his name for the series of federal penitentiaries that became his home for two years — that the composer Marvin David Levy marshaled the resolve to write the kind of music he had always wanted.Mr. Levy, who died on Monday at 82, was at midcentury an American composer of seemingly limitless promise, compared by Leonard Bernstein to Benjamin Britten.But after the critical failure of his most famous work in the late 1960s, his life followed a path that, while it would scarcely raise eyebrows in the pop music world, is almost unheard-of in classical music’s rarefied orbit: Convicted of serving as a bagman in a multimillion-dollar marijuana smuggling operation, he was incarcerated alongside murderers and other seasoned felons.“It shattered me,” Mr. Levy told The Chicago Tribune in 1987, speaking of that time.For most of Mr. Levy’s quicksilver career, his constant companion was his best-known composition, the opera “Mourning Becomes Electra.” That work, commissioned by the Metropolitan Opera when he was still in his 20s, would become both a source of his dissolution and, in the end, his salvation.Making its debut at the Met in 1967, “Mourning Becomes Electra” was the last full-length opera Mr. Levy ever wrote. Its history — from highly touted prospect to object of obscurity to recipient of late-life acclaim — parallels his own, illuminating the trajectory of a composer who found himself under immense pressure to cleave to musical fashions that were inimical to his art.“There wasn’t a taste for romantic contemporary music,” Mr. Levy told The Chicago Sun-Times in 1998, recalling the climate of draconian atonality in which he had composed the opera. “It was looked down upon, frowned upon, thought not intellectual.”The Met rarely commissions operas, and its selection of Mr. Levy was a signal honor. But at its premiere, “Mourning” met with unfavorable notices and after its brief run vanished from the American repertory.Then, in 1998, it was restaged by the Lyric Opera of Chicago in a version substantially revised by Mr. Levy, and met with a glowing reception. A revival in 2003 and 2004 — a joint production by the Seattle and New York City Operas, with the score further revised by him — drew even wider praise. And all this for an opera that the composer, by his own account, had despaired of ever seeing staged again.“I think this work in particular speaks to the average person because of the dramatic intensity of his writing,” said Susan T. Danis, the general director of the Florida Grand Opera, which presented a well-received production of “Mourning” in 2013.Speaking by telephone on Wednesday, she added: “I have many patrons who said: ‘I’ve seen a million “Bohèmes,” and I don’t remember all of them. But I will never forget this work.’ ”“Mourning Becomes Electra,” with a libretto by Henry Butler, is an adaptation of Eugene O’Neill’s 1931 dramatic cycle of that name. The O’Neill work is based in turn on “The Oresteia,” the Aeschylus tragedy about the sanguinary curse on the House of Atreus.Following O’Neill, Mr. Levy’s opera transfers the action to 19th-century New England. Agamemnon, son of Atreus, has become Ezra Mannon, the patriarch of a haunted, preternaturally dysfunctional clan.“And now, the curtains descend on an afternoon of incest, murder, adultery and suicide; we hope you have enjoyed it,” Mr. Levy recalled Milton Cross, the longtime voice of the Met’s Saturday radio broadcast, intoning plummily as the original transmission of “Mourning” came to a close.The audience may have enjoyed the opera; what is certain is that some critics did not. Though they lavished praise on the Met’s production, conducted by Zubin Mehta and starring Evelyn Lear, John Reardon, Marie Collier and Sherrill Milnes, they were less favorably impressed by the music itself.After December 1967, “Mourning” was not staged again in the United States until the Chicago production 31 years later. But the score would consume Mr. Levy to the end of his life.“The opera is about a curse on the House of Atreus,” Mr. Levy told The Sun-Sentinel of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., in 2013. “This opera put a curse on the House of Levy.”Marvin David Levy was born on Aug. 2, 1932, in Passaic, N.J.; his parents, ardent classical music listeners, ran a luncheonette in Newark. Marvin studied piano as a child, taking lessons at the Juilliard School with the distinguished pianist Carl Friedberg. After receiving a bachelor’s degree from New York University, where he majored in music and minored in philosophy, he did graduate work at Columbia, studying under the composer Otto Luening.There, amid prevailing atonal winds, Mr. Levy abandoned the lyrical style that came naturally.“I was young, and seduced by several influences including my desire to impress people,” he told The Seattle Times in 2003. “At Columbia University, I was studying in the cradle of atonality, writing scores full of cross-rhythms and scoring so complicated that my manuscripts looked like Jackson Pollock paintings.”His early work had significant admirers. In December 1959, Mr. Levy’s Christmas oratorio, “For the Time Being,” had its premiere at Carnegie Hall.“I find a new young Britten lurking in you,” Bernstein wrote to him after the concert. “I think that before you are through you’ll make opera history.”In 1960, Mr. Levy was awarded a Guggenheim fellowship; in 1964, he received the Rome Prize, a major international award for composition.Then came “Mourning.” Reviewing the world premiere in The New York Times, Harold C. Schonberg wrote: “To compound the strangeness of the score, it ends up sounding completely impersonal — neutral, even nondescript.” He added: “In short, everything about the opera was convincing except the music.”Mr. Levy continued to compose and taught at Brooklyn College and elsewhere. But “Mourning Becomes Electra” appeared to have run its course, and major commissions evaporated.“That’s the way the music business operates,” he told The Chicago Tribune in 1998. “You do a world premiere, it’s a novelty, and it gets you noticed as a supporter of American opera. Once it’s over, the novelty is gone; you become a secondhand rose.”During a fallow period in the late 1970s, Mr. Levy became involved — unwittingly, he later said — as a go-between in the drug-smuggling ring.“He was very open about having a real low point,” the soprano Lauren Flanigan, a friend and collaborator since the late 1990s, said in an interview. “It’s in a funny way what bonds him to all great writers. Not that they all go to prison, but they all had some kind of existential low point which leads them to make choices they regret.”As The Tribune reported in 1987, an unnamed friend asked Mr. Levy to hold money for him in a safe deposit box. During 1979 and 1980, “it was estimated that as much as $25 million could have passed through Levy’s hands,” The Tribune wrote.“I didn’t even look in the box,” Mr. Levy told the newspaper in the same article. “By the time I realized what was going on, I couldn’t get myself out. I knew too much.”In 1981, federal authorities broke the ring in Washington State; in 1982, Mr. Levy, about to be subpoenaed by a grand jury, fled to Europe. On his return to the United States later that year, he was arrested, tried and convicted of conspiracy. Sentenced to two concurrent five-year terms, he was incarcerated in a string of federal penitentiaries.As hard as the experience was, Mr. Levy said, it also forged his resolve “to say musically what I wanted to say.” In his cell, he began composing again. He was released in 1984.In 1987, after not having heard his work played for six years, Mr. Levy attended a performance by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and Chorus of his newly reworked dramatic oratorio “Masada.” The reviews were lukewarm, but his prison epiphany had equipped him to wrestle with “Mourning” once more.To prepare for the Lyric Opera’s revival in 1998, he shortened the score, scrubbed away the patina of atonality and gave lyricism free rein. The production, conducted by Bruno Bartoletti and starring Ms. Flanigan, Cynthia Lawrence, Jason Howard and Randolph Locke, drew effusive praise.“The composer and the company have scored an unalloyed triumph,” Lawrence A. Johnson wrote in The New Criterion. “Indeed, in its revised form, ‘Mourning Becomes Electra’ may be the great American opera we’ve been waiting for.”A former artistic director of the Fort Lauderdale Opera, Mr. Levy had resided in Fort Lauderdale since the late 1980s. He lived a spartan existence in subsidized housing there, surrounded by his piano and his scores.His death, in Fort Lauderdale, was from complications of a fall, said a friend, Jan Solomon. No immediate family members survive.Mr. Levy’s other work includes a piano concerto, given its premiere in 1970 by Earl Wild with the Chicago Symphony under Georg Solti. But it was “Mourning” that continued to haunt him.“It certainly has overshadowed my entire career,” he told The New York Times in 2004, before the City Opera production. “All I know is I’m never satisfied with it, and I keep on trying to get it into better shape. And now that it’s in New York again, let’s hope that’s the end of it.”The year before last, when the Florida Grand Opera staged “Mourning,” Mr. Levy supplied the company with a bespoke version, freshly revised.Advertisement