 It is one of the best posts in classical music — chief conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic — and no doubt many of the maestros who were vying for the job earlier this year would have quickly cleared their schedules to take it on if they had gotten it.But Kirill Petrenko, the respected musician’s musician who was ultimately elected to the position in June by the players of the Philharmonic after their first several ballots were inconclusive, does not appear to be in a particular hurry to start. Mr. Petrenko, the general music director of the Bavarian State Opera in Munich, has extended his contract there through August 2021, the opera company announced Tuesday, and the Philharmonic announced that he would not officially become chief conductor in Berlin until the 2019-20 season, though the current chief conductor, Simon Rattle, is stepping down in 2018.The Berlin Philharmonic said in a statement that Mr. Petrenko would appear as a guest conductor with the orchestra next season and the following, and conduct programs both in Berlin and on tour during the 2018-19 season, before becoming chief conductor in 2019. But even then his schedule in Berlin will be a limited one, the orchestra said: “With respect to his obligations with Bavarian State Opera in Munich, Kirill Petrenko will initially take on only a limited number of concerts during his first season as chief conductor in Berlin.”The Bavarian State Opera in Munich has established itself in recent years as one of the world’s most exciting opera houses; Mr. Petrenko became its music director in 2013. Its general manager, Nikolaus Bachler, has also extended his contract there through August 2021. The company said that in recognition of Mr. Petrenko’s commitments in Berlin, his title would revert to “guest conductor” during his final season in Munich.Mr. Petrenko said in a statement that he felt “very dedicated” to the Bavarian State Opera and its orchestra and “not least of all to Munich’s wonderful public.” Martin Hoffmann, the general manager of the Berlin Philharmonic Foundation, issued a statement thanking the opera company’s management, “with whom we were able to reach an amicable agreement on all scheduling issues.” And Ulrich Knörzer, a member of the orchestra’s board, said in a statement, “The response in the music world to the election of Kirill Petrenko as successor to Sir Simon Rattle was overwhelming, so we are delighted that we now have a timetable for his taking office, and that we can present our future chief conductor to the Berlin public in all future seasons.”