AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeThe young conductor Michele Mariotti’s precocious eminence in bel canto opera isn’t, perhaps, such a surprise. As a child, he made batons out of skewers and Champagne corks, waving them along to recordings.He comes from Pesaro, Italy — also the birthplace of the composer Gioacchino Rossini, whose opera “La Donna del Lago” Mr. Mariotti leads at the Metropolitan Opera starting Monday. His father, a prominent physician, is the longtime administrative head of Pesaro’s famed Rossini Opera Festival, which has been held each summer since 1980.But to hear the younger Mr. Mariotti tell it in heavily accented English, there was a time he dreamed only of pursuing a career in basketball, a sport Pesaro happens to adore about as much as it does Rossini.His aspiration was, well, implausible, since the boyish Mr. Mariotti, 35, stands, at best, an inch or two taller than a vertically challenged journalist who was interviewing him after a recent rehearsal at the Met. That reporter may have involuntarily snorted with laughter when Mr. Mariotti said that his original plan was to become an Italian hoops star.“I’m short, but I was good, I was good,” he insisted with an excited smile, his eyes twinkling and his center-parted hair flopping as cheerfully as it does on the podium.Thankfully for music (and for the Pesaro basketball team’s prospects), reality intervened, along with destiny. “My memory of the summer when I was younger, it was the smell of the velvet of the theater,” Mr. Mariotti, a calmly poetic storyteller, recalled. “I could see, very close, the giants working: Claudio Abbado, Chailly, Jurowski, the best of the singers. I could see each opera growing up.”Drawing on this well of experience, Mr. Mariotti has swiftly risen to prominence leading the operas of Rossini, Bellini and Donizetti, using his rare gifts for understanding how the works breathe and for teasing out nuances in scores that many once thought simplistic. Though his international career is just a few years old, the Met has entrusted him with its first-ever performances of “La Donna del Lago,” starring Joyce DiDonato and Juan Diego Flórez, and directed by Paul Curran.The seventh of nine operas Rossini composed for the Teatro San Carlo in Naples and its prima donna, Isabella Colbran, “La Donna del Lago” (1819) is based on Walter Scott’s narrative poem “The Lady of the Lake,” which enraptured Europe with its portrayal of the lovelorn, war-torn Scottish Highlands. Rossini and his librettist, Andrea Leone Tottola, played down the poem’s political themes in favor of its complex romantic plot, with several men competing for the affections of Elena, the lady of the title.Popular until the middle of the 19th century, the opera was then abandoned, along with most of the others from its period, until the bel canto revival that began in the 1950s and ’60s. This renaissance revealed “La Donna del Lago” as a forgotten gem, its lyrical outpourings and stirring ensembles capped by Elena’s final aria, “Tanti affetti,” one of opera’s greatest vocal showpieces and one of Ms. DiDonato’s most arresting concert-hall calling cards.In its sensitive evocation of nature, the opera anticipates Rossini’s final masterpiece, “Guillaume Tell” (1829). “You have to understand this opera is a wet opera, a humid opera,” Mr. Mariotti said. “The lake is not important just because it’s in the title, but because if you stare at a mountain, you can fix your eyes. But if you’re looking at the sea, it’s impossible to fix one point. This opera always moves. If you want to grab the ground you can grab it, but you can’t grab water.”That changeability, with lines that inhale, exhale and shift, coexists with aspects of the score that are characteristically Rossinian in their exuberant rhythmic thrust, requiring scrupulous attention from the conductor to maintain energy while varying the textures and colors.In a recent run-through of the second act, Mr. Mariotti brought out gradations of volume, emphasizing quiet passages against which Rossini’s fortissimo bursts stood out all the more shockingly. An observer could perceive the tiny applications of an individual vision, one that favors subtlety over headlong propulsion. Mr. Mariotti added an expressive, momentary pause before the third beat in one bar and the slightest lean on another phrase, a small yet potent spark of passion.“He sees a lot of potential in the score that not many conductors see,” Mr. Flórez said by phone. “The accents, the short notes, the long notes, the crescendo, the dramatic content in the orchestra depicting whatever the singers are expressing.”For many years, the Met was accused of waiting too long to spot young maestros, but under its current general manger, Peter Gelb, it has given early outings to Andris Nelsons, Yannick Nézet-Séguin, Pablo Heras-Casado and others. After the company’s artistic administrator, Jonathan Friend, heard Mr. Mariotti conduct in Pesaro, where he had some of his first important successes, the Met grabbed him, at the cusp of his international career, for a debut with “Carmen” in 2012.Then luck was with him, and he replaced a colleague who was originally slated to lead the 2013 premiere of the Met’s 1960s-Vegas themed production of “Rigoletto.” Mr. Mariotti won acclaim, demonstrating, as Anthony Tommasini wrote in The New York Times, “a sure feel for the give and take singers need to shape a Verdi line.”Those runs seemed like preludes, though, to recent Met productions of operas for which he displays the deepest affinity: a velvety, aching take on Bellini’s “I Puritani” last spring and a crisp, unusually nuanced rendition of Rossini’s “Il Barbiere di Siviglia” in the fall. “Mr. Mariotti led an attentive, febrile performance from the orchestra that showed meticulous attention to small details,” Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim wrote of that “Barbiere” in The Times.Mr. Gelb said by phone: “He has enormous potential in lots of repertoire. But he seems most comfortable and at home with bel canto.” Mr. Mariotti will lead a revival of “La Donna del Lago” at the Met next season, and Donizetti’s “Lucia di Lammermoor” soon.“We’re in an era with lots of bel canto repertoire,” Mr. Gelb added. “I think there’s a lot more ahead.”Meanwhile, Mr. Mariotti is developing a strong relationship with the Lyric Opera of Chicago, which he described as “a more European theater” than the Met in terms of its work rhythms. Last season in Chicago, he led a new production of “Il Barbiere di Siviglia” directed by the Broadway veteran Rob Ashford.“There were some exceptional orchestral details,” Anthony Freud, the Lyric Opera’s general director, recalled by phone. “A sense of pace that was unerringly judged. He knows exactly how to create an architecture for a score that allows it to breathe and allows you to listen to the music, not to focus on his interpretation.”This has been Mr. Mariotti’s first season as the music director of the Teatro Communale in Bologna, Italy, after serving as its principal conductor since 2007. Though he plans to leave his position in 2018, after a full decade with the company, his tenure has been a bright, stable spot in an Italian opera landscape that has lately been littered with conductorial turmoil.In September, the venerable Riccardo Muti withdrew from two planned productions at the struggling Teatro dell’Opera di Roma. Gianandrea Noseda stayed on as music director of the Teatro Regio in Turin only after a bitter, public battle with the house’s general manager. (Mr. Mariotti said he was approached during the conflict about taking the Turin position, but demurred.)The root of these troubles is financial pressures and the reductions in government subsidies for the arts, which Italy has begun to treat as a luxury rather than a necessity, a trend Mr. Mariotti rues. “The only way to survive is the culture,” he said. “Not how many mobiles you have, or cars.”In 2012, he married the talented Russian soprano Olga Peretyatko, whom he’d met while conducting her in a production of the Rossini rarity “Sigismondo” in Pesaro in 2010. He said: “She told me — I don’t know if it’s true, but I want to believe her — that she fell in love with my hands.”With an increasing number of people in love with his hands, Mr. Mariotti now has the challenge of shaping his career, deepening his experience in his native bel canto while expanding his repertory to avoid being pigeonholed and branching into symphonic music, to boot.“We’re talking about a number of things,” Mr. Freud said. “Some of them take him into new territory. He’s incredibly mature in that he wants to pace himself carefully. He’s not in a rush to conduct everything under the sun.”He is starting a Mozart cycle in Bologna that will culminate with “Don Giovanni,” and is pressing into Verdi’s later works, including “Don Carlos,” in its original French version, in Bologna and Chicago. Somewhere in the future, there may even be Wagner.But the distant future. Mr. Mariotti said, in an appropriate metaphor as he prepares to conduct such a humid opera, that Wagner is “a sea I’d like to swim in. But not now.”Advertisement