
Playlist By                     
 JON PARELES
 
FEB. 13, 2015
George EzraWANTED ON VOYAGEGeorge Ezra, a young English folk-rocker with fingerpicking, foot-stamping tunes and an unexpectedly grizzled baritone, pulls a Dr. Jekyll-to-Mr.-Hyde personality transformation in the sequence of his debut album, “Wanted on Voyage” (Columbia). He starts out offering all sorts of affection and reassurance, promising to trade riches for love in “Budapest” and begging “Please don’t leave!” in “Cassy O’,” and trying to convince an unhappy woman that “When I hold you I won’t let you go” in “Listen to the Man.” But it’s not long before a different side surfaces: jealous, bitter, pugilistic, vengeful and — in the album’s most bluesy moan of a song, “Did You Hear the Rain?” — openly possessed by Lucifer. Is it an illusion that he sings the nasty ones with more gusto?Natalie PrassNATALIE PRASSHer voice is a wispy soprano, but Natalie Prass has reinforcements on her self-titled debut album (Spacebomb). She’s backed by a rock rhythm section and pit-orchestra arrangements: sustained (and imperfect) strings, fluttering woodwinds, riffing horns, gospelly piano chords, even a harp now and then, and she overdubs her own voice into a modest choir. The production creates a richly retro, slightly cluttered ambience, like a parlor full of inherited knickknacks. It also points the songs toward vintage archetypes of long-suffering women and the men who break their hearts. In song after song, she’s needy, uncertain, wary and still tempted although she knows better. “Even if I wanted to/No, I never, never could get over you,” she sings in “Never Over You,” and the two dozen instruments buoying up her voice still aren’t solace enough.Mount EerieSAUNA“Sauna” (P. W. Elverum & Sun) isn’t a casual title for the new double album by Mount Eerie, the long-running project of the composer Phil Elverum. The patient organ drone of its title track, which dissolves in and out of something more ominous and electric, accompanies the crackle of a fire and the hiss of water hitting heat, while Mr. Elverum sings, in his unassuming but tenacious voice, about “rising steam: a small room.” The sauna becomes a ritual and meditation on physicality, Nature and the human perception that bridges them and makes them matter. In another song, “Planets,” he observes, “As long as I am drawing breath the world still exists/But when I die everything will vanish.” Mr. Elverum’s songs unpredictably traverse the palettes of vintage Minimalism (organ drones, plinking patterns, ethereal women’s voices), freak-folk (lo-fi acoustic guitars) and black metal (deep guitar distortion, crashing drums). What they add up to is an everyday mysticism, a sense of wonder at the strange fact of existence.Pops StaplesDON’T LOSE THISRoebuck (Pops) Staples, the guitarist and patriarch of the Staple Singers, always sounded like a kindly ghost. He led his children in earthy gospel songs that most often featured the deep, sultry lead vocals of Mavis Staples. But those songs were teased forward by his terse, spiky guitar playing with its distinctive tremolo, and his own voice was high and reedy, visiting the otherworldly blues realm of singers like Skip James. In 1999, the Staples family started an album featuring Pops on lead vocals and guitar; it was still unfinished when he died in 2000. Mavis Staples and the producer of her recent albums, Jeff Tweedy of Wilco, have now completed that album, “Don’t Lose This” (Anti-), adding some instruments and vocals, and it’s done right: lean, un-slick and focused on Pops’s vividly recorded guitar and determined voice, still finding the unexpected pause and turn. True to the Staples’ long catalog, the songs are more concerned with surviving present-day hardship and tribulation than with proselytizing. Years after the song was recorded, it’s startling to hear “No News Is Good News,” in which Pops warns, “Too many sidewalks are stained with the blood of our precious children/and those that we love.”Viet CongVIET CONGAll the right memories of post-punk are resurrected on “Viet Cong” (Jagjaguwar), the self-titled debut album by a Canadian band that includes two former members of Women. Viet Cong’s initial EP, “Cassette,” used deliberately dry, scrawny production in songs that clearly echoed sources like Gang of Four and Joy Division; “Viet Cong,” bassy and beefed-up, pushes past them. Viet Cong delivers punk with polysyllables and minimalism with a grudge, a determination to build structures that never stop bristling. The band uses odd and shifting meters, grinding repetition and lyrics filled with shards of disturbing imagery: “Failed to keep the necessary papers for evacuation/Hideously synchronized with cold and cruel arithmetic,” Matt Flegel sings in “Pointless Experience,” as drums sputter and woozy guitars heave from channel to channel. The album’s finale, “Death,” is an 11-minute suite that encompasses gleaming guitar patterns, melodic verses, a long stretch of flat-out one-chord bashing, a sprint of pointillism and dissonance and a final crunch; every swerve increases the impact.A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2015, on Page AR20 of the New York edition with the headline: A Blues Resurrection, a Folk-Rocker Debut and a Punk Revival.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »