AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony TommasiniTaken at face value, the reasons both Alan Gilbert and the New York Philharmonic are giving for his decision to step aside as music director in the summer of 2017 make some sense. Still, this move raises questions about how satisfied the administration is with Mr. Gilbert’s work and sends uncertain signals about the orchestra’s future.When he leaves, Mr. Gilbert will have been at the helm for eight seasons, a decent run. He makes a good point that whoever is music director when the major renovation of Avery Fisher Hall begins in 2019 (if indeed it does begin then) should remain through the two years the Philharmonic will be a nomadic ensemble and then be standing on the podium for the gala reopening. If Mr. Gilbert were to stay, that would increase his tenure to 13 years at a minimum, a long period, though hardly unprecedented.Whatever the full story, when Mr. Gilbert moves on the orchestra and its audiences may regret his loss. I worry less for Mr. Gilbert, who has been increasingly busy with guest stints, including acclaimed performances last year with the Berlin Philharmonic and the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra, and will surely find rewarding work.How Mr. Gilbert’s tenure is assessed is tied to one’s conception of what a music director of a major American orchestra should be. Of course, the core work involves maintaining the skills of the players and giving excellent performances. But a music director should also be a visionary, like a curator, the person who determines that one wing of the repertory needs development, or that a particular collection should be placed in storage for a bit. This person must take charge of outreach and education, foster relationships with living composers and be willing to rethink the protocols of concert life. Mr. Gilbert has excelled at the curatorial components of the job. More than any of his predecessors since Leonard Bernstein, he has tried to expand the template for what a major American orchestra can be. He has demonstrated that Avery Fisher Hall can be turned into a de facto opera house. Working with the ingenious director Doug Fitch, Mr. Gilbert presented productions that have been highlights of my opera-going life, starting with Ligeti’s “Le Grand Macabre.” He made a composer-in-residence essential to the leadership team. He started the Contact! series of contemporary programs, which has given the august Philharmonic a role in the downtown new music scene. Last spring Mr. Gilbert introduced the Biennial, among the most ambitious contemporary music projects any American orchestra has undertaken. His goal is nothing less than to have the Philharmonic spearhead a festival that will be classical music’s answer to the art world’s Venice Biennale. So what’s the problem? For some, including quite a few critics and loyal Philharmonic patrons, Mr. Gilbert, though a skilled conductor and insightful musician, has given too many performances of the staples that lacked crackle and excitement, some extra measure of inspiration.For me, this sells short the distinctive qualities of his work. One of the most essential challenges for a conductor is to bring players together to reveal how a piece of music, simply put, goes. What leads to what? Which inner details should be emphasized, which ones folded in?Maybe other conductors bring more sheer intensity and emotional fervor to, say, Mahler. But I have heard many Mahler performances nearly ruined by overemphasis on the frenzied, cosmic elements of the music. There is plenty of shock and awe in Mr. Gilbert’s accounts of these touchstone scores. But he also makes the Mahler symphonies come across as organic pieces. He has given performances of standards, from his reverent and stirring account of Bach’s Mass in B minor, to his stealthy, weighty take on Stravinsky’s “The Rite of Spring,” that sent me home thinking hard about works I thought I knew thoroughly.Replacing him may not be easy. Given the advance planning among major orchestras, the Philharmonic is starting this search late. Many of the artists who might be strong candidates are under contract at other orchestras, like David Robertson, now ensconced at the St. Louis Symphony, or Yannick Nézet-Séguin, who just extended his contract with the Philadelphia Orchestra. The administration must find someone willing to embrace two years of homelessness as an opportunity for experimentation and not a disaster. If the Philharmonic manages to entice an available eminence, will that maestro be willing to take the orchestra to alternative halls throughout New York City for two seasons? Suppose the Philharmonic puts its faith in a young dynamo, like the exciting Pablo Heras-Casado, whom New Yorkers are getting to know through his work with the Orchestra of St. Luke’s, or boldly brings in a relative unknown, someone like the impressive Susanna Malkki, who will make her Philharmonic debut this May. Subscribers and longtime patrons will have to be excited enough to follow this new leader when the Philharmonic becomes New York’s roving orchestra. Also, the Philharmonic is assuming that this unproven new music director can galvanize donors to give hundreds of millions in contributions toward the renovation. Not long ago, Mr. Gilbert sounded eager to take on the challenge. Being without Avery Fisher Hall, he said, would force everyone — the administration, players, patrons, audiences — to accept experimental ways of presenting concerts. It’s a risk he seemed willing to take. The Philharmonic could truly become New York City’s orchestra, Mr. Gilbert emphasized. It might have made sense to keep him on the job past the renovation, then let him turn his rejuvenated Philharmonic over to a new leader in, hopefully, a much-improved hall.Mr. Gilbert may not be Mr. Charisma, but he is game for anything. During the staged performance of Stravinsky ballets he did with Mr. Fitch, Mr. Gilbert, dressed in a satiny cape, leapt off the podium, playing the magician who introduces the puppets of “Petrushka” to the carnival revelers.I have long argued that orchestras should put their faith in adventurous leaders with a curatorial streak and bring in towering maestros as guests. Are we really going to pick the music director of America’s oldest orchestra in its cultural capital based on how splendidly he or she conducts the Beethoven symphonies?Advertisement