AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave ItzkoffLOS ANGELES — On a sunny January afternoon, James Corden stood on the roof of CBS Television City, the boxy building where he will take over as host of the network’s “Late Late Show,” and surveyed his new domain. He was less focused on his semiprivate panorama of the city, with the landmark Hollywood sign seemingly close enough for him to grab in one hand, than on the unused rooftop around him. Though Mr. Corden, 36, does not start his show here until March 23, he was excitedly describing a hypothetical plan to have a camera track the path from the “Late Late Show” studio below — presently as barren and yawning as a high school gymnasium — to this outside area where some of-the-moment rock band could perform for his program.“This is ours,” he said in his resonant British accent. “All this is ours.”But will CBS actually let him do this?“Well,” he replied with a chuckle, “I’m not entirely sure if they’ll let us do anything.”Four months earlier, CBS revealed it had hired Mr. Corden, a bubbly, burly, bearded British actor and comedian not widely known in America, to take over the show from Craig Ferguson, who had made it his perch for stream-of-conscious monologues and laid-back interviews for nearly 10 years.Mr. Corden’s appointment concluded a complete turnover in CBS’s late-night roster, beginning with David Letterman’s announcement that he was stepping down as host of its flagship “Late Show,” and the network’s decision to succeed him with Stephen Colbert, the puckish anchor of “The Colbert Report” on Comedy Central.Now that Mr. Corden has the job, he has a few weeks to wrestle with the existential question of just what the job is: to summon the irrepressible energy he has channeled as a British TV host and Tony Award-winning Broadway star; to set aside the question of whether American viewers know who he is (“I hope it doesn’t matter,” he said, “because no one does”); and to determine what to create, keep or throw away in an hourlong program where he is inheriting little more than its title. Speaking later that day from his office, furnished with a basic desk and couch and a box of diapers for his infant daughter, Mr. Corden said: “When you get a job like this, your first thought is, ‘Oh, let’s rip up the rule book — let’s do the whole show in a white box!’ ”But he quickly realized, he said, “no one wants to be the arrogant British guy who isn’t paying homage to the institution.”Presented with the deceptively limited format of a late-night talk show and charged with attracting a youthful viewership in an oversaturated landscape, Mr. Corden asked: “How do we bring an audience who are, in many ways, lethargic and apathetic about watching television when it’s on? How do we show them that this is a show worth staying up for — that is worth closing their laptops for?”Beyond his door were empty offices and desks, waiting to be populated with the staff responsible for helping answer these questions. Mr. Corden spent part of that morning in a conference room with the five writers he’d hired so far — the late-night veterans David Javerbaum (“The Daily Show”) and Mike Gibbons (“Tosh.0”) and the comedians Sean O’Connor, James Davis and Ian Karmel — brainstorming ideas for a program that so far had no form or structure. The conference room’s walls were to be covered with index cards color-coded for different segments — in-studio games; field pieces — but they were largely bare, aside from cards with ambiguous, tantalizing phrases like “Can We Start a Trend?,” “Mystery Quiz” and “Oh Dear.”Leaning back in his chair, placing his feet on the conference table and occasionally glancing at his smartphone, Mr. Corden heard pitches for segments that could involve Reggie Watts, his “Late Late Show” bandleader, or the pop singer Sam Smith. Some ideas were met with the host’s boisterous, approving cackle; others were dismissed as too similar to bits the writers had seen on “Chelsea Lately” or Craig Kilborn’s old “Late Late Show.” Asked how he could possibly be original in a field where it seems like it’s all been done before, Mr. Corden said the key was confidence. “Nobody wants a needy host,” he said. “Nobody wants a host who’s begging you to come to their party.”Though he has played manic, comically desperate characters in the film version of “Into the Woods” and the Hulu series “The Wrong Mans,” Mr. Corden comes across with much more self-assurance behind the scenes.Having grown up working-class in High Wycombe, a “beautifully ordinary” suburb west of London, he enjoyed breakthrough success in his 20s, in “The History Boys,” Alan Bennett’s play (and its film adaptation) about a class of teenage students, and on “Gavin and Stacey,” the hit BBC romantic comedy he created and co-starred in with Ruth Jones. By the time he went to Broadway in 2012 in “One Man, Two Guvnors,” a knockabout comedy that gave him ample room for improvisation, Mr. Corden was already a favorite of Nina Tassler, the CBS Entertainment chairwoman, who sought him to write or star in a comedy for her network.“There was no denying that this man was a force of nature, an acting tsunami,” Ms. Tassler said. “But there was such a sensitivity, a sweetness and a kindness that he really made an impression on me.”And when Mr. Corden had the opportunity to be considered for “Late Late Show,” he did not hesitate to put his hand up. “I said I think it’s a real challenge,” Mr. Corden recalled, describing his conversations with Ms. Tassler and Leslie Moonves, the CBS chief executive. “And I think it’s an honor to be given such a voice.”Now a married father of two, Mr. Corden said he had never really watched American late-night shows, except when he had trouble getting to sleep after “One Man, Two Guvnors” performances. But in looking back at Mr. Letterman’s old NBC “Late Night” program — say, an episode where the picture rotated 360 degrees — Mr. Corden said he found inspiration. “It embraced an audience of people who wanted to watch TV at 12:30,” Mr. Corden said. “If I look within the darkest corners of my mind, I can’t find an idea weirder than that.”It was no problem for Mr. Corden to supply CBS with an edited reel of the bits he’d performed on his anarchic comedy game show, “A League of Their Own.” But when the network asked for clips of him interviewing other stars, Mr. Corden said, “we were like, ‘No. That’s our point.’ ”The fact that Mr. Corden arrived on CBS’s doorstep without much practice as a talk-show host or a deep background in the American traditions of the format is what made him appealing to the network, Ms. Tassler said.“The identity and the quality of the host informs the kind of show you’re going to do,” she said. “Once we knew that James was our guy, the format was going to be developed and derived from who James is.” CBS was also encouraged when Mr. Corden chose Ben Winston as an executive producer, a well-spoken, well-attired fellow Briton who has produced and directed films and videos for One Direction and Justin Bieber.Mr. Winston, who has also produced several of Mr. Corden’s British TV projects and hosting gigs on the Brit Awards (the equivalent of the Grammys), has also seen his friend through some low moments. There was the time in 2010, Mr. Winston recalled, that Mr. Corden wanted to walk off a live, post-World Cup broadcast, after England’s heavily favored team played to a depressing 1-1 draw against the United States.“He said, ‘If I go on, I’m going to be terrible and my career’s over,’ ” Mr. Winston said. “ ‘If I don’t go on, I won’t be able to work for two years, but the money I will make from the book will be outstanding.” (He added that Mr. Corden “went on and he pulled it off, and I had to have some severe words with him later.”)Today, Mr. Winston said, “when James has an opinion that you fundamentally disagree with, what you absolutely can’t do is try to argue with him.”“He’s very quick and very funny, and absolutely certain that he’s right,” he added. “You let him roll with it, and then you go into his room two hours later, and you say, ‘Hey, listen, about that thing.’ ”Mr. Corden made no apologies for holding strong opinions. “I don’t think people are tuning in to see a show where someone goes, ‘Uh, um,’ ” he said. Mr. Corden has also hired Rob Crabbe, a veteran of Jimmy Fallon’s “Tonight Show,” as another executive producer. (“They needed to have one American on board,” Mr. Crabbe said.)But so far, it is Mr. Corden who is primarily driving this train, peppering his colleagues with mission statements about what his show should or should not be. “We’re on at 12:30, so we’re always going to be pushing up against the constraints of that,” he told Mr. Winston and Mr. Crabbe. “We have to turn that into a positive for our show. We have to be like Stephen Colbert’s younger brother with A.D.H.D.”In this inchoate, judgment-free phase, he was perpetually questioning every element of the late-night talk-show model: Could his “Late Late Show” guests enter from the back of the studio, so that they pass through the audience as they take the stage? Could that studio have a working bar in it? Does his program have to have an opening monologue? Does it have to have opening credits?Ms. Tassler said she regarded it as an encouraging sign that Mr. Corden and his colleagues were taking nothing for granted. “I don’t want to burst your bubble here,” she said, “but a lot of those things are not decided until, oh, very soon before a series airs. To do a show that’s current and tapped into the zeitgeist, you have to be nimble and flexible and spontaneous.” Mr. Corden is also certain that his “Late Late Show” will have ample time to experiment during its first several months, from the spring, when it is following Mr. Letterman’s final “Late Show” episodes, to the fall, when it could benefit from Mr. Colbert’s “Late Show” debut. “We’re not in a ratings war,” Mr. Corden said. “Your competition is people choosing to fall asleep. You’re not in competition with anything else.”In fact, Mr. Corden will find himself going head-to-head with NBC’s “Late Night,” where the host, Seth Meyers, has enjoyed steady ratings (about 1.5 million viewers a night), buoyed by a strong lead-in from Mr. Fallon and lacking a consistent rival on CBS. And any show capable of producing online clips could be seen as an adversary to Mr. Corden, who, with 4.7 million Twitter followers, understands the importance of virality. “I’ve got friends who love Jimmy Fallon because of these moments,” Mr. Corden said. “And the show doesn’t air in the U.K.”As a counterpoint, Mr. Winston shared a story from a party that Mr. Moonves held for them at his home. “He said: ‘I just want you guys to know, I back you. I back your show. I think you’re going to be great. Ratings will not ever bother me. For the first month.’ ”Mr. Corden and Mr. Winston laughed heartily at this anecdote. “Hang on, guys,” Mr. Corden said. “He was joking, right?”The next day, Mr. Corden was in the office of Diana Miller, a talent executive who is helping book celebrity guests.Without saying who had already committed or who was being pursued, Ms. Miller said, “It’s like a party — everyone wants to know who else is going.” To Mr. Corden, she said, “Essentially, you’re the first guest.”Mr. Corden said it would be all too easy for him to open his first show with a comedy sketch featuring Judi Dench, Daniel Craig, and Victoria and David Beckham. “But that’s not what the show’s about,” Mr. Corden said. “Is it better to go, ‘Hello, this is our show, I hope you come with us’? I still don’t know. Cut to March 23, and we might still be opening with that sketch.”“It’s a toughie, that first show,” Mr. Corden said. He smiled and then started to laugh as he added, “You almost wish you could not ever have it.”Advertisement