



Season 1, Episode 3: “Nacho”Vince Gilligan and his co-writers are black belts in the dark arts of plot kung fu. You run at these people, certain that you can anticipate their next move, and then bam, they hit you with feints and punches you never saw coming. All you can do is giggle and then take a deep breath when you hit the canvas.The twists in “Nacho” are too numerous to catalog, but they arrive straight away. We learn that Jimmy McGill’s past was a tad more sordid than previously known. Cue a flashback to what appears to be the early ’80s, judging from the Rick Springfield-ish rug sported by Bob Odenkirk. He’s in jail on charges that could leave him labeled, for time immemorial, as a sex offender. What did Jimmy do? This isn’t clear, though I Googled “Chicago sunroof,” a phrase he invokes to protest his innocence, to see if it turned up on Urban Dictionary. (It didn’t.)The I’m-scared-straight promises that Jimmy makes to Chuck McGill, who is revealed to be his older brother and — for a time at least — his lawyer, sound pretty tinny. But when the show returns to its version of the present, the rest of the episode suggests that Jimmy is hardly the reprobate he was a decade or so earlier, nor the money-laundering whiz that he will eventually become.If anything, Jimmy proves that he is a pretty decent guy. In an anonymous late-night phone call, he warns Craig Kettleman, the embezzling county treasurer, that his home might be invaded and his ill-gotten gains stolen, part of a scheme that Jimmy learned about from the man who conceived it, Nacho, at the end of Episode 2.This good deed is immediately punished when the Kettlemans ransack their own home and fake their own kidnapping. Nacho is arrested because his van was spotted for a few nights at chez Kettleman, staking out the place. He names Jimmy as his lawyer, and during a jailhouse visit, Nacho accuses Jimmy of framing him.
“You gave my score to another crew,” he fumes, confusing Jimmy for the sort of person who knows a “crew.” “You get me out of here today, or you’re a dead man.”And thus we have the sort of pickle previously found regularly in “Breaking Bad.” The villainous-looking man is innocent, the innocent-looking family is guilty, and Jimmy must prove these improbable facts to the world. This is not a simple feat, though he does briefly acquire an ally — Mike Ehrmantraut, who finally emerges as something more than a parking-lot drudge and, following some actual kung fu of his own, tells Jimmy that the Kettlemans probably didn’t wander far from home.One of my favorite moments in this episode is watching Mike mouth the letters to a crossword-puzzle answer as Jimmy stews by the parking lot gate, a few stickers short.There is also a bit of fun with doubling in this episode. The Kettlemans’s voice-mail message, which sounds lifted from a Mouseketeer (“Hello! You’ve reached Team Kettleman!”) is contrasted with Nacho’s considerably more terse, “Nacho. Leave it.” There are also two takes of Jack Nicholson’s famous “Here’s Johnny!” line from “The Shining” — one that opens the episode, as Jimmy enters the jailhouse room to meet Chuck, and another that closes it, when Jimmy surprises the Kettlemans in their hideout tent.Jimmy is a film buff. This is now abundantly clear. (Remember Episode 1, when he burst into a conference room at his brother’s law firm and quoted “Network.” Or Episode 2’s “All That Jazz” quote?)It’s also clear that the guy has an odd take on phone sex, one that involves speaking through the cardboard core of a paper-towel roll with a piece of tissue rubber-banded to the end. When he uses this makeshift voice-disguise system to warn the Kettlemans in that phone call, he seems a little too adroit at putting the contraptions together. We learn later why.“You didn’t,” says Kim Wexler (Rhea Seehorn), who flags early in the episode that she is Jimmy’s occasional phone-sex partner. “You didn’t do the sex robot voice, did you?”Not the sex robot voice!We learn a bit more of Jimmy’s back story when he pleads for his brother’s legal assistance. We also glimpse, for the first time. Mr. Odenkirk’s limits as an actor. For most of the first three episodes, he has been asked to play hardened wiseacre, frantic kidnap victim, and plenty in between. But when he begs for his brother’s aid, he must sound desperate in a nuanced and quietly vulnerable way. That is the sort of assignment that Bryan Cranston, the lead of “Breaking Bad,” would relish. It is not quite in Mr. Odenkirk’s range, at least not yet.That said, it no longer seems remotely nuts to have built a dramatic show around an actor that is best known for sketch comedy. Mostly he is a hoot, and never more so than when he sinks his teeth into a good insult wrapped in a pop-culture reference.“Hey, Cagney, Lacey,” he tells two cops who doubt his theory that the Kettlemans are unharmed and hiding. “When you realize how wrong you are on this, I’ll take an Edible Arrangement, heavy on the pineapple.”With the Kettlemans apparently now in custody, I’m guessing Nacho now turns from attitude to gratitude, which might be just as dangerous.Then again, with this show, guessing is dangerous.Anyone else going to change their outgoing message to “Nacho. Leave it,” or just me?