“Diary of a Wimpy Kid,” Jeff Kinney’s series about the misadventures of a misfit middle schooler, has sold more than 120 million books and inspired a Hollywood franchise. Now, a musical version will hit the stage next spring, capping off the 50th anniversary season of Children’s Theater Company in Minneapolis. “Diary of a Wimpy Kid: The Musical,” scheduled to run from April 12 to June 5, 2016, features music and lyrics by Joe Iconis and a book by Joe Tracz. Rachel Rockwell, a Chicago-based director known for productions of “Brigadoon” and “Beauty and the Beast,” will direct. Children’s Theater Company, which in 2003 became the first theater for young people to win the Tony Award for regional theater, will offer four other premieres as part of its 2015-2016 season, including a mixture of re-imagined classics and original works.  The season will open on Sept. 1 with “Akeelah and the Bee,” based on Doug Atchison’s 2006 film about an 11-year-old African-American girl who enters the Scripps National Spelling Bee, which has been adapted for the stage by Cheryl L. West, with Charles Randolph-Wright directing. “The Snowy Day and Other Stories by Ezra Jack Keats,” written by Jerome Hairston and directed by Peter C. Brosius, who is also the company’s artistic director, features puppets by Teatro Gioco Vita, a troupe based in Piacenza, Italy. “The Jungle Book,” directed by Greg Banks, re-imagines Rudyard Kipling’s classic, “with an emphasis on the sheer virtuosity of the actors,” according to a release.  “Animal Dance,” created and directed by the choreographer and performance artist Ann Carlson, with Mr. Brosius, is an original piece “developed specifically with preschoolers’ interests and attention spans in mind.” The season will also include productions of “The Frog Bride,” a one-person piece written and performed by David Gonzalez, and a musical version of “The Wizard of Oz,” adapted from the 1939 movie.A version of this article appears in print on 02/17/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: u2018A Wimpy Kidu2019 Musical Debut.