AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayBreakin’ Convention It’s odd that New York, where hip-hop and break dancing took form in the 1970s, has had no regular festival of hip-hop dance, the form that gave rise to many of the innovations of our era (Memphis jookin, for example). By contrast, Sadler’s Wells Theater in London has for 13 years been presenting an annual Breakin’ Convention of hip-hop dance theater from across the world. The good news is that New York is now presenting a local edition of the Sadler’s Wells project: The Apollo in Harlem, after an initial season in 2013, has a second this weekend, from Oct. 16-18.José Limón International Dance Festival In the middle of the 20th century, the dancer-choreographer José Limón (1908-72) was in the forefront of American modern dance; his works were elegant pieces of architecture, full of fervor. While the repertories and companies of several of his contemporaries have vanished, his dances and company may still be seen. The Joyce Theater’s two-week Limón Festival is a rare achievement: an assembly of international troupes, each performing one or more of this master’s works. Eleven Limón pieces will be seen, with the Limón company and four other companies (guests, too) dancing them.HarlequinadeThe commedia dell’arte, with its colorful stock character types (Harlequin, Columbine, Pierrot, Pantaloon and others), exerted an influence that pervaded much of European drama, dance, painting and literature from the 16th to the 19th centuries. Yet how well-known was it in America? A friend tells me of a report of the performers John Bill Ricketts and John During playing Harlequin and Pantaloon in the “Harlequin in Philadelphia” around 1795-1800. There must have been others along similar lines, but research yields little evidence.In 1957, things changed when the Italian performer Carlo Mazzone came to the United States. The Dell’Arte school he founded in Blue Lake, Calif., continues today. And in 1965 George Balanchine made his two-act ballet “Harlequinade,” which returns to New York City Ballet repertory for four performances this week. Catch this endearingly innocent work while you can; this year’s revival was the first in 10 years.Silas RienerFew modern dancers inspire the kind of awe that the lithe and sharp Silas Riener does. Most dancers who joined the Merce Cunningham Dance Company worked their way through its Repertory Understudy Group, but Cunningham fast-forwarded Mr. Riener straight into his troupe in 2007 and made him a most remarkable solo in Cunningham’s final work, “Nearly Ninety” (2009), just three months before his death. A friend observed that Mr. Riener’s uncanny backbends suggested he had different vertebrae from other humans.In 2008, Cunningham also coached Mr. Riener in another extraordinary solo (originally made for Jonah Bokaer) in “Split Sides” (2003). Mr. Riener’s complex play of balance and movement made a sensation when, in the Cunningham company’s final month (December 2011), he danced it at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, and a further sensation when a live video was uploaded to YouTube.Next Tuesday, Mr. Riener will become the first dancer since Cunningham himself to perform Cunningham’s long-lost “Changeling” (1957), another singularly challenging solo. This occurs at the Institute of Contemporary Art in Boston as part of its Black Mountain College exhibition; Mr. Riener does a series of further performances of it there, from November to January.And this week Mr. Riener opens a season of his own solo dances, “Blue Name,” at the Chocolate Factory in Long Island City. It runs until Oct. 28.Advertisement