By LORI HOLCOMB-HOLLANDFEB. 16, 2015
10 P.M. (13) INDEPENDENT LENS Thomas Allen Harris’s documentary “Through a Lens Darkly: Black Photographers and the Emergence of a People” tells the story of the men and women who have captured African-American culture over the past 170 years, including Carrie Mae Weems, Lorna Simpson, Anthony Barboza, Lyle Ashton Harris, Hank Willis Thomas (“Crossroads,” above), Coco Fusco and Clarissa Sligh. A. O. Scott, writing in The New York Times, called the movie “a family memoir, a tribute to unsung artists and a lyrical, at times heartbroken, meditation on imagery and identity.” He added, “The film is always absorbing to watch, but only once it’s over do you begin to grasp the extent of its ambitions, and just how much it has done within a packed, compact hour and a half.”12:30 P.M. (Spike) CARLITO’S WAY (1993) Al Pacino, below, stars as Carlito Brigante in this movie based on two novels by Justice Edwin Torres of the New York State Supreme Court. Released from prison, Carlito returns to Spanish Harlem with dreams of opening a car-rental business and resuming his romance with Gail (Penelope Ann Miller), but his scheming lawyer (Sean Penn) soon pulls Carlito into a plot involving an Italian gangster. Writing in The Times, Janet Maslin said the director Brian De Palma “captures the grandiose romanticism of his story without concentrating too heavily on the hard facts.” The film “is best watched as lively, colorful posturing and as a fine demonstration of this director’s bravura visual style.”8 P.M. (BET) THE BOOK OF NEGROES Based on Lawrence Hill’s novel “Someone Knows My Name,” this six-part mini-series from director Clement Virgo tells the story of a slave’s journey back to freedom. Aunjanue Ellis (“The Help,” “Ray”) stars as Aminata Diallo, who was kidnapped as a child by slave traders and enslaved in South Carolina; became involved in the American Revolution; made her way to Nova Scotia; returned to Sierra Leone, where she was nearly re-enslaved; and eventually settled in London as a free woman.8 P.M. (NBC) THE CELEBRITY APPRENTICE It’s one former talk-show host against another as Leeza Gibbons and Geraldo Rivera face off for the title of Celebrity Apprentice. Their challenge is to create and present a commercial for Universal Orlando Resort. On “State of Affairs,” at 10 p.m., the seventh-floor team gathers to help Charlie (Katherine Heigl), who quit the C.I.A. to track down and kill Omar Fatah (Farshad Farahat). Meanwhile, President Payton (Alfre Woodard) deals with an adversary’s threat to tell the public that Sheikh Hakam doesn’t exist.Advertisement8 P.M. (Fox) GOTHAM A date for Detective Gordon (Ben McKenzie) and Dr. Leslie Thompkins (Morena Baccarin) quickly turns bad when the circus they’re attending is attacked. Butch Gilzean (Drew Powell) helps the Penguin (Robin Lord Taylor) with the nightclub, and Bruce Wayne (David Mazouz, left) schedules a meeting with the Wayne Enterprises board. On “Sleepy Hollow,” at 9 p.m., Ichabod (Tom Mison) and Abbie (Nicole Beharie) fight a group that wants to reawaken a powerful witch coven, and Jenny (Lyndie Greenwood) discovers an unsettling truth about Frank Irving (Orlando Jones).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (Fox Business Network) STRANGE INHERITANCE: J.F.K. LETTERS In a Presidents’ Day edition of this series, the host, Jamie Colby, heads to Boston to view letters written by John F. Kennedy to the mother of a sailor killed on Kennedy’s Navy vessel. The letters contain details of the boat’s run-in with a Japanese destroyer. Ms. Colby talks with the heirs of the letters, who are trying to decide whether to sell them.Advertisement9 P.M. (CBS) STEVIE WONDER: SONGS IN THE KEY OF LIFE — AN ALL-STAR GRAMMY SALUTE A cast of 19 artists come together to celebrate Stevie Wonder, a 25-time Grammy Award winner. Featured performers include Beyoncé, Tony Bennett, Lady Gaga, Ed Sheeran, John Legend and Andrea Bocelli.10 P.M. (AMC) BETTER CALL SAUL The fragile relationship between Jimmy (Bob Odenkirk) and Kim (Rhea Seehorn) is further stretched when Jimmy goes out of his way to prove that his dangerous client is innocent.WHAT’S STREAMING NOWNEW WORLDS (acorn.tv) Jamie Dornan, star of the weekend’s blockbuster “Fifty Shades of Grey,” also leads this four-part period drama set in 1680s Britain and America. Mr. Dornan plays Abe, a heroic outlaw fighting for equality in post-Civil War England who falls in love with an aristocrat named Beth (Freya Mavor). LORI HOLCOMB-HOLLANDA version of this schedule appears in print on February 16, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.