AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertIn 2010, when Sumi Clements and Taryn Vander Hoop founded Summation Dance Company, they were just about to graduate from the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University. Five years later, their all-female ensemble still looks young, and the choreography by Ms. Clements retains the feel of high-level student work, adeptly constructed but emotionally and artistically immature. “Shift,” one of two pieces that Summation presented at the 92nd Street Y on Friday, begins arrestingly with three women arranged on a diagonal, each standing tilted like the earth on its axis. Six more women walk on to join them in that pose but also to collapse to the ground and contract up from it. The nine dancers divide into twos and threes, and as they passed around positions and patterns, they demonstrated Ms. Clements’s skill in moving between full-ensemble passages and smaller groups operating in counterpoint. As dances made for student showcases often do, this 2013 work allows each of its performers, all capable though green, a brief standout moment in a solo or duet. The choreography keeps shifting, with a swirling stage picture suddenly snapping into a new shape, but the mood stays constant. The dancers are vaguely distressed and aggressively protective, on guard against something just offstage. Periodically they turn on one another. The company website suggests that “Shift” is about parallel universes, but Kyle Olson’s score, in which ominous jabs of static, low thrums and deep booms eventually discover a driving beat, could be the soundtrack to a dystopian action film, perhaps one in the “Hunger Games” franchise. The score and the choreography together establish dramatic tension and suspense, yet they do it cheaply, and the clichéd tone emphasizes Ms. Clements’s lack of originality in other areas.“At the Hour” was labeled a preview in the program, but it might have been called a trailer for a sequel to “Shift.” The score by Mr. Olson is in the same mode, and Ms. Clements, working in the same spirit, deftly deploys a slightly smaller cast in a comparable mix of overlapping solos and duets, oppositional groups and full-ensemble poses. Once again, the dancers look wary, but their anxiety seemed misplaced. The danger wasn’t offstage. It was the ruts in which they were moving. Advertisement