AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasIt was 2007 when Peter Martins unveiled his “Romeo + Juliet.” At the time, the New York City Ballet production — which began a run of nine performances on Friday at the David H. Koch Theater — had one thing going for it: Mr. Martins’s decision to cast his leads, particularly Juliet, young. (His Romeos required more experience and strength for partnering.) He worked with students at the City Ballet-affiliated School of American Ballet, including the now-esteemed soloist Russell Janzen, but eventually settled on two fresh company members for the premiere: Robert Fairchild and Sterling Hyltin. They zipped across the stage with a dewy intensity that served the story. Romeo and Juliet find themselves in over their heads, and the same was true of Ms. Hyltin and Mr. Fairchild: young dancers carrying a full-length ballet that required both acting and the physical fortitude to navigate through Mr. Martins’s roller coaster of backbends. Despite thin choreography and a crude, movable set by Per Kirkeby, the casting innovation created a singular realm in which characters could bleed into dancers, and dancers into characters.Why, then, eight years later, are we seeing the same leads on opening night? Debuts were reserved only for Lady Capulet (Rebecca Krohn, seductive and privileged), Friar Laurence (Aaron Sanz, lanky with slender, expressive fingers) and the Prince of Verona (Silas Farley, regal, grounded and holding the stage as if he’d been born there). Without the advantage of young dancers — like, say, Mr. Farley — as the star-crossed lovers, the ballet doesn’t come close to being an eloquent version of the tragic tale. On Friday, Ms. Hyltin and Mr. Fairchild were sincere, generous and, whenever possible, inventive, but they couldn’t transcend this lightweight “Romeo + Juliet.” Of the roles, Juliet has more dramatic heft, which Ms. Hyltin captured in feather-light dancing that took on a grave tautness in the second act. She’s always been a spirited dancer; now she has spirituality. Mr. Fairchild was a poetic-enough Romeo, shedding some of his puppy eagerness for manly fervor, but his part has its limits. Both dancers have grown hugely since the ballet’s premiere, and their skill exposes the threadbare quality of the choreography.Tybalt was given menacing power by Joaquin De Luz, who, like Mr. Farley, embodies stillness to chilling effect yet moves with a thrilling single-mindedness. His intensity is bracing, especially when contrasted with the camaraderie of Romeo and his friends Benvolio (Antonio Carmena) and Mercutio (the jovial, razor-sharp Daniel Ulbricht): with these three, a stroll through the marketplace looks like an outtake from “Entourage.” Isn’t it wrong that their moments together are often more touching than when Romeo is alone with Juliet?When Mr. Martins’s choreography has no call for delicacy — as with the townspeople who, fueled by peppery, airy jumps, have a lovely way of sweeping across the stage — it temporarily lifts the production to a more animated place. The pas de deux remains its downfall. It’s as if Juliet, incapable of remaining upright in Romeo’s presence, must succumb to a constant, vapid state of swoons. Even without the youthful glow of 2007, “Romeo + Juliet” feels too much like teenagers acting out what they think love is supposed to be. New York City Ballet’s winter season continues through March 1 at the David H. Koch Theater; nycballet.com. Advertisement