AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RatliffFree jazz can be elusive. And it can be so by definition: what we’re talking about when we use that term is collective improvisation without a fully written plot, and usually without a prearranged grid of rhythm or harmony. But the early New York free jazz, the kind that the drummer Milford Graves was involved in during the mid-1960s, wasn’t that elusive. It wasn’t that fractured or obscurantist. It could have the immediate clarity of chants or anthems: it was about people working together in full cry, just coordinated enough. You could hear it and understand its essence before you processed its particulars. And that can also be said for what Mr. Graves did in a clear and quicksilver trio set on Friday night at the Village Vanguard with the alto saxophonists John Zorn and Steve Coleman.Starting last Tuesday, Mr. Zorn programmed the Vanguard with a complex run of gigs: six nights (and one Sunday afternoon), a different ensemble for almost every set. This one stood out for the fact that this trio had never performed together before, that Mr. Graves had never played in the Vanguard (or at least didn’t remember if he had, when asked after the set) and that it combined three musicians with ideas bigger than jazz, bigger than improvisation, and certainly bigger than the contours of any particular performance.Mr. Graves is important to American music. For decades he has also had an abiding professional interest in the relationship between music and the human heart, as a basis for holistic healing. Mr. Zorn has played improvised duos with him on and off since 1999; Mr. Graves has had a sparser history with Mr. Coleman, starting with some gigs in the late ’80s. But Mr. Zorn and Mr. Coleman have a lot in common, if you squint. They’re builders of musical systems and networks, of multiple bands and projects and research interests, historical and mystical, connecting new aesthetics to ancient practice. They’re concerned with teaching and community building, often by unorthodox or grass-roots means.Mr. Zorn and Mr. Coleman are also fascinated by form, and this is what gave the Friday set its shine, in its tension between intuitive freedom and an organizing, sometimes even symmetrical form. It proceeded in logical sections, with pauses: first all three together, then a Zorn-Graves duo, then a Coleman-Graves duo, then the two saxophonists alone, then the trio again. Both saxophonists have strong, bright tones, and when playing together their unison sound was gorgeous: it had a pulsation, an inner life. But they also quickly figured out distinct roles. Mr. Coleman gravitated toward rhythmic short-note cycles, Mr. Zorn toward longer grounding patterns and textured cries and careful exercises in timbre, sometimes made by pressing the bell of the horn against the inside of his leg.And Mr. Graves acted as the baseline event, doing what he’s been doing for ages, which is a kind of coordinated polyrhythmic attack on as much of the instrument as possible at once. Before he became a name in a jazz-related context, on records by Albert Ayler and the New York Art Quartet, he was an Afro-Latin music percussionist, a hand-drummer. And his technique over the last 50 years has consolidated both traditions and beyond: integrating bongos into his brightly painted trap set, holding two sticks in a V position in his right hand for maximum utility, using the high-hat and bass-drum pedals for a kind of dancing with the feet rather than for establishing set patterns. His drumming on Friday was dense and quickly shifting, but you could almost always hear something Afro-Latin in it, some version of a dance.Some of the Zorn-Graves collaborations in the past have gotten pretty wild pretty quickly. This was more organized by comparison, whether because of the occasion and the place — the Vanguard, with its 80-year history — or the exercise of adding a third member and the necessity of hearing everyone clearly. But it was no less powerful for that.Advertisement