By ZACHARY WOOLFEOCT. 13, 2015
A Previn-Stoppard Duo …As someone who has lately come around to the delicate pleasures of André Previn’s operatic adaptation of “A Streetcar Named Desire,” I’m intrigued by his disclosure, in a sweet interview with Frank J. Oteri of NewMusicBox, that he’s collaborating on a one-act with Tom Stoppard.… And a Week of Memorable SolosOn Tuesday, at Artists Space Books & Talks, the veteran experimental musician Malcolm Goldstein pays tribute to Ornette Coleman, who died in June.Also on Tuesday, at Roulette, is a bevy of new solo-piano works, in honor of Terry Riley’s 80th birthday, back in June.Also on Tuesday (what a day!), at SubCulture, there’s the first in a series of explorations of the prelude, étude and variation, by the pianist Ian Hobson.AdvertisementAnother piano concert comes on Thursday, when the young British virtuoso Benjamin Grosvenor makes his Carnegie Hall recital debut. To prepare, read Michael White’s profile of this thoughtful prodigy, from this weekend’s Arts & Leisure.AdvertisementThis Cover Looks Like That CoverThe musicologist (and New York Times contributor) Micaela Baranello noticed something about the weirdly cheesy packaging of an important new “Aida” recording. (I haven’t finished it yet, but it’s thus far quite good, if more immaculately crafted than viscerally affecting.)
            I see what you did there, Warner Classics pic.twitter.com/ftbgO33J9F Some Larger GroupsLast month, when he highlighted a flurry of upcoming performances of Telemann works, the Times critic James R. Oestreich included the American Classical Orchestra’s rare presentation, on Tuesday, of the sacred oratorio “Der Tag des Gerichts” (“The Day of Judgment”) at St. Ignatius of Antioch Church.Thursday brings the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra to Carnegie with a program that includes Wolfgang Rihm’s new Duo Concerto for violin and cello. “Dialogue becomes monologue,” William Robin wrote in our Arts & Leisure pages. “The cello and violin are intimately intertwined into a single voice, never playing alone as individuals for more than a few measures as the orchestra flickers around them.”A Composer’s Special Day …He seems not to have been the most happy or pleasant of men, but the Czech composer Jan Dismas Zelenka, baptized on Oct. 16, 1679, created a shining body of work, full of lively rhythms that he may well have learned from Bohemian folk music.Particularly treasurable are the masses he wrote late in his life, apparently for his private devotion rather than for public performance. Here’s a sensitive, nuanced recording of the “Missa dei Patris” by the Virtuosi Saxoniae under Ludwig Güttler:… And a Singer’sThe great baritone Rolando Panerai, born on Oct. 17, 1924, is happily still with us. The website Parterre Box has posted a 1959 Salzburg Festival performance of Mozart’s “Così Fan Tutte” featuring Mr. Panerai alongside a dreamy cast (Irmgard Seefried, Christa Ludwig and Nicolai Gedda) under Karl Böhm. And here, from a 1950s film, is his chilling, wounded yet poised and elegant rendition of “Eri tu” from Verdi’s “Un Ballo in Maschera”:Bravo, Mr. Panerai! Do you have any favorite clips of his work? Any performances you’re especially looking forward to? Let me know in the comments, or email zach.woolfe@nytimes.com, or tweet @zwoolfe. Happy listening!We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.