LOS ANGELES — Over a series of late October days, camera operators working on an episode of ABC’s “Modern Family” set aside their typical high-definition videocameras and picked up iPhones. The command “Action!” was followed by a tap of that familiar red button on the device’s small video screen.The result, which will be shown next Wednesday, Feb. 25, is an episode shot almost exclusively on mobile devices, an approximation of the way that many actual modern American families (of a certain class) communicate today.“Connection Lost” begins on the laptop screen of Claire Dunphy (Julie Bowen), who sits in an airport waiting for her flight. It becomes apparent very quickly that she is struggling to find her daughter Haley (Sarah Hyland) after a fight. Before long, the screen is filled with text messages, emails and FaceTime video chats with the rest of the family.“I have two daughters at college, and we do a lot of FaceTiming,” Steve Levitan, the show’s co-creator and executive producer, said at a Q&A session last week on the Fox studio backlot when asked about the episode’s inspiration. “One day I was on my computer, and I had some emails open, and some websites, and then my daughter showed up. But I couldn’t only see her, but I could see me.”The show was also partly influenced by the short film “Noah,” which was created by the Canadian film students Walter Woodman and Patrick Cederberg. That film is set entirely on the titular character’s computer screen as he goes through a wrenching breakup via Facebook and a few different messenger apps.“Modern Family” writers and editors said shooting “Connection Lost” ended up being more difficult than they had anticipated. At certain points in the episode there are three different screens open on Claire’s computer — one shows her sitting in the airport, while the others show various family members in their respective homes. To create a sense that the actors were all actually communicating on FaceTime, the scenes were all recorded simultaneously, sometimes with as many as three sets rolling at the same time.“Everything was shot on the iPhone 6 or new iPads,” Mr. Levitan said. “With one or two small scenes shot using MacBook Pros.”Tony Orcena, an editor on the show, said there were also some learning curves when figuring out how to shoot the episode with mobile devices. “At first, actors tried holding the iPhones themselves,” he said, but given that they had to focus on lines and other cues, some shots ended up showing the ceiling or floor, rather than an actor’s face. To solve this problem, camera operators took control of the iPhones and the actors grabbed the operator’s arm, thereby appearing to be in control of the phone as it moved around.If the episode’s multiple points of visual focus are at moments confusing, that’s on purpose. “We’re sort of in an age now when we have too much information, which can take us down a specific path,” said Megan Ganz, the writer behind “Connection Lost.” “You’re getting too much information too quickly to be able to slow it down and parse it out.” This is exactly what happens to the Dunphys.