Season 6, Episode 5, “Sounding”
There was a lot of voltage coursing through this episode.It was another Ava-centric hour. She’s trying to escape Harlan, escape Boyd, escape the Dixie Mafia and Raylan. Getting far, far away is probably her best option, given her fear that one criminal or another will figure out she was sprung from prison to gather evidence on Boyd. But I’m beginning to rethink my belief that she is resourceful and will come out of this alive. Because it’s pretty clear she hasn’t planned this out in anyway.Boyd has, though. He’s been holding on to something. “I think this has been sitting in my pocket long enough,” he says, slipping a diamond ring off of his pocket watch and on to her finger. Ava doesn’t seem all that happy about it, does she? She is supposed to meet Raylan, but instead tosses her cellphone out of the window, knowing the marshals use it to track her, and hightails it up into the hills to seek the help of Ellstin Limehouse (Mykelti Williamson), smokehouse operator and banker for the county’s criminal element. (A side note here: “Justified” is overwhelmingly white. Limehouse and Rachel Brooks are really the only black characters. And while this may be nothing more than an attempt at accuracy — Harlan County was actually 95.56 percent white in the last census — it still sticks out whenever one of the few non-white characters appear on screen.)Limehouse agrees to help after Ava mentions how he can get his hands on a lot of money. But Ava isn’t telling him about the safe in the pizza parlor. Again, her plan is not particularly clear.Limehouse sends Errol, a never completely loyal member of his crew, down with Ava to get the cash in return for a better escape plan. (Were you as surprised as I was to see him still in Limehouse’s employ?) She tries to trick Errol and escape him, but it’s foiled by another returning favorite: the hapless Constable Bob (Patton Oswalt). He Tasers Errol in order to get him away from Ava, as Raylan wanted. A high-voltage device pops up again as Wynn Duffy and his sidekick Mikey torture Albert Fekus, the former prison guard who framed Ava, with a cattle prod. They want to know how she got out of prison. (Danny Strong, who plays Albert, is quite busy these days. He is the co-creator of the hit TV series “Empire,” co-wrote two “Hunger Games” movies, wrote the screenplay for “The Butler,” and had a recurring role on “Girls.”) Finally we start to see how Boyd is going to get into the Pizza Portal. Going in the front door, against three trained killers, never made much sense. So what do you do in mining country when some of your crew used to be miners? You dig! The Markham gang is perplexed as to why people aren’t selling their land. (Boyd’s crew has warned them not to.) Dim-witted Choo-Choo, who continues to be one of my favorite characters of this final season, and who is willing to kill a waitress for skimming $40 a night, says, “Ain’t no problem. People don’t want to sell, I kill them.” Later, when Choo-Choo is told to lay into a real estate agent being tortured, he hits the guy and kills him. It was supposed to be a “starter tap.” That’s not Choo-Choo’s style. “You want him flat like a little girl, you do it. You ask me, he gets Amtrak-ed.”The last bit of voltage in this episode: Ava kisses Raylan. “You should go,” she says. “If you don’t mind I was just thinking I’d stick around for a bit,” he responds. I get Ava’s motivations, but is Raylan back to making stupid decisions? What do you think happened next? You do see Raylan turn, as if to leave, but there’s no sound of a door slamming shut.Other notes: It is starting to feel like every fan favorite — the ones still alive, at least — will make a guest appearance in this last run of episodes? Who do you want to see back, even just for a bit?Did you note that Ava’s maiden name is revealed to be Randolph, not Carter, as it is in the Elmore Leonard books? So was she teasing Choo-Choo a few episodes back by giving him her maiden name?  And finally, the show drink: The bottle Boyd delivers as a peace offering to Zachariah Randolph, Ava’s uncle, is Ancient Ancient Age 10 Star bourbon, yet another bourbon from Buffalo Trace Distillery. (This show seems to have a thing for Buffalo Trace brands, but the company does make a lot of different kinds.)  Ancient Ancient Age 10 Star — not to be confused with Ancient Age 10 Year — is considered a lower-shelf bourbon, costing about $20. Maybe it wasn’t the most impressive gift: “Don’t seem like that bottle is gonna get it done,” one the gang says. See you next week and remember, as Katherine Hale says: “Any more fighting and grandma is gonna lock y’all in the closet.”