By LORI HOLCOMB-HOLLANDFEB. 17, 2015
9 P.M. (13, 49) THE ITALIAN AMERICANS More than four million Italians emigrated to the United States from 1880 to 1924, mostly coming from southern Italy and Sicily to escape poverty. This series, narrated by the actor Stanley Tucci and written by John Maggio, spans four generations of Italian-Americans, beginning with the large wave of immigration in the late 19th century and continuing to the present day. Along the way, the two-part series uses archival material and interviews with experts and prominent Italian-Americans (like Mario M. Cuomo, above; Tony Bennett; and Gay Talese, to name a few) to tell the stories of those who played important roles in shaping the relationships between Italians and Americans, and how immigrants, once considered outsiders, have risen over time to become leaders in business, politics and the arts.3:45 P.M. (HBO East) WHAT LIES BENEATH (2000) The director Robert Zemeckis, who worked on a creature-of-the week-type TV show in the 1970s before moving on to films like “Forrest Gump,” dusted off his shock chops for this thriller about a woman haunted by the ghost of her husband’s lover. Michelle Pfeiffer, above, stars as Claire, a woman still traumatized by a car accident she had a year earlier. With her daughter off at college and her husband (Harrison Ford) always busy at work, Claire has no one to turn to when she begins to suspect that she may not be alone at home after all.8 P.M. (TCM) BEN-HUR (1959) This epic blockbuster swept the 1960 Academy Awards by winning 11 prizes, including best film, best director for William Wyler and best actor for Charlton Heston. Based on Gen. Lew Wallace’s 1880 novel, “Ben-Hur” is the story of Judah Ben-Hur (Heston), a Jewish prince who seeks revenge after he is betrayed by Messala (Stephen Boyd) — his childhood friend who is now a Roman tribune — and is sent into slavery. His quest for revenge culminates in a dramatic chariot race, that Bosley Crowther, writing in The New York Times, described as a “stunning complex of mighty setting, thrilling action by horses and men, panoramic observation and overwhelming dramatic use of sound.”8 P.M. (NBC) PARKS AND RECREATION In the first of two episodes, Andy (Chris Pratt) films a special finale to his TV show. At 8:30 p.m., Leslie (Amy Poehler) helps Tom (Aziz Ansari) plan an important evening; Ben (Adam Scott) and April (Aubrey Plaza) conduct a series of interviews; and Ron (Nick Offerman) gets help adjusting to a life change.Advertisement8 P.M. (USA) 139TH WESTMINSTER KENNEL CLUB DOG SHOW Who is the fairest pup of them all? We’ll find out tonight as the competition winds down with finals in the sporting, working and terrier groups, as well as names the best in show in a live broadcast from Madison Square Garden. Above, Mary Lou Hanlon and Wizard, a Border collie.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.8:30 P.M. (ABC) REPEAT AFTER ME The actress and comedian Wendi McLendon-Covey hosts this new series, which puts unsuspecting people in unusual situations in this comedic, hidden-camera reality show. Each week, Ms. McLendon-Covey will instruct her celebrity friends via an earpiece to interact with people in public places. The best moment of each night will be decided in front of a live studio audience. This week’s guests are Ellen Pompeo, Taye Diggs and Harry Connick Jr.Advertisement9 P.M. (TNT) RIZZOLI & ISLES Maura (Sasha Alexander) fears that she may have lost her best friend after Jane (Angie Harmon) jumps off a bridge to save a prosecutor suspected of killing his mistress.10 P.M. (TLC) OUR LITTLE FAMILY This series follows the Hamills of Maryland — a family of five whose members all have a form of dwarfism — as they work, play and overcome challenges. In the series premiere, audiences meet the parents, Dan and Michelle, and their children: Jack, 6, and the twins Cate and CeCe, 3.WHAT’S STREAMING NOWCREATIVE SPARK: NEIL PATRICK HARRIS Mr. Harris has hosted the Emmy Awards twice and the Tonys four times, but next Sunday will be his first time hosting the granddaddy of all awards shows: the Academy Awards. In the latest installment of “Academy Originals,” a weekly web series from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Mr. Harris gives a behind-the-scenes look at how he is preparing for the big event. (YouTube.com/academyoriginals) LORI HOLCOMB-HOLLANDA version of this schedule appears in print on February 17, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.