Compiled by JENNIFER SCHUESSLERFEB. 17, 2015
The drag queen RuPaul, left, the magician David Blaine, the dancer Suzanne Farrell and the “Mad Men” creator Matthew Weiner are among the speakers set to appear in the spring season of the New York Public Library’s Live From the N.Y.P.L. series. Tickets go on sale on Tuesday.The season begins on March 16 with Mr. Blaine, who will no doubt find the experience more pleasant than standing on top of a 100-foot-tall pillar for 36 hours without a safety net, as he once did in Bryant Park, right behind the library’s 42nd Street building. He will be followed on March 20 by RuPaul, above, the host of “RuPaul’s Drag Race,” whose autobiography “Lettin It All Hang Out” is at least one of the library’s branches, according to the online catalog. The season includes some more conventional writerly types, like the novelist Per Petterson (April 24); the philosopher Slavoj Zizek (March 31); the memoirist Azar Nafisi (April 1); and the poet Elizabeth Alexander (June 9), as well as high-culture figures like Ms. Farrell (May 12) and the art dealer and curator Jeffrey Deitch (March 25).But one of the hottest tickets may be Mr. Weiner, who will be appearing at the library on May 20, days after the “Mad Men” series finale. Over the years, the library has done a number of online tie-ins with that meticulously researched period TV show, tracking books referred to in dialogue or spotted in the background. In 2010, it posted its first “Mad Men” Reading List, followed later by dedicated lists for Sally Draper, Don Draper’s Nancy Drew-loving daughter, and Glenn Bishop, her onetime sort-of boyfriend. And in a blog post last month, it invited the public to identify the book seen peeking out of Peggy’s bag in a recent episode. The answer? “The Penny Wars,” Elliot Baker’s 1968 coming-of-age novel about a sensitive boy growing up in upstate New York.A version of this brief appears in print on February 17, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘Mad Men’ and RuPaul.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.