AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (13) MARY TYLER MOORE: A CELEBRATION Forty-five years ago, Ms. Moore turned the world on with her smile and inspired a generation of women to toss their hats into the wind — and the workplace — with the arrival of “The Mary Tyler Moore Show.” Her own career has spanned more than a half-century, from her Emmy-winning role as Laura Petrie on “The Dick Van Dyke Show” to her Oscar-nominated turn as the grieving mother in Robert Redford’s “Ordinary People.” Here, Mr. Van Dyke, Betty White, Carl Reiner, Valerie Harper, Ed Asner and Cloris Leachman talk about what makes Ms. Moore a national treasure. “I think Mary Tyler Moore has had more influence on my career than any other single person or force,” Oprah Winfrey says. (Image: Ms. Moore)11:40 A.M. (Starz Cinema) HAROLD AND MAUDE Harold, about 20 and obsessed with death, falls in love with Maude, a free spirit 60 years his senior, in this Hal Ashby classic. Harold’s mother, meanwhile, tries to find him a more suitable wife, but he scares off the candidates by pretending to shoot himself in the head, slash his throat and set himself on fire. “As Harold and Maude, Bud Cort and Ruth Gordon are supposed to appear magnificently mismatched,” Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times, not finding most of the antics terribly amusing. He added, “Yet, as performers, they both are so aggressive, so creepy and off-putting, that Harold and Maude are obviously made for each other.” (Image: Ms. Gordon and Mr. Cort)8 P.M. (Fox) GRANDFATHERED Jimmy decides to get to know Gerald a little better by taking him out for a night on the town. In “The Grinder,” at 8:30, Dean can’t believe that Claire, the new senior associate, isn’t interested in him and decides that she must be a mole for another firm. And in “Scream Queens,” at 9, Dean Munsch issues an ultimatum about Chanel’s plans for a pumpkin patch party.8 P.M. (BET) 2015 BET HIP HOP AWARDS Snoop Dogg hosts this ceremony, taped on Friday at the Atlanta Civic Center, where the major honoree, Scarface, received the I Am Hip Hop Award. Moments later, he was arrested backstage on child-support contempt charges.8:30 P.M. (CNN) CNN DEMOCRATIC DEBATE Hillary Rodham Clinton, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont and others make their cases for the presidential nomination.8:30 P.M. (ABC) FRESH OFF THE BOAT Louis tries to make Eddie’s first school dance as perfect as a John Hughes film.9 P.M. (ESPN) TROJAN WAR In December 2000, Pete Carroll took over the failing football program at the University of Southern California and almost immediately turned the team, the Trojans, around. Attendance skyrocketed. Carson Palmer, Matt Leinart and Reggie Bush won Heismans. And the team’s 2006 Rose Bowl match against the University of Texas is considered one of the greatest games in college football history. For the filmmaker Aaron Rahsaan Thomas, then a U.S.C. student, it was also the beginning of the end. Here, “30 for 30” kicks off a third season with this tale about a downfall that resulted in a two-year bowl ban, the loss of 30 scholarships and a forfeiture of victories, including the entirety of the Trojans’ undefeated 2005 regular season.9 P.M. (WGN) MANHATTAN The bomb-devising scientists return to the Hill in Los Alamos, N.M. William Petersen (“CSI”) shows up as the base’s new chief, who believes that God created atoms so America could redraw maps of the world.What’s Streaming NowTHE MARY TYLER MOORE SHOW The series that started a revolution. (iTunes)GLEN CAMPBELL: I’LL BE ME (2014) In 2011, at 75, Mr. Campbell, the country superstar behind standards like “Gentle on My Mind” and “Wichita Lineman,” revealed that he had Alzheimer’s and would embark on a farewell tour. James Keach chronicles 151 shows over 15 months as the music endures, but the man fades away. (netflix.com)Advertisement