AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenThere was a moment late in Jessye Norman’s Carnegie Hall recital of popular standards on Saturday evening when the clouds parted, a shaft of lightning illuminated the hall, and an adoring audience that had waited patiently for a burst of vocal fireworks erupted in a spontaneous standing ovation. That collective sense of relief came when Ms. Norman slipped a rendition of the Habanera from Bizet’s “Carmen” into the otherwise torpid program and unfurled her full operatic voice, which until then, she had held mostly in reserve. Ms. Norman, 69, is still capable of glorious sounds, but they need the drama of an operatic delivery and rich heated vibrato to ignite. In recent years, many opera divas have dabbled in the popular canon with varying degrees of success. Audra McDonald, for one, straddles both worlds so comfortably that they unite. Ms. Norman struggled to find a balance between classical and pop approaches. While adopting a vernacular vocal style, with minimal vibrato along with a somewhat eccentric conversational phrasing, she still treated the American songbook as a species of art song. Her accompanist Mark Markham supplied lush, rippling, semiclassical pianism that forsook strong rhythmic underpinnings to let her determine the tempos, which were almost invariably slow. The bassist Ron Carter and the guitarist Colin Davin, who also played mandolin, appeared, but except for a voice and bass version of “Sophisticated Lady,” their contributions were barely audible. Typical of her approach was her quiet, serene rendition of “All the Things You Are,” which ended with sudden operatic flourishes. The quality that suffered most was Ms. Norman’s intonation. In the passages where she unleashed her power she was relatively secure. But during much of the evening her singing was flat, sometimes gratingly so. Her dynamics were a case of either-or. She was either quiet or restrained or she burst out. Through it all, Ms. Norman kept a smile on her face, while her body language of hands-clasped-to-chest and sweeping gestures expressed an attitude of grandeur to go with the extravagant romantic declarations in the lyrics of “Lover,” “All the Things You Are,” and “The Song Is You.”It was Valentine’s Day after all.Advertisement