By SIOBHAN BURKEFEB. 16, 2015
On Friday at the Joyce Theater, an unusual sound rippled through the audience, a sound not often heard at performances by the Martha Graham Dance Company: laughter.It happened — more than once — during the company premiere of Annie-B Parson’s “The Snow Falls in the Winter,” a dance-theater piece based on Eugene Ionesco’s play “The Lesson.” (Ms. Parson created the work in 2008 for the short-lived ensemble OtherShore.) Of all the non-Graham works that the troupe is presenting this season, Ms. Parson’s is the most unorthodox and, with its absurdist wit and cool restraint, the most complementary to Graham’s heavy, psychologically driven oeuvre. It’s a happy discovery.In many ways, Ms. Parson, an artistic director of Big Dance Theater, could not be more different from Graham. Rather than telling a linear story or building an emotional arc, she dices up texts and strips movement of feeling. Her dancers move more like everyday people than like mythic figures, and they also speak, whether reciting stage directions or fragmented dialogue. They don’t dance to music so much as beside it (including, here, “Hotel California,” by the Eagles, played backward). Yet there’s something similarly elemental in her work and Graham’s: They both get to the essence of a thing, if by opposing routes.And so “Snow,” falling after Graham’s classic “Errand Into the Maze,” makes uncanny aesthetic sense. What a joy — a relief, really — to see a more human side of the five dancers: XiaoChuan Xie as the innocent pupil, Tadej Brdnik as the entitled professor, Lauren Newman as the no-nonsense maid and, as sometimes dueling narrators, Natasha M. Diamond-Walker and Carrie Ellmore-Tallitsch. From their web of swift, terse exchanges — with microphones, props and each other — feats both mundane and dazzling come into relief. Ms. Diamond-Walker balances a brown paper parcel on her thigh to the sound of a cheering crowd, which fades as the package drops to the floor. The unruffled Ms. Xie lifts one leg into an ultra-high extension, swirling her ankle with a fan between her toes, as if it’s no big deal.AdvertisementYet the Graham dancer as heroine can be joyous, too, like the flame-haired Blakeley White-McGuire in “Errand,” a 1947 telling of the myth of Theseus and the Minotaur. (Graham’s Theseus, of course, is a woman.) No one in the company commands its founder’s style quite like Ms. White-McGuire, with such innate, unswerving conviction — though in “Deep Song,” the 1937 solo that opened the program, Ms. Ellmore-Tallitsch came close.AdvertisementAnother Greek myth, interpreted anew, spooled out in the form of Andonis Foniadakis’s “Echo” (2014). In this tempest of a dance, Mr. Foniadakis makes liberal use of whirling limbs to pit Narcissus (the suave Lloyd Mayor) against his own reflection (the equally adroit Lloyd Knight) and his lover, Echo (the always captivating PeiJu Chien-Pott). Despite these voracious performances, “Echo” outstayed its welcome.Friday’s program also featured Graham in social activist mode, with “Panorama” (1935), danced by 40 teenagers from the New York metropolitan area. Crisscrossing the stage in billowing red, as one big group or in smaller factions, they rose above inexperience with plucky resolve.The season’s third program, on Sunday, was billed as “All Graham,” but a dancer injury dictated otherwise. Alongside “Embattled Garden” (1958), “Chronicle” (1936) and a crisply danced “Diversion of Angels” (1948), the company offered three works in its growing collection of “Lamentation Variations,” by the contemporary choreographers Kyle Abraham, Liz Gerring and Larry Keigwin. This is the only program that includes a live version of “Lamentation,” the 1930 solo on which the variations are based. The muscular Ms. Ellmore-Tallitsch etched herself into the cloaked, yearning role with total authority. As danced by her, this piece needs no variation.The Martha Graham Dance Company continues through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-242-0800, joyce.org. A version of this review appears in print on February 17, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Diverging From Gravitas to Have Some Fun.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.