
                New Music            By                     
 JON CARAMANICA,
 

 BEN RATLIFF and
 

 NATE CHINEN
 
FEB. 16, 2015
ESTELLE“True Romance”(Established 1980, Inc./BMG)A little too dignified for radio’s moist come-ons, a little too loose for R&B classicism, Estelle has never made it fully clear, in a decade-plus career, whether she was a dissenter, an aspirant, a traditionalist or something else altogether. As a result, she’s been pleasant, but not essential, a singer living between defined worlds.But that sort of back and forth has become its own narrative. That’s clear from “True Romance,” her fourth album, on which she definitively chooses a lane by not choosing one. Instead, on this modest but certain album, she’s something of a chameleon, and an effective one, showing that versatility is flamboyance, of a sort.This album is a cornucopia of styles delivered by a singer who clearly has learned from all of them, and who never felt the need to settle. “Something Good” is convincing in its early 1990s club music production, and Estelle sounds ecstatic over it. But on “She Will Love,” she sells lovers rock reggae just as effectively, and with a fraction of the energy. She sings pomp-heavy ballads like “Conqueror” (which has echoes of Shontelle) right before serving up peak raunch on “Make Her Say (Beat It Up).”On some of the songs, male vocals are used as a heavy counterpoint, like on “She Will Love,” which features the dance hall rapper Kardinal Offishall, and “Time Share (Suite 509),” which has pulpy spoken word by J. Ivy.AdvertisementMore than on her previous albums, there is a sense of play here, and a feeling that no one was holding a leash tight. That can be a liability, of course — the vocals feel slightly underproduced, and she slips off the occasional note here and there.Those are small things, though, especially given her facility across moods and styles. Take “Silly Girls,” a song that marries the caviar-yacht lushness of the producers J.U.S.T.I.C.E. League with Motown ambition. It’s an unlikely mix, but she nails it — still a singer without a home, at ease with the cosmopolitan life. JON CARAMANICASONNY AND THE SUNSETS“Talent Night at the Ashram”(Polyvinyl)A Sonny and the Sunsets record is a jangly little polis of characters, invented by the San Francisco songwriter and gentle-voiced singer Sonny Smith. Others have done this too — Bruce Springsteen, Craig Finn of the Hold Steady — but they tend to connect their characters’ fates and build an atmosphere you can almost see and smell; they’re working out some kind of high-stakes narrative and critical vision.Mr. Smith’s songs are cheaper, floppier, happier and stranger, like short-order stories for children. His characters tend to have no motivations or evident history. He can be a clever songwriter, very literate in surf-rock and psychedelic pop, but he’s drawn to harebrained twists and nonconclusive side roads, in sound or word. He’ll throw in an inapposite guitar chord, or rope the supernatural into his story lines. Why not?“Talent Night at the Ashram,” his fourth album, has a lot of that feeling: Why not?Sometimes Mr. Smith’s songs or albums start in another medium: a musical or play or film. This album apparently evolved from a series of short films. In “The Application,” a character fills out a form to become a human being. “I hope my papers go through,” he sings. “I hope to hear from you soon.”AdvertisementAnd in “Happy Carrot Health Food Store,” starting with fingerpicked guitar and wheezy synth, Mr. Smith runs through short profiles of the store’s employees. “Why is she so terrible with all the customers?” he asks about a character named Shannon. “Wayne in produce can tell us/he knows a thing or two ... ” A pause.“About everything and what to do.”You get the sense that this song could go on for a long time, stacking up characters in repeated form, telling us not very much. Then it suddenly changes course, turning into an instrumental waltz-time interlude, and you hear Mr. Smith’s talking voice. He’s describing, perhaps, an idea for his screenplay. As he talks a dog yelps in the background. The screenplay idea involves a character looking into his glass of beer and seeing a miniature version of his friend swimming in the glass.“I miss you,” he tells the friend.The figure in the beer glass replies indignantly. “Really? I thought I never heard from you again. Why did you go?”In reply, the full-size character swallows his friend. “And then it pans,” Mr. Smith continues, “and it goes to this other scene, and it got much more artificial.” A little bit of synth noodling and a single distorted guitar tone end the piece. That’s that. BEN RATLIFFADAM BIRNBAUM | DOUG WEISS | AL FOSTER“Three of a Mind”(Daedalus)Precision seems to come naturally to the pianist Adam Birnbaum, who has the harmonic fluency, sensitivity of touch and unhurried but assertive rhythmic footing of an elite jazz modernist in training, a possible heir to his former teachers Kenny Barron and Fred Hersch. But Mr. Birnbaum, who has won prestigious awards and prominent sideman posts, still isn’t all that familiar to the average American jazz fan.One reason might simply be access: his albums have been small-batch, some of them only released in Japan. But his new release, “Three of a Mind,” feels like a breakthrough. An eloquent dispatch from the heart of the contemporary piano trio tradition, it should raise Mr. Birnbaum’s profile by a few notches, though that refreshingly doesn’t feel like the aim.Mr. Birnbaum, 35, has spent the last six years working in a quartet led by the drummer Al Foster, a master of insinuative groove. Their cohesion is a pliable feature of “Three of a Mind,” which also features the redoubtable bassist from that band, Doug Weiss.Despite the album’s title, and the fact that all three names share billing on the cover, this isn’t an object lesson in the new rhythm-section equanimity, as expressed in groups like the Bad Plus or the Vijay Iyer Trio. Mr. Birnbaum is more interested in emulating a trio like Mr. Hersch’s — a bit too faithfully at times, as on “Thirty-Three,” a wry pastiche of Thelonious Monk, and “Dream Waltz,” whose title tells you what you need to know. There’s hardly a moment here that doesn’t feel guided, gently but firmly, by Mr. Birnbaum’s hand.AdvertisementBut the more time you spend with “Three of a Mind,” the clearer it becomes that this is an unbeatable platform for Mr. Foster, whose drumming at 72 is a marvel, stamped all at once by economy, urgency and ease. He handles the livelier of Mr. Birnbaum’s compositions, like “Stutterstep,” with a restraint that balances the whole; on a lyrical bossa nova like “Kizuna,” his flourishes are subtle but essential.It’s no secret that jazz draws strength from intergenerational exchange. But this album is worthwhile not only because Mr. Birnbaum rises to the maturity of his mentor, Mr. Foster. It’s also that a pair of old tunes by Mr. Foster, “Brandyn” and “Ooh What You Do to Me,” sound fresh enough to fit right in. NATE CHINEN A version of this review appears in print on February 17, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Able to Morph and Hard to Pin Down.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.