AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael WhiteLONDON — Whenever the conductor Simon Rattle takes his Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra to London, there’s a sense of reckoning: about the boy who went away, made good and is now bringing home the proof. For British audiences, the very idea that a conductor from England — what Germans used to call “the land without music” — is in charge of Germany’s flagship orchestra is a continuing source of national delight. British music lovers are always curious to know how the relationship has worked out. Last week’s London residency, in which Mr. Rattle and the Philharmonic gave concerts from Tuesday to Sunday at the Southbank Center and the Barbican, drew even more news media attention than usual, for two reasons. One is that Mr. Rattle’s engagement with Berlin is drawing to a close — he leaves in 2018, at the end of 16 years in the job — and it raises the question, what comes next? A possible answer is that he takes over the London Symphony. After prolonged periods of will-he-won’t-he flirting with that orchestra, there was the prospect of an announcement last weekend, but nothing was said. (Recent word that Alan Gilbert will leave the New York Philharmonic in 2017 has raised similar speculation.) Another reason for the extra interest is that Mr. Rattle has just turned 60, and it was presumably no accident that the music chosen for this residency looked back on some of the preoccupations of his working life. Saturday’s Southbank concert opened with a contemporary classic by Helmut Lachenmann — “Tableau for Orchestra” — that signaled Mr. Rattle’s relationship with modern Germany and his efforts to open the Berlin repertoire to composers finding new possibilities in the old traditions of Austro-German orchestral writing. Otherwise, the focus was on Mahler (two performances of the Second Symphony) and Sibelius (a cycle of all seven symphonies): special interests that predate his elevation to Berlin and were conspicuous highlights of the 18 years (1980-98) spent with his previous orchestra, the City of Birmingham Symphony. While in Birmingham, Mr. Rattle made outstanding discs of Mahler’s Second Symphony and the complete Sibelius for EMI. Some would argue that for all the disparity in status between the two orchestras, it was in Birmingham, rather than Berlin, that the Rattle magic has worked best.That notion was supported by what was heard last week in London. The most striking quality of the Sibelius cycle that ran at the Barbican was the sheer grandeur of the Berlin Philharmonic sound, which seemed to burst out of the boxed-in confines of the hall (acoustically, the Barbican is far from perfect) with assertive confidence and rich, red-blooded warmth. No British orchestra, however good, has anything to match that sound.The only problem was that warmth isn’t entirely what Sibelius calls for. The intensity of his symphonic writing demands white, not red, heat. And a relatively scrawny British sound has some advantage there, more suited to Sibelius’s icy bleakness.It’s also probably true that British orchestras have a stronger historical affinity with Sibelius than their German counterparts. The Berlin Philharmonic played him under Herbert von Karajan and has continued since (with a cycle under Mr. Rattle in 2010), but he’s not exactly in the musicians’ DNA. They laid on flaming color but not rhythm. One weakness last week was the way they handled the Sibelian trope of suddenly accelerated movement on an upward path, the music surging forward like a plane in takeoff on a scarily short runway. As the sonic counterpart of a jumbo jet, the Berlin Philharmonic doesn’t do that easily, and it was noticeable in perhaps the toughest of Sibelius’s symphonies, No. 5, where many of the difficulties of the score felt unresolved. If Mr. Rattle had solutions, he was struggling to persuade his orchestra to follow them. The result was disappointing.Nos. 6 and 7 worked far better, though they were not helped by Mr. Rattle’s running the two symphonies together without a break. He does this on the grounds that they share material and are conceptually joined at the hip. It’s plausible as an approach, but troublesome in practice. Along with other aspects of the cycle, it qualified the triumph everybody in the audience wanted this experience to be.The Mahler Second at the Southbank Center, by contrast, was a triumph: more secure and sorted out than the Sibelius, with the upholstered Berlin sound a bonus rather than a handicap in a performance that emphasized the grace and tenderness in Mahler’s writing over the neurosis. The sole problem here was with the hall, which is so dry it does no justice to an orchestra of such power — they might as well be playing in a sack. It’s an issue that has fed into the speculations about Mr. Rattle’s future. He has said that he would take a London job only if the city were prepared to build him a concert hall with seriously good acoustics: something that doesn’t currently exist. It’s the kind of demand he’s made before, and successfully. The excellent Symphony Hall in Birmingham has been there since 1991 because he made it happen. But in London, in a time of lingering economic crisis, with no public will to fund the arts, it’s almost certainly too big a request. So he must either climb down or look elsewhere — maybe to the New York Philharmonic. It would be enormously to London’s loss, and maybe there are possibilities for compromise. They’re just not obvious right now.Advertisement