Season 3, Episode 4: “Dimebag”Добрый вечер, товарищи. Вспомните, что Карл Маркс сказал о религии …
(Good evening, Comrades. Remember what Karl Marx said about religion …)The Jenningses, skilled as they are at tradecraft, were not expecting their innocent daughter to walk them right into a trap when they set up her birthday party. But her clever planning and execution certainly make her seem a perfect candidate for the K.G.B. Maybe they should have gone with taco night instead once they heard who was coming to dinner: the conniving (or just bland?) Pastor Tim and his wife. In their presence, Paige was confident and positively beatific. They served as her protection, propping her up so she could spring her fondest wish on her parents.  “What I really want this year is to get baptized,” she said, setting off a full 10 seconds of disbelieving silence around the table.
When Paige went on to explain baptism, “You wash away your old self and make yourself clean for Jesus Christ,” her parents looked ready to spit.The Cold War spy drama on FX.Church began as a rebellion for Paige, and one that shocked her parents, whose visions of revolution don’t involve God. Her donation of her savings to the congregation sent her parents around the bend, and motivated her father, Philip, to pay a threatening after-hours visit to Pastor Tim. As Paige became more deeply entrenched, Elizabeth joined her daughter at church. At the same time, Paige’s affect evolved from combative to enthusiastic and on to the starry-eyed phase she inhabits now, where everything is mellow, in a cultish way. Was Elizabeth using church as a way to influence Paige’s future and push her toward espionage? Or is Paige the mastermind controlling her parents, the puppets?Only in the ’80s 
Philip is convincing as “Jim,” a lawyer, Pink Floyd fan, anti-federal-drinking-age lobbyist (seriously?) and purveyor of “real” fake IDs to underage girls. But getting high with a teenager is one thing and turning her into an agent is another. Is Kimberly Breland tough enough beneath her sweet face and endearing smile? Her friends call her Kimmy. (Or is that Kimmi with hearts dotting the i’s?)I half-expected, when Philip complained about the quality of his groupie’s weed, that he would whip out his own special blend from some exotic locale and use it to … well, persuade her to plot against her dad, head of the C.I.A.’s Afghanistan team.Philip’s  … umm … development of Kimberly is discomfiting, as it’s meant to be. As she nestles against his shoulder at episode’s end, her beat box playing behind them, she looks as much a daughter as she does a smoking buddy. It all works to deepen Paige’s own story arc, starting with the moment at the beginning of the episode in which Paige arrives home just as her parents are upstairs discussing how young Kimberly is, and how wrong/risky it would be to recruit her.Growing their own
Philip is passive, even passive aggressive, about the possibility that Paige will join the family business. (And I don’t mean travel planning.) We know that Elizabeth, less seduced by American life, sees Paige’s options differently. But when Philip and Elizabeth finally have it out, their exchange is strangely opaque and begins as a spat about birthday gifts.“Just because you want to do nothing does not make it right,” Elizabeth says.“Oh, so you are doing something,” he says, seizing on her words.“It is happening; it is just happening, Philip,” she tells him. “And yes, I am, I am doing it, with or without you.”But the message was muddled. Did Elizabeth mean that Paige was developing naturally into a spy? Or that she was actively molding her? Or were they still talking about buying a necklace and a Yaz album?Brown is the new orange  
Nina is operational! When last we saw her in those brown sweats, she seemed worn down by her suffering and imprisonment, but give her one assignment in exchange for a vague promise of a more lenient sentence, and she becomes a hyperefficient spying machine, boring into the consciousness of her cellmate, Evi Sneijder. Even Nina’s makeup improves as she comes back to life.Does anyone think Nina’s nightmare was authentic? She operated like a born spy in her scenes with Evi. Nina warmed up to her roomie by sharing her own meticulously altered story; she made a few incisive inquiries about Evi’s personal life that established her to be single and alone, then, tossing and crying out, offered herself up be comforted. Naughty Nina, did you have an ulterior motive in luring Evi over to your cot to hold you?Dead dropping 
For Stan this episode is a turning point. He shares with his boss the nagging impression that something’s not quite right about the loopy defector Zinaida. Agent Gaad is incredulous as Stan builds his case, ticking off the sensitive areas Zinaida will have access to. “You think she’s going to kill the president?” Gaad asks.For dinner, Stan takes his charge to the President’s Diner, where she makes a long visit to the ladies room, with her handbag, before she eats her meal and starts in on his fries. Dessert came first, a Milky Way from the vending machine, courtesy of Stan.Later, Stan is so eager to go back to the diner that he doesn’t even wait until breakfast. So sure is he that Zinaida made a dead drop in the ladies room that he charges up to the front door after hours, flashes his badge, bursts in and urgently assaults the bathroom. Prying open fixtures and ripping away obstacles to the thumping synth beat of Yaz’s “Don’t Go,” he wreaths himself in a none-too-clean towel roll, scales the inside of a toilet stall to peek beneath the suspended ceiling and comes tumbling down. He finds nothing, but manages to exacerbate his anger and frustration. (Given Zinaida’s candy obsession, maybe he should have checked the vending machine for a drop?)Is EST working for Stan on some level? Did his screaming at the meeting unblock something within him? Was he yelling at the instructor? Sandra? Himself? As he trots over to Sandra’s house after dark yet again, this subplot feels strained. Either Sandra has to contemplate taking him back (her lip did quiver) or the show needs to move on.Other Notes
Burning questions: What was in the jumbo juice bottle Elizabeth (as Michelle) found in the cabinet of her A.A. sponsor’s kitchen? We know it was some kind of booze that Lisa’s husband is sneaking since he lost his job, but exactly what? It takes Elizabeth very little time to pinpoint the vulnerabilities in this household, but how ever will she gain access to Northrop when Lisa is an assembly line worker?Line of the week: “Who wears the pants in that family?” That’s Elizabeth, speaking of “Clark,” who fears that his wife, Martha, just might surprise him with a foster child.Comments on Comments
More thoughtful contributions from the group and some healthy dissent that will land no one in a gulag. Oleg the Oligarch. Very clever idea and quite a likely development, should he survive into the age of the Russian nouveau riche.Larry, great observations. Yes, Philip certainly seems to have put a listening device in the black box, and it allows us to hear what’s going on in Paaswell’s car. Is it an early car phone/preminiaturized cellphone?Best Interpretive Dentistry Award goes to Brian of Penn State whose explanation of Elizabeth’s injury and at-home treatment makes the most sense.
What are you all thinking about Nina? Will she be able to win her freedom by breaking every cellmate they toss in with her?Оставайтесь на канале, товарищи. Должно случиться что-то важное.
(Stay tuned, Comrades. Something big must be coming.)