Tom Colicchio, an acclaimed New York-based chef who has achieved national prominence as the main judge on Bravo’s “Top Chef,” has been named “food correspondent” for MSNBC. He will contribute reporting and develop programming for the network’s television and other platforms, including digital video.He will produce segments on food for “The Rachel Maddow Show” and “Morning Joe”; host “Stirring the Pot,” a weekly program featuring conversations with newsworthy food personalities that will appear on Shift, a new social media platform; and create “Everyone Eats,” a series of interviews over lunch with personalities who influence the food scene, including sports stars, politicians, entertainment figures and chefs. He expects to start sometime in the spring.Phil Griffin, the president of MSNBC, said in an interview that the move was part of the network’s drive “to become more culturally relevant. Food touches everyone and everything, stuff like depleting fish in the oceans, these are obvious things we should be covering.”Why hire someone who is not a professional journalist? “He’s a professional food expert who understands the issues. He can explain them.”The new job “has been in the works for several years,” said Mr. Colicchio. “I have made appearances in the past discussing issues like hunger and the farm bill on “Morning Joe.’ ”Mr. Colicchio started as a chef at Mondrian and Gramercy Tavern, and became a restaurateur after opening Craft, Colicchio & Sons and the sandwich chain ’wichcraft. Increasingly he has spoken up on food issues like school lunches, genetically modified foods, hunger in America and the minimum wage, testifying before Congressional committees. He was the executive producer of and appeared in 2013’s “A Place at the Table,” a film about food insecurity in America, which was directed by Kristi Jacobson and his wife, Lori Silverbush. His activism may fit well with the MSNBC brand, whose news personalities often mix reporting and commentary. “Being on ’Top Chef’ makes you comfortable on camera, but dealing with issues like the effect of agriculture on the environment is a natural evolution of food programming,” he said. “People are ready for this. Food programming has grown up.”