An occasional series on vintage comics.Comic strips and comic books were born as throwaway culture. Strips were meant to be ephemeral, if amusing, splashes of color that helped sell newspapers, while comic books were originally aimed at children before wending their way to the pulp heap. But as so often happens when the grown-ups aren’t looking, both art forms quickly got above their raisings and became home to some powerful working-class truths that still resonate today.The newspaper funny pages in the early 20th century included enduring and stunning cartoonists like George Herriman (“Krazy Kat”), Lyonel Feininger (“The Kin-der-Kids” and “Wee Willie Winkie’s World”) and Winsor McCay (“Little Nemo in Slumberland”), who took a blue-collar medium and elevated it into serious art. Comic books nurtured the near-hallucinatory violence of Jack Kirby’s art and the winking yet hardy gruesomeness of EC comics. Two new volumes exemplify how some comic strips and books not only ducked the trash, but manage to remain meaningful decades later. “Black Light: The World of L.B. Cole” (Fantagraphics) rescues the reputation (and art) of a nearly forgotten proto-psychedelic comic book cover artist from the 1940s and ’50s, while “Little Nemo: Dream Another Dream” (Locust Moon Press) features some 140 cartoonists and illustrators paying homage to McCay’s most memorable creation.Like so many of his hack-’em-out brethren in the primordial golden age of comic books, Cole (1918-1995) worked in all the usual genres — crime and western, funny animals and romance, war and horror — creating shocking and theatrical covers for obscure comics like Frisky Animals, Terrors of the Jungle and Criminals on the Run. Subtlety was not one of his virtues. His best covers feature bold primary colors smoldering against black backgrounds.Quoted in “Black Light,” which includes a helpful biographical essay by Bill Schelly, Cole said, “Being perfectly practical as a businessman and a publisher, for me there was no other motive than to create a poster oriented to newsstand sales.” And the cartoonist R. Crumb has written of Cole’s work, “His covers are really noir: spirals, figures falling down through space, big spider webs.”Typical of Cole’s work is the cover to Black Mask No. 1 from 1945: Like a classic 1960s black-light poster a demonic figure lurches from the darkness, clutching a luridly melting candle, as six tiny winged figures — doomed angels? — are drawn toward the malign flame. “The value of black is what the viewer will read into that black space,” said Cole, who, though a comic book artist, wasn’t against seeking more rarefied mentors. “I went to the old masters,” he said. “I went to Rembrandt because he was a master of shadow.”◆When it comes to old masters, McCay, who died in 1934, was certainly one of the defining artists of early animation (“Gertie the Dinosaur”) and comic strips. His “Little Nemo in Slumberland” strip, which ran off-and-on from 1905 to 1926, can still make grown men sigh, if not cry. So no wonder that the micro-publisher Locust Moon Press was moved to produce “Little Nemo: Dream Another Dream,” a broadsheet-size hardcover tribute to McCay and Nemo that features ravishing art by a worldwide cast of illustrators and cartoonists, including Craig Thompson and P. Craig Russell, David Mack and Yuko Shimizu, and Jill Thompson and Gustavo Duarte.In his introduction to “Dream Another Dream,” Josh O’Neill, Locust Moon’s publisher, writes: “It’s our belief that Winsor McCay was the greatest cartoonist who ever lived, and that ‘Little Nemo in Slumberland’ was his greatest creation.”These loving and lovely tributes to “Little Nemo,” drawn in a wide range of styles and moods, end up being an essential companion to McCay’s strips themselves. They confirm that there can never be enough phantasmagorical dreamscapes in our lives, those secret worlds where the rites of childhood never end. As Mr. O’Neill writes, “This is the culmination of our two-year attempt to pick the lock on the gates of Slumberland.”