Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.HUGO WOLF: Italienische Serenade/EDVARD GRIEG: String Quartet in G minor/LEOS JANACEK: String Quartet No. 2
Amphion String Quartet
(Nimbus Alliance NI 6289; one disc)
 The debut recording of this exciting young quartet brims with propulsive energy and raw drama. The players bring jaunty exuberance to Wolf’s “Italienische Serenade,” an epic sweep to Grieg’s String Quartet in G minor and fiery temperament to Janacek’s String Quartet No. 2. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim) ‘AN DIE GELIEBTE’
Lieder by Beethoven, Weber, Wolf and Strauss
Julian Prégardien, tenor
Christoph Schnackertz, pianist
(Myrios Classics MYR012; one CD)
The 30-year-old German tenor Julian Prégardien, whose father is the noted tenor Christoph Prégardien, brings a refined voice and stylistic insight into this rewarding album of German lieder. The highlight is Beethoven’s song cycle “An die ferne Geliebte,” an innovative work in which songs segue without break from one to the next to make an arching, dramatic entity. Collaborating with the elegant pianist Christoph Schnackertz, Mr. Prégardien gives uncommonly intimate and subtly expressive performances of this cycle and various songs by Weber, Wolf and Strauss. It is like hearing German lieder sung in a living room. (Anthony Tommasini)BEETHOVEN: Piano Sonatas (Opp. 31, 49)
Maurizio Pollini, pianist
(Deutsche Grammophon, 479 4325)
Perhaps it was never really intended to be comprehensive, but after more than three decades the pianist Maurizio Pollini’s traversal of Beethoven is finally complete — or, rather, more than complete. Throughout there have been second recordings, and a new, vigorous “Tempest” sonata makes for an intriguing comparison with a steelier but less radical 1989 version. Mr. Pollini’s febrile intellect is on show of course, but so too is a wit rarely associated with him, especially in the tiny Opus 49 works. (David Allen)‘WANDERING SHADES — LES OMBRES ERRANTES’
The Final Harpsichord Works of François Couperin
Katherine Roberts Perl, harpsichordist
(Music & Arts CD-1284; one CD)
In recent decades, as the magnificent operas of Rameau have been increasingly explored and performed, this French Baroque master has tended to overshadow his slightly compatriot François Couperin, best known for his harpsichord and organ works. Couperin, though, has had some pretty powerful champions along the way, from Ravel to Richard Strauss to, more recently, Thomas Adès. It’s good to have this rich recording of Couperin’s extraordinarily inventive and ingenious late works for harpsichord, played with vitality and color by Katherine Roberts Perl. (Tommasini) ANNA THORVALDSDOTTIR: ‘Aerial’
Various Artists
(Deutsche Grammophon, B0022217-02)
Six pieces for diverse sets of instruments constitute the Icelandic talent Anna Thorvaldsdottir’s latest album. Whether writing for piano and electronics (“Trajectories”), brass and percussion (“into — Second Self”) or full orchestra (“Aeriality”), her language remains eerie and still, drones and rumbles stretching into the distance, sparks and shades drifting across. However similar the landscapes on the surface, each has its own character, and each moves. (Allen) ‘MOZART 1791’
Charles Neidich, clarinetist and conductor; Ensemble Clarimonia, Orchestra Solamente Naturali
(Bremen Radiohall Records brh CD1402; one disc)
 The mellow, woodsy tone of the basset horn stars in this pleasing recording of works for basset horns and/or clarinets (in various configurations) and orchestra by Mozart and his Bohemian contemporary Jiri Druzecky. Charles Neidich’s reading of Mozart’s Concerto for Basset Clarinet in A (KV 622) radiates sunny serenity. But over the course of the following works, including Druzecky’s Concerto for three basset horns and orchestra in F and a reconstruction of Mozart’s Adagio in F for clarinet and three basset horns (KV 580a), the music takes on an inescapably narcotic quality. (Fonseca-Wollheim)SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)