By BRIAN SEIBERTOCT. 12, 2015
There may come a day when reviewers of work by the choreographer John Heginbotham will not feel the need to mention Mark Morris. But that time has not yet come, especially since one of the best parts of the pleasing program that Dance Heginbotham performed at the Joyce Theater on Saturday had roots in the years that Mr. Heginbotham spent as a member of the Mark Morris Dance Group.For some of that time, the group’s musical director was the brilliant pianist Ethan Iverson, and in “Easy Win,” Mr. Heginbotham recalls the ballet classes that Mr. Iverson accompanied. Mr. Iverson’s score, which he plays onstage, is terrifically smart and stylistically diverse, mixing strains of early jazz, blues, contemporaneous classical music, Latin tinges and later pop with wit and a playful sense of history. (The title points to Scott Joplin; the music alludes to Duke Ellington alluding to Chopin.)Mr. Heginbotham’s dance begins in a classroom setting, but quickly wanders far afield into hokeypokey steps, quivering, coupling and some kind of sleeping sickness. He takes advantage of associations between the early-jazz sound and silent-movie comedy, and his eccentricity (obsessive patella polishing, arms that seem to embrace but actually repel) is organized with a musical logic. The return to ballet class manners at the end functions as a larger-scale joke.In his program note, Mr. Heginbotham connected the three pieces on the program to ballet, yet the more impressive continuities were of musical styles. Between the dances, the pianist George Shevtsov played interludes: a player-piano-like work of his own that segued seamlessly into Mr. Iverson’s music; a Villa-Lobos piece that set up the pseudo-Brazilian mode of the Darius Milhaud score to Mr. Heginbotham’s “Diamond,” a thin solo for Kristen Foote.Mr. Heginbotham did create “Angels’ Share” for a ballet company, Atlanta Ballet, but it is a barefoot affair that responds felicitously to the surface and undercurrents of Ernst von Dohnanyi’s Serenade in C for String Trio (more excellent live music). The dance is bright with witty detail, yet also shaded with loneliness. Particularly in a women’s duet, there’s a beautiful sadness that’s not easy to label. That tone, as much as the quirkiness, is coming to define what makes a Heginbotham dance distinct.A version of this review appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Mixing Whimsy and Sadness.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.