The 2015 inductees to the Songwriters Hall of Fame will include such varied musicians as Toby Keith, Cyndi Lauper, Linda Perry, Bobby Braddock, Willie Dixon and the Grateful Dead writing duo of Robert Hunter and Jerry Garcia. The ceremony will take place at the Marriott Marquis in New York on June 18.“Each one of these brilliant music creators have written instantly recognizable classics, songs that are both of their time and timeless,” Linda Moran, the Songwriters Hall of Fame president, said in a statement, citing the diversity of the bunch.In country, Mr. Braddock is known for writing top songs across five decades, including Tammy Wynette’s “D-I-V-O-R-C-E” in 1968 and Mr. Keith’s “I Wanna Talk About Me” in 2001. Mr. Keith’s own compositions include the hits “Should’ve Been a Cowboy” and “Beer for My Horses.”Mr. Dixon, the blues songwriter, had his work — including “Hoochie Coochie Man” and “Little Red Rooster” — recorded by artists like Chuck Berry, Muddy Waters, Sam Cooke and the Rolling Stones. He will be inducted posthumously, as will Mr. Garcia, whose collaborations with Mr. Hunter represent some of the best-loved entries in the Grateful Dead songbook.Ms. Lauper and Ms. Perry, the former singer for 4 Non Blondes, will represent the pop world. “‘Get the Party Started’ is a stupid song, but it’s good and unique,” Ms. Perry said in an interview, in reference to her top-ten Billboard single performed by Pink. “Have you heard ‘Beautiful’ before or after?” she asked of the ballad she wrote for Christina Aguilera. “The closest thing is probably the Beatles.”Ms. Lauper, known for hits like “Time After Time” and “She Bop,” said the honor was especially sweet for a female artist. “I had to fight to write my whole life,” she said. “Usually women with big voices sang other people’s songs. That was always a struggle.”Founded in 1969, the Songwriters Hall of Fame includes about 400 inductees. The organization also offers scholarships and workshops, in addition to keeping a gallery at the Grammy Museum in Los Angeles.A version of this article appears in print on 02/18/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Cyndi Lauper and Toby Keith to Join Songwriters Hall.