AdvertisementSupported byBy Lori Holcomb-Holland9 P.M. (ABC Family) MATILDA (1996) For every child who ever thought the world was unfair, there’s hope that, like Matilda (Mara Wilson), he or she may one day discover a way to even the score. In this film based on Roald Dahl’s novel, Matilda is a clever heroine born to a loathsome set of parents — played here by Danny DeVito, who also directed the film, and Rhea Perlman — who is sent to a school overseen by a monstrous woman who torments her students. But things begin to change when Matilda realizes that she can use her telekinetic powers to defend herself and her fellow underdogs. Though the film may be too twisted for very young children, Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times, the “sweet, self-possessed little heroine” is someone to admire: “Even when addressed by her father as ‘You lyin’ little earwig,’ Ms. Wilson’s poised Matilda never loses the quiet confidence that guarantees she will prevail.”1:30 P.M. (TCM) THE NUN’S STORY (1959) “The Nun’s Story” was nominated for eight Academy Awards. Unfortunately, it was up against one of the most celebrated films ever, “Ben-Hur,” and came out Oscar-less. But the film was a Hollywood success even without the hardware. Based on Kathryn Hulme’s novel of the same title, this drama stars Audrey Hepburn as a young Belgian who becomes a nursing nun around the time of World War II. Bosley Crowther, writing in The Times, said that the film’s screenwriter, Robert Anderson, and director, Fred Zinnemann, “have derived an equally amazing motion picture of an extraordinary dedicated life.”8 P.M. (CBS) THE MENTALIST Patrick (Simon Baker) agrees to help lure out a serial killer, and in the series finale, at 9, Teresa (Robin Tunney) accepts Patrick’s marriage proposal, but their happiness is cut short by a killer looking for revenge. On “Stalker,” at 10, the person who has been stalking Beth (Maggie Q) begins targeting those closest to her.8 P.M. (13, 49) NATURE: OWL POWER Unlike many of their feathered brethren, owls possess a set of skills that helps their species thrive, including the ability to hunt at night. In this program, filmmakers follow a pair of barn owls named Luna and Lily, right, from the moment they hatch, to show how they develop into lethal predators of the skies. On “Nova,” at 9, scientists explore the secrets of Petra, once a bustling city that was built more than 2,000 years ago in present-day Jordan. The episode, titled “Petra: Lost City of Stone,” features teams of scientists and sculptors trying to discover how the citizens of Petra created their oasis and why it ultimately disappeared.9 P.M. (ABC) MODERN FAMILY Gloria (Sofia Vergara) forces Jay (Ed O’Neill) to teach Manny (Rico Rodriguez) how to defend himself against a bully in cooking class, but it turns out that they might have pegged the wrong kid as the bully. And Mitch (Jesse Tyler Ferguson), Cameron (Eric Stonestreet) and Pepper (Nathan Lane) throw a baby shower for Sal (Elizabeth Banks). On “black-ish,” at 9:30, Zoey (Yara Shahidi) brings home her first boyfriend from school: a white kid from France whom Dre (Anthony Anderson) instantly dislikes. He’s happy when they break up, until he finds out that Zoey was dumped for being shallow.10 P.M. (Bravo) BEST NEW RESTAURANT This week’s theme, Battle of the Burger, pits Porter Ale House Gastropub of Austin, Tex., against Tongue & Cheek of Miami.10 P.M. (Comedy Central) WORKAHOLICS The guys stage an office-wide ditch day after agreeing to hand off a mysterious package for Karl (Karl Newacheck). On “Broad City,” at 10:30, after realizing that they spend too much time with electronics, Abbi (Abbi Jacobson) and Ilana (Ilana Glazer) decide to unplug and spend a day in the park, where they get involved with a wedding for dogs, in-line skating and a medical emergency.WHAT’S STREAMING NOWTHE BFF CHRONICLES The actresses Kim Cole and Erika Alexander worked together on the 1990s sitcom “Living Single,” but they’re also friends in real life. In this weekly series directed by Wes Armstrong, Ms. Cole and Ms. Alexander talk about the sorts of things that best friends talk about, like their love lives, their adventures in Hollywood, family, trends and hair. (youtube.com/therealkimcoles)Advertisement