By DANIEL E. SLOTNIKFEB. 17, 2015
Lorena Rojas, a Mexican actress known for her roles in popular Spanish-language soap operas like “Alcanzar Una Estrella” (“To Reach a Star”) and “El Cuerpo del Deseo” (“The Body of Desire”), died on Monday at her home in Miami. She was 44.Her publicist, Conchita Oliva, said that the cause was metastic cancer. Ms. Rojas learned she had breast cancer in 2008 and became an advocate for cancer education in Latino communities.A familiar presence in Mexico and internationally on Spanish-language channels like Telemundo and Univision, Ms. Rojas often played protagonists notable for their grace while facing down histrionic co-stars and weathering unlikely plot twists.She broke through in a supporting role in the 1990 series “Alcanzar Una Estrella,” a drama about an introverted girl’s efforts to win the love of a famous entertainer. The series spawned a sequel in 1991, which featured the pop star Ricky Martin, and a film in 1992. Ms. Rojas appeared in both.AdvertisementIn “El Cuerpo del Deseo,” which made its debut in 2005, she played the widow of a wealthy old man who dies and is reincarnated in a new body. More recently she played a villain in the telenovela “Rosario” in 2012 and 2013 and a mother trying to prove that her daughter was killed by her psychiatrist in the thriller series “Demente Criminal” in 2014.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Seydi Lorena Rojas Gonzalez was born in Mexico City on Feb. 10, 1971. In addition to her television work, she acted in Mexican films and recorded pop albums.Her marriage to Patrick Schnaas ended in divorce. She is survived by her mother; her sister, the actress Mayra Rojas; her fiancé, Jorge Monje; and her daughter, Luciana Rojas.AdvertisementIn 2014 Ms. Rojas released an album of children’s songs that was inspired by her daughter.A version of this article appears in print on February 18, 2015, on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: Lorena Rojas, 44, Actress in Spanish-Language Soaps.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.