AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleThe comedian Colin Quinn is a cunning self-deprecator: He makes fun of his own middling level of fame with an aggressive edge that suggests that he really ought to be bigger by now. On Twitter, he draws attention by encouraging his haters, retweeting their most imaginative insults. (Recent sample: “My girlfriend and I are going to play the CQ game. Every time you come on screen, we drink arsenic.”)His new eight-episode online series, the ragged, amiable and occasionally quite funny “Cop Show,” fits this pattern. It’s billed as a satire of police procedurals like “Law & Order,” but it’s really a double-edged satire of Mr. Quinn’s pretensions and desires. Playing himself as the creator, writer and star of a cut-rate, amateurish detective drama, he’s clueless, affected and obsessed with righting the wrongs done to him during his career. It’s a funny and fairly merciless self-portrait, but hey, “Cop Show” is, indeed, his show. No one else is getting the last laugh.The show debuts Wednesday, with new episodes of five to six minutes each appearing weekly on the Lexus-sponsored video site L/Studio. It is a mock making-of documentary. We see the unspeakably bad show-within-a-show, which features Mr. Quinn, Sue Jean Kim and Keith Robinson as detectives, and we see behind-the-scenes interviews and outtakes filmed by a reporter for a snooty-sounding French publication, played with an amusingly exaggerated accent by Elsa Carette. Encountering Jerry Seinfeld on the set, wincing as he observes the proceedings, she cautiously asks, “Your name ees on zees?”Mr. Seinfeld’s name isn’t on the series, but he showed up for Episode 1, and a number of other comedians drop by to help Mr. Quinn: Amy Schumer, Jim Gaffigan (doing a surprisingly convincing Congolese warlord), Jim Norton, Pat Cooper. In one amusing bit, Michael Che — currently a “Weekend Update” anchor, a role Mr. Quinn filled before his unceremonious off-season exit from “Saturday Night Live” — shows up to play a detective who has the Quinn character’s old job. “All people do is talk about how great you were,” Mr. Che says, reading his Quinn-written dialogue. “It feels like I’m following your shadow.” Mr. Quinn, with his contradictory blend of smugness and wounded pride, replies: “Well, I was just doing my job, fella. And I left of my own accord, I wasn’t forced out. Over the summer.”Cop ShowAvailable for streaming on LStudio.com.Produced by MEGA Films. Created and written by Colin Quinn; directed and produced by J. D. Amato; Morris S. Levy, Brian Stern, Mr. Quinn, Lisa Eisenpresser and Caitlin McGinty, executive producers.WITH: Colin Quinn (Colin), Keith Robinson (Joe), Sue Jean Kim (Grace), Peter Grosz (Kyle) and Griffin Newman (Jake).Advertisement