By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMFEB. 17, 2015
Clever or pretty? Spiritual or erotic? When it comes to the music of the 15th-century Franco-Flemish composer Johannes Ockeghem, certain distinctions become moot.As the outstanding early-music ensemble Blue Heron showed in a thoughtful program presented at Corpus Christi Church under the auspices of Music Before 1800 on Sunday, Ockeghem’s music is both intricate and expressive. A liturgical work like the “Missa De plus en plus” might incorporate music from a romantic song, conflating chivalric love with devotion for the Virgin Mary. In fact, quotations from other works are sometimes hidden inside scores of breathtakingly ornate counterpoint, like secret messages beckoning code breakers of future ages.But neither mental dexterity nor familiarity with the pre-1500 songbook are required to enjoy them.I should know. The eloquent program notes by Blue Heron’s music director, Scott Metcalfe, alerted me to the fact that Ockeghem’s “Missa De plus en plus” uses the same tenor line as that of a secular love song by an earlier composer and possible teacher of Ockeghem’s. But even after the countertenor Martin Near had sung that love song, “De plus en plus” by Gilles Binchois, with sweet limpidity over an accompaniment of two medieval fiddles, I still had trouble picking out its melody once the full complement of singers began to sing Ockeghem’s Mass.I dutifully listened for the quotation from Binchois’s “Pour prison ne pour maladie” (Not for prison, nor for sickness) in Ockeghem’s “La despourveue et la bannye” (“Destitute and banished”), noting how Binchois’s profession of constancy deepened the pathos of that Ockegham song’s description of a lover discarded and forgotten. But the magnetic allure of the music lay — for me — in its surface beauty.AdvertisementOf course, as with Bach, that surface is inseparable from the intricate architecture that supports it. Aided by the warm clarity of Corpus Christi’s acoustics and the wonderfully round and sleek sound of the Blue Heron singers, the music’s texture came alive with great malleability. Individual lines pirouetted apart and floated back together. The plainchant beginning of the Mass’s “Gloria” filled out and swelled, first gradually, then dramatically.In Ockeghem’s lament on Binchois’s death, “Mort, tu as navré de ton dart” (“Death, you have wounded with your dart”), there was a chiseled restraint to the plangent phrases, with only the top line, sung by the tenor Owen MacIntosh, imbued with a touch more heat. The soprano Pamela Dellal sang “La despourveue” with great tenderness.AdvertisementInstrumental accompaniment was provided by Mr. Metcalfe on vielle, a medieval type of violin, and harp, and Laura Jeppesen, who switched between vielle and rebec, another precursor of the modern violin. Their reading of two instrumental works by Ockeghem, “D’ung aultre amer” (“By loving another”) (arranged by Johannes Tinctoris) and “O Rosa bella” was pretty, but only faintly expressive next to the immediacy of the vocal performances.A music review on Wednesday about a concert by the early-music group Blue Heron, at Corpus Christi Church in Manhattan, misspelled the surname of the composer whose arrangement of “D’ung aultre amer” (“By loving another”), by Johannes Ockeghem, was played. He was Johannes Tinctoris, not Tinctorus.Blue Heron returns home to Boston and Cambridge, Mass., on Thursday with two separate programs. Blueheronchoir.org. A version of this review appears in print on February 18, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Meeting of the Solemn and the Secular.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.