By VIVIEN SCHWEITZERFEB. 17, 2015
The composer Meredith Monk is known for her uncanny ability to coax the human voice into sonorities both ethereal and startling. Ms. Monk, also a dancer, singer, choreographer, director and filmmaker, has been honing this extended vocal technique since the 1960s, championed by her own ensemble. Her otherworldly vocal quilts are often a patchwork of noises, cries and ululations, interwoven with chanting and humming. Other works are more lyrical, with plaintive, folk-tinged vocal lines stretched over somber, spare accompaniments.In recent years, Ms. Monk has explored ways to convey her aesthetic via instruments instead of voice, setting herself a particular challenge, given the unique sounds of her vocal works. She has composed “Backlight” for Ensemble ACJW, the group of young professionals in a two-year fellowship under the auspices of Carnegie Hall and the Juilliard School.The ensemble gave the three-movement piece its New York premiere at Weill Recital Hall on Monday evening after an in-depth collaboration with Ms. Monk. Scored for flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, piano, cello and viola, “Backlight,” according to the program notes, explores the idea of light and shadow. Ms. Monk initially planned to feature at least one singer in the piece, but decided to focus on instrumental textures.Given a committed performance here, “Backlight” certainly calls to mind Ms. Monk’s vocal aesthetic, beginning with dissonant tones in the winds unfolding over a string and piano motif that increased with gentle insistency. The beguiling harmonies and descending chord progressions of the second section were beautiful. But only the final section, with its gently cacophonous instrumental textures, evoked the alluring strangeness of much of her music. It’s a compliment to Ms. Monk that any composer, even she, would struggle to replicate her vocal aesthetic, but while there was much to admire in “Backlight,” it barely hinted at the sense of adventure and startling elements integral to so much of her work.The program opened with the Trio for Flute, Viola and Cello (Op. 40) by Albert Roussel, a contemporary of Ravel. Introducing the work, the violist Dana Kelley said it initially left a “less than positive” impression on her and her colleagues: the flutist Jacqueline Cordova-Arrington and the cellist Andrea Casarrubios. But they grew to appreciate its considerable charms, like the sensual flute melodies elegantly rendered by Ms. Cordova-Arrington, the dark-hued bluesy Andante and the perky dialogue between instruments in the finale.Ms. Casarrubios joined the pianist Michael James Smith and the violinist Kobi Malkin for a terrific performance of Ravel’s Piano Trio in A minor. They aptly traversed the palette of emotions from languid introspection to fevered intensity with gorgeous tone and an edge-of-seat intensity that ended the concert on an exciting note.A version of this review appears in print on February 18, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: An Instrumental Work With a Vocal Touch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.