AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayOn Sunday afternoon, before the ballerina Jennie Somogyi’s farewell performance at New York City Ballet at the David H. Koch Theater, I found myself asking friends present for the occasion for their memories. One spoke of the gotta-dance New Jersey child who arrived at the New York ballet school of Bronislava Nijinska’s student Nina Youskevitch (1920-98). Another recalled how, in the 1990s, Ms. Somogyi stood out amid the corps de ballet. (“Even when she was standing still, you would see how the movement always kept flowing through her arms.”) Others recalled the roles she has created: two for Jerome Robbins, no fewer than six for Peter Martins, one in Christopher Wheeldon’s “Polyphonia,” and more.At this performance, she danced George Balanchine’s “Liebeslieder Walzer,” but many present had vivid memories of the other roles by Balanchine and Robbins that Ms. Somogyi has danced. She came up through the remarkable path of roles associated with the ballerina Kyra Nichols (who retired in 2007), ranging from powerhouse virtuoso choreography to eloquent lyricism. Ms. Somogyi danced the role that Robbins made for Ms. Nichols in his 1981 Tchaikovsky work, “Piano Pieces”; and she made her farewell in the “Liebeslieder” role that Ms. Nichols danced longer (1984-2007) than its original interpreter, Violette Verdy; and she inherited many of the Balanchine roles associated with Ms. Nichols.She was never a Nichols clone — different height, different build — but she showed a similar temperament: someone who kept finding new facets of herself by means of clarity and fullness in dance, a performer for whom dance was never strained, always natural. In the last nine years — perhaps longer — no other City Ballet dancer has approached the clear power with which she could deliver Sanguinic in “The Four Temperaments”; sometimes she has even articulated the role’s elusive gargouillades (rings written in the air by feet while the dancer is jumping sideways), which are blurry with all other current dancers.Much of her career in the 21st century was blighted by long absences: severe injuries and a pregnancy. But she always seemed untroubled on her returns to the stage; and the only dark moments in Sunday’s performance were the notes of poignancy she eloquently sounded in her “Liebeslieder” role. Curtain calls were both tender and joyous.Bouquets and flowers came from many of the company’s men, led by the four “Liebeslieder” partners and ending with Mr. Martins; joining the company’s women to embrace her were Maria Kowroski, visibly and glowingly pregnant, and Wendy Whelan, whose own retirement from the company occurred just a year ago. Most memorably, Ms. Somogyi’s husband and their daughter, Madelyn, joined her: though Ms. Somogyi tried to make Madelyn bow to the theater, Madelyn wanted all the applause to go to her mother. Finally, confetti and streamers fell. The occasion was one of celebration, affection, esteem.Advertisement