By ALESSANDRA STANLEYFEB. 17, 2015
In comedy, opposites don’t attract. Instead they repel each other attractively. And by that standard, the CBS remake of “The Odd Couple,” that has its premiere on Thursday, isn’t so bad. It may even work.Matthew Perry (“Friends”) is sufficiently rumpled as the grumpy, divorced sportswriter Oscar Madison. And Thomas Lennon, (“Reno 911”) is delightfully silly as the finicky Felix Unger, the neat-freak fussbudget who moves in with Oscar after getting kicked out by his wife.The original “Odd Couple” television series, which ran from 1970-75, is a hard-to-follow classic but, given that it was an adaptation to begin with (of a 1968 movie starring Walter Matthau and Jack Lemmon, which itself was based on a Neil Simon play) the show is not sacrosanct. What is, however, is the unique chemistry of Jack Klugman and Tony Randall, who made such a memorable ill-matched pair. Networks have certainly tried to replicate the show’s formula, though, churning out imitations and variations.Some of them have done well. “Will & Grace” which ran from 1998 to 2006, was a version for the turn of the 20th century — messy single girl and obsessively neat gay best friend. CBS has produced several recent takes on the “Odd Couple” formula. In “Two Broke Girls,” the yin and yang dynamic is between two disparate waitresses in Brooklyn. “The Big Bang Theory” has a large cast, but its core relationship is the odd-coupledom of the easygoing Leonard and fastidious Sheldon.Advertisement“Two and a Half Men” is a Malibu beach house version of “The Odd Couple,” and it has thrived for 12 seasons, even after replacing its lead actor Charlie Sheen with Ashton Kutcher. Both incarnations worked: Behind puerile jokes about penises and poop, the sitcom has wit, sophistication, and even heart — though never too much.Matthew Perry and Thomas Lennon star in a CBS update of the classic sitcom.“Two and a Half Men” has its series finale on Thursday, and that impending loss helps to explain why CBS went back to the original source. This is not the first time: In 1982 there was a short-lived African-American version called “The New Odd Couple” that starred Demond Wilson (“Sanford and Son”) in the Oscar role.AdvertisementThe new show updates the surface details without dissolving the central bond between the two friends. This is Mr. Perry’s third attempt at sitcom success after a decade on “Friends,” and there is an uneasiness to his performance — in some scenes he looks startled, even frightened — that makes it hard to play off Mr. Lennon, who seems very comfortable as a nervous nelly. That chemistry could come with time, but even if the show flops, it’s an interesting experiment. The minutia says a lot about what has changed, and what hasn’t, over the last 40 years.Oscar doesn’t write columns on a typewriter or even a laptop, he talks to sports fans on his call-in radio show, which he records in his laundry-strewn living room overlooking Central Park. (Mr. Perry also played a sports radio host on his sitcom “Go On.”) Felix makes a nuisance of himself preparing vegan chicken wings, not beef Wellington.The dialogue reflects the loosened mores of network television, with the same kinds of jokes about sex and masturbation that infuse “Two Broke Girls” and “Two and a Half Men.” Felix plays the cello to soothe his easily rattled nerves, and Oscar doesn’t appreciate it. “I’d choose a piece more to your liking, but it’s hard to play porn on a cello,” Felix huffs.And yet the show also reflects more advanced sensitivities about gender stereotypes and sexism in the writers’ rooms of Hollywood.On the ’70s sitcom, Oscar made his ex-wife Blanche a running ball-and-chain joke and was a wolf when it came to chasing a pair of sisters who lived in the building. Mr. Perry’s Oscar is much quicker to admit he values and misses his ex-wife (played in later episodes by Lauren Graham, a star of “Gilmore Girls,” and “Parenthood”) and even gets misty about lost happiness.Even the wives’ names have been changed to suit today’s fads. Blanche is now Gaby and Felix’s wife, formerly Gloria, is now Ashley.AdvertisementThis Oscar also lusts after the sexy single girls in his building, but it’s the women who are the predators. Casey (Leslie Bibb), a gorgeous tall blonde, says she is willing to date Oscar, but only for sex — she is not interested in commitment.Diversity matters now as well. In 1970 ABC was so worried that viewers would think Oscar and Felix were gay that the show’s intro stressed that the roommates were “divorced men.” In this version, one of Oscar’s poker buddies is a little disappointed that Felix isn’t gay, because he thinks a gay friend would make him seem more “evolved.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You already have a black friend,” Oscar’s agent, played by Wendell Pierce (“The Wire”), replies. “What are you trying to prove?”For its part, CBS is obviously trying to prove that with a few tweaks, “The Odd Couple” can work as well in today’s television landscape as it did back when there were only three networks.Other variations on the show’s theme have been successful. It could be that a more faithful copy of the original finds a new audience all its own.A television review on Wednesday about the new CBS remake of “The Odd Couple,” noting that the show reflects changes in society since the original series, misstated the period of time covered. It is 40 years, not 30. (The original series ended in 1975.)The Odd CoupleCBS, Thursday nights at 8:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 7:30, Central time.Produced by CBS Television Studios. Matthew Perry, Bob Daily, Sarah Timberman, Carl Beverly, Eric Tannenbaum and Kim Tannenbaum, executive producers; Garry Marshall, executive consultant.WITH: Matthew Perry (Oscar Madison), Thomas Lennon (Felix Unger), Lindsay Sloane (Emily), Wendell Pierce (Teddy) Leslie Bibb (Casey) and Yvette Nicole Brown (Dani).A version of this review appears in print on February 18, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Oscar and Felix, Rebooted.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.