AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Roslyn SulcasDRESDEN, Germany — David Dawson’s new “Tristan and Isolde” for the Dresden Semperoper Ballett raises interesting questions about the full-length story ballet, a genre much-loved by audiences and seldom tackled by choreographers today.It’s surprising that the Tristan and Isolde story, a medieval Celtic tale that has long figured in literature, film and in Wagner’s opera of the same name, has been so infrequently used by ballet. Like “Romeo and Juliet,” it has instant attraction and union between lovers from opposing camps, with society and history against them, and tragic death at its end. You can imagine what John Cranko or Kenneth MacMillan, who brought the big, all-guns-blazing story ballets like “Manon” and “Eugene Onegin” to the world in the 1960s and 1970s (ballet box offices are still thanking them), might have done with it.The British-born Mr. Dawson, who was at the Royal Ballet School with Christopher Wheeldon and has established a strong reputation in Europe, is from another generation. Although he is a skilled classical dance-maker, his sensibility is coolly contemporary, and in this “Tristan and Isolde,” which had its premiere at the Dresden Semperoper on Sunday, he takes a more high-stakes approach. (Mr. Wheeldon has also recently made a new story ballet along more traditional lines, a critically acclaimed version of Shakespeare’s “The Winter Tale.”)His “Tristan” has few of the traditional accouterments of the big narrative ballet. There are no elaborate sets and costumes to provide historical context, no acting interludes and few secondary characters. The décor, by Eno Henze, is composed of simple mobile black pillars, amplified by smoky, atmospheric lighting by Bert Dalhuysen and simple, period-neutral costumes by Yumiko Takeshima. The ballet is set to a new score, by the Polish composer Syzmon Brzoska, that provides dense sonorities and shimmering texture, but little in the way of sweeping, emotionally compelling melody to amplify the lovers’ tragic fate.The result is a ballet of formal beauty and surprisingly little suspenseful drama. The opening promises otherwise. After an overture of Prokofiev-like building sound, the curtain lifts to show four lines of black-coated men standing immobile with their backs to the audience, half-illuminated by a band of light at the back of the stage. Over this is a platform upon which a man dances, and when the men below suddenly join him in a turning movement, the action is both dramatic and thrilling.Mr. Dawson is a superb choreographer of group movement. In this scene, as King Marke’s soldiers prepare to invade the kingdom of Morold, Isolde’s uncle, and in the next one, as Isolde’s companions dance together, he keeps kaleidoscopic shapes unfolding before your eyes. He likes to use uneven numbers of dancers to create unpredictable combinations; solos emerge from quartets, duos combine to make quartets and sextets, then dissolve into a trio or quintet. Often dancers on opposite sides of the stage do the same steps, so that the general effect is of busy crowd activity, but the subtle ordering keeps the spectator’s eye focused.Mr. Dawson doesn’t give the eye much rest, however. In the next scene, the soldiers arrive and, to harsh minor key chords, begin to push the young people around before full-scale fighting ensues. This isn’t nearly as dramatic as it might be, since the incessant movement and activity don’t leave space for the central plot-turning events: the death of Morold and the wounding of Tristan (Fabien Voranger). Both happen in a blur of action and only come into focus when Isolde (Courtney Richardson) arrives to mourn her uncle’s death and discovers Tristan’s body.In one of the rare moments of potent theatricality in the ballet, Ms. Richardson stands immobile and in silence at the front of the stage as two lines of light descend behind her, creating an off-center cross. The solo that follows, the magical healing of Tristan and their instant attraction to one another are some of the best moments in the ballet, partly because Mr. Dawson allows breathing space within the choreography.It’s also because Ms. Richardson is a world-class ballerina who is always entirely at the service of the dance. She is superbly coordinated; every movement seems a complete one, from head to toe. Nothing is presentational, everything is fluid and dynamic. With each dance phrase, Ms. Richardson offers us paragraphs, not words, mini-eassays full of emotion and intention.In this, she perfectly serves Mr. Dawson’s choreography and his flair for creating surprising and beautiful duos, full of swirling, floor-skidding turns, astonishing upside-down swinging lifts, and moments of poetic physical beauty.These extraordinary pas de deux are threaded through the ballet, marking the story’s turning points: the reunion of Tristan and Isolde aboard the ship taking her to marry Marke (Raphaël Coumes-Marquet); the impassioned, erotic duo after the wedding has taken place; the final pas de deux after Tristan has been stabbed by Marke’s lieutenant, Melot (the excellent Jón Vallejo), and refuses to be healed by Isolde.(Imagine the lifts they could have done if he hadn’t been stabbed, a friend remarked to me afterward.)But like the music, beautifully played by the Sächsische Staatskapelle Dresden and conducted by Paul Connelly, which doesn’t offer much differentiation in tonal mood, these pas de deux are all composed and conducted at the same level of intensity and so the cumulative effect is dulled.The same is true of the crowd scenes. The wedding party is full of gorgeous ensemble work (Ms. Takeshima’s glamorous costumes, 50 shades of grey for the women, black frock coats for the men, are marvelous here), but the dancing is so relentless that the theatrical impact of Tristan’s jealousy or Melot’s suspicions have far less impact than they might.This dancing is uniformly excellent, the choreography often remarkable. But the impact of the ballet comes from the superb, give-it-all-they’ve-got performances of the principals (particular commendation to Mr. Voranger for his marvelous partnering) rather than from our belief in the characters and their tragedy. The question of how to make a story ballet work today remains at least partly unanswered here.Tristan und Isolde.  Dresden Semperoper. Through Feb. 26, and on July 6.Advertisement