A New York judge on Thursday urged Second Stage Theater, an Off Broadway company, and the owners of the Helen Hayes Theater, a Broadway house, to settle their differences about the sale of the Hayes with her help, rather than continue to litigate the matter.Lawyers for Second Stage had asked the judge, Joan M. Kenney of New York State Supreme Court, to prevent the Hayes owners from scuttling a $25 million deal under which Second Stage would buy the Hayes. That purchase was negotiated in 2007 but faced multiple delays. Since then, one of the Hayes owners, Jeffrey Tick, said he had had a change of heart about selling and would prefer to keep running the theater, one of 40 on Broadway.Mr. Tick and his partner, Martin Markinson, had insisted that Second Stage complete the closing on the Hayes sale this past Tuesday as initially scheduled. Second Stage sought a 90-day extension to complete bank financing and other closing details. The two sides could not agree on the extension, prompting Second Stage’s lawyers to go to court to block the collapse of the purchase agreement and grant the 90-day extension.Judge Kenney did not hold oral arguments on Thursday; rather, she called the lawyers for Second Stage and the Hayes owners to her bench for talks that lasted 10 minutes. Afterward a lawyer for Second Stage, Robert J. Ward, said of the judge: “She wants us to sit down to try to settle. I’m trying to get my principals to come down.” Second Stage’s artistic director, Carole Rothman, was expected to come to the courthouse to join in talks with the lawyers, Mr. Tick (who was in court with family members), and Judge Kenney. Mr. Ward said that Judge Kenney did not indicate if she was leaning favorably toward granting the extension or if she was inclined to agree with one side over the other.As they waited for Ms. Rothman to arrive, Matthew E. Hearle, the lawyer for the Hayes owners, said that he and Mr. Tick were prepared to talk about settlement options with the Second Stage side and Judge Kenney.“It’s our position that a reasonable offer on an extension was made last week, and Second Stage flatly rejected it,” Mr. Hearle said. He said that the Hayes owners had asked for $175,000 from Second Stage in return for an extension through the end of March, among other conditions that include a final agreement on potentially lucrative air rights for the theater. On Wednesday, Second Stage’s lawyer told the Hayes owners that Second Stage was willing to pay $175,000 in exchange for a 90-day extension on the purchase agreement. Mr. Hearle said that the Hayes owners, Mr. Tick and Mr. Markinson, had rejected that proposal. Mr. Tick, in an interview, said he and Mr. Markinson were seeking additional payment from Second Stage because a delay in the purchase agreement was depriving them of possible rental income for the Hayes.“We had several producers who were interested in putting shows in the theater this spring, but that won’t be possible,” Mr. Tick said, because the back-and-forth over the purchase has stymied any short-term rental deals.
Owning a Broadway theater would significantly raise the profile of Second Stage in the eyes of theatergoers and donors, likely leading to new revenues for the nonprofit theater. Broadway theaters rarely come on the market; they are coveted because ticket sales and profits tend to be greater for Broadway musicals and plays than Off Broadway shows, and only Broadway productions are eligible for Tony Awards – the most prestigious honor in the theater world.In Second Stage’s original legal filing last week Ms. Rothman, the artistic director, argued that the Hayes owners were trying to get a higher price, given that the theater’s value has probably grown since the deal was negotiated in 2007. Mr. Tick said they were not seeking more money from another buyer; rather, he wanted to hold on to the theater after changing his mind for personal reasons following the death of a daughter a year and a half ago.Casey Reitz, the executive director of Second Stage, has said the company needed more time to complete financing for the purchase, “one of 38 points on a checklist of closing-related items we have to deal with.” He and Ms. Rothman contended that the Hayes owners had not given Second Stage enough time to prepare for the closing because, in part, the owners had not given them any advance notice last fall that the musical “Rock of Ages” was ending at the Hayes, and therefore the closing date was on for February.