By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 19, 2015
8:30 P.M. (CBS) THE ODD COUPLE Matthew Perry stars as Oscar Madison, a slovenly sports radio host, and Thomas Lennon is Felix Unger, an avowed neat freak, in this remake of the ’70s Jack Klugman-Tony Randall sitcom about roommates struggling to survive their divorces. Wendell Pierce plays Oscar’s agent; Leslie Bibb lives in their building and is willing to date Oscar, but only for sex; and Lauren Graham is his ex-wife. “The new show updates the surface details without dissolving the central bond between the two friends,” Alessandra Stanley wrote in The New York Times. “This is Mr. Perry’s third attempt at sitcom success after a decade on ‘Friends,’ and there is an uneasiness to his performance — in some scenes he looks startled, even frightened — that makes it hard to play off Mr. Lennon, who seems very comfortable as a nervous nelly. That chemistry could come with time, but even if the show flops, it’s an interesting experiment.” In “The Big Bang Theory,” leading in at 8, Wolowitz (Simon Helberg) gets some startling news as the gang prepares to help Stuart (Kevin Sussman) celebrate the reopening of his comic book store. And in the finale of “Two and a Half Men,” at 9, rumor has it that Charlie Harper, the character played by Charlie Sheen, may still be alive.8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY Maggie (Kelly McCreary) grows irritated with Meredith (Ellen Pompeo) when she won’t answer questions about Washington. In “Scandal,” at 9, the White House works to rescue Olivia (Kerry Washington) from the auction block. And in “How to Get Away With Murder,” at 10, a guilt-racked Annalise (Viola Davis) turns to her mother (Cicely Tyson) for help.8 P.M. (NBC) THE SLAP After the police visit Harry (Zachary Quinto), Hector (Peter Sarsgaard) tries to persuade him to apologize to Gary (Thomas Sadoski) and Rosie (Melissa George) for slapping their son.8 P.M. (Starz Cinema) THE LIFE AQUATIC WITH STEVE ZISSOU (2004) Bill Murray is Steve Zissou, a flashy oceanographer far past his prime who, after the death of his friend (Seymour Cassel), is confronted by his own sense of mortality; the sudden appearance of an airplane pilot (Owen Wilson), who may or may not be his son; an investigative reporter (Cate Blanchett); and a bond company stooge (Bud Cort) in this comedy from Wes Anderson, who wrote the screenplay with Noah Baumbach. “In my ideal cinémathèque, ‘The Life Aquatic’ would play on a permanent double bill with ‘The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie,’ ” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “Mr. Anderson and Stephen Hillenburg, Mr. SquarePants’s creator, share not only a taste for nautical nonsense, but also a willingness to carry the banner of unfettered imaginative silliness into battle against the tyranny of maturity.”Advertisement8 P.M. (BBC America) QI Stephen Fry brings his quiz show to the United States, offering celebrity panelists points for offering interesting answers to questions while avoiding common misconceptions and urban myths. In other words, be wrong, but don’t be boring. Each season begins with a different letter, and here it’s J, with back-to-back episodes centered on jargon; jam, jelly and juice; and journeys.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.8 P.M. (TCM) DR. STRANGELOVE, OR HOW I LEARNED TO STOP WORRYING AND LOVE THE BOMB (1964) Peter Sellers plays three roles — a British officer, the president of the United States and his physicist adviser, a former Nazi — in Stanley Kubrick’s Oscar-nominated satire on the nuclear arms race. Writing in The Times, Bosley Crowther called the film “beyond any question the most shattering sick joke I’ve ever come across.”Advertisement8:30 P.M. (E!) WHO WORE IT BETTER? Catt Sadler and Orly Shani scrutinize celebrities who wore the same fashions during awards season, and then judge others who dare to show off their styling abilities in the studio.10 P.M. (IFC) PORTLANDIA Doug (Fred Armisen) decides he’s a “male feminist.”What’s Streaming NowCITY.BALLET Two 12-episode seasons follow New York City Ballet dancers and choreographers, including Peter Martins, the ballet master in chief, and the principals Sara Mearns and Chase Finlay throughout their daily routines and onto the stage. Sarah Jessica Parker, a City Ballet board member, is an executive producer. (aol.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 19, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Thursday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.