By MIKE HALEFEB. 18, 2015
Sail. Raze. Repeat.Those could have been the operating instructions for the first season of “Vikings,” the straightforwardly entertaining History channel drama about rugged Norsemen (and Norsewomen) and the quaking Englishmen who fall like tenpins whenever battle is joined.“Vikings” starts its third season on Thursday night, carrying a steady audience of more than three million, substantial for this tier of basic cable. It’s a success that seemed unlikely when it began life in 2013 as History’s first scripted series, looking like a cut-rate “Game of Thrones” knockoff.A Canadian-Irish coproduction filmed in Ireland, “Vikings” had sweeping vistas to rival those of HBO’s “Thrones,” but neither the fantasy-tale license nor the special-effects budget to fill them with armies and architectural wonders. Tied in some nominal sense to the actual history of medieval Denmark, as handed down in the Viking sagas, it put realistically small bands of men in those big landscapes — 20 Vikings on this side, 30 Northumbrians over there — and let them hack away at each other with a grunting, sweaty abandon.That modesty turned out to be an all-around virtue. Without the surface sheen and labyrinthine plot of so many of its costume-drama counterparts, “Vikings” was admirably focused and engaging, its story easy to follow and its requisite elements of family soap opera and philosophizing relatively restrained. The story featured Ragnar (Travis Fimmel) and Lagertha (Katheryn Winnick), farmers on their way to becoming a Norse power couple, and their struggles against Haraldson (Gabriel Byrne), the local nobleman who ruled over them and determined when and where the Vikings went on their pillaging expeditions.AdvertisementAs Season 3 begins, Haraldson is long gone — Mr. Byrne’s no-nonsense performance is missed — and Ragnar and the fierce Lagertha are at least temporarily split, her place in his household taken by the willowy Princess Aslaug (Alyssa Sutherland, whose supermodel looks and stature seem to belong in another, glossier show, perhaps on Starz). Ragnar is now a king and in an uneasy alliance with the Saxon leader, Ecbert (Linus Roache), who has promised to give the Vikings farmland of their own in England — if they engage in a little mercenary slaughter of his rivals.There’s a feeling in the new episodes that the show is entering its decadent phase. The Vikings, having discovered England and had their way with it (up to a point), are looking jaded and world-weary, and the always enterprising Ragnar is a little too glum. Perhaps he’ll perk up when he leads his merry band against Paris later in the season.Advertisement“Vikings” has benefited all along from the accomplished, subdued performances of a number of its cast, including Mr. Byrne, Mr. Roache, Clive Standen as Ragnar’s warlike brother and both Nathan O’Toole and Alexander Ludwig, who play Ragnar’s son Bjorn at different ages. But the heart of the show remains Mr. Fimmel’s smirking, withdrawn, not quite good but certainly distinctive performance as Ragnar, who’s written by the show’s creator, Michael Hirst, as a kind of eighth-century entrepreneur and visionary. He’s the Vikings’ risk-taking, slightly crackpot but also prudently strategic Steve Jobs, and as long as he’s in charge their stock should keep rising.A version of this article appears in print on February 19, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Steve Jobs, if He Were an Eighth-Century Warlord.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.