AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimPity the pianist who has to accompany Jamie Barton. It’s not that Ms. Barton, a dramatic mezzo-soprano who has found stardom in the opera world since her double first prize in the 2013 Cardiff Singer of the World Competition, treats her chamber music partners callously. During her recital debut at Zankel Hall on Tuesday evening, she exuded immense likability and down-to-earth charm. No, the predicament for Bradley Moore, her very able pianist on this occasion, was that next to the magnificent power of Ms. Barton’s voice, virtually everything he played came out sounding forlorn.The program, featuring songs in Spanish, French, German and Czech, as well as the world premiere of Jake Heggie’s three-song cycle “The Work at Hand,” showcased Ms. Barton’s versatility. Bookended by proudly defiant songs by Joaquín Turina (“Homenaje a Lope de Vega”) and Dvorak (“Gypsy Songs”) were moody works by Ernest Chausson, a selection of Goethe settings by Schubert and the neo-Romantic lusciousness of Mr. Heggie’s work. But in Schubert’s lieder, with their transparent textures and often gestural vocal lines, it seemed as if Ms. Barton were trying to wrestle her voluminous voice into submission. In “Gretchen am Spinnrade” (“Gretchen at the Spinning Wheel”), her rendition of the girl’s rising agitation sounded calculated, and the fiery power with which she sang the word “Kuss” (“kiss”) out of place.Ms. Barton’s voluptuous voice, dusky and scintillating, with each note animated by an interplay of richly shaded overtones, was well served by the Chausson selections. Here, the languidly unfolding melodies created sufficient space for her to play with a mesmerizing array of tone colors. In “Hébé,” she was able to thin out her voice on the final word, “divin,” in a way that maintained its lustrous sheen. The broody melancholy of “Le temps des lilas” (“The Time of Lilacs”) made the most of her dark low register. But throughout, I found myself wishing for an orchestra of Straussian dimensions to carry and celebrate her voice.Reinforcements arrived in the form of the cellist Anne Martindale Williams, who joined Ms. Barton and Mr. Moore for “The Work at Hand.” The first song, “Individual Origami,” opens with a flamboyant cello solo, played here with intense heat by Ms. Williams. But the music soon settled into predictable patterns, with Ms. Barton’s lines soaring lyrically, while piano and cello traded the same arabesque motifs. While the music always flattered Ms. Barton’s artful singing, the endlessly yearning melodies felt staid and old-fashioned. Advertisement