AdvertisementSupported byBy the NumbersBy Stephen HeymanHow much does culture influence creative thinking? For a study out next month in The Journal of Business Research, a team of scholars led by Gad Saad of Concordia University in Montreal showed how an identical brainstorming exercise produced very different results in two distinct cultural contexts.The experiment pitted a so-called “individualist” culture that prizes free thinking and personal expression (Canada) against a collectivist culture that emphasizes humility and group harmony (Taiwan).Dr. Saad, an evolutionary behavioral scientist, said the idea for the experiment was suggested by one of his graduate students, Louis Ho, who co-wrote the paper with Dr. Saad and Mark Cleveland of the University of Western Ontario. Mr. Ho, a Canadian, was raised in a family of immigrants from Taiwan. “He had anecdotally noticed that there was something inherent about the Taiwanese culture that he grew up in that seemed to hinder thinking outside of the box,” Dr. Saad said.About 300 university students in Canada and Taiwan participated in the brainstorming exercises. To keep the experiment culturally neutral, the researchers chose somewhat surreal prompts that participants were not likely to have thought about beforehand. These included: “How would you attract tourists to an underwater city?” or “What would be the practical benefits of a second thumb?”The students were separated into groups of four, and encouraged to brainstorm ideas. The researchers’ main hypothesis — that individualist cultures would generate more ideas — proved correct. On average, the Canadian teams produced twice as many ideas as the teams from Taiwan. The Canadian participants were also more confident about their own suggestions, and more negative about those of their peers.The atmosphere was different inside the Taiwanese teams. Participants suggested fewer ideas and seemed reluctant to criticize those made by other team members. “In the collectivist group dynamic, you don’t want to stick out,” Dr. Saad said. “You want to create harmony.” What the Taiwanese groups lacked in quantity they made up for in quality, however, scoring slightly higher marks in originality than the Canadian teams.Dr. Saad said a lesson that could be drawn from the study was that while brainstorming and other predominantly Western exercises meant to spur innovation might not translate easily to other cultures, that did not mean they were not worth exporting. “The results may be just as good,” he said. “Or even better.” Advertisement