Beyoncé’s self-titled album from late 2013 had an unfamiliar name in many of its credits: Boots. Who is Boots? We were theorizing about it on the Popcast 14 months ago. Jon Pareles said, “I have the feeling he’s holding it together.”Recently he got a chance to find out whether he was right.  The New York Times music critics talk each week about the latest pop music news. Subscribe in iTunes.
Boots is Jordan Asher, a 28-year old singer, songwriter, filmmaker and experimenter in spooky, distressed and broken-down sounds and images; a disciple of the producer and rapper El-P; and formerly half of the retro-indie duo Blonds. In 2013 Beyoncé heard a song of his — how she heard it is a closely guarded secret — and brought him in for a week-long work session on one song, then a few more, and then months more to work on other songs.  In the spring of 2013 he put out a Soundcloud mixtape, “WinterSpringSummerFall,” but now is his moment. His next project, to be released online on March 3, is “Motorcycle Jesus,” a 30-minute film, directed by Mr. Asher, constructed around five new songs. (Shorter preview versions have been viewable at his website.)“He’s intent on every detail, completely versed in cinema and music,” Mr. Pareles said on this week’s Popcast, after visiting with Mr. Asher in Los Angeles and on the video set in the Mojave desert. “He said he sees himself doing movie scores, too. I see in him a connection to Trent Reznor — Trent Reznor minus the S-and-M. He loves analyzing and destroying sounds, making normal instruments sounds abnormal. He also has the skill of making a song a dramatic unfolding, just in sound. It’s not the same loop; it’s not flown in from the first verse to sound exactly the same at the end. Something happens transitively in his songs. They usually don’t end up where they began.”Listen above, download the MP3 or subscribe in iTunes. RELATEDJon Pareles on ‘Beyoncé’Jon Pareles on BootsSPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks by artists discussed this week. Spotify users can also find it here.
