Charlie Sheen filed a $100 million lawsuit after getting fired from the CBS sitcom “Two and a Half Men.” Angus T. Jones (the young half-man of the show’s title) made a video for his church that went viral on the Internet in which he said that the show was “filling your head with filth.”But in the end, after 12 seasons, Chuck Lorre, a creator of the show, had the last laugh. Mr. Sheen did not return for Thursday night’s series finale, as many fans had hoped. Instead, in the episode, pianos were dropped on the heads of both Mr. Lorre and a stand-in for Mr. Sheen’s once-presumed-dead character, killing them both. It was a bizarre and yet fitting end for TV’s longest-running multicamera sitcom.Mr. Lorre spoke about the final episode. The show’s final title card explained that you asked Charlie Sheen to return and rant about the dangers of drug use before getting squashed by the piano, but he declined, suggesting instead that you do a heartwarming scene to set up a new show co-starring him and Jon Cryer. Did you speak with Sheen personally? No, Jim Patterson and Don Reo, two executive producers on the show and co-writers of the finale, spoke with Charlie. Why do you think he turned down your original idea? I can’t say. I just have to assume that he didn’t see the humor in it, which is all right. What are you going to do? We thought that was a terrific way to end the series. He certainly understood there was a huge pent-up demand to see Charlie in the finale, and there would be creative closure in that. I wanted to make that happen, but it wasn’t meant to be. Did you give any consideration to his proposed ending? Not for a second.  Because you didn’t think it was right creatively?  (laughs) It just didn’t feel appropriate for what we were doing. Charlie spoiled the fact he wasn’t going to be in the ‘Two and a Half Men’ finale 12 hours before it aired, tweeting that his fans would have to wait to see him on ABC’s ‘The Goldbergs’ because “I go where the love is.” Do you have no love left for Charlie? Have you forgiven him, or are there still hard feelings?  Oh, we’re way past hard feelings. We made what I know to be a sincere effort to include him in the finale, in a way that would give him a real featured moment, and a funny moment—a self-deprecating and outrageous moment. The final moment would have been his. He chose not to do it. That was an effort not to just give him what he wanted, but to give the fans of the show what they wanted. I’m not clear on what else I could have done. I wasn’t about to turn creative control over the show to anybody, not at this point, not in the finale. I mean, why? Why did you decide to put yourself in the show?  It seemed funny. It seemed like a way to get to where we wanted to go, which is that nobody gets off the show alive. Every choice we made was with the intention to do a funny finale. At this point in the 12-year run of the show, there was no point in going for dignity or deep meaning. We never did before. Why start now? How did you get Angus T. Jones to come back as Jon Cryer’s son?  We called him and said, “Hey, man, come be in the finale.” And he was thrilled. He jumped at it, and we had a blast. That was one of the most fun parts of the whole experience. In front of a live studio audience, when Angus stepped on the stage — we hid his entrance really well, there was no way they saw it coming — the place went nuts. It was really a homecoming. The audience clearly had a lot of love for him and the character he played for many years. It was a really nice experience for everyone on the show to spend the week with Angus again. He’s a terrific young man. He had some pretty harsh things to say about the show around the time of his departure a few years ago. Had you talked to him about that since? He called me and apologized a long time ago. That’s over and done with. He’s a young guy, and you have to throw that stuff away. Angus is one of the nicest people I’ve ever known and worked with in my career. He never really faltered from that. He’s been a rock on the series, and he’s been a joy to work with. That’s not smoke and hyperbole. It’s true. You ask anyone who worked on the show. He was never the showbiz kid with an attitude or anything like that. There were a lot of inside jokes in the episode about the series running too long. Did you ever feel like 12 seasons was a bit much?  I was so grateful that we got a second life with Ashton, and that everybody got to keep working for four more years, when it looked like we were dead in the water. The show has ended twice for me, in a way. This time we ended on our terms. Did it run too long? I don’t know. People were laughing, people were watching. Did we stay past our expiration date? Maybe. But we were having a good time doing it. It might have turned sour, but we were having a lot of fun. Looking back over the last 12 years, how does it feel to have overseen one of the longest-running live-action sitcoms in TV history? I’d prefer to have hit 70 home runs, but I’m delighted that the show has an asterisk next to it. That’s 12 years with a writers’ strike and a couple stops for rehab, so we did pretty good.