Jon Stewart may not be on our televisions for much longer, but his appearance Thursday night before a packed house at Joe’s Pub on “Employee of the Month”, Catie Lazarus’s long-running talk show, gives hope that he’ll be seen around town a bit more.Mr. Stewart, rarely visible on the city’s live comedy scene these days, was an impressive booking when he was announced in January; but it became even more fortuitous when he announced last week that he plans to leave “The Daily Show” later this year.After Ms. Lazarus teasingly listed credits including “Death to Smoochy” and “Caroline’s Comedy Hour,” Mr. Stewart walked out to the house band’s rendition of “Born in the U.S.A.” In khakis, a hoodie and a leather jacket, he looked more like a stand-up comic or indie-film director than the fake news anchor who holds court on Comedy Central.Ms. Lazarus jumped to the question on everyone’s mind: What is he going to do next?“I’m going to be a featured blogger on The Huffington Post,” he joked. The interview touched on his short-lived MTV show, his thoughts when starting at “The Daily Show” and his recent film, “Rosewater,” about the jailed Iranian journalist Maziar Bahari.When pushed on whether he would direct more films, he was noncommittal. “I don’t know if Maziar’s gonna get arrested again,” he said.“I would like to,” he continued. “I have a lot of ideas. Partially, that’s why I decided to move on from the show. I think I got to a certain point where I thought, well, you shouldn’t stay somewhere just because you can.”He confirmed later that he wasn’t retiring, but just shifting gears to spend more time with his young children. He floated the idea of returning to regular stand-up, which earned a cheer from the crowd.Mr. Stewart dodged the other much-awaited question, about who will replace him at the anchor desk.“What I want to see there is the next iteration of this idea,” he said. “I feel like the tributaries of my brain, combined with the rigidity of the format, I feel like I utilized every permutation of that that I could possibly use. You can only go so far with four facial expressions and five to seven curse words.”He praised the former “Daily Show” correspondent John Oliver’s success on HBO’s “Last Week Tonight,” saying it was exciting to watch that show flourish, adding that he looked forward to seeing a “Daily Show” successor do the same. Ms. Lazarus showered the departing host with appropriate gifts, including a COBRA insurance form, a program for the 92nd Street Y and a notebook, “because I hope you never stop writing.”