Various shows.
Museum of  Contemporary Art in Krakow.
Through April.
In his 2008 two-channel video ‘‘Take a Deep Breath,’’ the Israeli artist Omer Fast juxtaposed an interview with a witness to a suicide bombing with a fictional recreation of the incident. An exhibition dedicated to Mr. Fast’s work is showing at this gleaming art space — which opened its doors in 2010 — alongside a selection of other shows. These include ‘‘Logical Emotion,’’ which features work by 13 contemporary Japanese artists, ranging from tech-savvy creators like Ryoji Ikeda to Masayasu Mitsuke, who handpaints pottery. ‘‘Young Israel,’’ meanwhile, shows video art by two Israeli artists, Nadav Bin-Nun and Ben Hagari.Louise Bourgeois: I Have Been to Hell and Back
Moderna Museet.
Through May 17.
The artist’s monumental ‘‘Maman’’ aims to depict the ferocity of motherhood. It appears outside of the Moderna Museet for the duration of this show, which brings together more than 100 of the Franco-American artist’s works, around a third of which have never been shown publicly. Half of the exhibition focuses on her sculptures while the other half focuses on her works on fabric and paper.
Marvels and Mirages of Orientalism
Montreal Museum of Fine Arts.
Through May 31.
The French painter Jean-Joseph Benjamin-Constant (1845-1902) earned praise during his lifetime for his opulent depictions of North Africa — dappled with lush fabrics, endless horizons and women draped seductively across his canvases. In recent years, though, his work has undergone scrutiny for minimizing and stereotyping the region. This exhibition offers visitors a glimpse of a wide swath of Benjamin-Constant’s work. It also offers subtle critiques, like new pieces by the contemporary female artists Yasmina Bouziane, Lalla Essaydi and Majida Khattari, who were commissioned to respond to Benjamin-Constant’s oeuvre. The Baroque Underworld: Vice and Poverty in Rome
Petit Palais.
Feb. 24 -May. 24.
Many shows on late Renaissance Roman art keep their focus on works depicting the pious and the pleasurable. Not so this exhibition, which focuses on the city’s dark and disturbing output from the era. Artworks include a prostitution scene by Claude Gellée, a nighttime witchcraft painting by Salvator Rosa and Nicolas Régnier’s off-kilter image, from around 1623, of a woman holding a lit wick below a sleeping man’s nose, shown above. Roughly 70 paintings are being presented in all. A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Hidden Treasures of North Korea Revealed
Korea International Exhibition Center.
Through March 6.
From 2005 to 2010, the Dutch art dealer Frans Broersen made several journeys to North Korea, collecting work by local artists. Now, around 150 artworks by 70 of those artists are showing in Goyang, a city just outside of Seoul and less than 50 miles from the North Korean border. Artists included in the exhibition — which has already toured Europe — include Jong Chol, Kim Song Min and Gong Cheong Kwon. Some paintings depict urban life, but many focus on pastoral scenes and hark back to 19th-century European and Asian techniques. Hong Kong Arts Festival
Various venues.
Feb. 27-March 29.
The Los Angeles Philharmonic, the Bolshoi and the Dutch National Ballet will all perform on Hong Kong stages during this festival — an annual lineup of performances at  several venues across the city. In addition to productions by some of the world’s leading arts institutions, a number of smaller events will also take place — including local dance works, Chinese opera productions and two concerts by Pink Martini, a quirky, world-touring jazz ensemble founded by a pair of Harvard graduates. The sought-after conductor Gustavo Dudamel will lead the orchestra in two performances (of Mahler and of Adams and Dvorak) at the festival.The Queen of Spades 
Bolshoi Theater.
Feb. 27-May 19.
Tchaikovsky’s thickly plotted opera — which centers on a ghost with a knack for winning card games — will appear at the Bolshoi as the theater celebrates the composer’s 175th birthday. The acclaimed director Lev Dodin, known mostly for his work in theater, led the production, and Mikhail Jurowski conducts. The 1998 production, which was designed by David Borovsky, sets the action in a mental institution and frames the proceedings as an extended hallucination. Henry Moore: Wunderkammer — Origin of Forms
Gagosian Gallery.
Through April 2.
The British sculptor Henry Moore (1898-1986) kept a trove of curios like skulls, bones and plants in his studio as inspiration. This exhibition recreates the studio where Moore worked, placing these objects alongside a number of artworks (ranging from sketches to finished bronze casts) that they inspired. In addition to the artworks on view at Gagosian, two large-scale open-air sculptures are showing in nearby Berkeley Square. Yebisu International Festival for Art & Alternative Visions
Various venues.
Feb. 27-March 8.
Artworks by some of the world’s leading digital and video artists will appear in this festival, including pieces by the Turner Prize-winner filmmaker Duncan Campbell; the provocative video artist Ryan Trecartin; and the multimedia artist Daito Manabe, who recently collaborated with the dance company Eleven Play on a performance featuring dancers and drones. In addition to screenings and installations, a number of electronic music performances, conferences and discussions will also take place. 