AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 A.M. (CUNY) A TIMESTALKS CONVERSATION: DAVID CARR INTERVIEWS LAURA POITRAS, GLENN GREENWALD AND EDWARD J. SNOWDEN On Feb. 12 Mr. Carr, who wrote about media for The New York Times, sat down at the New School with Ms. Poitras, the Oscar-nominated director of the documentary “Citizenfour,” about Mr. Snowden, the National Security Agency whistle-blower; Mr. Greenwald, the Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist who first wrote about Mr. Snowden’s revelations; and Mr. Snowden himself, who joined the discussion via a video link from Russia. Mr. Carr died later that night. (Repeats at 4 and 9 p.m.) In “Science Goes to the Movies,” a new series at 7:30 p.m., Faith Salie, an NPR host, and Heather Berlin, a neuroscientist, dissect the science portrayed in some current films, starting with hallucinations in “Birdman,” black holes and gravity in “Interstellar” and the work of the theoretical physicist Stephen Hawking in “The Theory of Everything.” Emily Rice, an astrophysicist with the Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History, weighs in. 8 P.M. (Oxygen) PREACHERS OF DETROIT “Preachers of L.A.” spins off to Detroit, where seven men and women of the cloth allow cameras to follow them on their faith-based missions at and away from the pulpit.8 P.M. (FX Movie Channel) HITCHCOCK (2012) Anthony Hopkins, buried in a fat suit and facial prosthetics, summons the spirit of Alfred Hitchcock during the making of “Psycho” in this biopic, directed by Sacha Gervasi and based on a book by Stephen Rebello. But Hitchcock isn’t merely taken with the inspiration behind his perverse shocker: Robert Bloch’s 1959 novel about Ed Gein, a serial killer in Wisconsin who adorned his home with human body parts and walked around in the skin of his female victims. Hitchcock becomes possessed, enduring insomnia and tension with his wife and adviser, Alma (Helen Mirren), who is unhappy about his fixation on blondes — in this case, Janet Leigh (Scarlett Johansson). “The real Hitchcock’s great flaw, apparently, was that he was at once a genius and a private man, a combination that has allowed some writers and filmmakers to have their insultingly imaginative way with him,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “It’s fluff,” she added. “But while its dim fantasies about Hitchcock and the association of genius with psychosis can be written off as silly, they also smack of spiteful jealousy.”9 P.M. (Nat Geo Wild) CESAR MILLAN: VIVA LAS VEGAS! Mr. Millan brings his live stage show to the small screen in this two-hour special, during which he helps some frantic owners transform their disobedient dogs into manageable pets right onstage.10 P.M. (HBO) REAL TIME WITH BILL MAHER The singer Aloe Blacc and the writer Fran Lebowitz are the interview guests. Elahe Izadi, a national reporter for The Washington Post; the science educator Bill Nye; and the director Rob Reiner are at the round table.10:30 P.M. (13) 66TH & BROADWAY Taped in front of an audience at the Tisch WNET Studios at Lincoln Center, this new cabaret series opens with Jennifer Sheehan’s performance of classics from the Great American Songbook.What’s Streaming NowRICHIE RICH In this retooling of a comic-book character, Richie Rich (Jake Brennan) becomes the world’s wealthiest kid after inventing a green technology and selling it for a trillion dollars. He moves his family into a mansion that covers 16 acres, which he traverses in a mini-Lamborghini. The adventures don’t stop there in this Netflix original series. (netflix.com)NICK BROOMFIELD COLLECTION Fandor presents several notable films directed by Mr. Broomfield, the British documentarian, including “Heidi Fleiss: Hollywood Madam” (1995), about Ms. Fleiss, who supplied prostitutes to celebrities; “Biggie and Tupac” (2002), which investigates the killings of the rappers Biggie Smalls and Tupac Shakur; “Fetishes” (1996), filmed at Pandora’s Box, an S-and-M parlor in New York; “Kurt and Courtney” (1998), which sets the relationship between Kurt Cobain and Courtney Love against the destructive power of corporate America, economic depression and freedom of speech; and “Battle for Haditha” (2008), about the bombing of a Marine convoy by Iraqi insurgents and the retaliation that led to the massacre of 24 civilians, many of them women and children. (fandor.com)Advertisement