AdvertisementSupported byBy Joshua BaroneAround TownMuseums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and other diseases? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out diseases. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum: ‘Masters of Disguise: The World of Camouflage’ (through Tuesday) The art of camouflage in nature and its appropriation by hunters and the armed forces are explored in this exhibition, which uses digital images, artifacts and interactive elements to showcase how color, shade and shapes can be used to deceive the eye. Daily, from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 877-957-7447, intrepidmuseum.org.‘Mapping Brooklyn’ (through Sept. 6) BRIC and the Brooklyn Historical Society present this exhibition featuring artworks that incorporate various themes from historical maps. The artists here are exploring the ways maps represent the practical and metaphoric aspects of life. A free opening reception will be at BRIC House on Wednesday at 7 p.m. Starting on Thursday, the show will be on display at BRIC House, and will run through May 3. Tuesdays through Saturdays from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., to 6 p.m. on Sundays, BRIC House, 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. The show will also be at the Brooklyn Historical Society through Sept. 6. Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5 p.m., Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Chinese American: Exclusion/Inclusion’ (through April 19) In his review for The New York Times, Edward Rothstein called it a “vigorous and imaginative new exhibition,” that includes a look at “how Chinese-American identity came to be, how immigration and discrimination were followed by recrimination and conflict, and how, finally, a people’s trials give way to celebration.” Tuesday through Thursday and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Friday until 8 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., this Monday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Public Library: ‘Becoming the Man in the White Suit: The Tom Wolfe Papers’ (through next Friday) The New York Public Library is exhibiting highlights from Mr. Wolfe’s archive. Included are his correspondences with John Glenn about “The Right Stuff,” a notebook he carried to “Black Panther Night” at Leonard Bernstein’s apartment, and notes from an interview with the Grateful Dead’s Jerry Garcia that would be used for “The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test.” Fridays, Saturdays, Mondays and Thursdays from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Sundays from 1 to 5 p.m.; Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/events/exhibitions; free.New York Public Library for the Performing Arts: ‘Emily Dickinson: Musician and Poet’ (through March 6) Emily Dickinson’s poems and letters as well as the library’s collection of her work provide the backdrop for this exhibition, which focuses on the musical side of her writing. Dickinson’s musical identity encompassed piano performances, the collection of sheet music and concert outings, and those experiences are detailed here. Friday, Saturday, Tuesday and Wednesday from noon to 6 p.m.; Monday and Thursday from noon to 8 p.m.; 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/lpa; free.New York Transit Museum Annex: Holiday Train Show (through Sunday) This free annual treat for model train enthusiasts, featuring vintage Lionel trains, is on display in Grand Central Terminal. Weekdays from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Weekends from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; at Grand Central Terminal, near the Station Master’s Office; mta.info/mta/museum.GardensNew York Botanical Garden: Bird Walk (Saturday) The botanical garden’s diverse plant life makes for a similar array of bird species. Guests are encouraged to bring their binoculars and hear an expert speak about the birds who make the garden a permanent home. The tour begins at the Leon Levy Visitor Center reflecting pool. At 11 a.m., Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.Black History Month EventsApollo Theater Open House (Saturday) The theater celebrates Black History Month by opening its doors for an afternoon of free events. John Reddick, a Harlem historian, will give a presentation about the Apollo’s history and the other theaters that once populated 125th Street. A panel discussion, “Theater as Activism: Then and Now,” led by Jamal Joseph, a former Black Panther, will explore how culture reflects community. Performers include former winners of the theater’s Amateur Night. From noon to 5 p.m., Apollo Theater, 253 West 125th Street, Harlem, 800-745-3000, apollotheater.org; free.Arsenal Gallery: ‘The Migration’ (through Tuesday) During the early and mid-20th century, more than 6 million African-American people left the Jim Crow South for cities in the north and on the West Coast. The Ebony Society asked more than 20 artists to interpret the events and effects of the Great Migration, and their works are on display at this show commemorating Black History Month. Weekdays from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Central Park, 830 Fifth Avenue, at 64th Street, third floor, 212-360-8111, nycgovparks.org; free.Black Artstory (through Feb. 28) The Myrtle Avenue Brooklyn Partnership has been celebrating Black History Month with an art walk spanning 12 blocks. The theme is “Where I’m From: The Black Artstory of Myrtle and Beyond,” about the long history of black art and its contributions to the area. Black Artstory’s other free events this weekend include “Remembering Rodeo Caldonia,” a discussion about the black women’s art collective between the writer Lisa Jones and Alva Rogers, a writer and composer. The event will be at Pillow Café, 505 Myrtle Avenue, on Friday at 6 p.m. On Saturday at 11 a.m., BLDG 92 and Inside Out Tours present a guided tour at Brooklyn Navy Yard. The art walk map, as well as a schedule of events for the month, is at myrtleavenue.org/blackartstory.Double Treble (Sunday) The Convent Avenue Baptist Church celebrates Black History Month with Double Treble, made up of the organist Roderick Demmings Jr. and the pianist Karl Van Richards. The program includes works by the black composers Oswald Russell and Samuel Coleridge-Taylor, and an arrangement of George Gershwin’s “Rhapsody in Blue.” At 4 p.m., 420 West 145th Street, Hamilton Heights, 212-234-6767, conventchurch.org; free.Black Entertainers and New York City History (Tuesday) Black entertainment in the city, across art forms and media, is the subject of a discussion featuring Judy Smith, author of “Becoming Belafonte: Black Artist, Public Radical”; Gayle Wald, author of “It’s Been Beautiful: Soul! and Black Power Television”; Farah Jasmine Griffin, author of “Harlem Nocturne: Women Artists and Progressive Politics During World War II”; and Ruth Feldstein, author of “How It Feels to Be Free: Black Women Entertainers and the Civil Rights Movement.” Registration is required. At 6:30 p.m., Graduate Center, City University of New York, 365 Fifth Avenue, at 34th Street, 877-428-6942, gc.cuny.edu.Events‘Commedia Dell’Artichoke’ (Sunday through Tuesday) Two actors, Carter Gill and Tommy Russell, perform in a modern twist on the Italian tradition of commedia dell’arte. Together, they create characters who live and work in a New York pizza shop. Admission includes a slice of pizza and a drink. At 9:30 p.m., Artichoke Basille’s Pizza, 114 10th Avenue, at 17th Street, Chelsea, 203-889-8883, francesblackprojects.com.Sharon Isbin (Tuesday) The National Arts Club celebrates the classical guitarist Sharon Isbin by screening the documentary “Sharon Isbin: Troubadour.” In addition, Ms. Isbin will take part in an interview with WQXR’s Elliott Forrest, and perform a brief concert. Registration is required (send an email to music@thenationalartsclub.org). At 7:30 p.m., 15 Gramercy Park South, 212-475-3424, nationalartsclub.org; free.The Shanghai Restoration Project (Thursday) A performance by this group blends Chinese culture with hip-hop and electronic music to take listeners on a sonic journey through the city. The concert, inspired in part by 1930s Shanghai jazz bands, also involves projected visuals from contemporary Chinese artists. The singer Zhang Le and the animator and rapper Ray Lei will also take part. At 7:30 p.m., Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.‘What Design Sounds Like’ (Saturday) Designers from around the world will discuss their trade, using only their voices and sound samples, no visuals. The all-day symposium covers a range of topics, such as how New York’s subway system would sound as a string instrument and graphic design on the radio. Doors open at 8:30 a.m., and a reception will follow at 5:30 p.m., School of Visual Arts Theater, 333 West 23rd Street, Chelsea, wdsl.designobserver.com; free.Spoken Word‘Brutal! Paul Rudolph’s Postwar New York Interiors’ (Thursday) Timothy M. Rohan, a professor at the University of Massachusetts, discusses his new monograph, “The Architecture of Paul Rudolph,” about the architect’s brutalist interiors at his Beeckman Place residence and elsewhere in the city. Mr. Rohan will be joined in conversation by Donald Albrecht, curator of architecture and design at Museum of the City of New York. A reception will follow. At 6:30 p.m., Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org.Andrea Chapin in Conversation With James Shapiro (Tuesday) Ms. Chapin, an actress and editor, discusses her debut novel, “The Tutor,” an Elizabethan-era drama about love and ambition. She will be joined by James Shapiro, an English and comparative literature professor at Columbia University. Registration is required (send an email to events@centerforfiction.org). At 7 p.m., the Center for Fiction, 17 East 47th Street, 212-755-6710, centerforfiction.org; free.Robert Christgau in Conversation With Rob Sheffield (Wednesday) Mr. Christgau, the self-proclaimed “Dean of American Rock Critics,” discusses his memoir, “Going Into the City: Portrait of a Critic as a Young Man.” The book recounts his adventures in music criticism over the past 50 years, like his time at Woodstock. He will be joined by Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.Hasia Diner in Conversation With José Moya (Tuesday) Ms. Diner, a historian, discusses her newest book, “Roads Taken: The Great Jewish Migrations to the New World and the Peddlers Who Forged the Way,” about the young men who, from the late 1700s to the 1920s, left their homes to seek opportunities abroad. She will be joined by José Moya, a history professor at Barnard College. At 6:30 p.m., Center for Jewish History, 15 West 16th Street, Flatiron district, 212-868-4444, cjh.org.Richard Price, David Simon and Deborah Voigt (Monday and Thursday) On Monday, Richard Price will discuss his new novel, “The Whites,” published under the pen name Harry Brandt. He will be joined by David Simon, creator of “The Wire.” On Thursday, the opera singer Deborah Voigt presents “Voight Lessons,” a one-woman show created with the playwright Terrence McNally and the director Francesca Zambello. Ms. Voigt will perform songs alongside stories about her life. Monday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday at 8 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org.Walking ToursFlatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.The Ghosts of Grand Central (Saturdays) This tour offers shelter from the cold, though discovering the ghosts of Grand Central Terminal may bring a different sort of chill. There will be history of the Vanderbilts, as well as August Belmont, Franklin Roosevelt and his dog, Fala. The tour meets west of the M.T.A. information booth under the four-faced clock in the station’s Grand Concourse. (Through March 28.) At 7:30 p.m., 646-493-7092, ghostsofny.com.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.Lower East Side Gallery Tour (Saturday) This gallery tour covers seven shows, with works including video installations and sculptures of objects bouncing in and on boxes. In addition, two artists, Eric Mistretta and Evie Falci, will speak with the tour group about their multimedia artworks. The group meets at 196 Bowery, at Spring Street. At 1 p.m., 212-946-1548, nygallerytours.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org. JOSHUA BARONEInformation on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. Advertisement