AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel Graeber‘Can Do Duck: The Musical’President Obama might be interested to learn that he’s not the only one to win big with a “Yes, we can” philosophy. A comparable mantra is helping a little duck in the East Village, though he’s not running for office — at least not yet.He stars in “Can Do Duck: The Musical,” created and directed by Arielle Sosland. Ms. Sosland, a senior at New York University, has based the show on “The Can Do Duck,” the first book in a self-published series by her father, Dr. Morton Sosland, a child psychiatrist. Writing under the nom de plume (emphasis on plume) of Ducktor Morty, Dr. Sosland enlisted his daughters to illustrate his book when they were small. A similar dynamic plays out onstage as the show’s fictional dad asks his little girl, Sarah, to help him figure out what his new manuscript lacks. Sarah decides that the book, a children’s story, needs pictures, and as she draws them, they take shape and move on a large video screen behind her. (Hala Alhomoud designed the whimsical animations.) At the same time, energetic young adults act out the book’s narrative, which concerns the confidence that all ducklings — and humans — need before they can leave the nest. Although tales encouraging children to believe in themselves have been around since a certain little engine scaled a mountain, Ms. Sosland has enlivened this well-worn message with comical staging — ducklings are funny when they walk and even funnier when they’re struggling to — and a more expansive plot than that of her father’s storybook. Instead of one duckling, the musical features a quirky five, and a couple aren’t above a bit of sabotage when they think their formerly meek brother — the Can Do of the title (Max Hoffman) — has been puffing out his chest feathers too much.Their plan, outlined in a mischievous rap, is more memorable than the pop ballads that make up most of the score, composed by Ms. Sosland, Dr. Sosland and Charlie Wright, who all wrote the lyrics with various collaborators. (I’m not counting the Tchaikovsky excerpts when two ducklings tackle ballet.)And the tiny fledglings in the audience? They can regularly join the action: by duck walking, quacking, flapping, beat boxing, repeating that “I say I can” strategy. The motto does give the show’s hero a proven idea: Maybe he’ll one day alight in the White House.(Saturdays and Sundays at 11 a.m., through March 8, at the Lynn Redgrave Theater at Culture Project, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street; 866-811-4111, candoduckthemusical.com.) LAUREL GRAEBERFor Children‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’  (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.Baby Loves Disco (After) Valentine’s Day Ball (Sunday) Mommy and Daddy often love disco, too, and they can enjoy these afternoon dance parties — with bona fide D.J.s and nostalgic hits — along with their offspring. (The target age range is 6 months to 7 years.) Unlike clubs, these disco gatherings often feature diaper-changing stations, and unlike playgrounds, they usually have snacks and beverages for adults. This one, at Le Poisson Rouge, is a post-Valentine’s Day celebration, with face painting and video making as well as dancing. From noon to 3 p.m., 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich Village, babylovesdisco.com.‘The Bully’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company is reviving this ever-topical musical, by John Gregor and David L. Williams, which refreshingly avoids the trap of bullying its own audiences with heavy moralizing. Instead, the many pitfalls of the typical middle school relationship of victimizer and victim are revealed through wit, humor and a killer of a sly twist. (Through April 26.) At 3:30 p.m., McGinn-Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org. ‘A Child’s View of Life in 19th-Century New York’ (Saturday) No smartphone, no computers, no TV. How did a kid in the 1850s cope? Today’s children — the recommended ages are 8 through 12 — are invited to find out in this interactive family tour at the Merchant’s House Museum, which was built in 1832. Among the points to consider: dealing with hoop skirts; carrying a bucket of coal up steep stairs; taking a bath when no one had running water. And just imagine: you were supposed to have beautiful handwriting. At 3:30 p.m., 29 East Fourth Street, East Village, 212-777-1089, merchantshouse.org. Dr. Seuss: ‘The Cat Behind the Hat’ (Friday through Thursday) The Cat in the Hat and Horton the Elephant are old friends to many children, but this free exhibition will allow Dr. Seuss’s fans to meet characters and images they’ve probably never seen before. Pop International Galleries Midtown is showing paintings and sculptures that Theodor Geisel, a.k.a. Dr. Seuss, created for his own enjoyment and rarely, if ever, displayed. Fans of his picture books can expect to encounter some familiar faces too. From 11 a.m. to 7 p.m., the Atrium, Citicorp Building, 153 East 53rd Street, Manhattan, 212-533-4262, popinternational.com.EcoCruises: Winter Seals and Waterbirds of New York Harbor (Sunday) A lot of tourists visit New York in the winter, but some of the most interesting won’t be found in the crowds at Times Square. These two-hour cruises from New York City Audubon focus on birds that migrate to this region at this time of year, like many ducks and geese. They also visit the harbor seals that can be found around Governors, Hoffman and Swinburne Islands. (Seal behavior researchers will take part in several of the tours.) An Audubon naturalist narrates the adventures, which include complimentary hot tea and cocoa and are conducted via New York Water Taxi. Warm clothing and binoculars are recommended, as is advance purchase. (Through March 8.) Sundays at noon, Pier 16, South Street Seaport, 89 South Street, near Fulton Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-742-1969, nywatertaxi.com/tours/audubon-winter.‘Fancy Nancy the Musical’  (Saturday and Sunday) One of the arts’ youngest divas has returned to the McGinn/Cazale Theater. This musical from Vital Theater Company focuses on a little girl who wants everything to be fancy — especially herself. Based on the book series written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, the production explores the predicament that ensues when Nancy finds out that she hasn’t been cast as the glamorous mermaid she’d hoped to be in the coming dance show. With a book by Susan DiLallo, a score by Danny Abosch, and lyrics by both, the musical humorously follows Nancy’s attempts to cope with a most unfancy role: that of a tree. (Through April 26.) At 1:30 p.m., 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.FIAF Kids: Animated Weekend (Saturday and Sunday) Bonjour to French cartoons! Both the material and the young audience members will be thoroughly animated in the French Institute Alliance Française’s weekend-long salute to French cinema for children. And there’s no need to speak the language: Although some of the related activities are in French, the films come with English subtitles. On Saturday, screenings begin at 11:30 a.m. with “School Is Out” (“En Sortant de L’École”), young animators’ interpretations of Jacques Prévert’s poems, followed at 1 p.m. by a program of shorts by the master filmmaker Michel Ocelot, and at 4 p.m. by “The Tale of the Fox” (“Le Roman de Renard”), Irène and Ladislas Starewitch’s 1941 puppet classic about the wily title character. On Sunday at 11:30 a.m., the films get underway with three brief adventures: “Le Père Frimas,” “Kokoa” and “Samba le Grand.” Then 1 p.m. brings screenings of two episodes of the history-related French television series “Once Upon a Time ... Man” (“Il Était Une Fois ... L’Homme”). Other events will include storytelling, crafts, songs and games. At Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, fiaf.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com. ‘Give Me Sound!’ (Sunday) Hayes Greenfield has been giving sound for years, and at this program, he’s encouraging children to give it back. A jazz musician, composer and educator, Mr. Greenfield will work with young audience members — the recommended ages are 3 through 7 — in sonic activities and games, with the goal of creating a “sound sculpture” at the end of the hour. While little enthusiasts will use their natural rhythm makers — voices and bodies — instruments from home are welcome, too. (Through March 22.) At 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-675-6677, 13thstreetrep.org.Carla Hall’s Culinary Kids Week (Friday through Sunday) Everyone likes to eat during vacation, and this celebration, coinciding with the public school winter break, concludes this weekend with intriguing and healthful possibilities. Presented by the chef Carla Hall, co-host of “The Chew” on ABC, and the Ruth Rea Howell Family Garden at the New York Botanical Garden, the festival features a daily cooking demonstration with visiting chefs making child-friendly recipes. In daily culinary workshops at 11 a.m., noon and 2 p.m. (registration is first come first served), young visitors will master kitchen skills and make dishes themselves. Other attractions include food activity stations and a treasure hunt for edible rain forest plants. From 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one will sprout indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which is reviving Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor will now star in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Friday at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 1 p.m.; Tuesday through Thursday at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional performance on Wednesday at 2:30 p.m. Reservations required. Some performances are sold out. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.‘Kid M.D.’ (Saturday) It’s never too early to prepare for medical school, especially when you can have fun doing it. In this new program from Discovery Times Square, geared to children 8 and older, aspiring physicians will be given lab coats and stethoscopes before taking part in workshops within the “Body Worlds: Pulse” exhibition. Sloka Iyengar, a neuroscientist, will lead the activities, which will explore the sensory system, the brain, the heart, the lungs and the bones. The investigation ends with a mini-graduation. (Also on March 14 and 28.) At 10:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m., 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com. Lunar New Year at the Prospect Park Zoo (Saturday and Sunday) Some refer to it as the Year of the Sheep, and others as the Year of the Goat, but the nice thing about the Prospect Park Zoo is that you can welcome the occasion with both animals. This celebration will include some woolly meetings with the zoo’s Cotswold and Jacob’s four-horned sheep; a puppet show from Chinese Theater Works; a lunar zodiac scavenger hunt for animals throughout the grounds; and crafts and calligraphy demonstrations. From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., 450 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, 718-399-7339, prospectparkzoo.com.Making ‘The Dance’ (Saturday) It’s not just Black History Month; in Brooklyn, it’s also Black Artstory Month, a time to celebrate the African-American past through creative and performing arts. Presented by the Myrtle Avenue Brooklyn Partnership, the series of programs includes this free children’s workshop, conducted by educators from the organization Fokus (Fighting Obstacles Knowing Ultimate Success). Young participants will investigate the career of the artist Emilio Cruz, whose 1962 painting “The Dance” will inspire them to create their own abstract, movement-inspired works. They’ll act them out, too: The plans include a joyful exploration of five decades’ worth of social dances. From 3 to 5 p.m., Ingersoll Community Center, 177 Myrtle Avenue, at Prince Street, Fort Greene; myrtleavenue.org.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.Moon Over Manhattan!: Celebrate Lunar New Year  (Saturday) Happy Year of the Goat (also, in some quarters, the Year of the Sheep or the Ram)! Celebrating its arrival isn’t just a Chinese phenomenon; cultures all over Asia celebrate the lunar new year, and Asia Society and Museum will investigate different traditions throughout this festival. The activities will include a lion dance, Korean drumming, a kung fu demonstration, Himalayan incense making, and workshops to create puppets, ceramic charms and lanterns. From 1 to 4 p.m., 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through May 9.) At 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, 13thstreetrep.org.‘The Red Balloon’ (Friday and Saturday) Birds and butterflies may soar in the country, but on urban streets, a balloon is its own kind of beacon. “Le Ballon Rouge,” or “The Red Balloon,” Albert Lamorisse’s classic, nearly wordless film from 1956, stars Pascal Lamorisse (the director’s son, then 6) as he follows the object of the title through the Belleville section of Paris. The Museum of the Moving Image is screening the film at 1 p.m. through Saturday. A related workshop, “The Red Balloon Animation Adventure,” daily through Sunday at 2:15 p.m. and recommended for ages 6 and older, allows participants to use their own neighborhoods in a way that evokes the film. The children will create backdrops inspired by areas of New York and make animated sequences to fill the scenes. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.Sesame Street Live: ‘Make a New Friend’ (Friday through Sunday, and Wednesday and Thursday) Everyone is welcome on Sesame Street, and in this new musical stage production, that sunny neighborhood is opening its doors to a visitor from afar: Chamki, a friend of Grover’s from India. The only problem is that she’s so busy sharing good times with all the local residents, including Abby Cadabby and Cookie Monster, that Grover is afraid he won’t be able to show his pal the town. Little audience members, of course, can help, as they join in some multicultural fun. (Through March 1.) Friday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 10:30 a.m. and 2 and 5:30 p.m.; Wednesday and Thursday at 11 a.m.; Theater at Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, theateratmsg.com/sesame.‘Steal Away: The Living History of Harriet Tubman’ (Sunday) The New Perspectives Theater Company’s World Voices Program is reviving this fascinating and poignant play by Rick Balian, aimed at ages 4 through 12. In about an hour, using puppets and live actors, it covers Tubman’s girlhood as a slave; her relationship with her father, who taught her to use the night sky as a map; the head injury inflicted by a cruel master, which left her prone to narcolepsy; and her rise as a leader of the Underground Railroad. After the production, children will learn two spirituals that contained coded messages for fleeing slaves. At 11 a.m., New Perspectives Theater Studio, 458 West 37th Street, Manhattan, 212-630-9945, nptnyc.org. Seating is limited, and reservations are advised, by phone or via an email to contact@nptnyc.org.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘To Kill a Mockingbird’ (Friday and Saturday) That intrepid and peerless young observer, Scout Finch, is back again, this time onstage, in Downtown Art’s adaptation of Harper Lee’s novel about courage and bigotry in a Depression-era Southern town. Directed by Ryan Gilliam, this all-female “Mockingbird” features seven teenage members of the troupe, playing multiple roles and using minimal props. On Saturdays only, audience members are invited to stay after the show for some Southern food and a discussion about the work’s themes with Ms. Gilliam and Emily Gallagher, a historian. (Through March 7.) Fridays at 7:30 p.m.; Saturdays at 6 p.m.; Downtown Art, 61 East Fourth Street, East Village; downtownart.org.‘Tropical Discoveries’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) At least a little bit of New York resembles the tropics, even at this time of year. It can be found at the New York Botanical Garden, whose latest exhibition, “Wild Medicine in the Tropics,” investigates the medicinal use of rain forest plants. Visitors to the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden can explore this area through “Tropical Discoveries,” in which they’ll compare tropical and temperate plants inside the William and Lynda Steere Discovery Center and pot up a tropical species to take home. They can also take field notes on the hidden signs of life in the winter garden outdoors. Saturday and Sunday from 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; Friday, and Tuesday through Thursday from 1:30 to 4:30 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.Vered and the Babes (Sunday) This trio — Vered Ronen, Rob Jost and Matt Hilgenberg — play some percussion children can understand: pots and pans. Of course, they’ll also perform on more conventional instruments, like the French horn and trumpet, at this concert at the Jewish Museum. Known for a style reminiscent of doo-wop, they’ll offer tunes from their hit album, “Good Morning My Love.” The show, for ages up to 7, will include lullaby material for parents. At 11:30 a.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Hours: Mondays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Sundays, 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum. LAUREL GRAEBERAdvertisement