AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Accidental Movement/Mariangela López  (Thursday through Feb. 28) Now settled in its new downtown home, Gibney Dance kicks off the space’s inaugural spring season with 22 artists performing over 14 weeks under the title “Making Space.” The series begins with Mariangela López, who helped organize Gibney Dance’s community outreach and has often worked with large groups in her work. In the solo “El Regreso (The Return),” the Brooklyn-based, Venezuelan-born Ms. López internalizes that broad communal intelligence in her own body, giving personal expression to big ideas. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Brian Schaefer)Ballet Rakatan (through Sunday) This Cuban company makes its United States debut with “Havana Rakatan,” a hip-swiveling, skirt-tossing, action-packed show that traces the evolution of Cuban music from the 16th century to today. The eight-piece band Turquino joins the dancers onstage for an evening of salsa, rumba, jazz, bolero, mambo, son and cha-cha. The event is the first in “A Bailar: Dance at the Center,” City Center’s three-week festival of Spanish and Latin American dance. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org. (Siobhan Burke)Ballets With a Twist  (Thursday) The costume designer Catherine Zehr returns to her alma mater for a conversation on “Designing for Dance,” featuring examples of her designs and performances by Ballets with a Twist. The company presents excerpts from its popular “Cocktail Hour: The Show,” choreographed by Marilyn Klaus. Classic libations, like absinthe and the Bloody Mary, serve as muse for Ms. Zehr’s colorful frocks and Ms. Klaus’s bubbly dance numbers. At 6 p.m., Museum at the Fashion Institute of Technology, Seventh Avenue, at 27th Street, 212-732-1813, balletswithatwist.com. (Schaefer)★ Adam Barruch  (Friday through Sunday) The 92nd Street Y’s Harkness Dance Festival examines dance from the inside out, with its Stripped/Dressed conceit of exposing the seams and stitches of a work before presenting the finished look. Five companies, organized by the choreographer Doug Varone, take the challenge over five weeks. First up is Adam Barruch with “Belladonna,” inspired by Nathaniel Hawthorne’s short story “Rappaccini’s Daughter” in which love ultimately proves an insufficient antidote to poison. Featuring Mr. Barruch and Chelsea Bonosky, this gothic work straddles pleasure and punishment. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Schaefer)★ Ronald K. Brown/Evidence (Tuesday through March 1) Mr. Brown was just 19 when he started his dance company; this week that troupe marks its 30th anniversary. In those three decades, Mr. Brown has distinguished himself with a singular style combining African, African-American and modern dance, often with keen social insight and a spiritual halo. To celebrate the milestone, Mr. Brown revives classics and acclaimed newer works over two programs, and will unveil New York premieres, including the solo “Through Time and Culture,” which Mr. Brown will perform. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday and next Friday at 8 p.m., Feb. 28 at 2 and 8 p.m., March 1 at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)★ Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui  (Thursday through March 1) Long after the sun sets in Buenos Aires, the dance halls awaken with tango. The milonga, as these late-night gatherings are called, is the inspiration for a scintillating new work by Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui, an acclaimed contemporary choreographer and tango aficionado. “M¡longa” pairs Mr. Cherkaoui’s fluid gestures and intricate partnering with tango’s spiky precision, performed by a dozen dancers who are serenaded by a five-piece Argentine tango band. Thursday through Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org. (Schaefer)★ ‘Dancers, Buildings and People in the Streets’ (through March 28) Ballet and contemporary dance sometimes seem like estranged relatives, but with its latest platform, inspired by the dance critic Edwin Denby, Danspace Project collapses the space between them. The curator Claudia La Rocco, a critic and poet who contributes to The New York Times, paired artists from different choreographic traditions — those of Merce Cunningham, George Balanchine and Judson Dance Theater — and left them to their own devices. A program that began on Thursday features two of those collaborations: the former Cunningham dancer Silas Riener with the New York City Ballet principal Adrian Danchig-Waring, and the choreographer Will Rawls with the freelance ballet dancer Kaitlyn Gilliland. On Saturday afternoon, a group of Platform participants convenes for a discussion open to the public. At various times, Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)Carmen de Lavallade (Friday, Saturday, Tuesday and Wednesday) An autobiography in movement, Ms. de Lavallade’s “As I Remember It” reflects on the venerable dancer’s six-decade career on screen and onstage. At 83, she is no less a star than the younger self whose image visits her throughout the show. The production’s national tour, dedicated to her husband, Geoffrey Holder, who died last year, returns to the Baryshnikov Arts Center, where Ms. de Lavallade developed the work. Friday, Saturday and Tuesday at 8 p.m., Wednesday at 1 p.m., 450 West 37th Street, Manhattan, 866-811-4111, bacnyc.org. (Burke)★ Digital Dance Festival  (Monday through Feb. 28) To attend this festival, simply tune in on your device of choice. Performances that have been staged for live audiences at New York Live Arts over the past year return for an online encore, shot and edited for optimal impact, and screened at a specific time each night at 2ndLine.tv. The choreographers Niv Acosta (Monday and Thursday), Bill T. Jones (Tuesday and next Friday) and Elena Demyanenko and Dai Jian (Wednesday and Feb. 28) present works that deal with duality — whether performed as a duet or inspired by a dialogue. At 7:30 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Schaefer)Tess Dworman and Anya Liftig (Friday) What is “experimental dance television”? You can find out at “Liftig and I,” an hourlong show in which Ms. Dworman and Ms. Liftig, two mischievous dancer-choreographers, unpack a host of questions about the human body and performance art legacies. Their fount of inspiration includes “Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman,” Tennessee Williams and “Cheers.” At 8 p.m., Center for Performance Research, 361 Manhattan Avenue, near Jackson Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-349-1210, cprnyc.org. (Burke)ESOTA (Friday) The film “Selma,” nominated for a best picture Oscar, includes a harrowing scene of domestic terrorism that claimed the lives of Cynthia Wesley, Denise McNair, Addie Mae Collins and Carole Robertson. On Friday, students from the Edge School of the Arts, or ESOTA, in Queens present “4 Little Girls: The Dance-ology,” a tribute to these young victims and a commemoration of the long, zigzagging, determined march for civil rights in America. The performance is presented as part of Black History Month celebrations. At 7 p.m., Jamaica Performing Arts Center, 153rd Street and Jamaica Avenue, Jamaica, Queens, 718-618-6170, jcal.org. (Schaefer)FJK Dance  (Friday) Fadi J. Khoury was born in Iraq and moved to Lebanon at age 13, before relocating to the United States. This journey is reflected in “A Fusion of Culture and Dance,” co-presented by the Consulate General of Lebanon in New York, and featuring FJK Dance, the company Mr. Khoury started last year. His blend of classical ballet, ballroom dance and Middle Eastern music and movement provide the foundation for the works “Arabesque” and “Tango Unframed.” At 7:30 p.m., the Graduate Center, City University of New York, 365 Fifth Avenue, at 34th Street, 877-428-6942, gc.cuny.edu. (Schaefer)★ Martha Graham Dance Company (through Sunday) It’s been 85 years since Martha Graham choreographed “Lamentation,” her grief-stricken work for one woman in a tubular dress. As part of its Joyce Theater season, the Graham company offers a new crop of “Lamentation Variations,” fresh takes on the classic by contemporary choreographers. Those homages — by Kyle Abraham, Michelle Dorrance, Liz Gerring and Sonyah Tayeh — appear in various combinations on Programs A and B, alongside Graham staples and newer additions to the repertory. (Program C features the original “Lamentation.”) In its efforts to aesthetically diversify, the troupe also presents Annie-B Parson’s “The Snow Falls in Winter,” a stirring response to Ionesco’s “The Lesson,” on Program B. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)★ New York City Ballet (through March 1) City Ballet presents Peter Martins’s two-act rendering of “Romeo and Juliet” (Friday through Sunday). This weekend’s swoon-worthy lovers are Tiler Peck and Zachary Catazaro, who lead the cast on Friday and Saturday nights, and Lauren Lovette and Chase Finlay, who take on the roles for the Saturday and Sunday matinees. The company’s more varied “Hear the Dance” programming returns on Tuesday with a quadruple bill saluting American composers. Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 and 7:30 p.m., Tuesdays through Thursdays at 7:30 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Burke)★ New York Theater Ballet (Friday and Saturday) Merce Cunningham aficionados will be flocking to the latest program assembled by this small but intrepid troupe. In addition to premieres by Pam Tanowitz (whose work draws closely on Cunningham’s technique) and Nicolo Fonte, the company presents Cunningham’s 1964 “Cross Currents,” a trio set to Conlon Nancarrow’s “Rhythm Studies for Player Piano,” arranged by John Cage. The eclectic evening also includes Keith Michael’s “The Alice-in-Wonderland Follies.” At 7:30 p.m., with an additional performance at 2 p.m. on Saturday, New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Burke)Lula Washington Dance Theater  (Thursday) For more than three decades, Ms. Washington has been a dynamic and respected voice of the Los Angeles dance scene, creating powerful and pleasurable works that celebrate the history and talents of African-American dancers and choreographers. For this visit to New Jersey, the company brings a jazz-inspired program with works by Rennie Harris and Christopher Huggins, as well as several by Ms. Washington, including “We Wore the Mask,” an indictment of racial stereotypes. At 7:30 p.m., New Jersey Performing Arts Center, 1 Center Street, Newark, 888-466-5722, njpac.org. (Schaefer)Kate Weare Company (through Sunday) Ms. Weare celebrates her troupe’s 10th anniversary with excerpts from past pieces and the premiere of “Unstruck,” a trio created with the composer Curtis Macdonald. Passages from “Bright Land” (2010), “Bridge of Sighs” (2008) and “Drop Down” (2007) should reveal both the darkly emotional and daringly physical layers of her work. Her dancers will be joined by guests from San Francisco’s ODC/Dance and, for select shows, students from the Juilliard School. At 7:30 p.m., with an additional performance Saturday at 2 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org/kateweareco10. (Burke)★ Works & Process: Pam Tanowitz & David Lang  (Sunday and Monday) The Guggenheim’s behind-the-scenes series usually features new works and creative collaborations in their incubator stage. This time the series presents the premiere of “Broken Story (wherein there is no ecstasy),” the artistic baby of the choreographer Pam Tanowitz and the composer David Lang, both of whom respect classicism while pushing its boundaries. For the project, Mr. Lang recruited three composers making their dance-score debuts, and Ms. Tanowitz compiled a team of some of New York’s most mesmerizing dancers. Sunday at 3 and 7:30 p.m., Monday at 7:30 p.m., Guggenheim Museum, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3587, worksandprocess.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement