By ANTHONY TOMMASINIOCT. 12, 2015
Devoted admirers of the master Italian pianist Maurizio Pollini, including those who packed Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon for his program of Schumann and Chopin, have had cause to worry about him in recent years. An illness, never specified, led him to withdraw from the concert circuit for a period during 2011 and 2012. And after returning, he drew some baffled reviews for performances troubled by uncharacteristic rough patches.Mr. Pollini’s fans can relax. On Sunday, in the first of two Carnegie Hall programs this month, Mr. Pollini, 73, played with consummate musicianship and pianism. There were technically shaky moments now and then. But flawless execution is not the hallmark of great technique.The high point came after intermission, with Mr. Pollini’s revelatory account of a later Chopin work, the Polonaise Fantaisie in A flat. This enigmatic 13-minute piece is like a free-roaming, pensive fantasy from which a dark yet snappy polonaise tries to emerge. Ambiguity was exactly the quality Mr. Pollini, long admired for his Chopin, emphasized in his fascinating performance.The opening alternates short flourishes of majestic chords with curious strands of lacy lines that trail up the keyboard. Is some kind of march about to begin? Or is the music already consumed with self-reflection? It’s both at once, as Mr. Pollini’s playing suggested. Hearing this performance, I realized as never before that every time the dancing elements of the polonaise emerge, the themes are quizzical, the harmonies wayward.AdvertisementHe began with a milky-textured and restless account of an early, seldom-heard Schumann piece, the teeming, craggy Allegro in B minor (Op. 8). Then came Schumann’s 30-minute Fantasy in C. Mr. Pollini was especially masterly during the elusive first movement, which shifts between impassioned episodes — with a stirring melody in chords over an onrushing left-hand accompaniment — and passages of tender poignancy. He brought brio, with a touch of impish wildness, to the second movement, a march, and magisterial lyricism to the slow, melancholic final movement.AdvertisementThe all-Chopin second half began with the Barcarolle (Op. 60). Mr. Pollini showed Italianate sensitivity to this genre, which evokes Venetian gondolier songs. In the Nocturnes in F minor and E-flat (Op. 55, No. 1 and 2), Mr. Pollini was daringly alert to the turbulent elements that course below the sleepy surfaces. He ended with a rhapsodic, glistening account of the Scherzo No. 3.In response to the long, heartfelt ovation he received, Mr. Pollini played three Chopin encores, pieces he also played as encores during his Carnegie recital last fall: the “Revolutionary” Étude, the First Ballade and the Nocturne in D flat (Op. 27, No. 2), all impressively performed. Those looking for something different from Mr. Pollini should head to David Geffen Hall on Friday: He performs Chopin’s First Piano Concerto with Alan Gilbert and the New York Philharmonic, his first appearance with the orchestra in 20 years.­Maurizio Pollini returns to Carnegie Hall for a recital of works by Beethoven and Schoenberg on Oct. 25; 212-247-7800, carnegiehall­.org.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Playing With Ambiguity, an Italian Master Finds His Verve.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.