FEB. 19, 2015
 Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera‘Carmen’ (Monday and Thursday) With the rich-toned mezzo-soprano Elina Garanca delivering a blank performance in the title role, Bizet’s classic can’t make too much of an impact. But the dependably passionate tenor Roberto Alagna and the strong-willed, strong-voiced soprano Ailyn Pérez (in her Metropolitan Opera debut) do their best to spark intensity in this revival of Richard Eyre’s stony Met production. (Hei-Kyung Hong steps in for Ms. Pérez on Monday.) Louis Langrée conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)★ ‘Don Giovanni’  (Saturday, Tuesday and next Friday) Although acclaimed for his adventurous work in England, the director Michael Grandage presided over a surprisingly tame new Metropolitan Opera production of this opera by Mozart in 2011. That staging, dominated by a three-tiered set, is back, and still lacks a strong point of view. But the cast, headed by the charismatic baritone Peter Mattei in the title role, is excellent, and Alan Gilbert, in his second appearance with the Met, conducts a vividly detailed, urgent and elegant performance. The soprano Elza van den Heever as Donna Anna and the bass-baritone Luca Pisaroni as Leporello are also standouts. Saturday at 12:30 p.m., Tuesday and next Friday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)★ La Donna del Lago (Friday and Wednesday) The mezzo-soprano Joyce DiDonato is magnificent as Elena, the winsome heroine of this Rossini melodrama, which is having its premiere production at the Metropolitan Opera. The story is set against the 15th-century rebellion by some clans of Scottish highlanders against their king, James V. As the daughter of the king’s former tutor, who is now allied with the rebels, Ms. DiDonato brings affecting sensitivity and brilliant coloratura to her performance. The tenor Juan Diego Flórez is at his best as the king, who, disguised as Uberto, falls for Elena, though she loves — and eventually marries, with the king’s blessing — Malcolm, a contralto role, sung here by the rich-voiced mezzo-soprano Daniela Barcellona. The director Paul Curran’s essentially traditional production, atop a shifting floor and against the backdrop of atmospheric videos, gets the job done. The conductor Michele Mariotti leads a stylish and supple performance. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)Advertisement★ ‘Iolanta’ and ‘Bluebeard’s Castle’  (Saturday) This new production, an intriguing pairing of two one-act operas — Tchaikovsky’s fairy-tale “Iolanta” and Bartok’s chilling psychological thriller “Bluebeard’s Castle” — opened at the Metropolitan Opera four days after schedule because of a snowstorm. The missing time may have affected the opening night performance, which seemed tentative. Still, the director Mariusz Trelinski, working with an inventive video production designer, has fashioned a dark, almost surreal staging that draws out the grimness in both works. The soprano Anna Netrebko brings her charismatic voice and stage presence to the role of the blind, trusting yet baffled Iolanta, the daughter of a fiercely protective king. The tenor Piotr Beczala is the ardent, noble knight who whose love helps heal her. In Bartok’s great opera, with its ingenious, haunting score, the formidable bass Mikhail Petrenko is riveting as the controlling Duke Bluebeard; the impassioned soprano Nadja Michael excels as Bluebeard’s new wife, who yearns to know his ominous secrets. Pavel Smelkov conducts. At 8 p.m., 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)Advertisement★ ‘Mona Lisa’ (Friday) Leon Botstein and the adventurous American Symphony Orchestra present the latest installment in their series of obscure operas: offering a rare performance of Max von Schillings’s 1915 “Mona Lisa.” Inspired, of course, by the painting and set to a libretto by Beatrice von Dovsky, this opera traces a fictional story of the picture’s theft and return, set to von Schillings’s lyrical score. Mr. Botstein will lead a preconcert Q. and A. at 7 p.m. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)Opera Lafayette  (Thursday) This valuable company, specializing in early French opera since 1995, harkens back to its roots with an evening featuring a chamber ensemble and a singer soloist, here the excellent soprano Dominique Labelle, in music by Handel and Bach. At 8 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, operalafayette.org. (Woolfe)★ ‘The Rape of Lucretia’  (Friday and Sunday) Benjamin Britten’s dark, often painful chamber opera receives rare performances from Juilliard Opera. Mark Shapiro conducts the Juilliard Orchestra and student singers, and the faculty member Mary Birnbaum directs in an intimate space. Friday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., Rosemary and Meredith Willson Theater, Juilliard School, 60 Lincoln Center Plaza, 212-769-7406, events.juilliard.edu. (David Allen)Classical MusicDanish String Quartet (Friday) The outstanding players of this quartet, all in their 20s, combine youthful energy with uncommon maturity, and have become popular with audiences of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center. For this program the quartet plays works by Haydn and the great Danish composer Carl Nielsen. After intermission the excellent pianist Jon Kimura Parker joins the group for a performance of Brahms’s Piano Quintet in F minor. At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Tommasini)★ Ecstatic Music Festival: Bang on a Can  (Thursday) A highlight of the Ecstatic Music Festival is Bang on a Can’s annual People’s Commissioning Fund Concert, which highlights imaginative new works by a range of composers. This year the ensemble presents music by Glenn Kotche, Donnacha Dennehy, Jace Clayton, Michael Gordon, Annie Gosfield and Erdem Helvacioglu. At 7:30 p.m., Merkin Concert Hall, Goodman House, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, kaufman-center.org. (Schweitzer)★ Richard Goode and Friends  (Sunday) It’s always a treat to hear the pianist Richard Goode, here in partnership with young artists he has mentored at the Marlboro Music Festival. Mr. Goode joins the soprano Sarah Shafer, the violinist Itamar Zorman, the violist Kyle Armbrust and the cellist Brook Speltz for a program featuring Brahms’s Piano Quartet No. 2 in A, Schumann’s Piano Trio No. 2 and lieder by Brahms and Schumann. At 3 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Marc-André Hamelin (Saturday) This probing pianist, who has championed obscure works and offered insightful performances of popular repertory, is also a composer. Here he will perform the New York premiere of his own “Chaconne,” as well as Book II of Debussy’s “Images,” John Field’s “Andante Inédit” and several works by Liszt. At 8 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Schweitzer)★ JACK Quartet (Tuesday) This quartet has become self-recommending in recent years, just like the Miller Theater’s early evening pop-up concerts. It’s free, and there’s beer to go with the American premiere of Georg Friedrich Haas’s new String Quartet No. 8. At 6 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (Allen)AdvertisementJuilliard Orchestra  (Tuesday) David Zinman conducts the orchestra in a program of Viennese-inflected music by Strauss (the tone poem “Ein Heldenleben”) and Steven Stucky (the 1986 orchestra fantasy “Dreamwaltzes”) alongside Shostakovich’s taut Cello Concerto with Juilliard’s own James Jeonghwan Kim as soloist. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, events.juilliard.edu. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Mahler Chamber Orchestra (Monday and Wednesday) The probing pianist Leif Ove Andsnes invites listeners on a “Beethoven Journey” as he teams up with this excellent chamber orchestra in performances of the composer’s Second, Third and Fourth piano concerto on Monday and the First and Fifth on Wednesday. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ New York Philharmonic (Friday, Saturday, Tuesday and Thursday) The orchestra’s programming has a strong Asian tinge in the coming days. This weekend, the Philharmonic, conducted by Alan Gilbert, joins forces with the cellist Yo-Yo Ma’s Silk Road Project, which draws musical inspiration and performers from cultures along the ancient trade route between East Asia and the Mediterranean and is celebrating its 15th anniversary. The program includes works composed for the project by Osvaldo Golijov, Dmitri Yanov-Yanovsky and others. On Tuesday, Mr. Ma will take part in a program celebrating the Chinese New Year and conducted by Long Yu. Mr. Ma will perform in the United States premiere of Zhao Lin’s Duo for Cello, Sheng and Orchestra, the sheng being a Chinese mouth organ, played here by Wu Tong. On Thursday the orchestra will perform Sibelius’s “The Oceanides” and Violin Concerto and Brahms’s Symphony No. 2. The Finnish maestro Sakari Oramo conducts, and Frank Peter Zimmermann is the soloist in the concerto. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Tuesday and Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (James R. Oestreich)Rotterdam Philharmonic Orchestra (Sunday) Yannick Nézet-Séguin, music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra, brings his other orchestra to Avery Fisher Hall for two classics of Romanticism. Nicholas Angelich is the soloist for Brahms’s Piano Concerto No. 1, which will be paired with Tchaikovsky’s evergreen Symphony No. 5. At 3 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org. (Allen)Takács Quartet  (Thursday) Lincoln Center’s Great Performers series presents this reliably wonderful string quartet in an all-star program featuring Beethoven’s fiery String Quartet in F (Op. 59), Schubert’s “Quartettsatz” and Mozart’s dark-hued String Quintet in G minor with the violist Lawrence Power. At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Theater of Voices  (Saturday) Karlheinz Stockhausen’s “Stimmung” has a good claim to being the most brilliantly weird piece ever composed within sight of the Long Island Sound. A mesmerizing choral work of gods, erotica and chant all based on a single harmonic series (or chord), it’s the single item on the program for this team of six singers, led by Paul Hillier. At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)★ Trinity Wall Street  (Saturday) Under the leadership of Julian Wachner, this venerable church’s brilliant musical forces come together (along with the Washington Chorus and the Washington National Cathedral Choir of Boys and Girls) for rare performances of Ginastera’s grand “Turbae ad Passionem Gregorianam” and Ives’ Symphony No. 4. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Woolfe)Denes Varjon (Sunday) This Hungarian pianist appears as part of the Peoples’ Symphony Concert series in a program of Beethoven, Schumann, Ravel and Bartok. At 2 p.m., Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, 212-586-4680, pscny.org, the-townhall-nyc.org. (Woolfe)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page C15 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.