FEB. 19, 2015
 Prices may not reflect ticketing service charges. For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.★ The American Songbook: Shovels & Rope  (Thursday) The husband-and-wife duo of Michael Trent and Cary Ann Hearst stomp up a scene as Shovels & Rope, lacing roots ballads and Americana anthems with a barbed, nearly punk edge. Their instrument-swapping set brought a twangy fury to the Celebrate Brooklyn! festival last summer, and borrowed largely from their most recent album, “Swimmin’ Time.” Also coming up in this series: Joey Arias’s tribute to Billie Holiday on Wednesday. At 8:30 p.m., the Appel Room, Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-721-6500, americansongbook.org. (Stacey Anderson)Ariel Pink  (Wednesday) Once an abysmal live performer who slumped across the stage and mewled without any semblance of pace or pitch, this experimental-folk singer shored up enough energy last fall to release the album “pom pom.” It tempered this Los Angeles native’s typically detached, fuzzy lo-fi squalor with flouncy nu-disco elements and falsetto navel-gazing. With Jack Name. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)Bang on a Can: People’s Commissioning Fund Concert  (Thursday) Every summer the mind-bending Bang on a Can Marathon heralds the start of the River to River Festival, by joining avant-garde notables in one extended, experimental spree. On this evening, Bang on a Can will reconvene for its annual People’s Commissioning Fund Concert and perform new works by Glenn Kotche of Wilco, Jace Clayton and Ben Frost. At 7:30 p.m., Merkin Concert Hall, Goodman House, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, kaufman-center.org. (Anderson)AdvertisementBuckwheat Zydeco  (Tuesday and Wednesday) This singer and accordionist from Louisiana (whose real name is Stanley Dural Jr.) is a master craftsman of zydeco, an ebullient strain of Cajun folk, and an unpretentious showman with musical flair for miles. He held court last year on the final episode of “Late Night With Jimmy Fallon,” performing a gleeful rendition of “On a Night Like This.” At 8 and 10 p.m., Iridium Jazz Club, 1650 Broadway, at 51st Street, 212-582-2121, theiridium.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementBuke and Gase and Landlady  (Tuesday) The art-rockers Buke and Gase emit a cacophony of twee steampunk instrumentation from their largely homemade string section, and the singer Arone Dyer’s knifelike vocals cut through the squall. Landlady, the expansive pop-folk band led by Adam Schatz, is a familiar face in the Brooklyn jazz and rock scenes, and draws from the wandering troubadour rock of the Band and Arcade Fire. At 9:30 p.m., Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street, at Ludlow Street, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, mercuryloungenyc.com. (Anderson)Dan Deacon  (Wednesday) This hyperactive electro-pop figure from Baltimore can take a haughty attitude during his live shows or he can be a beaming, inspired conduit of live noise loops. His 2012 album, “America,” is an ambitious and anarchic study of these fruited plains; the follow-up, “Gliss Riffer,” is being released on Tuesday. With Eaters. At 9 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, at Kent Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. (Anderson)★ Dig Deeper with Roy Lee Johnson  (Saturday) Each month this cult-hit soul party invites veteran musicians to share their original songs with appreciative young audiences, leaving all involved with full hearts and sore feet. This installment features the Atlanta soul singer Roy Lee Johnson, whose sweet “Mr. Moonlight” found early admirers in the Beatles, who covered it on “Beatles for Sale.” At 9 p.m., Littlefield, 622 Degraw Street, between Third and Fourth Avenues, Gowanus, Brooklyn, littlefieldnyc.com. (Anderson)JJ Grey & Mofro  (Saturday) The sterile steel confines of Terminal 5 are an odd match for the Southern rockers JJ Grey & Mofro, whose unhurried guitar jamming and lightly swinging percussion conjure visions of humid swamps and backyard barbecues. Mr. Grey’s drawling, Memphis soul-inspired vocals further add to the mellow spell. They release the album, “Ol’ Glory,” on Tuesday. With Marc Broussard and London Souls. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)★ Helmet (Saturday) This stalwart alt-metal band, which found modest fame nationally in the 1990s but whose members were regarded as cult heroes in their native New York, played with the conventions of its genre by incorporating jazzy time signatures and grunge-pop tunings. The frontman, Page Hamilton, remains the lone original member. The group performs its third album, “Betty,” which on its release in 1994 helped define the burgeoning genre of post-metal. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)Ms. Lauryn Hill (Friday and Monday) Ms. Hill seems to be warming to local showmanship. In recent years, she has had a handful of concerts at small clubs. Now she’ll perform two acoustic sets at the Highline Ballroom, which may be a more ideal setting for this talented singer and rapper: In his review of one of her outings last year, Jon Pareles lamented that she “was often buried in the mix of her band’s hyperactive funk.” At 8 p.m., 431 West 16th Street, Chelsea, 212-414-5994, highlineballroom.com. (Anderson)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Booker T. Jones  (Monday) As the leader of Booker T. & the MG’s, the house band for Stax Records, Mr. Jones poured the foundation of Memphis soul from his Hammond organ in the 1960s. Today, Mr. Jones remains a modest, vigorous multi-instrumentalist and producer with a charmingly versatile hand: he can leap from producing for Willie Nelson to playing on the ska-punk band Rancid’s album “Let the Dominoes Fall.” With Bhi Bhiman. At 8 p.m., City Winery, 155 Varick Street, near Spring Street, South Village, 212-608-0555, citywinery.com. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret (through Sunday) We know now that the Who’s famous cry of rock ’n’ roll defiance, “Hope I die before I get old,” hasn’t prevented countless veteran rockers from thumbing their noses at time as they reach retirement age. There’s no expiration date on raucous rock-’n’-roll fun. For proof you need only visit Café Carlyle, where Buster Poindexter, the seedily attired, punkish lounge lizard, now 65, has been playing a two-week engagement. This alumnus of the New York Dolls and eternal high-school cutup with a crocodile grin is not to be missed. Friday and Saturday at 8:45 p.m., 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. Other highlights include the encore engagement, on Sunday at the Metropolitan Room, of the singer and dancer T. Oliver Reid, whose one-man revue of 1930s songs, “Drop Me Off in Harlem,” is being presented in celebration of black history month. (He continues once monthly through May 31.) At 7:30 p.m., 34 West 22nd Street, 212-206-0440, metropolitanroom.com. (Stephen Holden)AdvertisementNervo (Friday) After co-writing the enormous David Guetta and Kelly Rowland hit “When Love Takes Over,” the Australian D.J.s and twins Miriam and Olivia Nervo opened for Britney Spears on her 2009 “Femme Fatale” tour — a fittingly glamorous pairing for a couple of professional models. They’ve released a number of peppy singles, including collaborations with Au Revoir Simone and Afrojack, and are still working on their debut full-length album. At 10 p.m., Space Ibiza NY, 637 West 50th Street, at 12th Avenue, spaceibizany.com. (Anderson)Kate Pierson  (Wednesday) Ms. Pierson has built a career as an active and generous collaborator, whether it’s sparring in call-and-response with Fred Schneider as part of the campy pop-rock band the B-52s, duetting with Iggy Pop on “Candy” or assisting R.E.M. on its stellar hit “Shiny Happy People.” She enlisted Sia to help her write her energetic first solo pop album, “Guitars and Microphones,” which was released this month. At 8 p.m., City Winery, 155 Varick Street, near Spring Street, South Village, 212-608-0555, citywinery.com. (Anderson)★ Leon Russell  (Friday and Saturday) After starting his career as an in-demand, multi-instrumental session musician for the Rolling Stones and the Byrds, Mr. Russell made the leap into recording his own piano-laden, folk- and country-tinged pop in the late 1960s. At times, Mr. Russell’s hoarse, aching pipes recalled Elton John, especially on the classic 1970s love ballad “A Song for You,” though he enunciated in a loose Southern drawl. Mr. Russell and Mr. John joined forces seamlessly on the duet album “The Union,” released in 2010 and produced by T Bone Burnett. With Riley Etheridge Jr. At 8 p.m., City Winery, 155 Varick Street, near Spring Street, South Village, 212-608-0555, citywinery.com. (Anderson)★ Sleater-Kinney  (Thursday and next Friday) Many an indie-rock fan lamented the summer of 2006, when Sleater-Kinney announced its indefinite hiatus after 12 years together. Last month, the members, Corin Tucker, Carrie Brownstein and Janet Weiss, reunited to release their eighth album, “No Cities to Love,” and it’s a gripping comeback. The album is filled with taut punk riffs and its dauntless, alternately wailed and growled vocals are an exhilarating reclamation of feminist power. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)Swans  (Thursday) Sonic booms think that Swans are too loud. This assaultive noise-rock band, born in the 1980s no-wave movement of New York and reformed in 2010, occasionally veers into softer, acoustic soundscapes, but its default approach involves repetitive, densely howling waves of friction. Its songs are best absorbed through earplugs and an exoskeleton of masochism. The group’s latest album, “To Be Kind,” was released in May. With Xylouris White. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)They Might Be Giants  (Sunday) These Brooklyn-born eccentrics of the highest order — they represented for Keep Williamsburg Weird decades ago with the 1990s singles “Istanbul (Not Constantinople)” and “Snail Shell.” They released their 16th studio album, “Nanobots,” in 2013 — after which, fittingly, they gave a lively and heartfelt closing performance at the Celebrate Brooklyn! festival. For their residency at the Music Hall of Williamsburg, they will play the last Sunday of each month through June. At 8 p.m., 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)Timber Timbre  (Monday and Tuesday) Marble-mouthed earthiness gets two-stepping in “Hot Dreams,” the unexpectedly jazzy recent single from this Canadian chamber-folk group. Its frontman, Taylor Kirk, is a confidently laid-back charmer who falls easily into blues slipstreams onstage. The band’s new album, also called “Hot Dreams,” suggests a sullen beauty akin to its Polaris prize-nominated 2011 effort, “Creep on Creepin’ On.” At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page C14 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Pop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.