By ALASTAIR MACAULAYFEB. 19, 2015
For a small company that seemed near to closing not long ago, New York Theater Ballet is looking almost indecently healthy. I went to its “Legends & Visionaries” program at New York Live Arts this week hoping to enjoy maybe two of the four works; I left not only having enjoyed three or four (I will explain this ambiguity) but also with affectionate admiration for the dancers. Never before in my experience of this troupe have its performers made so engaging and memorable an impression.The first half of the program consists of three works, a 1964 trio by Merce Cunningham and two new pieces, by the choreographers Pam Tanowitz and Nicolo Fonte, all accompanied by live music. The program’s weakness occurs in its finale, Keith Michael’s “The Alice-in-Wonderland Follies.” Though several aspects of it prove enchanting, its jolly enjoyability is too protracted.Though it’s no surprise that the Cunningham is the most remarkable item here, the happy surprise arrives in finding that it’s in good company throughout. There are several affinities between it and the opening piece, Ms. Tanowitz’s “Double Andante.” In both, you begin by remarking on eccentricity, quirkiness, non sequiturs; and then you find yourself admiring compositional wit, structural authority, felicitous invention.“Double Andante” also has the virtue of introducing you to 12 of the program’s 19 dancers, most of whom are seen again during the evening; it’s a pleasure to find how strong and stylish an impression they make, sometimes divided into five subunits, sometimes given individual opportunities. You notice the nonchalant precision of footwork, the calm assurance of turns, the ease of sudden changes of direction, the cleanness and power of jumps. Steven Melendez (calmly riding the climax of big jumps like a surfer borne on a wave) and Amanda Treiber (with her poised, adult command), are just the most authoritative performers.AdvertisementThe music is from the Andante of Beethoven’s Sonata in D (Op. 28); sections are reiterated, making an interestingly obsessive background. Ms. Tanowitz’s way with music is all her own: She establishes her rhythmic freedom from it, she homes in on particular features of it, develops a phraseology of her own that satisfyingly harmonizes with it. She demonstrates her maverick way with movement constantly, and with exciting inventiveness. Women pass down a diagonal line of men doing supported pirouettes that end with a whooshing slide forward on point. Mr. Melendez does a series of pirouettes, each ending facing a different way — then coolly, with no break in continuity, falls headlong to the floor. Some phrases alternate small footwork and big jumps in disconcerting alternation.Many of us used to watch Cunningham’s “Cross Currents” danced by his company in its Event anthologies. One of its phrases is lodged in my memory: The man and two women, moving in canon, each keep one leg extended in the air while changing the angle of their bodies, so that the leg variously points backward (arabesque, with torso addressing the floor), sideways (with torso leaning sideways, too), and forward (with torso now facing the ceiling).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This staging restores the choreography to its original music, “Rhythm Studies for Player Piano,” by Conlon Nancarrow, a marvelously jazzy collage for player piano that feels spiritually just right for Cunningham. And one of the fascinations of the choreography emerges from how it changes before your eyes: Salient dance details come and go (at one point the two women make sharp out-and-in arm gestures as they slowly pluck their way on half toe in a diagonal advancing across the stage) while the three maintain an intriguing combination of independence and proximity. At the end, as the three dancers travel briskly to one side of the stage, they suddenly pivot, so that they hop backward into the wings.Mr. Fonte’s “There, and Back Again” is a dramatic dance quartet that confers distinct characters on its two men, Mr. Melendez and Michael Wells (a performer whose elegance has an appealing brutishness) and two women, Ms. Treiber and Elena Zahlmann. We’re immediately aware of mystery (one dancer is masked). Mr. Fonte doesn’t let the tension drop throughout the sustained duets, trios, quartets; and it’s heightened by occasional Expressionist, staccato gestures and turns of the head. I was sorry afterward to read the news release that said this was based on the Grimms’ “Hansel and Gretel”; the dance has far more meanings when you think it is about unknown grown-ups in uncharted situations.Among the delights of Mr. Michael’s “Alice Follies” are the intricately theatrical fun of Sylvia Taalsohn Nolan’s costumes and Gillian Bradshaw-Smith’s décor. At one point a human hand emerges from a tiny doll’s house (built by Brian W. Griffin and painted by Nancy Horne) and pours itself a cup of tea; we can’t believe it when the house turns out to contain Alice herself (Ms. Zahlmann, perfect). There are marvelous steps (Alice keeps punctuating one solo with a sharply angular and decisive pose on point); and many of Lewis Carroll’s characters are engagingly captured (the Duchess and the Cook take turns to swing the Baby through the air with casually appalling indifference).AdvertisementThis “Follies,” set to sundry 19th- and early 20th-century popular musical numbers, is far better than Christopher Wheeldon’s recent full-length “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland” (2011). Theater Ballet often performs it by itself, when surely it doesn’t outstay its welcome.“Legends & Visionaries” continues through Saturday at New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-924-0077; newyorklivearts.org. A version of this review appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Jumps, New Works and a Classic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.