By NEIL GENZLINGERFEB. 19, 2015
Let’s begin with a hat-tip to June Squibb, an Oscar-nominated actress, for being willing to play third fiddle to an undereducated man-boy and a vituperative dog puppet. That’s what she does in Adult Swim’s irreverent new comedy, “The Jack and Triumph Show,” which begins Friday night. The show is hilarious with a capital If: It’s hilarious If you like Triumph the Insult Comic Dog.There are, no doubt, people who can’t take Triumph, the invective-spewing canine puppet created by Robert Smigel (who also provides his voice) and familiar from Conan O’Brien’s various talk shows. But such people are unlikely to be fans of the fare on Adult Swim’s late-night comedy block anyway. “The Jack and Triumph Show,” a scripted series with dashes of improvisation, elbows its way into the lineup with an inspired pairing: Triumph’s co-star is Jack McBrayer. Yes, that’s right: Kenneth the page from NBC’s “30 Rock.”Mr. McBrayer plays Jack Mlicki, a former child star who with Triumph had a hit “Lassie”-like TV show in the 1980s and ’90s. Jack, we learn in the premiere, went the way of practically all child stars after the show ended, sinking into a seamy life, aided by Triumph. But then his TV mother — Ms. Squibb, nominated for an Oscar for “Nebraska” — stepped in and put him back on the straight-and-narrow. Now, in the premiere, Triumph has returned, and the show’s central gimmick is set: It’s a battle for Jack’s soul.That’s the framework, but the series seems willing to go just about anywhere. In the premiere, “anywhere” include an autograph convention, where we get to hear Triumph’s assessment of the professional wrestler Hulk Hogan’s admirers. “Judging by the fans,” he says, “I guess ‘Hulkamania’ is some form of Type 2 diabetes.”The Jack and Triumph ShowAdult Swim, Friday nights at 11:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 10:30, Central time.Produced by Poochie Doochie Productions and Universal Television. Created by Robert Smigel, Michael Koman and David Feldman; Jack McBrayer, Mr. Smigel, Mr. Koman and Conan O’Brien, executive producers; Mr. Feldman, co-executive producer.WITH: Jack McBrayer (Jack Mlicki); Triumph the Insult Comic Dog, voiced by Robert Smigel (Triumph Nadler); and June Squibb (June Gregory).A version of this review appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page C9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Mama’s Boy Is Tempted by a Bark From the Past.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.