AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony TommasiniJuilliard Opera’s production of Britten’s “The Rape of Lucretia” has arrived at a time when disturbing reports about sexual assault on college campuses have been in the news. In a program note, the director Mary Birnbaum, says she and her cast drew a clear parallel between “college ‘rape culture’ ” and this harrowing Britten chamber opera, with a libretto by Ronald Duncan, first performed in 1946.During rehearsals, she had the singers read firsthand accounts of such assaults. The result is a viscerally overwhelming performance of an intimate work, written for eight singers and a 13-piece orchestra. That these college-age singers throw themselves into it with such uninhibited emotion and physicality makes this spare, modern-dress production unsettlingly immediate. It is presented in the school’s Rosemary and Meredith Willson Theater, a black-box space that, as set up here, seats only 98 people. The insightful conductor Mark Shapiro draws subtle and dynamic playing from the excellent ensemble. The story, set in Rome in 509 B.C., tells of the occupying Etruscan prince Tarquinius, a tyrannical and licentious ruler, who is leading Rome in its war against the Greeks. Fed up with hearing his general Collatinus, a noble Roman, speak of his devotion to Lucretia, his virtuous wife, Tarquinius decides to test her. He shows up at her house in Rome, demanding shelter, and reassures Lucretia that Collatinus, away at war, is well. That night he enters her bedroom and rapes her.Though “The Rape of Lucretia” has an ingenious score, the opera has been felt to have problems. In a nod to Greek tragedy, the tale is related by two singers called Male and Female Chorus. Also, the libretto is strewn with Christian moralizing that can seem at odds with such a brutal pagan crime story. Ms. Birnbaum brings these disparate elements into dramatic unity. The tenor William Goforth, as the Male Chorus, and the mezzo-soprano Marguerite Jones, as the Female Chorus, look like casually dressed college students. Here they must bear witness to the tale. We first see them sitting at a little kitchen table, reading from a book which tells the story. When the characters appear, the Male and Female Chorus watch. During the rape they can barely look. Shattered, they retreat to the kitchen table, crying and holding hands.Mr. Goforth, with his virile voice, does not hold back in this intimate space. Ms. Jones’s warm, melting singing effectively complements his power. The action is played atop a tiered, rotating platform. The generals wear drab army pants and shirts, with touches of ancient Rome, like leather breastplates. The tall, strong-voiced bass Daniel Miroslaw, as Collatinus, brings out the decency of the character; the robust baritone Joe Eletto, as Junius, another general, is all impotent bluster when he learns his wife has cheated on him. Kurt Kanazawa, a small-framed baritone, looked a little innocent to be Tarquinius, until he started to sing. With his athletic voice and kinetic volatility, he conveys the seething entitlement of his menacing character. With her sensual mezzo-soprano voice, Avery Amereau is achingly perfect as Lucretia, who summons vehement intensity when Tarquinius attacks her. As her two attendants, Amanda Lynn Bottoms and Christine Price are also wonderful. After the rape, Lucretia sends word to Collatinus that he must return. Full of shame, she stabs herself. In an epilogue, the Male and Female Chorus beseech Christ for healing, a shift that often seems too pat. But in this wrenching production, you leap at any strand of consolation, no matter your beliefs. “The Rape of Lucretia” is repeated on Friday and Sunday at the Rosemary and Meredith Willson Theater, Juilliard School, Lincoln Center, 212-799-5000; juilliard.edu. Advertisement