By MARTHA SCHWENDENERFEB. 19, 2015
Many people are familiar with the Gee’s Bend quilts by now. Made by generations of African-American women who were the descendants of slaves, and later sharecroppers, the quilts developed on an isolated peninsula carved out by the Alabama River southwest of Selma. Over the last decade and a half, however, the art world has discovered Gee’s Bend, and the quilts have been exhibited in museums nationwide. A small show at the Lehman College Art Gallery of 14 quilts by seven artists, all made since 1990, and an accompanying exhibition of photographs, offers an update.What makes this tradition so compelling is that unlike most quilts in the European-American tradition, which favored uniformity, harmony and precision, Gee’s Bend quilts include wild, improvisatory elements: broken patterns, high color contrasts, dissonance, asymmetry and syncopation. Aesthetically similar to modern geometric painting and West African textiles, the quilts came into being alongside gospel, blues and jazz. Originally made from feed sacks and castoff work clothes, they were not just for private use: Displaying your work on a clothesline showed the whole community your artistry, skill and ingenuity.In the current work at Lehman College, the textiles look more contemporary: Recycling is still favored, but sometimes the fabric is bought from thrift stores — and the earlier quilts, made after picking cotton, between chores and child-rearing, have a slightly more breathless quality. (Gee’s Bend quilt makers were historically prolific: Some historians have suggested that as many as 10,000 quilts were made there during the 20th century, piled six or seven high on a bed for warmth in wood-plank houses. The earliest surviving examples are from the 1920s.)Several quilts here are by Mary Lee Bendolph and include denim and bright, almost Day-Glo colors. Since Gee’s Bend quilters came to the attention of museum curators, they’ve also begun adding simple titles. Ms. Bendolph’s “Camo” (2005) uses camouflage-pattern fabric, and “Arrow” (2005) has triangles of fabric that form an arrow pointing to the right.AdvertisementLoretta Bennett favors sly, humorous titles. In “Broken Housetop” (2008), the traditional housetop composition of squares-within-squares falls apart in the middle into a fabulous jumble of red and blue rectangles. In “Log Cabin With Cracks” (2014) she also plays with the log cabin pattern, which typically uses rounds of different colored bars of fabric; her composition is cracked into a fantastically minimal half-yellow, half-red quilt, divided diagonally by a zigzag border and marked with splashes of black and blue, almost like brush strokes. Leola Pettway’s quilts feature the pulsating stars associated with Gee’s Bend.AdvertisementThe other newish element here is a wall of prints made in collaboration with Paulson Bott Press in Berkeley, Calif., which started making Gee’s Bend textile patterns into etchings in 2005. While the colors and scale are not as vibrant as in the quilts, they are pleasing fragments. Louisiana Bendolph’s “American Housetop (for the Arnetts)” (2005) is dedicated to the family who connected Gee’s Bend with the museum world (although their role has sometimes been criticized), and Loretta Pettway’s gorgeous “Lazy Gal” (2006) and “Old Beauty” (2006) use sinuous lengths of color, reminiscent of Bauhaus textile masters like Anni Albers, but jazzier.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Photographs trace the often depressing history of Gee’s Bend. After emancipation, freed slaves lived on the former Pettway plantation (hence the predominance of the name Pettway among quilters). After the stock market crash drove the price of cotton down and merchants out of business, Gee’s Bend residents were left so destitute that at one point, many were surviving on wild fruits and berries.This made Gee’s Bend one of the poorest communities in the country, and attractive to the New Deal’s Resettlement Administration, later the Farm Security Administration. Roy Stryker, of that agency, sent photographers to document the area, both before and after federal aid. Photographs from 1937 by Arthur Rothstein show the interiors of Gee’s Bend homes, with walls papered in newsprint to cover the gaps and Jorena Pettway sewing a quilt, with two girls assisting. Marion Post Wolcott’s photographs from 1939 depict the new school built with federal aid, as well as the river ferry to Camden, whose service was terminated after the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. visited Gee’s Bend in 1965, and Benders followed him across the river to march from Selma to Montgomery. (The ferry was also stopped, presumably, to halt voter registration.)Linda Day Clark — assigned by The New York Times in 2002 to photograph the women of Gee’s Bend for the House & Home section — shows a different view of the region, capturing the red clay soil, laid bare in a dirt road, so rich in color that it seems digitally tweaked but also linked to the rich colors in the quilts.A Freedom Quilting Bee founded in 1966 employed a number of quilters; for a time they had contracts with Bloomingdale’s and what was then Sears, Roebuck, mostly for corduroy pillow covers and baby quilts. But the mass production of Gee’s Bend quilts wasn’t a lasting success. It was resented by some of the quilters and embraced by others. The women in Ms. Day Clark’s photographs are older; children and grandchildren have moved to Mobile, Ala., and Atlanta, and even Bridgeport, Conn., a center for migrants from the Bend. And the conditions that fostered such an extraordinary aesthetic tradition have changed. There are distractions like television and the Internet. In 1963 the Army Corps of Engineers built a dam that flooded around 2,500 acres of farmland, changing the topography of the region.The dire need for warmth and comfort that drove these women to create innovative designs and pass them along as family heirlooms is happily a thing of the past. As much as this exhibition is a record of the present, it also suggests that the soulful stitching tradition from the bottomlands may be near the end of its run.“The Gee’s Bend Tradition” and “Linda Day Clark: The Gee’s Bend Photographs” continue through April 24 at Lehman College Art Gallery, Lehman College, 250 Bedford Park Boulevard West, the Bronx; 718-960-8731, lehman.edu/gallery. A version of this review appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page C22 of the New York edition with the headline: Alabama Quilts, the New Chapter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.