By JAMES PONIEWOZIKOCT. 12, 2015
No human being has ever lived in the past. Everyone — cave dweller, 1920s flapper, medieval peasant — has existed in his or her own urgent present. This is the challenge of period dramas: to paint another time without furnishing a museum diorama, to make history feel as immediate as it did to those who lived it.One way to do this is to focus on characters whose job is to create tomorrow, as in two audacious dramas returning for their second seasons: “Manhattan,” the WGN America series about the atom-bomb scientists of World War II, and Cinemax’s “The Knick,” about copiously bleeding-edge medicine in the early 20th century.“Manhattan,” which returns on Tuesday, is like fission: It unleashes its power in the minute. We know what will happen with the bomb. What we don’t know is what will become of its parents, the men and women of science working on the Hill (the secret Manhattan Project base at Los Alamos, N.M.), racing to save freedom while living in a paranoid, authoritarian community. The military, meanwhile, both reveres them as saviors and mistrusts them as freethinkers.By the end of the first season, the project leader, Frank Winter (John Benjamin Hickey), questioned how the bomb might be used, and was arrested for betraying secrets to his wife and fellow scientist, Liza (Olivia Williams). (The new season’s second episode, in particular, is a striking showcase for Mr. Hickey as the bristly, principled Frank.)AdvertisementAs Season 2 begins, the military has begun a clamp down on base, led by the new chief, Col. Emmett Darrow (William Petersen, “CSI”), who sees the bomb as manifest destiny: “God buried an atom under a million tons of rock,” Colonel Darrow says, “so that America could split it in two and redraw the maps of the world.” New cast members also include Mamie Gummer as a Women’s Army Corps member.AdvertisementVisually, “Manhattan” looks more like a network show of 20 years ago than the lavish cable epics of today; its New Mexico seems washed out compared with the brilliant vistas of “Breaking Bad.” But it does fine work in shadows and close quarters, the influence of the co-executive producer Thomas Schlamme (“The West Wing”), a veteran TV director with a knack for creating theatrical intimacy.The creator Sam Shaw previously wrote for “Masters of Sex,” and like the best episodes of that series, “Manhattan” has a feel both for the rush of scientific discovery and for the often-difficult personalities drawn to it. In this war story, the most fascinating battles are among allies.If “Manhattan” shoots unusual subject matter in a familiar style, Cinemax’s “The Knick,” returning on Friday, takes a much-visited genre, the medical drama, and renders it transfixingly new. It’s set in 1901, at the Knickerbocker Hospital in New York City, yet it feels a good several decades more advanced than the likes of CBS’s new doctor saga, “Code Black.”Gilded Age Manhattan is changing fast, bursting with new immigrants and new money. The Knickerbocker has been chasing a moneyed clientele by investing in medical research, led by Dr. John Thackery (Clive Owen), a brilliant surgeon with an inconvenient taste for cocaine and for a newfangled elixir from the good folks at Bayer: heroin. (The show’s sensibilities are not exactly Victorian, including its operating-room scenes saturated with blood, guts and pus.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The creators Jack Amiel and Michael Begler ground “The Knick” in the infancy of modern medicine, but Steven Soderbergh, the show’s producer and director, sends the series hurtling into the 21st century, with a push from a pulsing electronic score by his longtime composer Cliff Martinez. Whether Mr. Soderbergh’s camera is gazing down a hallway illuminated with crackling electricity or choreographing a back-room wrestling match to percussive synthesizer music, the effect is a transporting, steampunk futurism.The new season continues Thackery’s story as he’s drying out in turn-of-the-century rehab, and Mr. Owen plays him with a dark magnetism. But “The Knick” has become much more than another tortured-genius antihero story. It has developed a sprawl reminiscent of HBO’s “Deadwood,” stretching to the mansion and the gutter with equal familiarity.“The Knick” explores the day’s racial tensions through Dr. Algernon Edwards (André Holland), Thackery’s talented, African-American colleague, and it’s sharply aware of the push and pull of change. The influx of industrialist money brings both philanthropy and corruption. The new faith in science promises wonders, but coupled with an anti-immigrant fervor (which resonates disturbingly with today’s headlines), it also yields the rise of eugenics, foreshadowing the war the scientists in “Manhattan” will fight.Despite the often dark outlook, there’s also a sense of awe at the analog machinery of life, as in a scene in which two surgeons try to cure a syphilis patient by heating her to a near-fatal body temperature. On the one hand, it’s barbaric; the doctors, on the strength of a hunch, are cooking a patient alive. Yet the sequence is also kinetic and thrilling. As Mr. Soderbergh lingers on the antique mechanisms — a long match igniting burnished gas jets, a thermometer climbing perilously upward — the images are gorgeous, hypnotic.This is what “The Knick,” like the best historical fiction, does for us. It takes us over a century into the past, and it shows us the future.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: The Past Returns, Bristling and Forever Looking Ahead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.