
Antiques By                     
EVE M. KAHN

FEB. 19, 2015
HONOLULU — Piece by piece, the furnishings of the last Hawaiian queen, Liliuokalani, are returning to Iolani Palace here, on a grassy square wedged between office buildings and populated by egrets. The royal property was dispersed through auctions and giveaways around 1900, but benefactors are retrieving it from antiques stores, thrift shops, backyards, storage units, museums and government offices worldwide.During a recent tour of the palace, an Italianate 1880s building that became a museum in 1978, its curator, Heather Diamond, and its docent educator, the historian Zita Cup Choy, described how chairs, tables, dinnerware and cuff links had ended up scattered. Based on records like vintage photos and descriptions in period Hawaiian newspapers, however, “we can identify what belongs here and where it goes,” Ms. Cup Choy said.A newly returned armchair temporarily stored in the palace attic was awaiting a re-creation of its original satiny blue upholstery. Staff members had just heard from the owner of some cranberry glass vases that are believed to have been gifts to the royal family from Queen Victoria. Sometimes visitors arrive with artifacts in their handbags, hoping to donate them; in 2010, someone dropped off another palace armchair at the door of a nearby art school.Also arriving are copies of the original floral carpets patterned with roses, carnations and calla lilies, in line with the botanical interests of Queen Liliuokalani. In the 1890s, after the monarchy was overthrown, she was imprisoned in an upstairs bedroom.AdvertisementSome of her possessions wound up in the hands of the American officials who took over. “Almost all of our spoons are on loan from the state archives,” Dr. Diamond said.AdvertisementThe museum is commissioning more replicas of what was lost, including a wine cellar, a dress covered with peacock feathers, and the royal staffs called kahilis. Feathers for the kahilis were harvested from Midway Atoll albatrosses that had died. “I actually plucked two of them myself,” Dr. Diamond said.She has also been culling antiques donated over the years that have no verifiable royal provenance. After the museum started out with largely empty rooms, she said, “a lot of extra baggage accumulated.”Mainland scholars have been analyzing Iolani pieces as well. Nancy Carlisle, a senior curator at Historic New England, a heritage preservation organization in Boston, has examined furniture that the Hawaiian royal family acquired in the 1880s from A. H. Davenport, a Boston manufacturer that also helped furnish the White House. (Historic New England owns Davenport drawings, furniture, wallpaper and architectural fragments.) The company shipped about 225 pieces to Honolulu in that era; one-third of them are now on view in the palace, either because they never left Hawaii or have been returned.Ms. Carlisle suggested that New England connections prompted the royal family to order from the Boston firm. Its members knew missionaries from the East Coast, and elite Hawaiian children were sent to boarding schools there.Liliuokalani’s brother, King Kalakaua, whose reign preceded hers, had his own Davenport suite in ebony and gilt. “We all hope someday the king’s bed will show up,” Dr. Diamond said.SCHOOLGIRLS’ NEEDLEWORKNew exhibitions and books about samplers stitched by schoolgirls in the 18th and 19th centuries are revealing genealogical connections among the works and regional quirks in the embroidery.Much of the research focuses tightly on specific regions. “Hail Specimen of Female Art! New Jersey Schoolgirl Needlework, 1726-1860,” an exhibition of about 150 pieces of embroidery, is on view through March 29 at the Morven Museum & Garden in Princeton, N.J. “We’ve brought sisters back together, we’ve brought mothers and daughters back together,” said Dan Campanelli, an antiques collector and artist who is part of the show’s curatorial team.Mr. Campanelli and his wife, Marty, along with the co-curators Daniel C. Scheid and Elizabeth G. Allan, have identified recurring patterns like figures of women looming over their farmsteads. A motif common in southern New Jersey, it is known as “the Towering Ladies of Cape May.”AdvertisementScholars have researched what became of these young embroiderers — whether they suffered faithless husbands and bankruptcy, for example, or became matriarchs of happy clans on the farmsteads depicted in the samplers. The underlying message of the childhood embroidery “is pride of place, pride of family,” Mr. Campanelli said.Information on works in the Campanellis’ collection is being posted online through the New England Historic Genealogical Society. (Other searchable databases are emerging as well, like samplerconsortium.org.) D. Brenton Simons, the genealogical society’s president, said in an interview that valuable data on samplers is easily lost when heirs to estates fail to recognize the names. The fabric squares may be sold or given away, he said, or worse, “tucked away in a drawer with linens” that are later dumped in the trash.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Schoolgirl needlework is also on view through July 5 at the Winterthur Museum in Delaware. And more works in the medium will be assessed this spring in exhibitions at the Bartow-Pell Mansion Museum in the Bronx, the Cumberland County Historical Society in Greenwich, N.J., and the Dyer Library/Saco Museum in Saco, Me. A conference at Colonial Williamsburg, “Stitching Together a National Identity,” will cover traditions in various states and in urban centers, and a book due out in April by the cartography historian Judith A. Tyner, “Stitching the World: Embroidered Maps and Women’s Geographical Education” (Ashgate), will explore how girls depicted the globe. This fall a show at the Georgia Museum of Art in Athens will survey that state’s samplers.Yet more studies are expected in the next year or two. Mary Brooks, the archivist at the centuries-old Westtown School in West Chester, Pa., is writing a history of its Quaker embroidery lessons called “Threads of Useful Learning.” Another volume in progress, by Gloria S. Allen, covers Delaware samplers; about 300 have been identified.Delaware textiles, though rare, can cost only a few hundred dollars each, particularly if sellers have not recognized the typical local imagery and faded inscriptions and do not realize what they have. Cynthia Steinhoff, the editor of Ms. Allen’s book, said that in one recent find, “the threads were almost the same color as the linen behind.”A picture caption on Friday with the Antiques column, using information from the Morven Museum & Garden in Princeton, N.J., misstated the date of a needlework sampler on display there in the exhibition “Hail Specimen of Female Art! New Jersey Schoolgirl Needlework, 1726-1860.” It is from 1829, not 1827.A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page C23 of the New York edition with the headline: A Hawaiian Palace Reclaims Its Heritage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »