AdvertisementSupported byBy Robin PogrebinRONALD O. PERELMAN, billionaire business titan and a self-described “frustrated musician,” owns five drum sets and has played with the likes of Bon Jovi and the Beach Boys. Yet he is landing at Carnegie Hall not by practicing on his snare drum but by taking over as the eminent music institution’s standard-bearer.On Thursday, Carnegie announced that he had succeeded Sanford I. Weill, who has served as chairman for nearly a quarter-century. “Carnegie Hall is probably the thing in New York that I love the most,” Mr. Perelman said. “It’s just magical.” Mr. Perelman, 72, said that he was not much of a classical music enthusiast and would push for the hall to stage more of the pop performances it was known for decades ago. He has developed something of a reputation for combativeness, having variously sued the investment bank Morgan Stanley, the celebrity art dealer Larry Gagosian and the father of an ex-wife over a daughter’s inheritance. But Mr. Weill called Mr. Perelman a good choice to succeed him because of his record of generosity toward Carnegie and a range of other charitable and cultural organizations, from the Weill Cornell Medical Center, where he sits on the board, to the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, where Mr. Weill’s wife, Joan H. Weill, served as board chairwoman for 14 years.“If one gets to know him, I think he’s a man of his word,” Mr. Weill said. “He knows about giving back.”Mr. Perelman has been a trustee at Carnegie Hall since 1988, a member of its executive committee since 2010 and vice chairman since 2012. Mr. Weill, a former Citigroup chief who turns 82 next month, is becoming the hall’s president, a title last held by the violinist Isaac Stern and retired upon his death in 2001. “It means a lot to be sitting in the chair Isaac sat in,” Mr. Weill said. “He was able to use his personality to be incredibly helpful. I’d love to follow in his footsteps as best I can.” “But I’m not going to take violin lessons,” he joked. The hall’s hope is apparently that Mr. Perelman’s wealth — he has a net worth of $14.5 billion, according to Forbes — and broad connections will bode well for fund-raising; he has already donated about $30 million to Carnegie over the years. The hall hopes to collect $125 million by May 2016 to broaden its artistic and education offerings and its digital initiatives, and so far, a third of that financial goal has been met.Mr. Weill set a high bar with his own record: Over 30 years, he has overseen $525 million in fund-raising for the institution. Carnegie’s endowment has grown to $320 million from $4 million since he assumed the chairmanship in 1991. Through his personal fortune and the Weill Family Foundation, Mr. Weill has given over $75 million of his own money to the hall. In recognition of his and his wife’s contributions, Carnegie’s more intimate third-floor recital hall has borne their names since 1986.One challenge for Mr. Perelman may be keeping the spotlight on the institution and not himself. He has a penchant for making headlines — sometimes as a result of business disputes like a suit against Morgan Stanley, but also through legal clashes with two of his ex-wives. (He is now married to Anna Chapman, a psychiatrist, his fifth wife.) “I am more prone to let my feelings get hurt than Sandy,” Mr. Perelman said of Mr. Weill. “He’s been through a lot more stuff, and he’s a lot smarter in that way than I’ve been.”A chairman of a cultural organization is a blend of cheerleader, paterfamilias and benefactor. While Mr. Perelman may appear to be something of a maverick, he said that a capacity for collaboration had been critical to his success as chairman of Revlon and his holding company, MacAndrews & Forbes. “In all of our business, if you don’t get a consensus, it doesn’t work,” he said.He is also a vice chairman of the Apollo Theater Foundation and sits on the boards of the Museum of Modern Art, NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital and Columbia Business School, among other institutions. He once served as president of the Guggenheim Museum and owns works by artists from Matisse to Modigliani to Blinky Palermo.In an interview at his office on Manhattan’s Upper East Side, Mr. Perelman said his goals for Carnegie included digital advances like streaming more concerts, an effort that began only last fall; diversifying the audience; and generally making the place more hip. For much of its history, Carnegie Hall was a major draw for popular music, including landmark rock concerts starting in the 1950s, and Mr. Perelman said it was time to reclaim that legacy. He noted that the Beatles performed at Carnegie in 1964. “The Rolling Stones were there” the same year, he said. “We need a little more balance in the programming to broaden the audience and particularly the artists.”While some classical music loyalists may object to a stream of contemporary offerings, the hall’s leadership argues that such concerts are necessary, given the aging of the classical music audience and the resulting financial travails of symphony orchestras across the country. “We’ve been trying for a long time to do this,” said Clive Gillinson, 68, Carnegie Hall’s executive and artistic director. “We’ve always been about the best of every sort of music. It’s a great part of our history, and it should be a great part of our future as well.”Mr. Weill cited Pharrell Williams’s performance of the song “Happy” with accompaniment by the classical pianist Lang Lang at the Grammy Awards this month. “We want to think about, how can we do more in pop music, country music, in jazz, to get a younger audience here?” he said. Mr. Perelman said he felt confident about meeting the current fund-raising goal of $125 million by May 2016. “I never mind being asked for money — I never mind asking others for money,” he said. “It’s important for the system.”As for how much he will directly contribute to the current campaign, he declined to be specific. “We’re still working on it,” Mr. Perelman said. “Sandy’s soliciting me, and I’m soliciting him.”Advertisement