By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 21, 2015
8 P.M. (HBO) THE FAULT IN OUR STARS (2014) Two teenage “cancer kids” — Hazel Grace Lancaster (Shailene Woodley), who expects to die soon from the thyroid cancer that has plagued her since childhood, and Augustus Waters (Ansel Elgort), known as Gus, who lost part of his leg to cancer but has been healthy since — fall in love while trying to lead extraordinary lives in Josh Boone’s adaptation of the young-adult novel by John Green. Willem Dafoe plays Peter Van Houten, the misanthropic author of Hazel’s favorite cancer story, who lectures the couple on the difference between fiction and reality; Sam Trammell and Laura Dern are Hazel’s stricken parents; and Nat Wolff is Gus’s slightly goofy wingman. “Though it is a tragic love story, it is also a perfect and irresistible fantasy,” A. O. Scott wrote of the film in The New York Times. “Hazel and Gus possess an absolute moral authority, an ability to assert the truth of their experience that few can share and many might covet.” He added, “The loudest weeping you hear — including your own — may arise not from grief or admiration, but from envy.”10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY Haris Tarin of the Muslim Public Affairs Council reports on the White House conference on violent extremism. Rabbi Jonathan Sacks talks about religion as a component for a meaningful life. And Lucky Severson looks at the growing number of religious services held in pubs. In “Richard Heffner’s Open Mind,” at noon, Col Needham, the founder of the Internet Movie Database, ponders the state of film.3:45 P.M. (Starz Cinema) IN A BETTER WORLD (2011) In this Oscar winner for best foreign-language film, a Swedish doctor, Anton (Mikael Persbrandt), divides his time between his semi-estranged wife and two sons in Denmark and a refugee camp in Africa, where his patients are victims of a warlord. At first, Anton confronts the horror stoically. But when his older child (Markus Rygaard) exacts revenge against a bully at school, and the warlord comes to his clinic seeking treatment, Anton’s calm facade cracks. “The performances are impeccable,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times of this drama directed by Susanne Bier, “and the images, of verdant Denmark and parched Africa, are lovely without being too ostentatiously gorgeous.” But, he added, “everything about ‘In a Better World’ feels just a little too easy: A better movie might have let in more of the messiness of the world as it is.”7 P.M. (Ovation) THE ARTFUL DETECTIVE Detective William Murdoch (Yannick Bisson) uses steampunk technology to solve cases in early-20th-century Toronto in this mystery series, whose eighth season features the historical figures Bat Masterson, President Theodore Roosevelt, Mark Twain, Thomas Edison and W. C. Fields.Advertisement8 P.M. (Lifetime) BABYSITTER’S BLACK BOOK (2015) When their parents’ financial woes threaten their college plans, enterprising teenagers turn to prostitution.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS: FALL FROM GRACE In October 2012, Bethany Deaton, a young wife and nurse, was found dead in the back seat of a minivan, a plastic bag over her head with an empty bottle of sleeping pills and a note nearby. But was her death a suicide or a murder committed by someone within the cultlike religious community her husband led?10 P.M. (OWN) ESSENCE BLACK WOMEN IN HOLLYWOOD AWARDS Oprah Winfrey opens this annual luncheon, held at the Beverly Wilshire Hotel in Beverly Hills, Calif., honoring African-American women who are pushing boundaries and breaking barriers in film and television. Adrienne C. Moore, Danielle Brooks, Laverne Cox, Lorraine Toussaint, Samira Wiley, Uzo Aduba and Vicky Jeudy of “Orange Is the New Black” will be honored with the Vanguard Award; Regina King with the Fierce & Fearless Award; Gugu Mbatha-Raw with the Breakthrough of the Year Award; and Ruth E. Carter with the Visionary Award.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowBLOOD Park Ji Sang (Ahn Jae Hyun) is not merely a surgeon at a top oncological center. He is also a vampire, who, with the help of the hospital’s director, is able to keep his bloodlust for his vulnerable patients in check. But when Yoo Ri Ta (Gu Hye Sun), a beautiful surgeon, joins his team, he starts feeling an unfamiliar desire that could jeopardize his life in this South Korean series, which releases new episodes each Monday and Tuesday. (dramafever.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 21, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.