AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichAt a time when symphony orchestras struggle at the box office and surefire audience draws are few, the cellist Yo-Yo Ma continues to work magic. The New York Philharmonic’s three subscription concerts this week, in which the orchestra is joined — all but displaced — by Mr. Ma’s Silk Road Ensemble, were sold out well in advance.And most of the Philharmonic’s notoriously conservative subscriber base probably had no clear idea of what was in store. Even those who have followed the Silk Road Project from the beginning in 2000 had yet to hear how well the motley and exotic Silk Road Ensemble would blend with a full symphony orchestra.The project draws musical inspiration from cultures along the Silk Road, the ancient trade route between Asia and Europe. The ensemble, a shape-shifting band of performers from those cultures (and America), consisted here of 17 players, including Mr. Ma.As it happened, there was little question of blend since the Philharmonic was represented before intermission by only two players, briefly, and by its music director, Alan Gilbert. In the opening Fanfare for Gaita, Suona and Brass (2012), by Cristina Pato and Wu Tong, Joseph Alessi, the orchestra’s principal trombonist, and Matthew Muckey, its acting principal trumpeter, provided milder responses to the raucous utterances of Ms. Pato on gaita, a Galician bagpipe, and Hu Jianbing on suona, a Chinese trumpetlike oboe.Then the visiting ensemble played a “Silk Road Suite,” with music of David Bruce, Kojiro Umezaki and Sapo Perapaskero, and selections from Dmitri Yanov-Yanovsky’s “Sacred Signs: Concerto for 13 Musicians” (2012). The Yanov-Yanovsky work was written for performance by the Silk Road Ensemble as part of a major commemoration of the 2013 centenary of Stravinsky’s “The Rite of Spring” at the University of North Carolina.Five of its 10 movements were presented here, conducted by Mr. Gilbert. To judge from these, any borrowings from “The Rite,” or allusions to it, are subtle, and little of its violence remains.Mr. Gilbert also conducted the second half, starting with Strauss’s “Death and Transfiguration,” which — oddly, in a Philharmonic program — looked in prospect to be an interloper here. Hearing it in place didn’t make it feel any more at home.The program concluded with Osvaldo Golijov’s “Rose of the Winds” (2007, revised 2014), which Mr. Golijov, in a preconcert discussion, described as a sort of study in communal activity, whether ritual, mourning, riot or protest. It incorporates field recordings of a Mexican service honoring the Holy Virgin of Guadalupe, and its use of shofars and wind instruments at the end brought the evening to a close as raucous as its beginning.There was no end of virtuosity among the Silk Road players, most notably Kayhan Kalhor, a consummate virtuoso and soulful singer on the kamancheh, an Iranian spike fiddle. Other stars were Kinan Azmeh, on clarinet; Mr. Umezaki, on shakuhachi, a Japanese bamboo flute; and Wu Man on pipa, a Chinese lute.In the end, the audience heard both more and less of Mr. Ma than it might have expected. He was onstage most of the evening, playing a subservient role within the ensemble, but his few substantial solos sang out proudly and eloquently.The audience, in any case, roared its approval.The program will be repeated Saturday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center; 212-875-5656, nyphil.org.Advertisement