By JON PARELESFEB. 20, 2015
In parts of her concert on Thursday night at SubCulture the English singer-songwriter Olivia Chaney sounded like a next-generation bearer of British folk traditionalism. Her voice holds the purity, tension, dignity and sorrow of a heritage full of songs about lost love and cruel fate. She drew material from folk stalwarts like Peter Bellamy, Andy Irvine, Alasdair Roberts and Shirley and Dolly Collins, as well as the Chilean songwriter Violeta Parra. When she introduced a song as “kind of sexy rock ’n’ roll,” it turned out to be from Purcell’s 1692 semiopera “The Fairy Queen.”Yet Ms. Chaney is no captive of tradition. Early in the set, introducing another Purcell song, “There’s Not a Swain,” she warned that she was “unorthodox” — a very British understatement. Her patter between songs had a shy, self-deprecating tone, but there was no sign of uncertainty in her music. Whether she’s singing old songs or her own, Ms. Chaney destabilizes them, turning them into rhapsodic, immediate dramas, giving listeners a reason to hang on every phrase and inflection. She melts down the meter of her songs, seeming to linger over phrases at will. There’s no foot-stomping drive to distract from the immediacy of words and melodies.In some ways, Ms. Chaney harks back to old, unaccompanied Celtic and Appalachian ballad styles, with their ornaments and fluctuations. But she is also willfully modern. She performed in a duo with Jordan Hunt on violin and occasional harmony vocals, while she played guitar, piano or harmonium. Her arrangements were meticulous and gorgeously wayward: fingerpicked guitar in delicate crosscurrents to her vocal lines, piano parts that evolved from open, sporadic chords to lush counterpoint, a harmonium drone like a trackless landscape. They were more a dialogue with her voice than a backdrop.The concert drew largely from Ms. Chaney’s coming album, “The Longest River,” due in April. Along with folk and traditionalist songs, it includes some by Ms. Chaney herself. They unabashedly show the influence of Joni Mitchell in vocal leaps, in piano parts that transform themselves from hesitant to declarative, and in lyrics about complex relationships, doubts and self-invention.“Represent the unexpected/Go where no man has gone before,” she suggests in a cryptic, pristinely radiant song called “Cassiopeia.” Ms. Chaney is thoroughly grounded in the past, from medieval music to the Mitchell song, “A Case of You,” that was her last encore. But in her quiet way, she’s radical.A version of this review appears in print on February 21, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Willfully Modern Singer of Traditionalist Folk.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.