AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon CaramanicaAnyone concerned that there is no more opulence left in rock ’n’ roll need only take a look at Imagine Dragons, by some measurements the most popular rock band in the country.During the Grammys earlier this month, this band performed its new single, “Shots,” live during a four-minute commercial break for Target. According to Billboard, the ad time alone cost $8 million.That’s $8 million spent on marketing one band, in an environment where major labels are as timid as ever, budget-wise. And that’s $8 million spent on the idea that rock ’n’ roll might be a viable means of mass communication, an idea that went out of fashion sometime in the Clinton years.So Imagine Dragons is a unicorn, an unlikely survivor of the Darwinian hunger game that happily culls the weak and irrelevant.And yet what this band — the singer Dan Reynolds, Wayne Sermon on guitar, Ben McKee on bass and Daniel Platzman on drums — accomplishes on its second album, “Smoke + Mirrors” (KIDinaKORNER/Interscope), is no different than what it did on its debut, and no different than what any number of other mainstream rock bands have been attempting for the last 10 years.It is, perhaps, the least interested in difference, and maybe that’s why it has survived.Imagine Dragons is preoccupied with a few elementary sonic ideas — deeply forthright guitar rhythms and melodies, jagged juxtapositions between loud and soft, gestures in which one instrument rises to the top and quickly commands attention. There are almost no rough edges to its sounds — all of its moves have been polished smooth by its predecessors over decades. The band recently detailed the process of making this album to Billboard, describing it as six months of 9-to-5 sessions. Theoretically, it is possible to innovate within constraints like that, but undoubtedly, the bulk of this album sounds like office-cubicle drudgery, the work of recombining old parts to sell under the banner of something new.That trickles down to the lyrics, too, which are damningly vague, except for perhaps the strain of fame anxiety on “Gold”: “Who can you trust, who can you trust/when everything, everything, everything you touch turns to gold, gold, gold?” In the main, the lyrics traffic in cheap metaphor, like on “Polaroid”: “Love is a Polaroid/ better in picture/but never can fill the void.” (Clearly, not all the metaphors make sense.) Vocally, Mr. Reynolds often sounds as if he’s doing Chris Martin karaoke — Coldplay is never far from this band’s mind. The way he lightens his voice (and the way it is subsequently processed) leaves the impression that he’d rather not leave much of an impression. He has nominal range and sounds alert only when he’s shouting, which he often does, if only to drown out the brutalizing guitars by Mr. Sermon and the aggressive drumming by Mr. Platzman.The drums, though — they’ve become this band’s true calling card, seen most vividly in the 2014 Grammy performance with Kendrick Lamar, where Mr. Reynolds was banging mercilessly on a set, as was almost everyone else onstage, almost a parody of a drum circle.But when Mr. Platzman is left to his own devices, he can create real energy, the way he does on “Friction,” by far the best song on this album. It also features Mr. Reynolds sounding nervous and frenzied — it’s his least comfortable singing, and also his most triumphant. But apart from that song, and “I’m So Sorry” — which has slashing rhythmic guitar and Mr. Reynolds singing staccato, for an effect not unlike the Red Hot Chili Peppers — the music here is little more than a set of compromises, completely bereft of formal innovations.That said, it’s unfair to say that Imagine Dragons is wholly without pleasure, because its sound primarily activates pleasure terrain that’s old and familiar. It can be pleasing in the way Nickelback or Creed once were — so close to the pop mean that it’s almost indistinguishable from it. (For good measure, there is “Trouble,” a blatant Mumford & Sons rip-off, and on “Gold,” a whistle straight from 2011.) Which brings everything back to that $8 million — that’s a lot of money to spend on photocopies. It’s not excess for the sake of aesthetics. And it’s not excess for the sake of bad behavior. And it’s not excess for the sake of experimentation. But like most big piles of money, that $8 million is basically a bully. It’s excess for the sake of making this band — blank as a clean sheet of paper — too big to fail.Advertisement