By DEBORAH JOWITTFEB. 20, 2015
Two people sit opposite each other at a table and talk: Can this be a dance? Tentative answer: Maybe. After all, the speakers are the downtown choreographer Will Rawls and Kaitlyn Gilliland, who danced with the New York City Ballet until 2011. You could feel the question rustling through the audience on Thursday night during this opening event of “Platform 2015: Dancers, Buildings and People in the Streets,” a two-month series of performances, workshops and panels organized by Claudia La Rocco and presented by Danspace Projects in St. Mark’s Church.Ms. La Rocco, a freelance critic for The New York Times, was inspired by the writings of the poet and dance writer Edwin Denby to pair selected artists from ballet and contemporary dance and ask them to create a “dance dialogue” together. “Dancers, Buildings and People in the Streets” is also the title of a 1965 book by Mr. Denby, in which he wrote with equal eloquence of George Balanchine, Merce Cunningham and choreographers who emerged from the radical Judson Dance Theater in New York.In their “#loveyoumeanit, part 1,” Ms. Gilliland and Mr. Rawls are separated by more than the table and their respective disciplines. They are distanced from their earlier selves by the text messages that they wrote across miles and during the months leading up to Thursday night and now read from a script. They voice everything that would appear on their computer screens; the words “emoji” and “hashtag” form a rhythmic undercurrent, icons flashing onto a screen behind them. The spectators hear of a friendship burgeoning long before the two meet, and theirs is a pas de deux of sorts, its rhythms produced by flirtatiousness, guarded admissions and word games. At some point, Mr. Rawls gets up to start casually spinning out loose, twisting movements, while Ms. Gilliland tries to influence their quality by calling out words she has scribbled.The audience doesn’t get to see Part 2 of this brainy concoction until after the second “dialogue” of the evening, between Adrian Danchig-Waring, a principal with New York City Ballet, and the dancer-choreographer Silas Riener, who was a member of Merce Cunningham’s company. This untitled work uncorks the audience’s suppressed need for dancing. Mr. Riener, wearing nondescript practice clothes and a hood, bursts into the church; soaring repeatedly, his legs together in the air, he looks like a rocket on its trial flight.This “dialogue” also features an enigmatic virtual connection. Mr. Danchig-Waring is not there in person. The men are seen in projected film clips working together in a windowed studio, with Mr. Riener appearing to learn and rehearse the steps that Mr. Danchig-Waring is creating for the two of them. The steps draw on the ballet vocabulary and push it a little. But what Mr. Riener does in the church looks very different — big, bold, askew steps that cover yards. At some point, he strips off his outer clothing and continues in a brightly patterned, strapless leotard. He is channeling something, or someone, but we will never know what he hears through the headphones whose wires twist through his several long braids. His is a virtuosic endeavor — not a display, but a quest.When Ms. Gilliland and Mr. Rawls return for Part 2 of their duet, we’re not eager for more words. We get them anyway. But we also, finally, get a solo — for her, directed by him. And she is lovely: a lean, accomplished woman, leggy in her point shoes. The classical steps she’s been raised on are set in slightly unusual ways and make her, too, look like someone on a mission. The pair end on opposite sides of the church balcony, reading their most recent posts, mentioning Balanchine, mentioning Mr. Denby. In the growing darkness, she says, “I only date men your age.” He replies, “I only date men.” But their disembodied voices seem to get closer together.A version of this review appears in print on February 21, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Pas de Deux in the Stillness of Seated Positions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.