By DAVID ALLENFEB. 20, 2015
From the serialists to the spectralists, a fascination with timbre has long been a feature of contemporary composition. As the Italian composer Stefano Gervasoni, 52, explained during his worthwhile Composer Portrait at Miller Theater on Thursday, he started dealing explicitly with the character of sounds, as opposed to their pitch or volume, a decade ago.That meant exploring not only the seductive and mysterious, what he called the “irrational” side of color during an onstage interview with the pianist Laura Barger. But it also meant finding ways to use timbre as a formal tactic, a way to structure material, to illuminate and develop important moments, even to make music rhyme.None of that is particularly revolutionary, and Mr. Gervasoni’s captivating, demanding writing is indebted to a broad range of influences, from Heinz Holliger and Brian Ferneyhough to Helmut Lachenmann and Salvatore Sciarrino. Still, as Mr. Gervasoni’s music is rarely heard in New York, the beauty of this concert — Miller’s series at its most important — was to show what makes him distinctive in that cerebral European crowd. When his music is puzzling or harsh, deliberately wrapping itself in ambiguity, he somehow manages to maintain a cantabile quality, an ability to make the most abstract and alien of sounds sing.That taste for the melodious was most obvious in “In Dir” (2003-4). Composed for vocal sextet — here, the vital Ekmeles ensemble — it sets poetry by the 17th-century German mystic Angelus Silesius.  Mr. Gervasoni unites 13 abstruse couplets with a single tone row. From there, he blurs the line between intelligible text and elusive textual fragment, just as Silesius’s words blur the distinction between God and the self. The music shifts uncomfortably between high rapture and wary fear, as inklings of secure chorales dissolve in trembles and unwindings, collapses and sighs. I found it all opaque but riveting nonetheless.“Sviete Tihi” (2005-6), theatrically played by the two pianists and two percussionists of Yarn/Wire, treats texture in a completely different way. If “In Dir” is fundamentally devoted to obscurity, “Sviete Tihi” bathes in “Joyful Light,” the title’s English translation, a fusion of sound and silence that rustles as if in a slow wind. It’s a dazzling, still world in which the pianos are treated purely as percussion instruments, and remarkably versatile ones. The pianists play traditionally, but also gently graze the strings themselves with rubber mallets, draping crotales (tiny cymbals) or icebells through the piano’s mechanism, all the while aping and enhancing the twinkles and sparkles produced by the percussionists’ array of chimes, triangles and gongs.Mr. Gervasoni’s second string quartet, “Six lettres à l’obscurité (und zwei Nachrichten)” (2005-6), was yet another contrast, atmospherically evoked by the excellent Mivos Quartet. It’s based on the letters of a name, Claire, that’s coded musically and then to some extent concealed — the joke being that “claire” also means “clear” in French. A diverse but unified work, it mixes abrasive aggression with hints of lyricism, chiefly through an agonizingly disturbed arrangement of a Frescobaldi organ ricercar. Were it to be recorded, it would make the perfect entry into a tempting composer’s work.The next Composer Portrait, on March 5, focuses on Augusta Read Thomas; 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. A version of this review appears in print on February 21, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: Exploring Sounds and Hidden Messages.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.