By STEPHEN HOLDENFEB. 20, 2015
Tovah Feldshuh, unlike most performers in their 60s, isn’t afraid to bare her arms. At Thursday’s opening-night performance of her spunky one-woman show, “Aging Is Optional,” at 54 Below, she stepped onto the stage wearing a shiny orange and purple outfit that might be described as an entertainer’s adaptation of a workout suit. Removing the jacket, she displayed her biceps, which are well-toned from her trapeze work in “Pippin.” By any standard, this woman appears almost alarmingly fit. Along the way, she mentioned that she is making plans to climb Mount Kilimanjaro.The show, a mixture of character comedy and songs, is an exhortation to all of us lazy couch potatoes to get up off our seats and have fun before it’s too late. In the language of “No Time at All,” from “Pippin,” “I believe if I refuse to grow old, I can stay young till I die.”That faith, if taken literally, is as absurd as the airborne fantasies from the musical “Peter Pan,” whose song “I’m Flying,” opened the show. But there is also plenty of truth to the adage that you’re as young as you feel.Ms. Feldshuh, 62, is not much of a singer, but she puts across song lyrics with the fierce conviction of a bossy mom who knows what’s best for her brood. And beneath her optimism, she has no illusions that magical thinking can solve all of our problems. In her funniest sketch, she plays a proudly morbid talk show personality named Sylvia Chronic: To air your woes, dial 666-SUFFER.The songs and sketches in the well-made program, directed by Jeff Harnar, cover every age group, and Ms. Feldshuh adopts the perspectives of men, women and children. What knits it all together are Ms. Feldshuh’s forceful personality and keen intelligence. Even when her material was thin on Thursday, she forged ahead in her trek.“Aging Is Optional” continues through Saturday at 54 Below, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 646-476-3551. A version of this review appears in print on February 21, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Brazenly Refusing to Grow Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.