AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeDeep into Chopin’s Ballade No. 4 is a passage of hushed emotion, almost a memory of feeling. When the young Uzbek pianist Behzod Abduraimov reached that moment in his New York debut recital on Wednesday at Weill Recital Hall, he seemed to stretch his entire upper body over the keys, as if suppressing the sound — or, perhaps, protecting it.It was an arrestingly intimate moment in an intimate concert in an intimate space. Recitals in Carnegie Hall’s Stern Auditorium take on a certain grandeur; those in the basement Zankel Hall tend to share the modern feel of its architecture. Too few serious pianists end up in the 268-seat Weill, the coziness of which means an intimidating degree of exposure. If Stern is a stadium, Weill is an operating theater.Boyish yet solid, Mr. Abduraimov, who appeared in Stern with the Mariinsky Orchestra a few weeks ago, is a serious pianist, and he seemed to relish the exposure. It requires some courage to play a program of such classics — the four Chopin Ballades, two of Schubert’s Impromptus and Ravel’s suite “Gaspard de la Nuit.” (Dinu Lipatti and Van Cliburn were just two of the imposing predecessors, and inevitable comparisons, whose names were overheard at intermission.)This was playing of assurance and ideas: a tense Chopin, a Schubert slipping between stability and dissolution and “Gaspard” as a surreal flood of colors, from the glassy opening of “Ondine” to the trills in “Scarbo.” Mr. Abduraimov came out with something to prove, and in the first Ballade the extremes — of tempo, volume and phrasing — stood out in stark, self-conscious relief, with an effect like that of looking at a landscape through the glare of the sun.But his playing soon settled without losing vividness or dramatic thrust. The second Ballade was notable for its continuity of line, the third for its unease and the speed with which even its idylls fell into darkness. The sense of control and careful management gave way, at the start of the fourth Ballade, to a naturalness that felt like genuine respite.If there was phrasing that could have been relaxed further and melodies whose lyrical intensity could have deepened — as in the poised yet oddly flat Scriabin étude he played as an encore — Mr. Abduraimov will, I expect, have a long and distinguished career to show us.Advertisement