AdvertisementSupported byBy Aysegul SertPARIS — The first time the writer and filmmaker Samuel Benchetrit saw Bernardo Bertolucci’s “Last Tango in Paris,” he was 10 years old. Long after bedtime, he spied through a cracked door while his parents sat watching the film on television. It was the early 1980s in Champigny-sur-Marne, an impoverished suburb on the outskirts of Paris, where his family owned one of the few television sets in their public housing building.Seeing Marlon Brando and Maria Schneider made a lasting impression, but it was some years later, while watching Martin Scorsese’s “Goodfellas” as a teenager with his friends, that Mr. Benchetrit experienced his cinematic epiphany: “My buddies were taken by the violence it portrayed, dreaming of becoming gangsters,” he said in an interview at his apartment in Paris. “I spotted an invisible identity in each frame of what I yearned to become — a filmmaker.”Mr. Benchetrit, now 42, has made a name for himself among the culturally savvy in France. His fifth feature film, “Asphalte,” which had its premiere at Cannes in May, opened in movie theaters in France last week. Based on his semi-autobiographical collection of short stories, its large cast includes Isabelle Huppert and Michael Pitt and features Jules Benchetrit, the director’s 17-year-old son with his first wife, the actress Marie Trintignant, who died tragically in 2003. Meanwhile, his latest novel, “Chien” (Dog), was published this spring to positive reviews, and his play “Moins 2,” (Minus 2) which was a success when it had its premiere a decade ago, is on stage at Théâtre Hébertot in Paris. Yet despite his successes, the director is philosophical when assessing his journey from Champigny-sur-Marne. “I don’t feel like I was saved,” he said, taking a deep drag on his cigarette. “I got lost several times. The past 10 years, I was taken by a sense of ambition, and the more it worked the more I felt like an imposter, and the further away I got from my core. Today, I feel in line with the boy I was when I made my way here — honest, driven, not expecting anything from anyone.”A 30-minute train commute separates Paris from the ragged suburbs where Mr. Benchetrit grew up, but he says he felt like a foreigner when he moved here, after dropping out of school at age 15. He found work as a photographer’s apprentice and took other small jobs to make ends meet. “I was broke and lonely,” he said, but he was also determined, and in his early 20s he began making short films in his spare time. “I remember shooting a glass cup for hours, thinking I had captured a revolutionary angle,” he said with a laugh.It was during this time that he met Ms. Trintignant, who encouraged his endeavors. Her father, the famous French actor Jean-Louis Trintignant, saw potential in the locksmith’s son and suggested he try writing for the theater. His efforts paid off: “Comédie sur un Quai de Gare” (Comedy on a Train Platform), which he directed on stage in 2001, starred Jean-Louis and Marie Trintignant and was well received by critics. His first feature film, “Janis et John,” followed two years later; an offbeat comedy, it opened to mixed reviews. (His first book of fiction, “Récit d’un Branleur,” [Story of a Wanker] published in 2000, was largely overlooked by critics.)His literary success came in 2005 with the publication of “Chroniques de l’Asphalte,” short stories based on the life of a teenager in the largely working-class, immigrant suburbs (called banlieues in France). The second volume under the same title was released in 2007, and the third in 2010 — all to rave reviews. At the same time, Mr. Benchetrit was building his reputation in the film world, winning the World Cinema Screenwriting Award at the Sundance Film Festival for “J’ai Toujours Rêvé d’Être un Gangster” (I Always Wanted To Be a Gangster) and acting in films by eminent directors like Emmanuelle Bercot and Jacques Doillon. His last two movies as a director, “Chez Gino” in 2011 and “Un Voyage” in 2014, garnered scant attention, however, and disappointing reviews.François Grelet, a film critic for the magazines Premiere and Technikart, explained why he thought critics disliked those films. “There is clear imitation in his style of filmmaking — he reproduces images seen elsewhere, without filtering the inspiration and letting the source sink in. It lacks singularity and re-appropriation.” The critic has not yet seen “Asphalte,” but said expectations are high: “The talk of the town is that it is a nice surprise.”Mr. Benchetrit said he fell into a depression in the near past, in part because of his early successes. “It felt like I was imprisoned in a candy shop,” he said. Once he emerged, he drafted “Chien,” a Kafkaesque tale of a man turning into a dog, pessimistic in tone yet buoyed by wit. Then he directed “Asphalte,” based on “Chroniques de l’Asphalte”; it sparkles with optimism. “It’s the quietest movie I’ve made,” he said. “It’s about people who have lost hold of spoken language and slowly try to regrasp it.” The movie is set in a housing project, much like the one where the filmmaker grew up, and tracks three encounters: A man (Gustave Kervern) temporarily bound to a wheelchair after an accident attempts to impress a nurse (Valeria Bruni Tedeschi); an American astronaut (Michael Pitt) whose capsule lands on the building’s rooftop is greeted by the hospitality of an Algerian woman (Tassadit Mandi); and a teenage boy (Jules Benchetrit) is taken with his new neighbor, a famous but faded actress (Ms. Huppert).“He has a gift for writing dialogue,” said Ms. Huppert, a French screen legend. “The script was soaked in poetry,” she added. “When he directs, you get the feeling he doesn’t tell you everything he has in mind for the scene; it’s intriguing and allows you the freedom to bring what you envision.”Before filming in the northeast of France, Mr. Benchetrit took his set designer to Champigny-sur-Marne. “It’s an interesting experience to return to where you grew up; the light and the atmosphere are familiar, yet something inside you has shifted.” He said that the suburbs of his childhood have changed, but he continues “to dislike people’s opinion of them. Violence, anti-republican youth, burning cars; it exists but it’s not the whole picture. There is also an incredible sense of solidarity and potential in these areas.”The French political scientist Gilles Kepel, who has written extensively on the banlieues, concurred: “Today, compared with the ’70s and ’80s, there has been tremendous transformation.” But he also said that “the banlieues are not abandoned; the state does invest in them. Educational forums and other institutions exist.”The fragmented neighborhoods are a far cry from the life Mr. Benchetrit inhabits today. The colorful living room of his apartment near the Palais Royal in the upscale Second Arrondissement is filled with stacks of books and mementos like a black-and-white snapshot of Scorsese and Robert De Niro. Soon the director will move to New York, where he is set to shoot the film adaptation of “Chien” in the coming year. “What interests me is the human condition,” he said. “I like the United States because it is protean. In France, you are quickly categorized and it’s difficult to break away.” He brightened with the thought of his next adventure and repeated the words of his mentor, Jean-Louis Trintignant: “Life is short but a career is long.”Advertisement