Season 5, Episode 11: “The Distance”Last week’s dreary episode ended on an intriguing note of potential uplift: the arrival of Aaron (Ross Marquand), a remarkably kempt counterpoint to our grimy heroes. On Sunday night (how many of you switched over from the Oscars for an hour?), we picked up where we left off, with Sasha and Maggie returning to the barn with their new friend. I joked last week that Aaron looked like a camp director; turns out he’s more of a camp recruiter. Come with me to the Alexandria Safe-Zone, he said. You’re good people! We want you and you should want us — get a load of our awesome fences, for crying out loud!The reception was perhaps less grateful than he hoped. Guns were drawn, eyes narrowed. Rick, who last week urged his compatriots to pretend that “we are the walking dead,” made like the punching dead instead, and down went Aaron. The blow seemed excessive, both to us, as viewers, and to Rick’s friends. That wasn’t a “let’s attack that man look” I just gave you, Michonne told him. “It was a ‘He seems like an O.K. guy to me’ look.”But it was of a piece with an episode that focused largely on the degree to which Rick might be broken, or at least unfit for a return to civilized life. Robert Kirkman, who created the comic book on which the show is based and is an executive producer on the series, has said that “The Walking Dead” isn’t a zombie show, it’s a survival show. Not that it necessarily needed saying — that much has been apparent at least since Season 2. But it’s the issues surrounding the quality of the survival — questions and debates over what it means to be human, beyond merely continuing to biologically exist — that the show returns to over and over.See, for example, the simmering disagreement between Michonne and Rick over her urge to settle versus his need to just keep driving on. More broadly, there’s a division between Rick and friends regarding what sort of people they want to be. Rick is a wartime leader, trained by dark experience to be ever vigilant, ruthless toward outsiders and trustful of almost no one. His approach makes brutally pragmatic sense but it also comes at a cost, both to his own emotional well-being — paranoia works, but the hours stink — and the self-image of his cohorts. Sunday found survivors as varied as Glenn and Abraham fretting over their humanity, with Glenn finally stepping in to stop Rick from forcibly separating Aaron from his boyfriend, Eric.“I want us to be safe, too,” Glenn said. “But I can’t give up everything else.” (Rick as metaphor for the post-9/11 American security state? Discuss.) Rick’s charges respect his leadership and the losses he’s suffered, as well as the fact that, with two kids in tow, his priority will always be security over comfort. They’re just ready to start feeling human again, and it’s hard to blame them. Put Rick and Aaron side by side: One is death-obsessed and mercurial, and looks like a Civil War colonel at the tail end of a particularly bloody campaign. The other is swaddled in Eddie Bauer sportswear and nurturing a loving relationship. Which seems more appealing to you?The survivors opted for Door No. 2, led by Michonne with the tacit approval of Daryl, who no longer cared for the smell of the barn. An investigation revealed two vehicles, including another Winnebago, and soon everyone was off. Of course, this is “The Walking Dead,” so before long it was dark and the lead car was plowing through walkers like so many meaty pylons.The situation got dicey, as the big sedan stalled out with innards in the intake. Walkers descended, and Aaron freaked all the way out at the sight of a flare in the distance. “This is over!” he shouts, and the unsettling Ben Linus parallels — the tidy vanilla wardrobe, the affiliation with a mysterious group of Others, the ability to take a punch — came into clearer focus. Aaron fled and everyone else dispersed, too, battling walkers in the woods on their way to an eventual reunion with the others and Aaron’s boyfriend. The zombie sequence was legitimately chilling, but over all the commute to Alexandria was visually confusing to me. One second it’s daylight and everyone’s trucking along, and the next it’s night, they’re separated and it turns out the R.V. is parked next to . . . what exactly? I couldn’t tell. And how did Eric break his ankle, again? The whole thing seemed muddled.I also spent some time thinking about how Aaron came off by the end. There was the moment early on when he wouldn’t eat applesauce from Rick because his mother used to force it on him to “make me more of a man.” (Aaron, this crazed joker has a gun and already knocked you out once. Eat the applesauce.) Then there was the conniption over the flare, revealed to be fueled by concern for Eric. In other words, the final analysis of Aaron seemed to be “oh, he’s not weird or untrustworthy, he’s just gay.” Which seems a little retrograde, right? Or am I reading too much into it? Honestly, I’m not sure what I’m supposed to be outraged about anymore.At the very least, Aaron seems to have a penchant for both odd behavior and obliviousness about how his actions could unsettle others. Are we sure he’s the best H.R. man for Camp Alexandria?That said, he did his job and everyone arrived at the gate more or less unharmed. The only suspense left was whether Rick would go along with it — he’s led efforts to settle before and has been burned every time. I don’t know whether the kids and I will join Alexandria, he told Michonne earlier. But unlike the silence they heard at the gates of the prison and Terminus, the crew arrived at the settlement’s formidable ramparts to the sound of children playing. And Rick scooped up Judith and headed inside.Andrew Lincoln did fine work signaling Rick’s ambiguity and anxiety without overselling it. But my vote for the episode Emmy goes to Baby Judith, who Method frolicked with aplomb in the back seat.“Even though you were wrong, you were still right,” Carol tells Rick, affirming his earlier skepticism. I’m with Carol, sort of. Though his methods can be extreme, I’m not sure Rick was wrong at all. Because while the others seem oddly confident that their prayers have been answered, that doesn’t exactly bode well, does it? When has confidence ever been rewarded on this show?A FEW THOUGHTS WHILE WE CHECK OUR CHEKHOV• That was an odd bit of business when Rick stashed that handgun in the old blender pitcher, huh? Clearly it will figure into the story somehow later but I have a more basic question: Where did he put it? It was another confusing sequence.• Effete New Yorker alert: I’m hoping the survivors’ first stop in Camp Alexandria is the shower tent. I’m all for verisimilitude, but the funk level has become distracting.• The survivors have been intact for three whole episodes now — it feels as if it’s time to bust up the old gang again. While the endless cycle of survivors coming together, rearranging and then splitting apart on this show can start to seem quasi-comical, it does allow more characters to shine. Which is a long way of saying, more Carol and Daryl, please. • What say you? Will Rick be able to let go of “the fight,” as Michonne advised, and mesh within Alexandria’s presumably more neighborly confines? Will we ever see more of D.C. than the glimpse we got on Sunday? Please weigh in on these or any other issues in the comments.