Season 4, Episode 6: “Close-Up”After last week’s breakup episode provided something close to closure for Hannah and Adam, at least as boyfriend and girlfriend, “Girls” has some room to grow. The show is no longer chained to its stagnant central couple, and the rest of the season has that air of scarily open-ended possibility that the end of a long-term relationship can bring. Leaning into the latest U-turn on this bumpy, circuitous journey through early adulthood are your recappers, Joe Coscarelli and Lydia Polgreen. Joe: Don’t hold me to this, but I might love “Girls” again. Or maybe I shouldn’t even say “again” — I don’t think the show has ever glided at an elevated level long enough for me to really fall for it — but these last two episodes rank among my favorites. (See also: “All Adventurous Women Do” from Season 1, “Video Games” and “One Man’s Trash” from Season 2, and “Beach House” from Season 3.) It’s probably not a coincidence then that this one was directed by Richard Shepard, who was also behind both of those second-season episodes I mention above, most notably “One Man’s Trash,” the Patrick Wilson brownstone daydream. While that episode was, to use Hannah’s word, “flummoxing” to viewers at the time, it has aged well and remains the most ambitious half-hour in this show’s run, for my money.The HBO comedy by Lena Dunham.The breakup and its aftermath episodes have a similarly eerie, hazy vibe to the point of feeling almost unreal. And that mood manages to cover both sides of the big split, which functions as a sort of hard reset for the show, with Hannah trying to piece her life back together after Iowa, and Adam having the honeymoon phase of his picturesque new relationship cut brutally short.  Sunday night’s episode opens with Adam making himself at home in Mimi-Rose’s perfect apartment, preparing her a perfect brunch on her perfect backyard deck while she wears a perfect pajama set. Hannah, meanwhile, managed to keep her old place  (Mimi-Rose’s is infinitely better anyway),  but her matching pajamas look somehow sadder, and so does her Cinnamon Toast Crunch.  The clarity of who won and who lost in the split is quickly scrambled, though, when Mimi-Rose (Gillian Jacobs) turns down Adam’s suggestion that they go on a couple’s run — like that’s something they do! — by nonchalantly dropping the news of her recent abortion. While Adam Driver, the actor, continues to be a hurricane-strength force, Adam the character freaks out in a legitimately frightening way, clearing the table with a swipe and screaming that not telling him about the procedure beforehand was “evil.” Cold, maybe, but considering they’ve been together for just seven weeks, not evil and certainly not his decision. I’m not sure why Adam only verges on actually abusive when he’s not with Hannah — remember the nonconsensual sex act he pulled with Natalia? — but the way Mimi-Rose explains herself and eventually talks him down was virtuosic. Can she really be so flawless? What did you make of the abortion fight, Lydia?Lydia: First things first: No wonder Adam didn’t put up a fight over who would keep the apartment. The wabi-sabi perfection of her place contributed to my main takeaway from this episode: There is something just a little too perfect about Mimi-Rose. Look at how Hannah’s therapist, played by the great Bob Balaban, gushes over her striking appearance, offering a description of her nose so on the nose that Hannah wonders, did he Google her? You are absolutely right, Joe, about the dreamlike quality of the last two episodes, and I have to wonder whether, like the Patrick Wilson hunk of “One Man’s Trash,” we aren’t supposed to wonder whether she is really real. She seems to have been conjured as a kind of idealized, fully self-realized and and totally self-possessed artist, pretty much the exact opposite of Hannah. I was struck by this in the last episode, when Hannah was engrossed by the YouTube video of Mimi-Rose’s speech in which she describes giving up her first love at the age of 9 because he got in the way of her art. I keep thinking back to what Caroline, Adam’s sister (played by the delicious Gaby Hoffmann), said about him in the breakup episode. He needs to be needed and take care of someone. “He is really at his best when he is nurturing the poor, the lost, the profoundly damaged,” she said. Mimi-Rose is none of those things, and Adam is struggling to understand how to love without being needed. “Wanting you like this is better than needing you because it is pure,” she tells Adam as she stands outside her impossibly picturesque doorway, dressed in an impeccably paint-spattered shirt. Adam decides to give it a shot. Let’s see how long that lasts. Joe: Every other subplot was humming along, too. Marnie and Desi having sex to their own music was just wonderfully mortifying. (And my earlier complaints about their awful music being played too straight was belied by giving them a number called “Song for Marcus Garvey.”) But Marnie appears to be stuck in the last decade when she says things like “indie music blogs are where everything is happening” and name-checks She & Him.Desi, meanwhile, is more interested in getting laid and working on his motorcycle than in music, and Marnie is obviously getting frustrated. It’s painful, in a fun way, to watch her mentally weighing good sex against everything else about this dolt. Lydia: The cherry on top was how Desi referred to his motorcycle as “she.” And those song titles are the gift that keeps on giving. “Oaxaca Blues”! But nothing that came out of his mouth was as revealing as his elevator pitch for their sound: “Modern American folk with an indie edge.” Yeesh. This story line is appealing for its how-low-can-you-go humor, but I am starting to wonder if the writers have gone to the “humiliate Marnie” well a little too often. In the early seasons, she was a necessary counterpoint to Hannah, but I wonder if it isn’t time for a little redemption for this much-abused character. Joe: The scene that really landed with me, though, was more low-key. Removed from the Adam drama but equally affecting, it was when the girls and Elijah had dinner at the bar of a restaurant that was obviously for them. Could there be a more accurate representation of aspirational New York City adulthood? Jessa calls the “table” the “island of misfit animals,” which, yes, but everyone was being their truest selves at that moment: Elijah doing an aware self-parody of his superfluous time in Iowa (“I was dating the guy who was the front-runner in the mayoral race”); unemployed Shosh scoffing at nonprofit jobs; and Hannah deciding to “change the world” by becoming a teacher. Cue the Jessa eye roll all around. Lydia: Eye rolls aside, it does seem as if this shift for Hannah has been building for a while. Her parents are teachers — college professors. And remember that scene in the Iowa restaurant where her father tells her that her mother wrote a book once and that her life became so much happier when she finally just gave it up?All she has to do is look across her bedroom, through the now-missing wall, to see what giving up your art without a plan B looks like. There lies the former dancer Elijah, in his briefs, bed strewn with pretzels, a half-drunk bottle of Gatorade by his side. In her cute dress with her neatly typed résumé, Hannah is clearly hoping to avoid that hot mess. Hannah isn’t the only one considering a career in public service. After weeks of inchoate rage over a new traffic light on his corner, Ray decides to take Shoshanna’s advice and complain to the city. He takes a carefully built model of his corner with him to his community board meeting, even taking the trouble to wear a sport coat. When the meeting is adjourned before he is called, he works up a head of steam. “I take umbrage,” he shouts into the microphone. The board chairman, played by Marc Maron in a scene-stealing cameo, promptly shuts him down, and a bickerfest erupts among the board members over who is responsible for its dysfunction. (As a veteran reporter who has attended my fair share of such meetings, I assure you they are all to blame.) Ray decides, improbably, that he’ll have his revenge by toppling the chairman in the next election. In the episode’s final montage, we see him trying out different fonts for his “Vote Ray Ploshansky” website. The plot line offers some funny possibilities, but Ray’s journey has started to drift from the rest of the crew, which makes sense, given that he’s older and at a different point in his life. Charlie, his onetime best friend, is long gone. He has broken up with Shoshanna, and his fling with Marnie is over. I was left at the end of this episode thinking that the show will either have to knit him back into the main plot or let him go, which would be a shame. His character lends a loopy gravitas to the cast, and I’d hate to lose that grounding. 