Alejandro G. Iñárritu won the Oscar for best director for “Birdman.”Melena RyzikThis was seen as a toss-up between Alejandro G. Iñárritu and Richard Linklater, in one of the tightest races of the night. But Linklater, who is based in Austin, Texas, is an Academy outsider — even though he’s an Academy member and a previous nominee.Jon CaramanicaMaybe Linklater was punished for that one scene in each year of “Boyhood” where he lingered on some emblematic artifact of technology. Also “Birdman” was better!Melena RyzikWhat, Academy members never played Gameboy?Jon Caramanica“Boyhood” was an easy sentimental choice, but the biggest virtue of the direction was patience. “Birdman” felt like a blend of superhero mythos and regular-dude misery.Melena RyzikIts problem, at least as far as the Academy was concerned, was that its direction was so seamless, almost invisible. “Birdman” was made by a man who is not afraid to mention tighty-whiteys in his acceptance speech. It’s not subtle cinema.In 1962, our pages proclaimed #Oscars to be “in trouble” and in need of “new vitality.” //t.co/lbsbfZOUdf pic.twitter.com/mmqNfHJOHK— NYT Archives (@NYTArchives) February 23, 2015When the Oscars ceremony does its In Memoriam segment, the membership of the committee that selects who is remembered reportedly keeps itself secret. After Joan Rivers was not remembered in this year’s broadcast, you might be able to imagine why.The outrage about Ms. Rivers not being mentioned came in many tweets, and in a variety of languages. Some in language that could not be shared here:Did I miss Joan Rivers? Or did the Oscars?— James Poniewozik (@poniewozik) February 23, 2015Ms. Rivers, as the chief of fashion police for the Oscars red carpet, played an important role in the pageantry that accompanies the Academy Awards. And for that reason, some Twitter users questioned how Ms. Rivers could be left out:Hey @Oscars Joan Rivers is the only reason 3/4ths of people watch your boring 3 hour award show, put her in the In Memoriam.— Nikki Koppers (@nikkikoppers) February 23, 2015Look, Joan Rivers was ok but she was no Marketing Executive. #RiffTraxOscars— Bill Corbett (@BillCorbett) February 23, 2015An explanation was offered for Ms. Rivers’s absence: She was not an Academy member:you guys Joan Rivers and Elaine Stritch are better than all these losers but you have to be an Academy member to be in the In Memoriam— Rachel Zarrell (@rachelzarrell) February 23, 2015But at least one Twitter user imagined that there would be consequences in the afterlife for those who made the call:Bad news, Academy. There's a red carpet on the way to the afterlife, and Joan Rivers will show you even less mercy than usual. #Oscars— Peter Hartlaub (@peterhartlaub) February 23, 2015The best supporting actress winner was asked backstage about her rousing speech urging wage equity for women. Noting that “the highest percentage of children living in poverty are in female-headed households,” she said that “even though we sort of feel like we have equal rights in America, right under the surface there are huge issues.”Ms. Arquette also said that she skipped a manicure this morning — and thus what she called “the dreaded Mani Cam” — to work on her charity.Jon CaramanicaPeople are mad they left Joan Rivers out of the In Memoriam list.Melena RyzikThe Academy doesn’t like people who rile on its members. Roger Ebert was also left out.Jon CaramanicaThat is a terrible set of criteria! That means we will never be memorialized in pencil-sketch!Melena RyzikYes, that’s the only thing that was standing between us and Academy honors.Joan Rivers on the set of Rabbit Test, a movie she directed. pic.twitter.com/G2QvTkhv0r— Dave Itzkoff (@ditzkoff) February 23, 2015Deciding who does and doesn't make the Oscars In Memoriam segment is not a pretty business //t.co/10fNuJgUku— New York Times Arts (@nytimesarts) February 23, 2015"I'm going to kill you, Brendadirk Cramplescrunch." pic.twitter.com/UQ4LUgzozD— Michael Deppisch (@deppisch) February 23, 2015