AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8:30 P.M. (ABC) THE 87TH ANNUAL ACADEMY AWARDS Neil Patrick Harris, that awards-show wonder, makes his debut as host of the ceremony, broadcast live from the Dolby Theater in Los Angeles. Oddsmakers are suggesting that Eddie Redmayne will take home the Oscar for his portrayal of the physicist Stephen Hawking in “The Theory of Everything” and that J. K. Simmons will win for best supporting actor as a music teacher from hell in “Whiplash.” In the best actress category, Julianne Moore is the front-runner for her portrait of a professor with early-onset Alzheimer’s in “Still Alice,” while Patricia Arquette, as a mother filmed across 12 years in “Boyhood,” is the favorite for supporting actress. And Alejandro G. Iñárritu’s “Birdman” may squeak by in the best picture category, which is filled out by Richard Linklater’s “Boyhood,” a close contender; Clint Eastwood’s “American Sniper”; Wes Anderson’s “The Grand Budapest Hotel”; Morten Tyldum’s “The Imitation Game”; Ava DuVernay’s “Selma”; James Marsh’s “The Theory of Everything” and Damien Chazelle’s “Whiplash.” Mr. Iñárritu, Mr. Linklater, Mr. Anderson, Mr. Tyldum and Bennett Miller, for “Foxcatcher,” are also nominated for best director. The countdown begins at 1:30 on E!; at 6 on Pop and WGN America; and at 6 on Channel 11. Red-carpet coverage begins at 7 on ABC. Postshow coverage follows at 11:30 on E!  7 P.M. (CBS) 60 MINUTES: REMEMBERING BOB SIMON On Feb. 11, Mr. Simon, the longtime CBS News correspondent who won 27 Emmy Awards and 4 Peabody Awards in his nearly 50-year career, was killed at the age of 73 in a car crash on the West Side Highway of Manhattan. Steve Kroft anchors this 90-minute tribute, which includes interviews with Mr. Simon’s “60 Minutes” colleagues and three of his most important stories from that newsmagazine. 9 P.M. (13, 49) DOWNTON ABBEY Lady Rose (Lily James) and Atticus Aldridge (Matt Barber) battle those who would derail their love; Mrs. Patmore (Lesley Nicol) receives a surprise; Anna (Joanne Froggatt) has a run-in with Scotland Yard; and Lord Grantham (Hugh Bonneville) has a revelation. 9 P.M. (HBO) GIRLS Hannah (Lena Dunham, left) has a breakthrough after some soul-searching. Shoshanna (Zosia Mamet) tanks in an interview yet again, only to find a silver lining afterward. Ray (Alex Karpovsky) takes his neighborhood’s noise issue into his own hands. And Adam (Adam Driver) gets a shock. In “Togetherness,” at 9:30, Brett (Mark Duplass) encounters a new-age practitioner (Mary Steenburgen) on a morning hike and decides to become more self-aware. And in “Looking,” at 10, Patrick (Jonathan Groff) decides to be more fun by hosting a Halloween party and dressing up as video-game characters.10:30 P.M. (TCM) ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO’S NEST (1975) Randle Patrick McMurphy (Jack Nicholson, left), a ne’er-do-well serving a six-month prison sentence for statutory rape, gets himself transferred to a state mental hospital for psychiatric observation, thinking life there will be easier. It’s the beginning of the end, especially after he becomes the self-proclaimed advocate for his fellow patients against the authoritarian Nurse Ratched (Louise Fletcher). Based on the 1962 novel by Ken Kesey, the film won five Oscars and became the first feature in 41 years to sweep the major categories: best picture, best director (Milos Forman), best actor (Mr. Nicholson), best actress (Ms. Fletcher) and best adapted screenplay (Lawrence Hauben and Bo Goldman). What’s Streaming NowAND THE OSCAR GOES TO ... (2014) Robert Epstein and Jeffrey Friedman venture behind the scenes at the Academy Awards with Ellen Burstyn, George Clooney, Whoopi Goldberg, Tom Hanks, Ben Kingsley, Liza Minnelli, Helen Mirren and Steven Spielberg. (netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement