AdvertisementSupported byBy Kimiko de Freytas-TamuraLONDON — For more than a century, Scotland Yard hid from the general public a large collection of grisly artifacts associated with criminals and crimes that captivated and horrified Britons for generations: Jack the Ripper, the Acid Bath Murders, assassination attempts on Queen Victoria, the Great Train Robbery, terrorist attacks by Irish rebels. The collection was so secret and macabre that the tabloids in the 19th century dubbed it the “Black Museum.’’ But now the collection is being exhibited for the first time.The Metropolitan Police Service’s “Crime Museum,” as the collection is officially called, opened to the public on Friday at the Museum of London, which has hosted big exhibitions like “Sherlock Holmes” in 2014 and had more than a million visitors last year. The exhibition, which runs through April 10, offers insights into the evolution of detective work like fingerprinting and forensics, much of it spearheaded by the force commonly known as Scotland Yard.The nature and variety of crime displayed in the exhibition is a reminder of London’s long history as a global political and economic center.“It’s a remarkable collection,” said Jackie Keily, a co-curator of the exhibition, adding that “it’s important to draw out the stories about London that all these objects tell.”The Crime Museum began in 1874 as a collection of items belonging to prisoners that were later used to instruct police officers. It houses around 2,000 objects, of which about 600 — mostly related to crimes committed from 1874 to 1975 — are exhibited at the show.Among the few newer items are a burned laptop used in the 2007 terrorist attack on Glasgow Airport and unexploded bombs intended to be used by the Irish Republican Army in the 1980s in London and more recently in front of the BBC’s Television Center in 2001. A replica of the 200-carat Millennium Star diamond, which was used to foil the attempted robbery of the real gem in 2000, is also on display.Ms. Keily said the museum did not show material from more recent crimes to take into account the sensitivity of victims’ relatives. But bottles of Champagne belonging to the gang involved in the 1963 Great Train Robbery are in the exhibition, even though some members are still alive.Artifacts include six ropes used to hang murderers in the 19th and 20th centuries, before Britain abolished capital punishment in 1964. “It’s a way to remind the public that hanging is a frightful thing and that in this country murderers were automatically punished with executions,” Ms. Keily said.The gloves and utensils used by the “Acid Bath Murderer” John Haigh in 1949 to dissolve the body of a wealthy widow in a drum of sulfuric acid also are on display. So are her false teeth, the only thing left of her. (He was convicted of killing six people.)There are some objects related to the notorious but unidentified serial killer known as Jack the Ripper, who is believed to have disemboweled as many as 18 women in the late 1880s. They include an “appeal for information” poster issued by the Met and court drawings of suspects. The murders, committed in Whitechapel in East London, continue to captivate the public and lure tourists to London. (A museum dedicated to the killer recently opened near the Museum of London, though it has come under fire by groups who maintain that it glorifies sexual violence.)Despite its often grisly subject matter, Ms. Keily said she wanted to avoid whetting the public’s appetite for sordid details, and aimed instead to shed light on the development of detective work.For example, she cited the Stratton brothers, whose masks are on display, as the first murderers to be convicted by fingerprint evidence in 1905.The 1924 murder of a pregnant woman by her lover brought forth the use of murder bags, known today as forensics kits. When Bernard Spilsbury, the Met’s forensic pathologist at the time, arrived at the crime scene, where the young woman’s body had been cut up into pieces, some of them boiled, “he was horrified to find detectives rummaging around with their bare hands,” Ms. Keily said. It was a turning point for the Met, which since then has required detectives to carry a standardized kit containing at least rubber gloves, scissors, tweezers and a tape measure. Such kits have become standard equipment in police forces worldwide.The Crime Museum is still used for lectures on forensic science, pathology, and law and investigative techniques because it still collects objects related to much more recent crimes, like the 2012 murder of 12-year-old Tia Sharp by her grandmother’s boyfriend, a case that horrified Britain, said Martin Hewitt, assistant commissioner at the Metropolitan Police, who also oversees the exhibition. But with an increasing number of economic crimes and crimes committed online such as fraud, data theft or incitement to terrorism, which are not covered by the exhibition, it is becoming more difficult to showcase police work, he said.Robert Shoemaker, a professor at Sheffield University of British history and an expert in criminal justice, underscored the significance of opening up the archives, saying that the British state “can be quite secretive.”“Presenting part of the picture is better than none at all,” he said. “But you would like to see a lot more and see the state give a broader and more in-depth picture of what crime and police work is really like.”Mr. Hewitt said the Met’s motivation behind authorizing and helping coordinate the exhibition was to make the police service more transparent to the public. “People have a right to understand how we operate,” he said.But when asked whether future exhibitions of the Met’s work could include work done by the Government Communications Headquarters, or GCHQ, Britain’s surveillance agency, which has come under fire for spying alongside the United States’ National Security Agency, Mr. Hewitt responded: “Well now, they might be cross with us if we did.”Advertisement