AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasFour experimental choreographers leap out of the pack this spring: Beth Gill, Rebecca Patek, Rebecca Serrell Cyrand Gillian Walsh. As part of the third Live Ideas Festival at New York Live Arts, Ms. Gill unveils “Portrait Study” on April 15, in which she creates a frame for an all-star cast of downtown dancers, including Neal Beasley, Emily Wexler and Stuart Singer. Here, Ms. Gill, whose precise choreography reveals painterly dimensions, delves into improvised structures. For this work, she has made short, personal pieces with each cast member; the dancers then incorporate that material into Ms. Gill’s larger, improvised movement score, which serves as a choreographic template. Over time, solos are meant to layer and collect; all the while, the musicians Ryan Seaton and Eliot Krimsky, and the lighting designer Thomas Dunn, will integrate their own improvised elements. With so many unknown variables, it’s a daring venture.Ms. Patek explores satire and violence in her works. For her latest, she takes on issues of “guilt, tainted blood and bad karma,” using the 1924 story of Leopold and Loeb, two lovers and students at the University of Chicago who kidnapped and murdered a 14-year-old boy for the thrill of it. The premiere is scheduled for the Chocolate Factory, May 20-23. There may or may not be actual blood; you can be sure that there will be trauma. At Jack, a cozy space in Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, where the walls are covered in crinkly aluminum foil — it’s like being in a silver cocoon — Ms. Cyr, a Bessie Award-winning dancer with a sumptuous approach to movement, strikes out on her own with “Assemblage.” Set for March 19-21, this evening-length work recasts Ms. Cyr’s dance investigations created over the past five years; in each, her task was to try something new. Now she collects those experiments into a single dance. And finally, Gillian Walsh unveils the latest in her stellar series of no-frill works that rely on a strict movement score meant to steer the dancers away from artificiality in their performance and toward form. Her new production, at the Kitchen, April 9-11, features Maggie Cloud, Nicole Daunic, Mickey Mahar and Ms. Walsh herself, with a score taken from Hasbro’s Twister Dance Rave. Through Ms. Walsh’s meticulous coding and scoring of movement, she continues to show, as she puts it, “dance as a nonfiction form.” While stark and contained, her pieces, with their repetition and detail, transform space over time. She exposes the inner workings of the group and always leaves room for air: In a perverse way, it’s a new avenue for expression.Advertisement