By BRIAN SEIBERTFEB. 20, 2015
Put together, the words “dance” and “spring” may conjure a mental image of barefoot people with flowers in their hair holding hands and skipping in circles. You can find such people in Mark Morris’s 2013 “Spring, Spring, Spring,” which will have its New York debut during his company’s season at the Brooklyn Academy of Music (April 22 through 26). What you won’t find is the ritual sacrifice from the original scenario for this work’s score, Stravinsky’s “The Rite of Spring.”This doesn’t mean that the ever-musical Mr. Morris is unfaithful to the music. Here he uses an invigorating jazz-trio adaptation, arranged and played live by the Bad Plus. And if this “Rite” is less violent than most, there is a time and place for peaceful rituals. Mr. Morris’s “Pacific” is another. Made for San Francisco Ballet in 1995 and set to a Lou Harrison score, it is a lovely evocation of climate, spiritual as much as meteorological. For the first time in New York, members of his troupe will ebb and flow in the work’s floor-length skirts.As for the season’s premiere, “Whelm,” the choice of music — “The Sunken Cathedral,” among other Debussy piano pieces — would seem to augur something similarly tranquil, and possibly wintry. (“Whelm” is an antique word for “submerge.) But if turbulence is what you want, the season also includes the psychologically fraught “Jenn and Spencer,” one of the very few duets this choreographer has made for a man and a woman. It’s a doozy. And if a lustier ceremony is what you desire, there’s the Harrison-Morris classic “Grand Duo,” a stomping celebration that used to be spoken of as Mr. Morris’s “Rite.”Still, the dominant mood of the season is lighter. In the exuberant “Crosswalk,” comic accidents are woven into a bright design. In “Words,” which made its debut at Fall for Dance in October, simple steps are arranged into fresh and pleasing patterns. Innocent joy: Few modern companies or choreographers convey it better than Mr. Morris and his appealing group, and especially in the chill of February, that’s something to look forward to.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page AR16 of the New York edition with the headline: Of Seasonal Rituals Lusty and Solemn.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.