By JAMES R. OESTREICHFEB. 20, 2015
Back in the day, the term “early music” meant pretty much what it said. In the United States, Noah Greenberg and the New York Pro Musica Antiqua started their systematic explorations of medieval and Renaissance repertory in 1952, and the Baroque boom of the ’60s installed a capstone of sorts, the music of Bach.The term has ever since become looser, now standing not so much for a specific body of music as for an aesthetic of performance: an attempt (revelatory? chimerical?) to revive the instruments and practices of a given era. Increasingly, those principles are being applied to later music as well: that of Mozart and Beethoven, Schubert and Schumann, even Brahms and Bruckner.In April, Carnegie Hall presents Before Bach, a festival revisiting really early music in all its varieties. Well, most of them anyway, there being no medieval music to speak of. The series includes many of the world’s finest performers of antiquarian bent, several of them in paired concerts. L’Arpeggiata, a superb Baroque ensemble directed by the lutenist Christina Pluhar, opens Before Bach with programs of Cavalli on April 7 and Purcell the next night in Zankel Hall.The viola da gamba virtuoso Jordi Savall hosts a program of Baroque music, “The Spirit of the Viol,” in Weill Recital Hall (April 13), and leads Le Concert des Nations in works by Lully, Marais, Rameau and others at Zankel Hall (April 16). The Tallis Scholars offer two programs of Renaissance choral music, including Tallis’s great 40-part motet, “Spem in Alium,” at the Church of St. Ignatius Loyola and at Weill Recital Hall (April 17 and 18). And for the grand final concerts — John Eliot Gardiner conducting the English Baroque Soloists and Monteverdi Choir in Monteverdi’s 1610 Vespers and a concert version of the opera “Orfeo” (April 30 and May 1) — the festival moves into Carnegie’s main hall, Stern Auditorium. Richard Egarr conducts Les Violons du Roy in the other Stern concert, performing excerpts from Purcell’s operas “King Arthur,” “The Fairy Queen” and “Dido and Aeneas” (April 12).Individual programs in Weill feature the viol consort Fretwork in works by Purcell, Gibbons, Locke and others (April 20); the harpsichordist Kristian Bezuidenhout in wildly varied repertory (April 23); and Robert Hollingworth directing the vocal ensemble I Fagiolini in music of Monteverdi, Senfl, Janequin and others (April 25). Alas, the overall slant is heavily British, the only representation of a suddenly resurgent New York early-music scene being Alexander Blachly’s program of Tudor choral works with Pomerium (April 9), also in Weill.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page AR22 of the New York edition with the headline: Early Music, in the Old Sense of the Term.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.