By ANTHONY TOMMASINIFEB. 20, 2015
New productions are typically the big news of a Metropolitan Opera season. But this spring I’m especially looking forward to a revival: Jonathan Miller’s production of Stravinsky’s “The Rake’s Progress,” introduced in 1997 and last seen at the house in 2003.The main reason is that I love this work and consider it one of the major operas of the 20th century. James Levine, who agrees with me, is conducting all three (only three, alas) performances, which is why I’m anticipating its return.It’s easy to miss the significance of Stravinsky’s achievement in this, his only full-length opera, which had its premiere in Venice in 1951. On the surface, it may seem just a comedic tale of Tom Rakewell, an ambitious, charming but weak-willed young man who is led astray rather easily by the devil in the person of Nick Shadow. Tom betrays his beloved Anne Trulove, goes to ruin in London and only too late comes to understand his shallowness.But beneath the neo-Classical surface of this score is some of Stravinsky’s most ingenious and inimitable music. Since Mr. Miller’s endearingly updated, colorful production had its premiere, there have been 15 total performances of the opera at the Met, and Mr. Levine has conducted all but two.The cast is enticing. The youthful tenor Paul Appleby should be an ideal Tom. Layla Claire, a beguiling, fast-rising lyric soprano, sings Anne. The baritone Gerald Finley, a compelling vocal artist and actor, is the devilish Nick. And the indomitable Stephanie Blythe portrays Baba the Turk.(Metropolitan Opera House, May 1 and 4, 7:30 p.m.; May 9, 1 p.m., metopera.org)In what also could also be a highlight of the spring months, the formidable violinist Anne-Sophie Mutter completes her tenure as a Perspectives artist at Carnegie Hall in a concert with the New World Symphony. This is the ensemble of the training academy for musicians on the thresholds of careers, founded and run by the conductor Michael Tilson Thomas and based in Miami Beach. Ms. Mutter will be the soloist in Berg’s great Violin Concerto and also “En réve,” a concerto written for her by the Swiss composer Norbert Moret (1921-98). Mr. Thomas will also conduct this inspiring orchestra in Schubert’s Incidental Music from “Rosamunde” and Debussy’s “La Mer. I can’t wait.(April 28, 8 p.m., carnegiehall.org.)A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page AR22 of the New York edition with the headline: Looking Beneath the Surface.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.