By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMFEB. 20, 2015
Schubert’s “Winterreise” (“Winter Journey”), an hourlong song cycle about heartbreak, loneliness and alienation published in 1828, is a masterpiece of austere beauty. In recent years, the work has been subjected to a flurry of stage adaptations, including one by the British director Katie Mitchell that weaves in poems by Beckett, and one, shown at the White Light Festival last November, with animated drawings by the South African artist William Kentridge. Theater and opera companies as far afield as Chicago, Anchorage and Melbourne have put on productions featuring actors, video art, sound design and dancers.Yet the “Winterreise” performance that generates the greatest excitement among dedicated lieder fans this season is a bare-stage recital, devoid of technological wizardry, which the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center presents at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday. Headlined by the German baritone Christian Gerhaher together with his longtime pianist and chamber music partner, Gerold Huber, it offers New Yorkers a precious glimpse of one of the greatest proponents of the German lied tradition since Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau. In Europe, where he is regular fixture on the concert and opera stages, critics have praised him lavishly. “Lieder singing doesn’t come much better than this,” wrote The Guardian’s Martin Kettle after one recital. The Telegraph’s Rupert Christiansen calls Mr. Gerhaher one of his “musical gods.”Mr. Gerhaher’s approach to “Winterreise” makes no attempt at dramatization. In fact, there is a quality of aristocratic restraint to any of his performances that conceals all trace of effort and ego, allowing the music to shine through. Even the beauty of his smooth baritone, as supple as buttery leather, becomes subordinated to the clarity of a given text and its inherent tone color. And yet the emotional effect on the audience is unmistakable. Several audience members dabbed away tears at a recital of Schumann songs in the Park Avenue Armory’s Board of Officers Room in 2013, part of a chamber music series to which Mr. Gerhaher and Mr. Huber will return in November.It was also at the Armory that I caught up with the two musicians last October. Mr. Gerhaher was in rehearsals for the Berlin Philharmonic’s semi-staged performance of Bach’s “St. Matthew Passion” there, in which he sang the words of Christ. Mr. Huber had just accompanied a young German soprano, Anna Lucia Richter, in recital.AdvertisementSpeaking in German heavily inflected with the Italianate vowels of his native Bavaria, Mr. Gerhaher presents multiple, sometimes contradictory personality traits: shy but frank with his opinions, soft-spoken but prickly, self-doubting but possessed of a brilliant intellect, he is as quick to turn that intellect on the subject of the lyric, the epic and the dramatic in literature as on his own superstitions.AdvertisementAfter the interview, he was planning to walk over to Bloomingdale’s in search of a replacement for his lucky trench coat, a talisman he has relied on for many years on concert days and which was now in tatters, threatening, he speculated, “quite possibly the end of my career.” But when pressed in a follow-up phone interview, he said he had not found anything suitable and was forced, for the time being, to “continue toting around the same old rag.”Rituals are especially important to Mr. Gerhaher, who lives in Munich with his wife and three children, when he is on tour. Having to perform a work repeatedly is a particular source of stress, he said, not because it leads to boredom but because it creates fears that the necessary inspiration won’t be readily available on a given night.  “A singer’s body and mind change over time, and the room is always different,” he said. “On tour, exhaustion sets in along with the tendency — the compulsion — to compare yourself to yourself.”A steady source of comfort is Mr. Huber, who has performed with Mr. Gerhaher for over a quarter-century. The two met growing up in the Gothic town of Straubing, in southern Germany. They played in the same school orchestra — Mr. Gerhaher played viola, Mr. Huber double bass — then sang in the same chamber choir. They were teenagers when they began to perform art songs together, organizing gigs at local inns. They moved to Munich to study, Mr. Huber initially focused on a career as a concert pianist, Mr. Gerhaher taking up medical studies.By the time Mr. Gerhaher was a fully qualified doctor, the two had begun to make a name for themselves with their lieder interpretations. Mr. Fischer-Dieskau took an interest in Mr. Gerhaher but was frustrated when he had to cancel lessons to take medical exams. In any case, Mr. Gerhaher said, “I learned little from him in person that I had not already learned from his recordings.”Mr. Gerhaher and Mr. Huber first performed “Winterreise” in 1998 when Mr. Gerhaher was coming to the end of his medical studies and was newly in love with the woman who would become his wife. “I was as filled with positive feelings as never before, and I was not at all tempted to link the song cycle with my own biography,” Mr. Gerhaher said. “That was a good thing.”“Winterreise,” Mr. Gerhaher says, is not only the most popular of Schubert’s song cycles but also the most misunderstood. For starters, it doesn’t depict any journey, notwithstanding its title. There’s no true narrative to it, either, as the order of the individual songs is interchangeable and is, in fact, argued over by scholars. Even so, Mr. Gerhaher sees a tendency by many performers to turn “Winterreise” into a story that is fixated on death as the ultimate destination. Too many singers, he said, therefore indulge in histrionics on stage, “sobbing and crying their way to the end.”Mr. Huber shares those sentiments. In a separate interview, he said those performers “die a thousand deaths on stage in order to appeal to the voyeur inside the listener.” The audience, he said, “should not be made to feel sorry for the singer onstage.”AdvertisementMr. Gerhaher distinguishes between opera — an extension of the dramatic arm of literature — with its overt artificiality and often escapist function, and oratorio and art song, which belong to the epic and lyric genre. Without the proscenium and orchestra pit to divide them, he said, performer and audience are joined in the common task of engaging with, and trying to understand, the work of art. A pianist and singer function not only as the medium through which that work is expressed but also as listeners, he said. “And ideally they are not bidden to bring their own inner lives onto the stage, but to take part in the work, to understand it and take home something from it just as the audience does.”That understanding is bound to be incomplete and subjective. Opera “wants to be understood,” Mr. Gerhaher said, no matter how cleverly it is deconstructed by modern directors. A poem, by contrast, “is something open.”Reading poetry — out loud, repeatedly, until the words reveal their full colors — is the basis of Mr. Gerhaher’s art. Among his favorite authors are Goethe and Shakespeare, but also German Romantic poets like Brentano and Eichendorff and the French Symbolists. His love for Schubert and Schumann is also fed by his admiration for their taste in poetry. But he is merciless in his judgment of some of the texts set by Brahms and Strauss, whose settings of syrupy poems by Felix Dahn in “Mädchenblumen” he singled out for special derision.“I still feel too young to sing bad texts,” he said dryly. “But who knows, maybe eventually I will reach the necessary maturity to appreciate even those.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is not surprising, then, that Mr. Gerhaher’s favorite role in opera is the poet-knight Wolfram von Eschenbach in Wagner’s “Tannhäuser,” a role that won him a 2011 Laurence Olivier Award. Earlier this season, he sang it at the Vienna State Opera; in April, he reprises it at the State Opera in Berlin. In July, he will repeat his acclaimed performance of the title role in Monteverdi’s “Orfeo” at the State Opera in Munich in a 1970s flower-child production that has Mr. Gerhaher carousing atop a Volkswagen camper van.When it comes to directorial intervention, Mr. Gerhaher is game, as long as the concept persuades him. He speaks warmly of Peter Sellars, the director of the “St. Matthew Passion.” But on the whole he considers the current fashion for draping operas in contemporary garb to bring them closer to the public unnecessary. “Man is a historical creature,” he said. “We’re interested in the past.”In fact, a sharp dose of incomprehensibility can be healthy, according to Mr. Gerhaher, who sees the decorative and the entertaining as “the greatest enemies of art.” In the visual arts, he said, he is grateful for works like Joseph Beuys’s notorious installations, “which are plain ugly and perhaps smelly and dusty and generally unappealing.” As musical equivalents, he cites composers like Pierre Boulez and Heinz Holliger. “I understand that many listeners recoil from these compositions,” he said, “but they are essential for the honesty of the art form.”Mr. Gerhaher said that when he performs contemporary music, he doesn’t always understand it any more than the audience. But he rejects the complacency of that segment of the audience “that thinks it understands the canon of music from Bach to Bruckner and Strauss thoroughly.” He counts himself among a different segment of listeners — “perhaps less educated” — who continue to be drawn to the genius of Mozart precisely because it remains incomprehensible. In that case, he added, “the step from Mozart to Ligeti and Boulez is actually quite small.”A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page AR20 of the New York edition with the headline: Art Songs Without All the Frills.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.