By JON PARELESFEB. 20, 2015
Festival season starts to rev up in spring where climate permits, and then it roars along all summer, with far too many choices. At its best, a music festival is more than just a multitude of bands booked for a marathon weekend. It’s inevitably a test of outreach for artists who are getting a chance to perform for casual listeners as well as committed fans. It can also be a site-specific environmental experience, a glimpse of a pop-up community and something like a live playlist from a trustworthy D.J.As the festival circuit continues to expand, it’s stratifying and polarizing. At one extreme are huge, grab-bag, wildly assorted festivals that try to offer something for nearly everyone. At the other are festivals that are refining the ways they specialize.The overwhelming, multistage major festivals now seem to grab every big-name touring band in the vicinity, for a smorgasbord effect: Festivals like the sold-out Coachella (April 10-12 and April 17-19 in Indio, Calif., repeating the same lineup each weekend); Sasquatch (May 22-25 in George, Wash.); Governors Ball (June 5-7 on Randalls Island in New York City); Bonnaroo (June 11-14 in Manchester, Tenn.); Firefly (June 18-21 in Dover, Del.); and Lollapalooza (July 31-Aug. 2 in Chicago). Their headliners overlap; Drake, Kendrick Lamar, Florence and the Machine, Lana Del Rey, Robert Plant, My Morning Jacket, St. Vincent, Modest Mouse and Tame Impala are all making the rounds. There’s more variation among the dozens of supporting acts at each festival — leaning toward roots at Bonnaroo, electronics at Coachella, indie-rock at Sasquatch — but even there the lineups tend to blur.One way to focus a festival is to stick to a style or kindred styles: full immersion with variation in the details, something like a wine tasting. It’s an approach as old as institutions like the Newport Folk Festival (July 24-26 in Newport, R.I.), which has made itself a showcase for singer-songwriters from multiple generations; the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival (April 24-May 3), which enlists a handful of nationally known out-of-town headliners to draw people to the ultimate celebration of an American city’s musical cultures (and food); and the string-band assembly of the Grey Fox Bluegrass Festival (July 16-19, Oak Hill, N.Y.). And it’s as recent as the proliferation of electronic dance music festivals that construct high-tech hippie environments in rural getaways, like Mysteryland (May 22-25, Bethel, N.Y.) and Electric Forest (June 25-28, Rothbury, Mich.).Genre die-hards also assemble at events like Levitation (May 8-10, Austin, Tex.), a new name for the drone-, reverb-, fuzztone- and echo-loving Austin Psych Fest, which this year has mustered a 50th anniversary reunion of Texas’ paramount psychedelic band, the 13th Floor Elevators. Another, more momentous 50th psychedelic anniversary will be marked with a one-band festival July 3-5 in Chicago: “Fare Thee Well,” a three-night stand billed as the final reunion of the surviving members of the Grateful Dead joined by Bruce Hornsby on piano (a frequent Dead collaborator) and Trey Anastasio, of Phish, on guitar.A promising development in festival-making, somewhere between the sprawl and the niche, is the growing number often described as “curated” — perhaps, to push the food analogy, a chef’s tasting menu. The curators are often musicians, who tend to delve far beyond their own chosen genres. Musicians listen carefully and widely, and their choices often reveal unexpected foundations and extrapolations of their own aesthetics: their idols, their chosen peers, their secret pleasures and improbable obsessions. The Big Ears Festival (March 27-29, Knoxville, Tenn.) has built a reputation mapping connections between contemporary (particularly Minimalist) classical music and nominally pop or rock music that’s actually not so distant in its artistic methods. At this year’s Big Ears, the Kronos Quartet — rock on! — is the artist in residence, appearing in multiple contexts. Another festival bridging classical music and art-rock is MusicNow (March 11-15, Cincinnati), overseen by Bryce Dessner of the National. One concert pairs the National with the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, in a program that includes songs by the National alongside music from Edgard Varèse and John Adams.Wilco, the Chicago band led by Jeff Tweedy, has been assembling its Solid Sound Festival (June 26-28, North Adams, Mass.) on and off since 2010; true to Wilco’s own polymorphous music, its lineups have convened roots-rockers, noise experimenters, jam bands, Brazilian tropicalia and the occasional comedian. Justin Vernon, the songwriter behind Bon Iver and a sometime collaborator with Kanye West, is behind Eaux Claires, a new festival in his hometown, Eau Claire, Wisc., July 17-18; he and Aaron Dessner, a guitarist in the National, chose a lineup encompassing not only their own bands and other indie-rock groups but also chamber music, Japanese noise-rock, country, black metal, soul revivalism and electropop. With luck, it will do what festivals should: give listeners something new to love.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page AR23 of the New York edition with the headline: Smorgasbords for Every Ear.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.