
Playlist By                     
 BEN RATLIFF
 
FEB. 20, 2015
Ernestine AndersonLIVE AT THE PENTHOUSEHere is something great, from when jazz and popular music were more or less the same thing, and you haven’t heard it. Ernestine Anderson sang with Johnny Otis in the late 1940s, with Lionel Hampton a little later, and by the early ’60s was competing for a commercially viable spot in American music: a sort of blues-informed jazz/pop/cabaret singer, braiding the threads of Sarah Vaughan, Dinah Washington and Lena Horne, an answer to several needs at once. She occupied that spot alongside Nancy Wilson and Gloria Lynne, among others, and played at their level, sometimes better. But by 1964, Motown and rock had erased the need for that kind of singer almost entirely. Ms. Anderson stopped singing for a while, not to return till the late ’70s. (She’s 86 now and was still working regularly up until about five years ago.)But her early ’60s records can seem crowded or over-arranged. “Live at the Penthouse” (Highnote) is the antidote: a clear recording of Ms. Anderson in 1962 at a club in Seattle, her hometown, just before her long hiatus, backed by an unobtrusive local trio. She’s singing jazz standards, or songs that by then had entered that repertory through records by, say, Ella Fitzgerald and Chet Baker: “I Fall in Love Too Easily,” “Time After Time,” “On Green Dolphin Street,” “This Can’t Be Love.” Nearly every line, strong, rhythmically intricate, and never coy, lands with impact. At slow tempos, it can seem like advanced science; frequently she dips down from her clear high register to use the low end with soul-singer daring, forecasting Donny Hathaway. It’s hard to predict how each phrase will come out, even after you get to know the record.Sabisha Friedberg With Peter EdwardsTHE HANT VARIANCEThe composer Sabisha Friedberg writes acoustic or electronic pieces specifically for places of performance and recording, transmitting an awareness of the physical space where the music is happening, and a fascination with the low frequencies. “The Hant Variance” is the second release on Distributed Objects, the new publishing and recording imprint created at Brooklyn’s performance space Issue Project Room, where Ms. Friedberg was artist in residence in 2013.It’s a four-movement piece she wrote and realized with Peter Edwards. Both musicians work with oscillators, analog synthesizers, field recordings and some kind of subwoofer setup that helps the sound shift directions. It’s a slow, quiet listen, with long crescendos and shifting ambient backdrops — sounds suggesting, say, a choppy wind as heard behind a thin wall, or a continuous cello note played in an airplane hangar.AdvertisementColleen GreenI WANT TO GROW UPFor the last five years, Colleen Green has been a one-woman operation: All that’s needed is her electric guitar, a microphone and a cheap rhythm machine. Raised in Massachusetts and based in Los Angeles, she writes bright, deadpan songs with simple, strummy chord changes and darting voice melodies — eighth-note pop-punk with an inner life. Her work is sunny verging on dark, and she can be a little hard to read. (She’s swiped two of the Descendents’ album titles and made them her own by changing one word, which may mean she loves the Descendents, or not.)Around her songs, there is a basic air of competence, toughness, self-reliance — she’s organized her sound, has identified her neuroses and doesn’t need your help. Her previous records were cruddy, funny placeholders, but her new album, “I Want to Grow Up” (Hardly Art), shows where it’s all been heading: a full band, a mix that displays her voice’s girl-group precision, the lyrics stepped up by a whole order of accomplishment. Her best songs, like “Pay Attention” or “TV” (“TV is my friend, made me who I am/and if you’re not a fan then I can’t relate”), play with a stoner-vacuous persona. But by the second verse, you always get the point: This is moody wit that took a weird route, dispatches from a life lived inside the head.AdvertisementVexxVEXX, GIVE AND TAKE 7”From Olympia, Wash., Vexx is a vivid new punk band that sounds as if it has been around for years. Its records — the self-titled first album from last year, just reissued on M’Lady’s Records, and a great four-song seven-inch EP soon to be released by Katorga — are thick with rehearsed, hotshot guitar solos and chops that you normally hear in punk bands during times of relative commercial acceptance for the music: the late ’70s, the mid-90s. So this is a band with multiple options, perhaps.But these records aren’t hedging their bets: They’re chewing themselves up from the inside, adrenalized by the singer Maryjane Dunphe, passionate and critical, pained and yearning, a detonation in process. “I want the world to know about you,” Mish Way, singer of White Lung, wrote in a kind of recent open-letter to the band for the website the Talkhouse. Hear these records, or watch a YouTube set of the band playing an all-ages show at Northern, in its hometown, last August, and you might feel the same way.A version of this review appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page AR29 of the New York edition with the headline: What You Haven’t Heard Can Still Sound Familiar.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »