By ALASTAIR MACAULAYFEB. 20, 2015
In July 1999, three months after his 80th birthday, the choreographer Merce Cunningham received this city’s highest honor for a contribution to its intellectual and cultural life, the Handel Medallion. At the presentation, in front of the curtains of what was then the New York State Theater (now the David H. Koch), Mr. Cunningham said how, 60 years before, he had first stepped onto a New York sidewalk and “knew this was home.”From 2012 to 2014, however, this city’s stages saw far too few of his dances. He died in 2009, a few months after choreographing his last magnum opus (which had its premiere at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on his 90th birthday); by his decree, his company closed in 2011. Since then, there have been many Cunningham stagings, but mostly elsewhere.The situation will improve somewhat with four important Cunningham revivals in New York, from February to April. For decades, Mr. Cunningham helped make this the world’s epicenter of choreographic radicalism and a home for superb dance training. Many of his pieces took the art form into zones that nobody since has even approached. They should be forgotten only when some yet more daring dance-maker goes farther. (If only! Or, as the British say, “the chance would be a fine thing.”)Nothing about these 2015 revivals can be predicted. Will the master’s choreography succeed with dancers he did not train? What will these once startling dances look like today? Will audiences no longer regularly used to Cunningham’s constant challenges adjust to the demands placed by his work? Following his work, for those who did so, was the most extraordinary and mind-expanding adventure in dance theater. It was seldom comfortable; its complexities could take many years to absorb. But it cleansed the palate more thrillingly than any other dance genre.AdvertisementThe first to arrive was the greatest rarity: “Cross Currents” (1964), a trio Mr. Cunningham created for himself and his two most celebrated female dancers, Carolyn Brown and Viola Farber. This opened for a four-day run on Wednesday, staged by New York Theater Ballet at New York Live Arts. For many, Mr. Cunningham was the most extraordinary dancer they ever saw; Ms. Brown and Ms. Farber were the two women with whom he most developed the female range of his dance style and with whom he made many of his phenomenal duets. For Theater Ballet, this is a sequel to the recent production of Mr. Cunningham’s “Septet” (1953), in which he, Ms. Brown and Ms. Farber had created three of the six original roles.AdvertisementIn the last years of Mr. Cunningham’s career (1992-2009), his assistant was the dancer Robert Swinston, who later led the posthumous Cunningham troupe on its memorable world tour, which culminated in farewell performances in New York in December 2011. Now living in France, Mr. Swinston brings to the Joyce Theater a Cunningham Event with the Compagnie CNDC/Angers that he directs, March 10-15.A Cunningham Event is a special anthology of dance items from the Cunningham repertory; the program, usually not revealed beforehand, is likely to include solos, duets and larger ensembles culled from a wide chronological span. A Cunningham Event was (and still can be) pure dance at its purest. It can focus your eye as never before on the facts of movement and yet also confront you with dance’s potential for drama, imagination, atmosphere, poetry and ambiguity.The biggest hit of Cunningham’s last 20 years was “Biped” (1999), the most dazzling creation of his final “computer” period, in which he initially devised dances on a dance-friendly computer. Many factors — music (Gavin Bryars), designs featuring computer-generated dance-based imagery (Paul Kaiser and Shelley Eshkar), lighting (Aaron Copp), and costumes (Suzanne Gallo) — all came together to make this a vision of 21st-century dance before the 21st century had even begun.Its imagery seemed to many to suggest death and transcendence; whereas many Cunningham dances feature stillness, this is a perpetuum mobile in which dancers descend to the stage (each differently) only in the closing phrases, then rise again. During the week of March 25, “Biped” will be performed by Juilliard Dance,  the students of the Juilliard School: It’s probably the most audacious dance staging ever undertaken by this admirable institution.Finally, April 7-12 brings to the Joyce Theater a revival of Mr. Cunningham’s unforgettable “RainForest” (1968). Famously, the décor is of silver Mylar pillows, designed by Andy Warhol, which travel as the performers touch them; the costumes are by Jasper Johns. Warhol had wanted the dancers naked; instead, Mr. Johns chose all-over tights that suggested lightly tanned flesh and into which he ripped slits with a razor blade.This staging will be undertaken by the Stephen Petronio Company, several of whose dancers are steeped in Cunningham technique and style. “RainForest” is a drama that touches on wildlife and anthropology; each of its six dancers has a vividly individual character, and the connections between them are charged with various elements of the feral.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page AR16 of the New York edition with the headline: Forced Focus on the Facts of Movement.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.