By AMY CHOZICKFEB. 20, 2015
Before Kevin Spacey got into character as Francis Underwood, the fictional congressman who by the third season of “House of Cards” has murdered and manipulated his way into the Oval Office, he liked to portray a real-life president: Bill Clinton.“We, in fact, have spent so much time together that sometimes I even become him,” Mr. Spacey said last fall at an event in Little Rock, Ark., to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the William J. Clinton Presidential Center.“I’m from a place called Hope,” Mr. Spacey said as he feigned Mr. Clinton’s Arkansas accent, which sounded vaguely like Underwood, who is from South Carolina.“Let me tell you one thing, I love that ‘House of Cards’ — it’s so good,” Mr. Spacey continued in his Clinton voice. “Ninety-nine percent of what they do on that show is real, and the 1 percent they got wrong is that you could never get an education bill passed that fast.”Mr. Clinton joined Mr. Spacey onstage, and a bromance between the two men ensued. Mr. Clinton grinned widely, relishing the impersonation. He put his arm around Mr. Spacey.AdvertisementIt was only the latest public display of affection between an actor, who is currently best known for portraying one of the most morally bankrupt presidents ever to come out of Hollywood, and a former president, who ever since he played the saxophone on “The Arsenio Hall Show” in 1992, has had a special bond with the small screen.AdvertisementMr. Spacey, a Democratic donor, first met Mr. Clinton in the White House during his first term. In two industries — politics and entertainment — known for fleeting friendships of convenience, the men seemed to genuinely bond. They stayed in touch and grew closer in Mr. Clinton’s post-presidency, talking a couple times a month and collaborating often on philanthropic work. It’s a relationship that is well known to those close to Mr. Clinton and that has become evident since I began covering him and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton. If you look closely at the décor in Underwood’s office on “House of Cards,” you’ll see a photo of Mr. Spacey and Mr. Clinton at dinner together plugging away on their BlackBerrys. The photo is likely to move to the White House with President Underwood in Season 3, which will begin streaming on Netflix on Feb. 27.Of all the TV shows for Mr. Clinton to be associated with as Mrs. Clinton prepares for a 2016 presidential campaign, the coldly cynical depiction of Washington in “House of Cards” might not be the best for political optics.Better to remind voters of the “The West Wing,” Aaron Sorkin’s optimistic ode to the Clinton years with President Josiah Bartlet as an unwavering liberal champion with none of the foibles of the real-life Mr. Clinton. Or, perhaps the current “Madam Secretary,” the glossy CBS drama with Téa Leoni as a glamorous and effective C.I.A. agent-turned secretary of state.After all, the second season of “House of Cards” included Underwood pushing a young journalist in front of a train and having a threesome with his wife, Claire, played by Robin Wright, and his eager-to-please secret service agent Edward Meechum.Not exactly the stuff of a 2016 campaign ad. (Representatives for Mr. Spacey, Mr. Clinton and Netflix declined to comment for this article.)Still, the Clintons have not been shy about their ties to “House of Cards.” Last summer, Mrs. Clinton told People magazine she and Mr. Clinton “totally binge-watched” the first season. After a crushing travel schedule as secretary of state, Mrs. Clinton said part of the appeal was “Oh my gosh, I can’t believe we can just sit here and do this.”The connection extends beyond Mr. Spacey and Mr. Clinton’s friendship. Before he became a TV writer and playwright, the “House of Cards” creator Beau Willimon worked as an intern on Mrs. Clinton’s 2000 Senate campaign.AdvertisementJay Carson, a political consultant on “House of Cards” and a college friend of Mr. Willimon, worked as a press secretary to Mr. Clinton and served as Mrs. Clinton’s traveling press aide during her 2008 presidential campaign.In August, Mr. Spacey, in character as Underwood, made a spoof video posted online in honor of Mr. Clinton’s 68th birthday. Underwood pretends to be Mr. Clinton and prank-calls Mrs. Clinton. He suggests that their daughter, Chelsea, then pregnant with her first child, name the baby “Frank” and tries to goad Mrs. Clinton into telling him what she will buy her husband for his birthday.“This is a very personal decision I will make when I’m ready,” Mrs. Clinton said, a play on the response she gives when asked whether she will run for president. She suggests another name for Chelsea’s baby: Kevin.Mr. Spacey’s relatively public friendship with Mr. Clinton began around the time of his 1996 re-election campaign. Today, Democrats must be careful not to appear too cozy with liberal Hollywood, lest they seem out of touch with a struggling Main Street. But during the Clinton years, Tinseltown swooned over the first couple, who represented a Democratic break after 12 years of Republican leadership. David Geffen and Barbra Streisand were invited to spend nights in the Lincoln Bedroom, and Mr. Spacey became a fixture on the inauguration and fund-raising circuit.After he left office, Mr. Clinton brought Mr. Spacey into his global philanthropic work through the Clinton Foundation. The two men helped struggling Lower Manhattan businesses in the aftermath of Sept. 11. They went on a five-day swing through Africa together to promote efforts to fight AIDS and joined Nelson Mandela onstage to address a crowd of teenagers about H.I.V. awareness. The British news media spotted them having dinner at a McDonald’s in London, sharing chicken nuggets as only old friends would.Mr. Spacey and Mr. Clinton, both known as expert raconteurs, appear to enjoy candid conversations and debates about politics and books they’ve read.Mr. Clinton seems to have less in common with Mr. Spacey’s on-screen persona. In many ways, the former president, with his preternatural sociability and desire to win over everyone (sometimes to a fault) is the opposite of Underwood, an antihero who has no interest in making friends and hardly ever deigns to meet the voting masses.Mr. Willimon has said Frank and Claire’s marriage, a complex portrayal of intellectual equals who enable each other in the name of ambition, could just as easily resemble Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt’s partnership. “You can compare it to lots of real-life unions, and you might find parallels, but it’s not based on any one marriage,” he said during a panel discussion in Washington last year.For all its villainy, “House of Cards” could also be instructive. At a time of partisan gridlock in Washington, Frank and Claire do manage to get a sweeping education bill passed, impeach a sitting president and start a fiery national debate about military sexual assault, all while sharing the occasional cigarette together in the windowsill of their townhouse.Advertisement“I wish things were that ruthlessly efficient,” President Obama told a group of tech executives including Reed Hastings, the chief executive of Netflix, who gathered at the White House last year. “I was looking at Kevin Spacey. I was saying this guy is getting a lot of stuff done.”A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page AR28 of the New York edition with the headline: Presidents, Real and Imagined, Bond.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.