AdvertisementSupported byBy Eve M. KahnMINNEAPOLIS — Géza von Habsburg, an art historian in suburban New York, would have inherited part of an Austrian empire if only his ancestors had not made some terrible life choices. He did inherit the title of archduke and an interest in the history of luxury goods — the kind his family commissioned for centuries. Recently, he watched as about 100 of his family’s former heirlooms were installed at the Minneapolis Institute of Arts here for a new exhibition, “The Habsburgs: Rarely Seen Masterpieces from Europe’s Greatest Dynasty,” that runs through May. It is the most comprehensive display yet staged for the collections from these Holy Roman Emperors, who owned palaces from Ukraine to Mexico. Gowns, rifles, suits of armor, sorbet cups, gilded knickknacks and artworks by luminaries like Rubens, Titian, Velazquez, Tintoretto and Holbein have come from the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna. Dr. von Habsburg’s great-great-grandfather Emperor Franz Joseph founded the institution in the 1890s, in a vast neoclassical compound. While walking around the preview, Dr. von Habsburg reflected on how the treasures fit into the context of global politics, war, looting, romance, religion — and family dysfunction.“My grandfather never talked to me,” he said, when asked what his imperious grandfather Archduke Joseph August would have thought about the puzzling markings on a gold chalice on view. It was made before 1438 and stamped AEIOU. Eike D. Schmidt, a lead curator of decorative arts and sculpture at the Minneapolis museum, said some witty observers had suggested that the letters were teasing references to the consonant-heavy languages spoken at the Slavic edges of the empire.“So many of the countries the Habsburgs were reigning over had very few vowels,” he said.The art collections have been Austrian government property since World War I, when the empire collapsed and the dynasty was banished. Few of the objects have come to America, until now.The exhibition heads next to the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, and then the High Museum of Art in Atlanta. Sabine Haag, general director of the Kunsthistorisches, said she was eager to lend to American institutions, partly because after World War II, United States soldiers made sure that the Kunsthistorisches received back what Nazis had stolen. “This tour is a late thank you gesture to the Americans, who helped us rescue everything,” she said.At the preview, Dr. von Habsburg and Dr. Schmidt made their way through teams of exhibition designers, art handlers and chaperones from Vienna. The objects being installed were as unwieldy as a carriage for ceremonial processions, meant to be pulled by six horses wearing gold plumes on their foreheads. Nearby, textile specialists were adjusting the folds on a red velvet cape embroidered in gold, part of an 18th-century costume known as Regalia of a Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece. “We actually have the train bearers,” Dr. von Habsburg joked, while they maneuvered the bulky fabric along the mannequin’s shoulders, as if it were a living royal who needed help getting down a chapel aisle.Dr. Schmidt, a native of Germany sometimes referred to as Eikepedia, kept up a stream of imperial patter with Dr. von Habsburg. The two focused the flashlights on their phones on sculpted details while searching the web to confirm facts. They discussed whose wedding in 1642 was celebrated with an ivory tankard carved in reliefs of cavorting wine drinkers, and which battle was commemorated in a 1687 silver plaque with portraits of defeated Ottoman troops. The two experts mused on whether bloodstains are still visible on a battered car on view in Vienna, the one in which Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife, Sophie — Dr. von Habsburg’s cousins — were assassinated in 1914.Forgeries of royal artifacts have appeared on the market, a problem that also pervades Fabergé wares, the subject of Dr. von Habsburg’s numerous books. Fabergé was the favorite provider of baubles to the Romanovs, a dynasty whose luck was even worse than that of the Habsburgs. Kaywin Feldman, the Minneapolis museum’s director, wandered the galleries unfazed by the maze of crates and tumult. She said the show had required hundreds of meetings on two continents. Some highlights from the Kunsthistorisches were not allowed to travel, including Bruegel paintings and the Austrian crown jewels. A fragile rock crystal goblet was permitted to leave for a year in America, but only after scientific studies showed that natural bubbles sealed inside would not burst in transit.A black velvet dress from the 1860s, made for the obsessive dieter Empress Elisabeth, Dr. von Habsburg’s great-great-grandmother, needed its waistline restored to her narrow dimensions before it could be shown. The gilded rococo sleigh with room for just one passenger required some repairs. A visitor asked Dr. Schmidt why anyone would think that a sleigh ride all alone would be any fun, even in a sculptural gold folly.“If you’d be an empress, you’d be lonely most of the time,” he replied.Dr. von Habsburg paused to admire a silver crucifix made in 1901, 12 years after Elisabeth’s son, Rudolf, had murdered his teenage mistress Baroness Marie and killed himself and three years after Elisabeth had died from an Italian anarchist’s stab wounds. Throughout centuries of conquerings and tragedies, the family remained faithful Catholics; they prayed to saints’ relics, for protection. He was born in Budapest in 1940, into a branch of the family based in Hungary and still able to hang on to their palaces in Budapest and a nearby hamlet called Alcsút. (Their inherited luxuries included the dowry of Grand Duchess Alexandra Pavlovna, a daughter of Czar Paul I, who died in childbirth in 1801, at 17.) At the end of World War II, he was still a toddler when his family was exiled. Their Hungarian homes were destroyed. He has no childhood memories of being there, but he has been studying the lost possessions.During the Minneapolis preview day, he brought out his phone and showed prewar photographs of the Alcsút palace that a friend had just emailed to him. He scrolled through scenes of liveried servants, a library three stories tall, a room largely devoted to armor and another to animal horns.“My grandfather shot tens of thousands of beasts on four legs,” he said.The servants would dress him and his seven siblings in formal clothes to visit with the adult Habsburgs once a day, he said. “We were never allowed to talk unless spoken to, and we could never laugh at table because it was considered bad manners,” he said.In 1944, as Soviet troops closed in on Alcsút, the family fled. Villagers looted and burned the palace. Jewelry that the family members had buried, anticipating they would soon return, was dug up and stolen. It later surfaced on the market. All that remains at the site are portions of the facade and front colonnade, deteriorated outbuildings and ghosts of gardens. In the spring, Dr. von Habsburg said the area is “a sea of snowdrops in the woods.”After the war, the family took refuge in Portugal. Dr. von Habsburg’s father, Archduke Joseph Francis, wrote plays and poems, composed modern music and fell into bitter depressions. His mother, Archduchess Anna, a daughter of the King of Saxony, scrounged up school scholarships for the younger children. She had one souvenir from Alcsút: an ivory statuette of Archduke Joseph Anton, the ancestor who had moved to Hungary in the 1790s. “She never, ever showed any sign of regret,” Dr. von Habsburg said. “She just basically saw it as her duty, and she never complained, ever.”In the 1960s, while studying art history in Switzerland, he was finally brought to see the Kunsthistorisches. “It was exhilarating, as an art student,” he said. He spent his early career running European offices for Christie’s, helping disperse the property of aristocrats, and then moved to New York in 1987. He now displays the ivory Archduke Joseph Anton in the Bronxville house that he shares with his second wife, Elizabeth, an art appraiser, and a cheerful mixed-breed dog named Maggie. Their teenage daughter, Isabella, made her debut in December and is in college (he also has three sons from a previous marriage and eight grandchildren).Habsburg portraits hang on the Bronxville walls, the children sometimes formally posed at the adults’ knees.The archduke statuette, he said, is “a symbol for what could have been my life, which, looking back, thankfully wasn’t.” If the family had stayed in power, he said, “I would have been bored stiff.” Advertisement