Season 1, Episode 4: “Hero”This episode is titled “Hero,” but “Con Man” would have worked, too. “Better Call Saul” forgoes most of the mortal tension built up in the previous three hours and focuses on Jimmy McGill’s approach to professional growth, which is built on a very theatrical bit of chicanery. If this episode has a creative godfather, it is David Mamet and his flimflam movies, like “The Spanish Prisoner” and “House of Games.” For viewers, much of the fun comes from getting hoodwinked, right along with those suckers on screen.There are two con jobs in “Hero,” and they share a basic architecture. They both involve confederates masquerading as strangers, and in both instances the swindled end up flushed with exhilaration — from an apparent financial benefit in con No. 1, and from an apparent emotional benefit in con No. 2.Personally, I prefer a gun and a borderline psychotic villain to a tale of two flimflams. This was the first episode that didn’t deliver at least a bit of the ole “Pulp Fiction” frisson of peril and pain. But I suppose that “Better Call Saul” would get a bit monotonous were it to stick to large weapons and duct tape. And anyway, there are surely more of both coming soon.The first con occurs in Jimmy’s pre-Albuquerque phase, and it separates a mark from his money using little more than a fake Rolex and a supine buddy (Mel Rodriguez) who is feigning a drunken stupor. (This buddy is identified on his license as Henry Gondorff, a superb nom de ruse; it was Paul Newman’s character in “The Sting.”) “Henry” and Jimmy unwind with some bong hits in the triumphant aftermath of their scam and it’s clear from Jimmy’s dismissive, somewhat depressed tone that these shenanigans are a bit small-time for his tastes.But this is a formative experience. When the show jumps to its present day — June of 2002, it says on newspapers we spot late in the episode — he practices his craft on a far bigger stage, with far better production values.We’ll get to that, but let’s first consider how Jimmy came to underwrite con No. 2. It’s courtesy of cash from the Kettlemans, who, having been caught in a tent with a bag full of embezzled money, offer Jimmy a bribe. Reluctantly, he accepts it, after first declining it and then trying to turn it into a retainer.“You’re the kind of lawyer guilty people hire,” says Mrs. Kettleman, explaining why the couple will stick with the white shoe firm, Hamlin, Hamlin & McGill, they’ve already engaged.Jimmy could report these mild-mannered reprobates, but instead he takes the money and one massive step to the dark side. Later, in his office, he performs some bookkeeping sleight of hand to account for the windfall, and then he puts it to use.“Upon this rock I will build my church,” he says, both quoting the Bible and setting up con No. 2, in the same sentence.This one is more elaborate than the first, and as it unfolds there is only a subtle hint that we are watching a deception. The hints come while Jimmy is at a men’s clothing store, being outfitted for a look that is a knockoff of the style sported by his nemesis, Howard Hamlin (Patrick Fabian). While the salesman fetches something, Jimmy picks an orange shirt and red tie off the shelves.“Hmm,” he seems to be saying, “not bad.”These very bright and clanging colors will become his trademark. We should know something is up when he sets those choices aside and opts for a pricey pinstripe suit.His goal, we soon learn, is to create a highway billboard ad for his law practice, one that so shamelessly mimics both HH&M’s logo and Hamlin’s personal style that Hamlin will force Jimmy to take the ad down. This is precisely what happens. And here comes the payoff: Jimmy has arranged for the man taking down the ad to feign a near-death experience, by “accidentally” falling off a landing and dangling from a rope 65 feet in the air. With a hired film crew capturing every moment, Jimmy rushes to the rescue, ensuring TV and newspaper coverage for a great story: Solo practitioner bullied by big law firm saves workingman’s life.“Whole thing was a publicity stunt,” huffs Hamlin, as he watches TV coverage of the event at his firm. “Gotta be.”He’s right. But everyone else is snookered, and Jimmy, at last, has messages on his answering machine, some from potential clients.Did I say everyone else? That’s wrong. Jimmy’s brother, Chuck, is also unconvinced. When he reads a story in the local paper about Jimmy’s putative bravado, he quickly grasps the entire fraud. And because Chuck is well aware of Jimmy’s penury, he also knows that it’s likely that Jimmy has done something underhanded to bankroll this charade.It is one small act of scripting genius that the moral ballast of this series, Chuck, is also stricken with a bizarre psychosis, namely a fear of all things electromagnetic. On the one hand, the guy is the show’s compass when it comes to right and wrong. On the other, he seems nuts. No armchair Solomons for these showrunners. When Chuck grasps his younger brother’s duplicity, he heaves a desperate sigh and wraps himself in his space blanket.I’ll close by noting that we learn here the derivation of Jimmy’s future name. It happens when his mark in con No. 1 says he didn’t catch Jimmy’s name.“Saul,” says Jimmy.“Saul?”“S’all good, man.”Apparently, when Jimmy came up with this professional moniker he didn’t want to sound Jewish. He wanted to sound chill.But back to show’s present day. Business is about to pick up. Will this lead Jimmy to become Saul? Or will something else cause that change?Theories, anyone?