Season 2, Episode 18: “Tempus Fugit”It’s been an uneven season, but you can’t ask for more than “Sleepy Hollow” delivered in the last two episodes, especially Monday night’s Season 2 finale. Whether that was also the series finale remains to be seen (Fox has been oddly noncommittal about a renewal),  but the writers at least proved that they can still bring the surprise and spunk that made Season 1 of this show so refreshing.How did they do it? With a table-turning trick that worked perfectly. “Sleepy Hollow” was built on a character in a fish-out-of-water story line: The 18th-century Ichabod Crane woke up in the 21st century. But as last week’s very fine episode ended, his modern-day sidekick, Lt. Abbie Mills, was transported back to Ichabod’s time after trying to intervene when Ichabod’s wife, Katrina, cast a spell.And so Monday’s finale found Abbie, a smart, confident black woman in strange clothes, trying to convince the 18th-century authorities that she was not a runaway slave or a crazy person. Eventually she found her way to Ichabod, who of course didn’t know her because this incarnation of him had yet to do his own time traveling to the 21st century. (Snippy aside: I’ll take Ichabod’s 21st-century look over the somewhat geeky 18th-century version any day.)In a wry touch, a cellphone video the two had shot in an earlier episode ended up convincing Ichabod that Abbie’s story about being from the future was true. There has been a lot of time-traveling on TV lately (see: Syfy’s “12 Monkeys”), and Abbie and Ichabod did some obligatory wrestling with the metaphysical issues that always come up: If you go back in time and muck around with historical events, do you change the future? They concluded that they had to find a way to reverse Katrina’s time-travel spell, a search that soon led them to one of the series’s more delightful recurring characters, Ben Franklin (Timothy Busfield). Franklin lost his head, literally, before their visit was through, but presumably his decapitation was undone later when the spell was reversed and Abbie returned to the present — to the moment right before the spell was cast.What happened next, in the episode’s final minutes, was what many fans of this series have been hoping for all along: Katrina died. She was the character you loved to hate, but still it was startling to see her killed, and especially to see her killed by Ichabod, who had long resisted acknowledging that she was part of the apocalyptic problem.In this series, though, death has a tendency to be impermanent, so there’s no way to know if she (or Henry, her son, who died last week) is really gone, unless there’s a third season. That leads us to the only question that really matters this week: Should there be? I thought the writers did a fabulous job of concocting an ending that both left open the possibility of more and served as a fitting conclusion to the series, if there is no more. Abbie, Ichabod, Frank Irving and Jenny Mills took stock and vowed to press the fight against whatever evil is still out there. That fight could continue in a new season — or just in our imaginations.I’ll stick my neck out and conclude with what will be heresy to fans of the show: I would be happy to see the series end right where it is. If Katrina really is dead, there will be an irresistible urge in the writers’ room to put Ichabod and Abbie into a romantic relationship in Season 3. One of the best things about the first two seasons was the ever-present hint of a spark between them, but the appeal was that romance was always just a vague possibility, never a reality. Mutual respect and trust worked for these two; I’m not sure courtship and passion would. You may have other ideas, about both Monday’s episode and the future. Let’s hear them.