The artist Jerry Marsini didn’t need to travel far to research his poster design for “The Absolute Brightness of Leonard Pelkey.” Written by and starring James Lecesne, a co-founder of the L.G.B.T. youth organization the Trevor Project, the show is about the murder of a gay artistically-minded 14-year-old in a small town.“I’m from New Jersey, and it takes place there,” Mr. Marsini said. “I grew up during the ’70s and ’80s there.  I wasn’t as brave as Leonard. I learned early that if I express myself in the ways I want to fully, I would get bullied and punished for it.”“Leonard Pelkey” is told through monologues from community members, including a sheriff and a teenage girl, all played by Mr. Lecesne. For the poster Mr. Marsini focused on the title character, who is never seen in the show.“There’s a moment when the rest of the world is looking at this boy and realizing that he was a bright spot in their lives, that has influenced them in a positive way,” he said. “They’re only realizing it when he’s gone.”Mr. Marsini recently spoke with Erik Piepenburg about the elements that inspired his design. Here are edited excerpts from the conversation.  Your poster has a psychedelic quality to it.  I was inspired by the Fillmore in San Francisco. I love the vibrancy, the color, the typography of that movement of art that was inspired by the Fillmore, which itself was inspired by Toulouse-Lautrec and the art from the turn of the century. The designers and the people creating the posters for the events at the Fillmore in the late ’60s were really designing from a sense of the psychedelic experience they were having, with the positive energy and the freedom of the time.After seeing a performance I had a vision of what the poster could be. In the story this boy has a vision of a world that is about light and connectivity. He’s insisting on expressing himself freely and being himself fully. It feels like it’s the same kind of vibe or the same mind-set that was going on when the Fillmore posters were being created.   The poster also has a children’s book quality to it, especially in the figure with a set of wings. In the story Leonard has this crafty quality. He makes things, his own costumes. I wanted the poster to have the quality of someone doing a drawing on the front of their textbook that they covered with a shopping bag. We used to do that with our own textbooks. Do people even have textbooks anymore? [Laughs].  The wings are very prominent in the poster. Tell me about where that idea came from. Leonard plays Ariel in “The Tempest,” and he insists on wearing these fairy wings. That really struck me, how as young people we express ourselves through clothing and what we adorn ourselves with. The wings turn out to be a really important element of the show. He also builds these platform shoes. I remember the nightclub scene in the early ’90s when people were creating these fantastic outfits for themselves, and being very ingenious about how they would construct their characters.  Here you have this boy who is doing his darndest in this little town in New Jersey to express himself as much as he can with what he has at hand.  Yet you don’t see his face in the poster. The boy never appears on stage. In the story we never know who he is. We get a picture of him from the other characters, but it’s an incomplete picture. His head is cut off at the top because the audience uses its imagination to determine who he is. Tell me about the color choices for the title. I wanted the poster to represent brightness. There’s also the rainbow symbolism of the L.G.B.T. community and the symbolism of what those colors represent.  Going from dark to light, you bring your eyes to the name. You see the wings first and then your eyes come down. The colors also go back to the ’60s, when they were using vibrant colors in different combinations and juxtaposing them for contrast. Purples and reds together is always a really interesting vibration. The red and magenta of his outfit is a very regal combination. “The Absolute Brightness of Leonard Pelkey” continues through March 28 at Dixon Place, 161A Chrystie Street, Lower East Side, 866-811-4111, dixonplace.org.