Carla Körbes, the Pacific Northwest Ballet principal dancer who announced last year that she would retire at the end of this season, will be the Artist-in-Residence at this year’s Vail International Dance Festival, which announced this year’s program on Monday. Damian Woetzel, the director of the festival, said in an email message: “Carla is among my favorite dancers of my lifetime — I have loved watching her at New York City Ballet and at Pacific Northwest ballet, and directing her over many years on my projects, including Vail.”  The festival, which is to run from July 27 to Aug. 10, features many other boldface dance world names, including Wendy Whelan; Savion Glover; Lil Buck; City Ballet’s Sara Mearns and Tiler Peck; American Ballet Theater’s Misty Copeland, Isabella Boylston and Herman Cornejo; Boston Ballet’s Misa Kuranaga and Jeffrey Cirio; and the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater stars Linda Celeste Sims and Antonio Douthit-Boyd.Since Mr. Woetzel, a former City Ballet principal, became director of the Vail festival in 2007, he has championed the intermingling of dancers across companies and genres, often encouraging them to perform works they wouldn’t have the chance to do with their home companies. Ms. Mearns, for example, will perform Alexei Ratmansky’s “Fandango,” a solo created for Ms. Whelan at the 2010 festival, accompanied by the Brooklyn Rider string quartet. Ms. Peck will dance her first role in a ballet by Antony Tudor, a pas de deux from “The Leaves Are Fading”; and Angelica Generosa, a young Pacific Northwest Ballet dancer, will perform Balanchine’s “Stars and Stripes” alongside Joseph Gordon from City Ballet.There is plenty of new work too. In “Now: Premieres,” Lil Buck (with the jazz musician Jon Batiste and the bagpiper Cristina Pato); John Heginbotham; Pam Tanowitz; Matthew Neenan; and the choreographic duo Silas Riener and Rashaun Mitchell will create new pieces for a number of ensembles, including BalletX from Philadelphia; a group of City Ballet dancers  including Lauren Lovette, Jared Angle, Chase Finlay and Zachary Catazaro;  Dance Heginbotham; and themselves.  As part of a Balanchine Celebration program, Mr. Cornejo will make his debut in “Apollo,” which is also the subject of this year’s “UpClose” — an onstage, informal presentation by Mr. Woetzel, working with dancers (including Ms. Körbes) to show aspects of the ballet.“To me, ‘Apollo’ can be seen as a chronicle of Balanchine’s artistic life, as he continued to work on the ballet from its premiere in 1928 until the end of his life, reshaping and redefining its relevance to the time it was being performed in and to the dancers it was being performed by,” Mr. Woetzel wrote in his email. “Being able to offer Herman Cornejo the opportunity to dance Balanchine’s Apollo alongside Tiler Peck is an honor.” Tickets go on sale March 24 on the festival’s website.