By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 23, 2015
9 P.M. (HBO) CITIZENFOUR (2014) Laura Poitras had been working on a film about surveillance for two years when Edward J. Snowden, the National Security Agency whistle-blower, contacted her in January 2013, using the name “Citizenfour.” When Mr. Snowden let Ms. Poitras know that he would not conceal his identity as the source of information about N.S.A. surveillance, she persuaded him to let her film their encounter. This Oscar-nominated documentary chronicles the encounter in a Hong Kong hotel room of Ms. Poitras; Glenn Greenwald, the Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist who first wrote about Mr. Snowden’s revelations; and Mr. Snowden as he hands over classified documents that provide evidence of the N.S.A.’s invasion of privacy and copes with the resulting media storm. “Cinema, even in the service of journalism, is always more than reporting, and focusing on what Ms. Poitras’s film is about risks ignoring what it is,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “It’s a tense and frightening thriller that blends the brisk globe-trotting of the ‘Bourne’ movies with the spooky, atmospheric effects of a Japanese horror film. And it is also a primal political fable for the digital age, a real-time tableau of the confrontation between the individual and the state.” He added: “Thinking about the issues Ms. Poitras raises can induce a kind of epistemological vertigo. What do we know about what is known about us? Who knows it? Can we trust them? These questions are terrifying, and so is ‘Citizenfour.’ ”7 A.M. (NBC) TODAY Savannah Guthrie interviews the family of Kayla Mueller, the American aid worker who was killed while being held hostage by the Islamic State.8 P.M. (Food Network) KIDS BAKING CHAMPIONSHIP The season ends as the four remaining competitors each create a cake celebrating the moment they might win $10,000 and the title, along with complementary party gifts.8 P.M. (Smithsonian) LEGEND OF LEAD BELLY (2015) As George Harrison once said: “If there was no Lead Belly, there wouldn’t have been any Lonnie Donegan. No Lonnie Donegan, no Beatles. Therefore, no Lead Belly, no Beatles.” And Kurt Cobain called Lead Belly his favorite performer. In this documentary, Van Morrison, Judy Collins, Robby Krieger of the Doors and Roger McGuinn of the Byrds help recount the life and times of Huddie Ledbetter, a grandson of slaves, member of a prison chain gang and one of the country’s greatest folk and blues virtuosos. He also helped preserve hundreds of songs from dating from the Civil War to the 20th century.Advertisement8:30 P.M. (BBC America) TOP GEAR Jeremy Clarkson and James May walk down memory lane with Peugeot. Elsewhere, Richard Hammond tests the new Porsche Cayman GTS against the latest Chevrolet Corvette on the track, while Mr. May takes the 950-horsepower LaFerrari hybrid on a road trip through Italy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (BET) THE 2015 BET HONORS Wayne Brady hosts this annual celebration of African-American leaders in music, literature, entertainment, media, service and education. The honorees include Phylicia Rashad; Kanye West; Usher; Johnnetta Betsch Cole, the director of the National Museum of African Art of the Smithsonian Institution; and John W. Thompson, the chief executive of Virtual Instruments and the chairman of the Microsoft Corporation. Ne-Yo, K. Michelle, Mary J. Blige, Trey Songz, Patti LaBelle and Charlie Wilson will perform.Advertisement9 P.M. (Fox Business) STRANGE INHERITANCE A New Jersey family hopes to rebuild the ice cream shop destroyed by Hurricane Sandy by cashing in on thousands of mint-condition vintage comic books found in an attic. At 9:30, the sons of Roy Orbison discover a homemade cassette with an unreleased track.9:30 P.M. (Fusion) McMORRIS & McMORRIS This series, originally shown on MTV Canada, follows Craig McMorris, the Saskatchewan-bred professional snowboarder, and his brother Mark, an Olympic bronze medalist and Craig’s fiercest competitor, on the slopes and off.What’s Streaming NowMIDNIGHT EXPRESS (1978) The director Alan Parker draws on the real-life tale of Billy Hayes (Brad Davis), a 23-year-old college student who was sentenced to 30 years in Sagmalcilar, a Turkish prison with horrific conditions, after being convicted of smuggling hashish in 1970. The film, one of the “award-worthy” movies recommended by Crackle, earned six Oscar nominations and took two awards. (crackle.com)A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.