By MIKE HALEFEB. 22, 2015
Pity the ensemble hospital show trying to survive in the considerable shadow of “Grey’s Anatomy.” Since that ABC series — the first Shonda Rhimes hit — began in 2005, one doctor dramedy after another has had its plug pulled after a season or two: “3 Lbs.,” “Heartland,” “Three Rivers,” “Trauma,” “Mercy,” “Emily Owens, M.D.”Last year, “The Night Shift” on NBC took a bold approach to the problem. It copied “Grey’s Anatomy” so closely that you might have thought you’d wandered into the hospital’s cloning lab.So far it’s working. “The Night Shift” averaged more than 6.5 million viewers over eight episodes and returns on Monday night for a 14-episode second season detailing the medical and romantic calamities of its fictional San Antonio hospital. Shows like this require an amped-up, adrenaline-addict atmosphere. In “Grey’s,” that’s explained by the pre-eminence of the show’s fictional Seattle hospital. In “Night Shift” it’s the prevalence of former military doctors, in an area overstocked with bases, on the overnight crew.From there, though, the correspondences take over. The central couple, the bad-boy former medic and emotional basket case T. C. (Eoin Macken) and the no-nonsense Jordan (Jill Flint) are a slightly gender-switched version of Meredith and McDreamy in “Grey’s,” right down to being white protagonists surrounded by a largely minority supporting cast. There’s a rigid but well-meaning administrator with his own medical issues (Freddy Rodriguez), a sexy female intern (Jeananne Goossen), a tentative male intern (Robert Bailey Jr.) and, in Season 2, a smoldering and sensitive new male surgeon as a counterweight to T. C. (Adam Rodriguez). Ken Leung gives the show’s one shaded, truly humorous performance as a levelheaded doctor in the Miranda Bailey mold.Victims are constantly caught under or inside things — elevators, collapsed buildings, box canyons — requiring doctors to grab their gear and sprint into the night. Emergencies are over the top in the best “Grey’s” fashion — cars plow into wedding parties, a motorcycling couple are both impaled on a piece of rebar, breast implants turn out to be leaking bags of cocaine.“The Night Shift” follows the “Grey’s” template of crazy plotting and maudlin sentiment but dials down the emotional temperature — the tone is more neutral, or more flat. This mainly serves to point up the talent Ms. Rhimes has for orchestrating melodramatic excess without reducing dramatic stakes. But it also shows that her formula can be successfully copied if you move fast, pay attention to detail and keep finding new things to put inside people’s bodies.A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Visiting a Familiar Hospital at a Lower Temperature.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.