By GIA KOURLASFEB. 22, 2015
It’s all too easy for a dance based on a story to lose its way. In “Belladonna,” the choreographer Adam Barruch finds inspiration in Nathaniel Hawthorne’s spooky tale “Rappaccini’s Daughter,” in which a scientist cultivates a garden of poisonous plants for medicinal purposes. His beautiful daughter, Beatrice, takes care of them; Giovanni, a young student, rents a room overlooking the garden and becomes obsessed with her, only to learn that the reason she can take care of the plants is because she is poisonous herself.The downfall of “Belladonna,” a duet performed at the 92nd Street Y on Friday night as part of its Stripped/Dressed series, is its excessively embroidered choreography, namely Mr. Barruch’s barrage of arm movements. To be fair, he had mentioned his penchant for arm choreography during a pre-performance discussion; in the annual Harkness Dance Festival, organized by the choreographer Doug Varone, artists spend the first half of each program deconstructing their dance through discussion and demonstration and the second half performing it in its entirety.During the show-and-tell portion, Mr. Barruch and his collaborator, Chelsea Bonosky, revealed how certain images from the story — words like “knowledge,” “magic” and “butterfly” — were used to create short improvisations. “Knowledge” meant a hand circling the skull; “butterfly” signaled crossed wrists and flapping hands. Later in the performance, Mr. Barruch’s steady stream of arm-and-hand gestures snaked around their bodies in expansive circles or punctuated the air with vigorous taps. When strung together, their shapes had a distracting effect — the equivalent of nonsensical chatter.A line in the story reads, “Was this garden, then, the Eden of the present world?” In “Belladonna,” Mr. Barruch, exploring his characters like Adam and Eve archetypes, is stoic and cool; Ms. Bonosky, topless much of the time with long hair that she frequently flipped forward and back, gravitates toward wild. He tries to tame her; all the while, she passes the poison onto him until he, too, needs it for sustenance.But as one anxious scene leads to the next, it’s difficult to accept Mr. Barruch’s lofty themes — nature versus man, science versus life — which feel as force-fed as the pair’s ravaged emotions. Mr. Barruch and Ms. Bonosky, well-matched as dance partners, move like silk; the fatal part about “Belladonna” is its melodrama.A version of this review appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Stepping Lightly Into a Poisonous Garden.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.