By BRIAN SEIBERTFEB. 22, 2015
Fifty years ago this month, when New York City Ballet danced the premiere of George Balanchine’s “Harlequinade,” it was already old-fashioned. Set to the same frothy score by Riccardo Drigo that Marius Petipa had used 65 years earlier for “Les Millions d’Arlequin,” this two-act ballet is one of Balanchine’s affectionate recreations of Petipa style and Franco-Russian tradition. It’s the kind of show that is always described as a confection, and when it returned to the David H. Koch Theater on Wednesday, after an absence of a decade, its antique charm was there, preserved. Yet the taste was not as fresh as possible.The tradition honored here is not just classical ballet; it’s also commedia dell’arte. And although Rouben Ter-Arutunian’s set evokes a toy theater and Balanchine’s production features more than two dozen children — adorable students from the School of American Ballet who appear as miniature versions of the ballet’s character types — this is a world of conventions less familiar to American children (or the adults they become) than the Christmas magic of “The Nutcracker” or the doll-comes-to-life conceit of “Coppélia.”“Harlequinade” tracks the efforts of the rascally Harlequin to marry Columbine, whose father, wishing her to wed a rich old fop, keeps her locked up. The plot, accordingly, hinges on gaining access to the girl. The key that Columbine tosses to her love, the balcony that magically descends, the gold that the Good Fairy gives to the hero: Harlequin gets a lot of help, and he needs it, especially after the father’s hired goons dismember him.Balanchine’s storytelling is typically efficient, and his choreography offers mild delights and unemphatic echoes. Certain sections — solos for Columbine and her maid, the female quartet that follows the lovers’ first pas de deux — have the petit-allegro brilliance and fun of Balanchine’s “Square Dance,” which opened Wednesday’s program, led by the lively Ashley Bouder. But “Harlequinade” also needs help, in the form of characterful performances, and Wednesday’s cast fell a bit short on charm.Joaquin de Luz brought to Harlequin the same mercurial flash he showed in the role 10 years ago, shooting up and spinning with the pressurized flow of the fountain in the second act’s enchanted park. Tiler Peck, making her debut as Columbine, danced with a captivating blend of softness and sharpness. Her second-act solo was particularly wonderful, suggesting in its slowness a gathering in of contentment.And yet Ms. Peck’s performance was a little lacking in sparkle. Columbine is a flirt, alternately dodging and yielding to Harlequin’s innocent advances. This ballet has more quick kisses than any other. If all that smooching isn’t to turn saccharine, Columbine must beguile us as well as Harlequin, and Ms. Peck didn’t quite. Daniel Ulbricht, leaping and turning with his usual dazzle, was no more than instrumental as Pierrot. Erica Pereira was a brittle, sweetly effective Pierrette. As the Good Fairy, Emilie Gerrity was pretty but neither glamorous nor of good humor — two approaches that have worked in the past. Lauren King was a brighter presence as the head of the flapping larks. The drunken patrolmen stumbled over their comedy. “Harlequinade” may seem a quaint recipe, but those can be the trickiest to get right.A version of this review appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: A Whiff of Antique Charm in Balanchine’s Capering Sweethearts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.