By NEIL GENZLINGERFEB. 22, 2015
Here’s a phrase you probably never expected to read: Highbrow PBS and trashy Investigation Discovery have complementary programs Monday night about race and intolerance. Neither is very satisfying on its own, but put them together and they acquire some substance.The PBS offering is an “Independent Lens” film called “American Denial,” about a long-ago sociological study and its continued relevance today. Investigation Discovery, home to true-crime schlock like “Sex Sent Me to the Slammer,” gets serious for a change with “Hate in America,” in which the journalist Tony Harris explores three recent hate crimes. The pairing is accidental, but the programs go together, one providing historical perspective, the other immediacy.“American Denial” revisits a study from the 1940s in which Gunnar Myrdal, a Swedish sociologist and economist who would later win a Nobel Prize, looked at the United States, especially the South, and found it to be a land of contradictions. He concluded that its people loved to wrap themselves in American ideals — equality, liberty and justice for all — yet perpetuated a society that aggressively denied those ideals to certain citizens through segregation and repressive law enforcement and judiciaries.His conclusions weren’t new, but the study garnered attention from people who mattered (even ending up as a footnote in the Supreme Court’s Brown v. Board of Education decision).Advertisement“This basic conflict between American ideals and American reality is something that Frederick Douglass recognized,” the Harvard scholar Vincent Brown says in the film. “It’s something that W.E.B. Du Bois recognized. Maybe they didn’t listen well enough until it was something that was said by this Swedish expert from outside the country.”AdvertisementToday, when jingoism and intolerance go hand in hand in some quarters, Myrdal’s conclusions seem self-evident, and “American Denial” is largely content to let academics point out the obvious. The film, directed by Llewellyn Smith (who also produced along with Christine Herbes-Sommers and Kelly Thomson), does eventually work its way to some intriguing notions. There is, for instance, the suggestion that the present-day success of some black Americans in politics and entertainment actually reinforces entrenched racism, the example of the few giving us unconscious permission to ignore the problems of the many.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the film doesn’t linger long on these more complex questions, and in any case the only voices we hear are those of comfortable-looking academics. “Hate in America,” the Investigation Discovery program, produced in partnership with the Southern Poverty Law Center, gets closer to the real-world consequences of intolerance and discrimination. Here, the victims of bias crimes, or their survivors, do the talking.Mr. Harris revisits three crimes: the race-related murder of James C. Anderson in Mississippi in 2011, the shootings at a Sikh temple in Wisconsin in 2012 and a homophobic attack on two men in Manhattan in 2013.Much of Investigation Discovery’s fare is lurid and lowbrow, but “Hate in America” is an exception. Mr. Harris details the crimes and conducts sensitive, often moving interviews with those who were affected. Why didn’t you just walk away, he asks Nicholas Porto, one of the men beaten near Madison Square Garden after he responded to gay slurs being shouted at him and his boyfriend.“Because the more you walk away,” Mr. Porto says, “sooner or later you run out of places to walk to.”A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Nation’s Unflattering Side, Past and Present.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.