Season 6, Episode 6: “Alive Day”A lot went down in this episode — shootouts, mining accidents, murders — so let’s see if we can cover it all.Let’s start with the question we all had after the last episode: Did Raylan and Ava hook up again? It sure looks like it. His boss thinks so. His partner thinks so. Boyd was certainly suspicious enough. Ava is finally cooperating with the law, so I suppose the end justifies the means. This is such a bad idea for Raylan, but it adds to the tension of a show that has finally hit its stride after a long final season windup.First, Markham’s gang has to deal with that recently deceased real estate broker, who was tapped out by Choo-Choo (Duke Davis Roberts), the strongman who we’ve been assuming is a bit daft. But that may not be the case. It’s Choo-Choo, not his fellow henchman, who remembers that they were seen by the broker’s prostitute when they arrived at his office.After the poor guy’s body is found, Raylan visits Avery Markham, who seems to be in the dark about the snafu. Raylan says: “You know where you went wrong? You hired a bunch of mercs,” or mercenaries. “They know killing, but they don’t know crime.” For once, Markham has to be agreeing with Raylan. His gang didn’t bother to tell him about the murder or the plan to kill the prostitute, a job delegated to Choo-Choo.The ride with Caprice, the prostitute, reveals that Choo-Choo has something more going on inside his head. “The good thing about people thinking you’re dumb is they give you the benefit of the doubt,” he tells her, clearly smitten. He says he has figured out another way to deal with the witness without killing her. What it might be, I can’t fathom. But he never gets that chance. Markham orders him killed.Ty Walker, who increasingly doesn’t seem cut out for this one-on-one killing business, shows up out in the woods with two new mercs ready to kill the prostitute (and Choo-Choo). The deputy United States marshals show up just in time and try to turn Choo-Choo against his compatriots by telling him that Markham ordered his death. Choo-Choo is clearly thinking it through. (Pretty fast, given the presence of all the guns.) His conclusion: “It’s all I’ve got.” In the subsequent shootout, the two newbies are shot, a winged Walker escapes and a seriously wounded Choo-Choo gets away as well. Not the most efficient gun play by two deputy marshals vaunted for their gun skills, but everyone has an off day.Choo-Choo also, it seems, has a sense of the poetic. He stops his car on the rail tracks so a train will smash into him. It stops in time — nothing is working out for this guy today — and he dies from his gunshot wounds in one piece. I hope we see more of Mr. Roberts on some other shows soon.The Markham gang is now down one, and two others are being hunted by the authorities. They’re not the only ones. Boyd and his gang are working an abandoned coal-mine shaft to tunnel into the pizza parlor’s bank vault when Boyd falls through some boards covering a deep vertical shaft. Ava’s uncle Zachariah saves him. You noticed that Zachariah directs Boyd over to the oil can resting on the boards, so I assume he wanted Boyd to have an accident. But why then does Zachariah save him? Later, one of Boyd’s gang points out to Zachariah that the board was not rotten, but had been sawed. For that, he is tossed down the shaft. Remember how Ava had earlier said to Boyd: “Do you think it is such a smart idea hiring on Zachariah? I don’t have to remind you how he is.” Is there something else wrong with him or does he just hate Crowders?The show’s cliffhanger comes when Ellstin Limehouse tips off Boyd that Ava tried to run.A few other questions: What was the point of Avery Markham’s proposal to Katherine Hale? Did he think it would alter any suspicions she has that he ratted on her crime-boss husband? Who is playing who? Clearly, neither trusts the other. I agree with Wynn Duffy who says, “It doesn’t really matter.”Is there truth a fifth “C” in choosing a diamond, as Wynn Duffy muses after seeing Katherine’s giant engagement ring? (Which she isn’t wearing, merely carrying around in a box.) The typical four are carat, color, clarity and cut. But apparently some merchants add certification. Tiffany only includes the first four.In the mine, with everyone’s face darkened by coal dust, did you notice how good the dental health insurance must be in Harlan County?The show drink: So what bourbon does Boyd drink at home? The glass he pours himself is clearly Buffalo Trace, which is good stuff, but not quite top shelf. By the way, Carla Carlton, who writes the The Bourbon Babe blog, says that last week’s bourbon was Ancient Ancient Age 10 Year, not Ancient Ancient Age 10 Star. She says the former is “a fine bourbon and a rare one” since Buffalo Trace has stopped making it.Do any other readers have other evidence? Either way, it didn’t seem to mellow Zachariah.