LONDON — Two film scripts by Harold Pinter, never made into movies, have been adapted as radio plays by the BBC’s Radio 4. The first, “Victory,” based on a novel by Joseph Conrad, will be broadcast on Saturday; “The Dreaming Child,” based on a short story by Karen Blixen, of “Out of Africa” fame, will be aired on March 7. (According to the BBC 4 website, most programs can be accessed from anywhere in the world.)“It isn’t often that you can announce the premiere of a script by the late great Harold Pinter, one of the leading dramatists of the 20th century,” Jeremy Howe, the Radio 4 drama commissioner, said in a report on the BBC website. “Then two come along, both wonderfully Pinteresque and both utterly different in tone and approach.”“Victory,” written by Mr. Pinter in 1982, tells the story of the encounter between Lena, a young English violinist, and Axel Heyst, a mysterious Swedish baron who lives alone on an island in the Dutch East Indies. In the introduction to his “Collected Screenplays, Volume 2,” Pinter wrote that he worked on the script with the director Richard Lester. “I had found Joseph Conrad’s book immensely powerful, with a very rich collection of characters. I was also excited to write a film based in East Asia in 1900,” Mr. Pinter wrote. “But the American production company did not share my enthusiasm. They decided that ‘period’ films cost too much money, particularly when they dealt with Conradian moral complexities, so they withdrew.”The screenplay has been adapted for radio by the film and theater director Richard Eyre, and will feature Mark Strong, Vanessa Kirby and  Simon Russell Beale, as well as Bjarne Henriksen, who starred in both “Borgen” and “The Killing”.The second screenplay, “The Dreaming Child,” concerns a mother who cannot love her adopted child, and was written for 20th Century Fox in 1997. It will feature Anne Reid and Rose Leslie, the Scottish actress best known as Ygritte in “Game of Thrones.”In the introduction to his collected screenplays, Mr. Pinter wrote that although he had never written an original film, he greatly enjoyed adapting other people’s books. (He also adapted four of his own plays for screen.) “I think that’s unusual,” he wrote. “I certainly understand adapting novels for the screen to be a serious and fascinating craft.”