By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 24, 2015
8 P.M. (TCM) A LITTLE ROMANCE (1979) Lauren (Diane Lane, above right), a 13-year-old American living in Paris with her stepfather (Arthur Hill) and mother (Sally Kellerman) — who is currently enamored of a pretentious filmmaker (George De Marco) — falls in love with Daniel (Thelonious Bernard, center). He is a French film buff, and together they arrange a rendezvous under the Bridge of Sighs in Venice with the help of an aging pickpocket (Laurence Olivier, left). “Lauren and Daniel are, I think, meant to be comic and appealing in their mixture of innocence and worldliness,” Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times. Yet the film, directed by George Roy Hill, “recalls most vividly the arch manner in which the Our Gang comedies worked — by having their child actors ape not the behavior of children but of grown-ups.” Georges Delerue won an Oscar for best original score.11 A.M. (Sundance) GIRL WITH A PEARL EARRING (2003) In his feature directorial debut Peter Webber imagines the life of Griet (Scarlett Johansson, left), a maid in the Netherlands in the 1660s who becomes the muse for Vermeer (Colin Firth) and is immortalized in one of his most famous paintings. “Ms. Johansson is photographed so that her skin is as opalescent as her earring, but the movie is opaque,” Elvis Mitchell wrote in The Times about this adaptation of the novel by Tracy Chevalier. Yet, he added, the film is “a dexterous and absorbing visual re-creation of the lighting and the look that Vermeer achieved in his work.”2:30 P.M. (Showtime) PHILOMENA (2013) With the help of a former political journalist (Steve Coogan), an Irish Roman Catholic woman (Judi Dench, right, in an Oscar-nominated performance, with Mr. Coogan) seeks the son who was taken from her 50 years earlier, when she became pregnant as a teenager and was forced to live in a convent, in this drama directed by Stephen Frears. Their sleuthing takes them to Washington after they discover that the boy was adopted by an American couple and worked for the Reagan administration as an adult. “Ms. Dench’s Philomena Lee glows with the radiance of someone serene in her faith despite inhumane treatment by the church,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. Her dignified performance and the screenplay — adapted by Mr. Coogan and Jeff Pope from Martin Sixsmith’s 2009 nonfiction book, “The Lost Child of Philomena Lee” — “stabilize a volatile blend of ingredients,” Mr. Holden added.9 P.M. (13, 49) THE ITALIAN AMERICANS A second generation of Italian-Americans enters the public domain — Fiorello H. La Guardia becomes mayor of New York City; Joe DiMaggio becomes a baseball powerhouse — but World War II leaves many questioning their loyalty to the United States, resulting in their being labeled “enemy aliens.” Part 2 of “Italian Americans of New York and New Jersey,” featuring interviews with Mayor Bill de Blasio; the chef Lidia Bastianich; and Joe Germanotta, Lady Gaga’s father, leads in at 8 on Channel 13.Advertisement9 P.M. (Fox) NEW GIRL The loft mates go on a spider hunt, thanks to the arachnophobia of Schmidt (Max Greenfield). In “The Mindy Project,” at 9:30, Danny (Chris Messina) makes a deal that he will stop smoking if Mindy (Mindy Kaling) stops eating poorly.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9:30 P.M. (BET) KEYSHIA COLE: ALL IN Ms. Cole, the R&B singer, returns to the network for this new reality show, in which she tries to use music as the glue that holds together her career and her marriage to Daniel Gibson of the Cleveland Cavaliers.10 P.M. (NBC) PARKS AND RECREATION Leslie (Amy Poehler), Ben (Adam Scott) and the rest of the gang complete one last task before bidding farewell to Pawnee in this series finale.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowTHE SLAP Before the NBC adaptation starring Peter Sarsgaard, Zachary Quinto and Thandie Newton, there was this Australian comedy of ill manners, starring Jonathan LaPaglia, Alex Dimitriades and Sophie Okonedo and based on a novel by Christos Tsiolkas, about the resulting legal action — and the resurrection of some long-buried family secrets — after a man slaps a couple’s young child. Melissa George, who plays the boy’s mother in the American version, originated the role here. (netflix.com). KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on February 24, 2015, on Page C8 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.