HOLLIGER: ‘Machaut-Transkriptionen’
Muriel Cantoreggi, Jürg Dähler, Geneviève Strosser, viola; the Hilliard Ensemble
(ECM)
The music that preceded him is often the subject of Heinz Holliger’s composing — but mutated, hidden. This new disc focuses on Mr. Holliger’s project of “transcriptions” (2001-09) of pieces by the 14th-century composer Guillaume de Machaut. Machaut’s ballade “Biaute qui toutes autres pere” is translated from a cappella voices into airy, sun-shard harmonics for three violas; in Mr. Holliger’s version of another ballade, the original melody glints behind veils of new dissonances. Machaut’s “Hoquetus David” becomes Mr. Holliger’s sliding, plucking, tapping, ultimately chaotic “nach Hoquetus David,” and the new arrangement of Machaut’s seventh lay adds three new, duskily harmonizing vocal lines to the single surviving one. The cycle is capped with two extensive summations; the final “Complainte” brings together voices and violas in a melancholy outpouring. The transcriptions project has Mr. Holliger’s customary, total elegance, as well as a tenderness that reaches, composer to composer, across centuries. The performers are attentive and passionate, and the recorded sound vivid enough to capture the violists’ intakes of breath as they cue each other. (Zachary Woolfe)Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.
STRAUSS, WAGNER: Songs
Adrianne Pieczonka, soprano; Brian Zeger, piano
(Delos)
Sopranos who specialize in Wagner and Strauss have to scale back their sizable voices when they sing lieder, even songs by those composers. Adrianne Pieczonka accomplishes this impressively in this rewarding recital program, accompanied by the elegant pianist Brian Zeger. Ms. Pieczonka does not sound vocally reined in. Rather, her luminous voice is skillfully focused. She sings with bright yet warm sound and a minimum of throbbing vibrato. For all the natural ampleness of her voice, there is a youthful, feminine quality to her singing. The 12 Strauss songs offered here include some popular ones, like “Morgen,” and lesser-heard fare, like “Rote Rosen” and “Die Nacht.” She gives an exceptionally sensitive account of Wagner’s “Wesendonck-Lieder.” Mr. Zeger plays everything beautifully. (Anthony Tommasini)
SCHUMANN: ‘Das Paradies und die Peri’
Sally Matthews, Kate Royal, Bernarda Fink, Mark Padmore, Andrew Staples, Florian Boesch, singers; London Symphony Chorus and Orchestra; Simon Rattle, conductor
(LSO Live)
A new era in London is marked with this recording, Simon Rattle’s first since 1977 with the orchestra he officially takes over in 2017. Schumann’s oratorio is one of his less appreciated compositions today, not least because of an embarrassingly sentimental text, drawn from Thomas Moore’s “Lalla Rookh,” that charts the mythical peri’s quest to return to heaven. But Mr. Rattle has long been an advocate for the piece, and his forces here respond with an eagerness born of discovery, particularly a chorus splendidly trained by Simon Halsey. (David Allen)‘FRENCH REFLECTIONS’
Sivan Magen, harp
(Linn)
The harp became an indelible part of the French musical landscape in the late 19th century. That landscape was, of course, itself in flux, and the harp’s new chromatic flexibility allowed it to reflect those changes, as this enchanting recording shows. From the dreamy “Une châtelaine en sa tour” by Fauré to the increasingly nervous inflections of the influential harpist and composer Marcel Tournier’s Sonatine (Op. 30) and Debussy’s “Estampes,” Mr. Magen’s playing is always responsive and richly colored. Two recent works, Philippe Schoeller’s “Esstal” and Bruno Mantovani’s “Tocar,” hark back to some of the exotic fever dreams of the fin de siècle even as they employ an entirely different harmonic language. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)‘GESUALDO’ 
Estonian Philharmonic Chamber Choir; Tallinn Chamber Orchestra; Tonu Kaljuste, conductor
(ECM)
In this cleverly conceived disc, Tonu Kaljuste’s transcription for string orchestra of Gesualdo’s “Moro Lasso” is featured before Brett Dean’s richly scored “Carlo” (1997) — in which fragments of the Gesualdo work morph into a harmonically unpredictable framework with eerie sound clusters and vocal writing that evokes Penderecki. The opening motif of Gesualdo’s motet “O Crux Benedicta” (here in a transcription by Erkki-Sven Tuur) is woven into Mr. Tuur’s vivid “L’ombra della croce” (2014). And in Mr. Tuur’s “Psalmody” (1993/2011), a minimalist instrumental part blends to intriguing effect with the Renaissance-inspired choral line. (Vivien Schweitzer)SPOTIFY PLAYLISTTracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)