AdvertisementSupported byDance ReviewBy Brian SeibertWhat does it mean when an 83-year-old woman says, “Once I was beautiful”? Carmen de Lavallade is 83, and when she speaks those words in her autobiographical one-woman show, “As I Remember It,” their truth is unmistakable. You can see it in the projected photos and videos from her youth as a celebrated dancer and actress. But there is also the evidence of Ms. de Lavallade in the present, belying the verb tense. Her beauty is not a thing of the past. The hourlong show, which had its New York debut at the Baryshnikov Arts Center on Thursday, is appropriately elegant. Alone onstage, Ms. de Lavallade is backed by a gorgeous, free-standing structure from which hangs a curtain of strings. This set, by Mimi Lien, serves as the screen for family photos and clips of old movies and television appearances (artfully edited by Maya Ciarrocchi). It’s a screen with the texture of memory. Ms. de Lavallade remembers, and as she tells her stories in a mellifluous voice, she acts them out with her still articulate body — sometimes with a gesture toward a gesture, like a flash of the Mexican hat dance; sometimes in fuller impersonations of figures from the past or excerpts from past performances. She sits and talks or watches herself. She dances duets with her younger image. Eight decades is an awful lot to pack into an hour. The efficiency of the show, directed by Joe Grifasi, is an achievement that ends up feeling like a self-imposed handicap. As the script, written by Ms. de Lavallade and Talvin Wilks, races along from her childhood in a paradisiacal-sounding Los Angeles through a varied career, much is left out, and still there is too little time for emotional impact. If the show were a little longer, we might be allowed to savor the footage of her glory days while she took a rest. As it is, the pace exacerbates the oft-told sound of the stories. Ms. de Lavallade can be charmingly wry about racial prejudice and professional jealousy, and can earn an easy congratulatory laugh by watching herself play an exotic bit part in a forgotten Hollywood film and say, “Beyoncé, eat your heart out.” But her tales, like one about how she dragged her school chum Alvin Ailey into his first dance class, tend to finish patly (“Who knew?”). The script, short on insight, skirts past sadness like the loss of her mother to a sanitarium when Ms. de Lavallade was 7, and pauses instead on platitudes or amusing mishaps. It’s telling that in recounting how she and Ailey parted ways, she reaches for borrowed eloquence, reciting from “A Midsummer Night’s Dream.” The false-ringing line about having been beautiful once comes from a François Villon poem about a decrepit prostitute and is juxtaposed at one point with a signature dance that John Butler made for her, depicting Billie Holiday’s drug-addled demise. In “As I Remember It,” Ms. de Lavallade seems more comfortable when she’s playing a character, one with a life more tragic than her own, at least as she tells it. (She’s also terrific dancing her standard biblical set piece, “The Creation.”) Despite the dropping of many famous names, she seems almost too modest or private for memoir. “Oh, it’s terrible getting old,” she murmured on Thursday, having momentarily forgotten a line. It surely is, but Ms. de Lavallade does not make it seem so. “As I Remember It” continues through Wednesday at the Baryshnikov Arts Center, 450 West 37th Street, Manhattan; 866-811-4111, bacnyc.org. Advertisement