AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerIt’s an interesting week in the ever-evolving relationship between television and crime. The History channel, no doubt hoping to fill the “Sons of Anarchy” void, puts motorcycle gangs back on the air with “Gangland Undercover,” based on a federal informant’s real story. And WGN tries to push the police ride-along show to the next dubious level by adding a potential-lawbreaker ride-along.“Gangland Undercover,” which begins on Tuesday night, is a six-episode adaptation of Charles Falco’s 2013 book, “Vagos, Mongols, and Outlaws: My Infiltration of America’s Deadliest Biker Gangs.” Damon Runyan plays Mr. Falco in the series, which opens with him as a meth dealer who, after he is busted, tries to worm his way into the notorious Vagos motorcycle gang so that he can be an informant for what was then still called the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. Bikers are close to qualifying for their own TV genre. Along with the fictional and underappreciated “Sons of Anarchy,” whose seven-season run ended in December, reality shows like “The Devils Ride,” on Discovery, have claimed to get inside biker clubs but have mostly just embarrassed everyone involved.“Gangland Undercover” is a sort of hybrid of these two. As scripted TV, it’s no “Sons of Anarchy.” Supporting characters aren’t given much to do except look menacing, and the least interesting tool in a writer’s kit bag, the voice-over, is used frequently. As a sort of honorary reality show, though, the series is informative about the ways of biker gangs. Their childish initiation rituals, for instance, make college fraternities look sophisticated.The production company behind “The Devils Ride” is also behind WGN’s new reality series, “Outlaw Country,” which arrives on Tuesday night in the same time slot (10 Eastern) as “Gangland Undercover.” Presumably in an effort to give it credibility, Kurt Sutter, the creator of “Sons of Anarchy,” turns up in “Outlaw Country: Bad Blood,” a behind-the-scenes special made to promote the series. (None of the show’s seven episodes were made available for advance viewing.)“Outlaw Country” takes place in Buckner, Mo. It focuses on two brothers in law enforcement, Mike and Steve Cook (Mike is the police chief, Steve the head of a vaguely described “criminal task force”), who are particularly worried about two other brothers with bad reputations, John and Josh Monk. The gimmick is that the cameras follow both sides, the police officers and the might-be-criminals. Buckner, a town of about 3,000, east of Kansas City, seems harmless enough, but not in the bombastic land of reality TV. “We’re a television crew embedded in small-town America, literally in a war zone,” someone says in “Bad Blood.” Um, sure you are. In the preview show, we hear a lot of blustery talk from both sides, and we see one generic-looking fight in a bowling alley that is immediately swarmed by gun-toting cops.  In local news reports about the filming of the series, citing nondisclosure agreements, the people involved decline to address how real it all is. That alone tells us plenty.Advertisement