Season 3, Episode 5: “Salang Pass”Здравствуйте, товарищи. Какая у вас специальность?
(Greetings, Comrades. What’s your major?)Age is not just a number, no matter what Kimberly says. We all knew she wasn’t really a Georgetown student, but I was hoping she was at least a high school senior. But no, she is, alas, 15, the same age as Philip and Elizabeth’s  daughter, Paige.  Philip is creeping (and I do mean creeping) toward  Kimberly, but the route there is like the Salang Pass through the Hindu Kush Mountains. It’s fraught with danger, and so is Philip’s journey.  In November 1982 the Salang Tunnel, a treacherous but vital artery for the Soviets in Afghanistan, became an inferno for troops trapped inside by an explosion. As Philip stands at the entrance to his own circle of hell, beset by moral pitfalls among others, he hears a snippet of news about this parallel tragedy.The Cold War spy drama on FX.And so the action is stretched and slowed, as the show runners manipulate us handily with suspense. We don’t want Philip to go forward with the seduction of this girl, even if her father is the key to the C.I.A. Afghanistan group. We rely on shows like “The Americans” to bring us to the edge of our seats, sometimes by means of plot developments that are distasteful, or worse. In this case, is it possible the writers can bring us this close, drag out the suspense and then not go through with what seems like the inevitable  – I can’t bear to say it except in the most clinical way — sex act? (What would Masters and Johnson do?)The masterly scene of this episode is Philip’s visit to Kimberly’s house, where she tugs at our parental instincts with her sweet face and her deeply stoned, stumbling speech about her “real mom” who had a garden, her widowed father who is never home and her stepmother who “doesn’t even cook.”  Kimberly is like a hungry, dreamy orphan who is too high to form a sentence. Her lonely monologue devolves into the munchies and a giggly popcorn war. (Who’s going to clean up the Jiffy Pop?)When Philip takes her in his arms and picks her up, it’s more like a daddy carrying his sleepy little girl to her room than like Rhett sweeping Scarlett off her feet and up the red-carpeted stairs. The scene is poignant and painful, and we hope Kimberly is out for the night, but as Philip gently puts her to bed, she opens her eyes and her arms and … we are saved by the untimely arrival of her parents!Is he going to be able to avoid sex with this child?Personal training

Could anything be worse than Philip’s chilling flashbacks to the K.G.B.’s training/brainwashing in seduction and sex with a parade of grim or leering partners. One by one, they waited behind a frosted glass door for the young, frightened Philip, probably a teenager himself. If he could follow the mandate he was given, “Make it real for yourself,” with these partners, even the scariest of them, he can do anything. Almost.Stealth by stormIf Philip’s relationship with Kimberly is slow-moving, Elizabeth’s relationship with her new A.A. friend, a Northrop assembly line worker, Lisa (barely keeping it together), is racing along. Elizabeth, posing as Michelle, wants information about the the Stealth bomber under development. So, in short order: Elizabeth persuades Lisa to drop her stony-faced husband and lends her a lovely house 50 miles away, near a new Northrop plant. Now all Lisa needs is a job transfer. Elizabeth then creates an opening for Lisa  by flattening some poor guy working under his car, which just happens to have a Northrop parking sticker. Efficiency, thy name is Elizabeth.The stage is now set for infiltrating Northrop. Elizabeth, with a fake job with General Dynamics, another defense contractor,  appears with new swag that includes expensive clothes and a Coach bag. She tells Lisa — and this is strictly “cone of silence” — that the goodies come from a handsome consultant who has cash to exchange for answers to questions about her job. It’s a good thing the K.G.B. has a real estate budget for occasions like this. And that Lisa has credulity to spare.Up to their old tricks
Paige is working the dinner table again, using Stan’s presence as a buffer so she can ask for a new dress for her baptism. Elizabeth and Philip give each other the evil eye. They can’t agree and are competing for her favor. Paige wins. I’m happy she needs a dress; that means she won’t be draped in a sheet and dunked in the Potomac as her rite of initiation. That might be too much for Elizabeth.Every time we see Philip with Paige, choosing the dress in a boutique, for example, thoughts of Kimberly arise, as if he is trying things out on Paige to use with Kimberly, and vice versa. Yuck.And what’s up with little Henry? He’s our comic relief with his boy crush on Sandra, who did not, by the way, make an appearance in this episode.And in the nurseryMartha and Clark visit a sort of goldfish bowl of children who need foster families. No comment.What’s love got to do with it?Does anyone else think the dialogue dragged? Or was it just when Oleg and Stan engaged in their usual repartée? Oleg (acting like a hotdog again in his royal blue track suit) being ambushed by Stan in the park was amusing, but when they meet again, they start accusing each other, somewhat woodenly, of loving Nina. It makes me yawn a little. We know already. But does Stan really believe the American intelligence services would not leave Nina “to rot in the gulag?” And is he serious about making things right?At the Rezidentura

When Oleg tries to loosen up Tatiana with an impromptu happy hour in her office, he barely chips away any of the ice. They were joking around just a few episodes ago, but now she’s being distant and won’t entertain his talk about defectors. Oleg, write a memo.Line of the week

Gabriel (now our resident purveyor of Afghan pot) goes all philosophical on us when he says to Philip: “It’s one of the ironies of this work that so many lives depend upon one man’s relationship with an adolescent girl.”Comments on the comments.

Comrades, excellent insights. And thanks for tracking Gabriel’s history in the show. It turns out he was discussed but never before made an appearance (in Frank Langella’s guise, anyway). The consensus among you seems to be that Paige and the pastor are heading toward a … um … fleshly union, if they haven’t begun to commune already. (And yes, his hairstyle was weird, way too Gene Wilder.) Another don’t-touch-this-with-a-10-foot-pair-of-tweezers  love connection would make a perfect counterpoint to Philip’s “courtship” of Kimberly. Some commenters said that Paige would rebound from an affair with Pastor Tim right into the arms of the K.G.B., but I think  that solution is too tidy — and frankly not kinky enough for this show.We need to stretch our imaginations when it comes to the church. What comes to mind is some underlying sinister network  along the lines of “The Boys From Brazil” or “Village of the Damned,” but intrinsically American in nature.  What are you all thinking? Any ideas?До следующего раза, товарищи, делайте это по-настоящему.
(Until next time, Comrades, make it real.)