KRAKOW, Poland –  Roman Polanski was questioned in a Polish court on Wednesday regarding the United States’ request for his extradition over a decades-old charge of having sex with a 13-year-old girl.Updated, 2:27 p.m. | Dariusz Mazur, a judge presiding over the case in the regional court in Krakow, complied with the film director’s lawyers’ request that the hearing be closed to the public. The hearing ended after an excruciating nine hours and Mr. Polanski left the courtroom feeling “exhausted.” “It was quite painful,” he said. “I had to talk about things I’d rather forget.” The decision to close the hearing was, Judge Mazur said, a standard procedure when proceedings concern sensitive material like sexual offenses.The judge said the court would not make a ruling on Wednesday since Mr. Polanski’s legal representatives had handed in preliminary paperwork from his extradition proceedings in Switzerland in 2010 for the court’s consideration.After more than nine months of Mr. Polanski’s detention resulting from a similar request from the United States, Swiss officials ultimately ruled against extradition. This was partly because of doubts over the conduct of the judge and prosecutor in the original trial in Los Angeles of Mr. Polanski, an Oscar-winning director. He fled the United States in 1978 before final sentencing.A hearing regarding the Swiss case is scheduled for April.Mr. Polanski, 81, who holds Polish and French citizenship, said in January that he believed that he would not be extradited from Poland, saying,  “I trust the Polish justice system.”If the judge rules in favor of the United States’ request, the justice minister has the power to overrule the verdict. But if the court refuses to extradite the filmmaker, the ruling will be final.The justice minister, Cezary Grabarczyk, declined to comment on the case. “My comments could be regarded as an attempt to exert pressure on justices,” he said in an interview with a Polish news channel.Zbigniew Cwiakalski, a former justice minister and prosecutor general, said that there were “a number of reasons why Mr. Polanski should not be extradited,” apart from the fact that charges against him had expired under the statute of limitations in Poland.“He made up with the victim, who has ever since appealed to stop his prosecution,” Mr. Cwiakalski said. “Moreover, since Polanski committed his crime, he has been leading an exemplary life of a husband and father.”Mr. Polanski needs the assurance of the Polish authorities that he will not be subject to extradition since he plans to shoot his new film in Poland. The filmmaker, who is a Holocaust survivor born to Polish-Jewish parents, wants to make a new version of “The Dreyfus Affair.”