Despite her negative-sounding surname, Leslie Knope (Amy Poehler) always stood out as one of TV’s most positive and upbeat characters, and this Pawnee, Ind., civil servant’s can-do spirit radiated throughout the sunny series finale of “Parks and Recreation.” Employing a flash-forward structure, the NBC sitcom’s send-off gave each of its characters a happy ending. For example, Leslie was elected governor of Indiana twice, with her beloved husband, Ben (Adam Scott), by her side. The show also implied that one of them ultimately reached even higher office.Even as he grieves over the recent death of his fellow executive producer Harris Wittels (which he declined to discuss), the co-creator Michael Schur spoke about the surprise cameos of Vice President Joe Biden and Dr. Jill Biden, paying homage to “Six Feet Under,” and whether big-screen success changed P&R’s breakout star, Chris Pratt.Why did you go with the flash-forward approach?We did a flash-forward at the end of last season to set up that Season 7 takes place in 2017. So that idea was rattling around in our brains. The writers talked a lot about what makes good finales, and one of those things is giving the audience an idea of what happens to the characters in the future. Then it was a very short jump from there to “Why don’t we just show it?” And the cast was so strong, I felt it was a good way to give every character a little moment in the sun.Was it an homage to the celebrated finale of “Six Feet Under,” which depicted the future lives and eventual deaths of the show’s main characters?We retroactively talked about that and began internally describing our finale to ourselves as “the comedy ‘Six Feet Under’ finale.” Only instead of everybody dying, you get to see something happy that happens to everybody. It wasn’t necessarily inspired by “Six Feet Under,” but it was neat, because that finale was so appropriate for that show and so effective and moving. People still talk about it. I felt like we were on solid footing based on the fact that we seemed to echo that finale.What was it like having Vice President Joe Biden back on the show, and to have him joined by wife, Jill, this time?It was great. We shot that back when we went to Washington, D.C., to film the eighth episode of this season, and we had to keep it under wraps for the finale. It’s crazy that the vice president of the United States is a recurring character on our show. But it was also really nice to have Dr. Jill Biden on the show, because my grandmother was a teacher, and I know a lot of teachers for whom she is a real role model.Did you have to give them much direction, or do they have natural comic timing?I’ll tell you, politicians are not trained actors, but they’re so prepared. They know all their lines, and they’re so comfortable in front of cameras. It makes sense. When I used to work on “Saturday Night Live,” we’d always be worried about a politician or a sports figure hosting a live comedy show, but the reality is, in their normal lives, they’re under so much more pressure than they are on a show like ours. They’re all pros and know exactly what they’re doing. It’s a real joy to watch.Now that Chris Pratt has become a huge movie star with Marvel’s “Guardians of the Galaxy,” do you think he’ll still return your calls?The thing about Pratt is, I defy anybody to find a single difference in his personality, demeanor or ego today from when he started on the show, or probably from when he was 12 years old. The guy is a modern marvel — no pun intended — but he’s just an incredibly solid, centered and nice person, and I don’t think there’s anything that could happen to him to change that. But to answer your question, no, he definitely won’t return my calls.Leslie refers to an unknown challenge ahead of her after finishing her two terms as governor, and we see a Secret Service-like agent speaking to Ben and Leslie at a funeral years later. Are we to infer that one of them becomes president?We explicitly say a lot of things about what happened to people on the show. I felt like because of that, it would be fun to leave a little ambiguity and let viewers make up their own minds about what happens to those two characters.The end of the episode quotes Teddy Roosevelt from a speech he made to a group of farmers in 1903 in which he said, “Far and away the best prize that life has to offer is the chance to work hard at work worth doing,” to which you added, “and getting to do it with people you love.” Does that reflect how you look back over your seven seasons on “Parks and Recreation?”Absolutely. In the course of the show and its saga of hanging on and us all getting to do it together for seven years, there became a lot of parallels between Leslie Knope and the work we were doing to create her. That quote from Teddy Roosevelt, which I love so much, is a perfect representation of Leslie’s attitude and the attitude of all the people who spent seven years putting our hearts and souls into the show. It can serve as an epitaph for both Leslie Knope as a character and also for the show as a whole.