By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 25, 2015
8 P.M. (13, 49) THE LAST ORANGUTAN EDEN The orangutan, considered Asia’s most intelligent ape, once roamed in droves across the Indonesian islands of Sumatra and Java. But today fewer than 7,000 Sumatran orangutans exist in the wild, their population rapidly declining because of the deforestation of land for vast palm oil plantations. In this “Nature” episode, the ecologist Chris Morgan accompanies researchers into a protected peat swamp forest to study the culture and behavior of orangutans. He also visits a research center where orphaned orangutans are taught the skills — like using tools, sharing food and foraging together — they need before being released back into the wild.8 P.M. (CBS) SURVIVOR A 30th season divides castaways into three tribes according to their civilian occupations: white collar, blue collar and no collar. The 26th round of “The Amazing Race,” at 9:30, plays matchmaker as six couples — including the Olympic speed skater Aly Dudek and her partner, the Olympic bobsledder Steven Langton — are joined by five pairs of singles set up on blind dates at the starting line.9 P.M. (ABC) MODERN FAMILY When Claire (Julie Bowen) is grounded at the airport after a fight with Haley (Sarah Hyland), she FaceTimes with Phil (Ty Burrell) and the rest of the family to track her daughter down. Then she turns to online snooping in this mockumentary episode. In “black-ish,” at 9:30, Dre (Anthony Anderson) tutors Andre Jr. (Marcus Scribner) in how to trash talk the school bully into submission.9 P.M. (NBC) LAW & ORDER: SPECIAL VICTIMS UNIT The life of a celebrity author, Walter Briggs (Robert Vaughn), becomes tabloid fodder when his sixth wife, Charmaine (Marcia Cross), and his daughters (Emily Bergl and Susan Pourfar) from past marriages fight for control of both his well-being and his estate. Then Charmaine is accused of abusing Walter.Advertisement9 P.M. (Fox) EMPIRE Lucious (Terrence Howard), Hakeem (Bryshere Y. Gray) and Jamal (Jussie Smollett) record a legacy album. Cookie (Taraji P. Henson) and Camilla (Naomi Campbell) finally meet in person.Advertisement9:45 P.M. (TCM) COAL MINER’S DAUGHTER (1980) Sissy Spacek won an Oscar for her portrayal of the country legend Loretta Lynn in this affecting biographical drama from Michael Apted, a role for which she did all the singing. A “gentle touch” gives “this movie its distinctive sweetness,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times, adding that the film “risks understating its story to make Loretta Lynn’s biography part of a larger fabric, and the gamble pays off.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (Cooking) DINNER AT TIFFANI’S When she’s not on the set, Tiffani Thiessen, whose career has spanned “Saved by the Bell,” “Beverly Hills, 90210” and “White Collar,” likes to relax by cooking and chatting with her celebrity friends. In this series premiere, she invites Ross Mathews, Jillian Barberie and Tim Meadows over for a game night with finger food that keeps hands free for throwing the dice. The menu includes roasted dates stuffed with goat cheese and smoked bacon, and mushroom, leek and prosciutto pizza. Meyer lemon and thyme whiskey sours help put guests in a playful mood.10 P.M. (Lifetime) KOSHER SOUL The stylist Miriam Sternoff, who is Jewish, and the comedian O’Neal McKnight, who is black and Christian, prepare to wed as he converts to Judaism and she adopts his Southern traditions.10 P.M. (USA) SUITS Harvey (Gabriel Macht) and Mike (Patrick J. Adams) race to save their victory against Liberty Rail when new evidence surfaces. But when District Attorney Wolf (Chi McBride) becomes involved, Donna (Sarah Rafferty) must confront the possibility of going to prison for her role in the case.11 P.M. (Fuse) BIG FREEDIA: QUEEN OF BOUNCE The rapper and self-described queen of New Orleans bounce — in 2013, she earned a Guinness World Records title, along with more than 250 dancers, for the most people twerking simultaneously — hits the road for her third season and first “megatour.”What’s Streaming NowFROM THE BASEMENT The music producer Nigel Godrich presents intimate performances by artists including the Shins, Aimee Mann, Feist, the Red Hot Chili Peppers and the Scissor Sisters. (crackle.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 25, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.