By BRIAN SEIBERTFEB. 24, 2015
In several ways, Pam Tanowitz’s “Broken Story (wherein there is no ecstasy)” is accurately titled. The parenthetical phrase might mislead, though. The work, which had its premiere at the Guggenheim Museum on Sunday as part of the Works & Process series, does have droll fun tweaking dance traditions of romantic fulfillment. But Ms. Tanowitz and her collaborators maintain such a high level of imagination that what is fragmented by design can be experienced as a satisfying, organic whole. Ecstatic is a good word for how it made me feel.“Broken Story” was broken in conception. The composer David Lang, rather than contributing a full-length score, wrote a short piece and invited three of his former students (Hannah Lash, Caroline Shaw and Ted Hearne) to supply short pieces of their own. The resulting works, all for string quartet, are inventive, bristling with the sounds of bows bounced and strings twanged and rubbed. Vividly rendered by the unflappable Flux Quartet, the individual scores share a skeptical attitude, melting down romantic themes, but they are separate, and it takes Ms. Tanowitz to thread them together with the variegated dynamics of her unpredictable steps.She has help in resourceful lighting design by Davison Scandrett and costumes by Reid Bartelme that combine flat Color Field shapes with translucent shimmer. Her dancers (Lindsey Jones, Maggie Cloud, Dylan Crossman, Stuart Singer and Melissa Toogood) could hardly be better. But most significant is the extra preparation time that the Guggenheim allowed her in its small and idiosyncratic theater. She makes the best use of it that I have ever seen.Indicative of her wit is how a safety railing can function as a barre or a dancer can check his balance with the underside of a low overhanging balcony. Entrances and exits, as from an odd, high-set door, are both comically and dramatically surprising. The dancers venture out on a semicircular path that arcs from the stage through the audience area and back.AdvertisementWhat’s most ingenious about this full exploitation of the space is how it feeds into Ms. Tanowitz’s suggestions of story. She was inspired by J. D. Salinger’s “The Heart of a Broken Story,” in which the narrator of a boy-meets-girl tale refuses to let boy meet girl. Less coy than Salinger, Ms. Tanowitz thwarts and fulfills conventional expectations, playing with the human implications of when a solo becomes a duet or a duet becomes a trio.There’s more wit in this, a funny passivity when Mr. Crossman frames Ms. Cloud with his arms and she turns, no help from him. But there’s also more than wit. A delight of Ms. Tanowitz’s choreography is how she makes dancers of extreme precision do strange and awkward things very precisely. A woozy solo for the hyperarticulate Ms. Toogood dryly suggests emotional imbalance, a reaction to what’s happened before.AdvertisementThe dancers keep turning into couples, and it matters more than formally whether they are going to get together. When someone ventures on the semicircular path, leaving someone else behind onstage, the shape of the path guarantees reunion. Near the end, Mr. Singer gives up on the independent Ms. Toogood, but he lingers near the wings. Soon just his hand sticks out, and Ms. Toogood, walking backward, takes it. Following an eccentric line, Ms. Tanowitz dodges sentimentality and sneaks up on deep emotion.A version of this review appears in print on February 25, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: With Unpredictable Steps, Wit Comes Full Circle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.