By ALASTAIR MACAULAYFEB. 24, 2015
Balletomanes know how druglike their special brand of dance can be. Energy and beauty flow from the spectacle onstage; in the audience, perceptions of time, space and human potential feel profoundly changed. The need to follow performances becomes akin to addiction; and the end of a season brings withdrawal symptoms.The many highs of the six-week New York City Ballet season that ends on March 1 have included memorably inflected performances of central classics by George Balanchine, not least “Serenade” and “Concerto Barocco.” A triple bill of modern choreography by Alexei Ratmansky, Justin Peck and Christopher Wheeldon confirmed beliefs that City Ballet is the world’s foremost home of 21st-century choreography. And Mr. Peck’s ballet, a world premiere, “Rodeo: Four Dance Episodes,” crowned the season.It’s not long since the levels of both Balanchine dancing and new choreography were chiefly cause for complaint; so gratitude is mixed with something close to incredulity. For me and others, the single hardest-to-credit feature of the season has been the quality of ballerina dancing in Balanchine’s “Chaconne” (1976).“Chaconne” is set to music from Gluck’s “Orphée et Eurydice”; it’s fair not only to see the lead couple as the poet-musician Orpheus and his regained Eurydice but also to feel that Balanchine was here hailing Suzanne Farrell as his own Eurydice, newly returned to City Ballet after a six-year absence. And in the multifaceted dramatic coloratura of her role he began a fresh chapter in ballerina virtuosity, later supplemented by “Walpurgisnacht Ballet” (1980) and “Mozartiana” (1981).AdvertisementIn its early years, “Chaconne” was a vehicle for Ms. Farrell and no other ballerina; in recent years, its heroine has usually been danced without inspiring luster. Forgotten glory was at last restored with Sara Mearns’s illustrious debut performances last October, excellently assisted by Russell Janzen in the role created for Peter Martins. Yet who then would have anticipated that January would bring two other ballerina performances of comparable luster?AdvertisementTeresa Reichlen’s debut (Jan. 28) showed the marvelous audacity she has gained this year (both twinkling and grand); and her partner, Adrian Danchig-Waring, reaching his maturity this season, matches her in boldness and brio. Most surprising of all, the company’s senior ballerina, Maria Kowroski, in performances the previous week, conquered the role more completely than ever, with a wealth of fresh musical nuances.The beauty of Ms. Kowroski’s long-limbed physique and the naturally vast amplitude of her line, along with her wryly discreet manner, have long won her high affection among the audience. But, perhaps because of her varying levels of technical assurance, a diffidence often attends her stage persona. (You see it in the way she tips her head slightly to one side in taking bows.) Several of her recent performances, however, seem newly irradiated by a basic love of dance itself: You can feel her giving more and getting more.The season was not without causes for concern. Erica Pereira, now admirable in the “Serenade” Russian dance lead role and as the “Nutcracker” Sugar Plum Fairy, remains unacceptably flimsy in too many other parts, notably the “junior” pas de deux in “Chaconne.” Lauren Lovette, often so exquisite above the waist, not only lacks the strength for the most allegro roles she’s being given (especially “Symphony in C” ’s third movement) but plays most of her repertory with a passive sentimentality that’s surely anti-Balanchine.The debut of any corps dancer in her or his first lead role is always an event, but Claire Von Enck’s first performance in Balanchine’s “Tarantella” — sweet and leggy — never showed how these dances fitted their music. She may well improve, but that way of losing musical focus was a characteristic of City Ballet’s long doldrums from the early 1990s on. Fortunately, her partner, Spartak Hoxha — his first lead, too — was sure in timing and merrily in charge of the entertainment.Dance is the most fragile of the arts. When Mr. Ratmansky’s “Pictures at an Exhibition,” a work of strange originality and wildness, returned to repertory on Feb. 4, it looked in some ways (notably in the heart-catching urgency and refinement of Sterling Hyltin’s line in the role made for Wendy Whelan) better than at its October premiere. A week later, however, other role debuts brought a number of slight blurs; and tipped it into faux-naïveté.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Rodeo,” billed on the same rich program, is Mr. Peck’s sixth creation for City Ballet, his home company, in less than three years. And it’s the fourth in which he has scored an unmistakable audience hit while making an impressively original piece of complex formal organization. (The others are “In Creases,” “Year of the Rabbit” and “Everywhere We Go.”) It shows several compositional advances: subtle same-sex partnering without sexual implications (notably in the wonderful Corral Nocturne adagio all-male quintet) and reciprocal female-male partnering in its Saturday Night Waltz pas de deux.Perhaps more important, it is the first ballet in which Mr. Peck rises to the level of music that is both important and beloved. And just as Balanchine distills aspects of the Orpheus story in “Chaconne,” so does Mr. Peck with that of “Rodeo”: While boiling away the plot, he keeps and concentrates its heart.In the ballet’s energetic outer movements, I love the way Mr. Peck combines an informal atmosphere with formal games of arithmetic and geometry. The 15 men are continually reorganized into different units; at one point the heroine bursts up above them in an explosive lift and, near the four corners of the stage, four men pop up in double air turns.Mr. Peck has been one of City Ballet’s soloists since 2013; at the start of his choreographic career, he was still in the corps. And his finest creations are for the dancers in these two lower ranks, whom he inspires most: Nowhere are these younger men so rapturous as in his dances. Despite the good lead roles for Ms. Mearns (Tiler Peck also danced it vividly on Feb. 11), Amar Ramasar, Daniel Ulbricht and two other male leads, you come out talking above all about its junior men: especially Taylor Stanley, the ardent focal point of that all-male adagio, and Mr. Janzen (whose authority is such that, for a couple of momentous phrases in the opening Buckaroo Holiday, the ballet seems all about him).AdvertisementIf Mr. Peck goes on to create dances equally revelatory for individual ballerinas and for the female corps, he’ll prove a true master. Already people are greeting “Rodeo” as a masterpiece; its brilliant and affecting range of moods and structures casts a rare spell.New York City Ballet’s season ends on Sunday; nycballet.com. A version of this review appears in print on February 25, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Premiere Adds Luster as a Season Nears Its End.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.