AdvertisementSupported byBy Janelle CarriganSYDNEY — In a serene Chinese garden in the heart of the city earlier this month Sun Qinglin danced across a large square of cardboard secured to the ground with overturned rice bowls. With a thick calligraphy brush he deftly formed black Chinese characters, and then their English translation: “Your lover’s love appears in your mind’s eye.”Then with 300 people watching the art performance, Mr. Sun and his two partners, who make up the Chinese artist collective Yangjiang Group, placed gnawed chicken wings, thin strands of jellyfish and strips of tofu atop the sweeping brushstrokes. The last letter was punctuated with a shiny cube of sweet potato and globs of rice.The three-dimensional work they created, “After Dinner Shu Fa,” is part of the trio’s first exhibition in Australia, which was curated by 4A Center for Contemporary Asian Art in Sydney, the first installment in “Mass Group Incident,” a five-month project that runs through May 31. Yangjiang Group is famous for subverting ancient calligraphy and bringing everyday pleasures, like food and drink, into their mixed-media art. Their show at 4A, “Actions for Tomorrow,” runs until March 7 and is an ambitious start to “Mass Group Incident.”Zheng Guogu, already an acclaimed solo artist, formed the group in 2002 with Chen Zaiyan and Mr. Sun in the southern coastal city of Yangjiang, which is best known for its production of Shibazi knives.“The big city has already been polluted in both an environmental and cultural way,” Mr. Zheng said. In Yangjiang “it is still pure, which is more inspirational.”Yangjiang Group’s calligraphic works and performances have been widely exhibited around the world, from Tate Liverpool in Britain to the Mori Art Museum in Japan and the San Diego Museum of Art. They have also been shown at Art Basel and the Venice Biennale, and there is a strong commercial market for their work, according to Reuben Keehan, curator of contemporary Asian art at the Queensland Art Gallery and Gallery of Modern Art. “That hegemony of the Beijing/Shanghai domination of the art world is really starting to break down,” he said. “Different parts of China are starting to evolve. It’s still very, very fresh but it’s a good time for Yangjiang Group. The art world has come to them.”Mr. Keehan visited the artists’ bold self-designed studio last year while on a research trip to China. “We’re quite familiar now with the slightly older generation of Chinese artists who were around in the 1980s and ’90s,” he said, “people like Ai Weiwei, Cai Guo-Qiang, Zhang Huan. They’re people who went through the Cultural Revolution and directly experienced the events of the late 1980s.”The members of Yangjiang Group, born mid-way through the Cultural Revolution in the early 1970s, experienced the full brunt of China’s consumer-culture boom of the 1990s.This is reflected in the group’s “Action’s for Tomorrow” exhibition at 4A, which plays with the notion of time. The artists’ “Final Days” installation on the ground floor of 4A’s Chinatown gallery, seems like a retail store at first glance. Clothes custom-made in Yangjiang hang on racks and are neatly folded on a central table. Slogans on the wall in Chinese and English advertise sales. But every item is encased in dripping wax, frozen in time, as globalization and online shopping encroach on local businesses.Aaron Seeto, 4A’s director, commissioned several new pieces for the Yangjiang Group exhibition. Upstairs, new works include a 24-meter-long calligraphic mural in scrawled Chinese and English proclaiming, “God is dead! Long live the RMB!” The statement was the result of a discussion the artists had with a local Sinologist over dinner about the property market, economics and Australia’s relationship to China. “We have both Western standards for art and Chinese standards for art and we combine these together,” Mr. Zheng said. “Then we get a new standard.”Unlike the bold political statements of artists such as Ai Weiwei, the members of Yangjiang Group say they’re more interested in challenging social conventions. “I don’t want to distinguish between political or not political,” Mr. Zheng said. “It’s a very sensitive issue. We travel from art to beauty, then from beauty to social issues. Beauty is the thing that always exists. Political issues change.”The artists also want to have fun. “That’s one of the fantastic aspects of the work,” Mr. Keehan said. “They’re very interested in collaborating with audiences. They let people really participate in the process.”At the night in the Chinese garden, guests were invited to play a game of chance with the artists. At the roll of a dice, winners were rewarded with a free cocktail and losers had their faces painted with random black markings. By the end of the night, dramatic curly moustaches and third eyes were as prevalent on faces as lipstick.“Actions for Tomorrow” was partly funded by a new partnership between Art Basel and Kickstarter, the online fundraising platform. Last year, 4A’s collaboration with Yangjiang Group was one of four nonprofit visual arts projects supported by Art Basel, and more than 20,000 Australian dollars, or nearly $16,000, were raised for the show between September and October 2014. The next installment in 4A’s wide-ranging “Mass Group Incident” project is from nine artists diverse in geography and practice, ranging from Shilpa Gupta of India to FX Harsono of Indonesia. The project, “Tell Me My Truth,” explores the individual in relation to the group. The project will end with “48HR Incident,” a continuous program of live performance and other art over two days. “We are asking audiences to really engage, to visit us at odd hours, to commit to the project in ways which galleries often don’t ask,” Mr. Seeto said.Advertisement