Jill Abramson, a former executive editor of The New York Times, has sold a book about the future of the media industry to Simon & Schuster.The book will explore the challenges that traditional media organizations are facing as they seek to survive and flourish in the digital age, and how online media companies are changing the way news is gathered and consumed.In a statement released by Simon & Schuster, Ms. Abramson said that after having wrestled with the rapidly changing media landscape as an editor, she was eager to tackle the subject as a reporter. “I’ve been a frontline combatant in the news media’s battle to remain the bedrock of an informed society,” Ms. Abramson said. “Now I’m going to wear my reporter’s hat again to tell the full drama of that story in a book, focusing on both traditional and new media players in the digital age.”Ms. Abramson, the first female executive editor of The Times, led the paper from September 2011 until May 2014, when she was abruptly dismissed by the paper’s publisher, Arthur Sulzberger Jr. She’s since taken a position as a visiting lecturer teaching narrative nonfiction writing at Harvard University, and announced plans for a long-form journalism startup with Steven Brill.Ms. Abramson has published several other books, including “Strange Justice: The Selling of Clarence Thomas,” which she wrote with Jane Mayer, and “The Puppy Diaries,” her memoir about training her dog Scout. Before joining the Times, where she worked for 17 years, she was an investigative reporter for The Wall Street Journal.Her new book will be edited by Simon & Schuster’s editorial director, Alice Mayhew, a publishing industry veteran who edits Bob Woodward, Walter Isaacson and the historians Doris Kearns Goodwin and Taylor Branch. In an interview, Ms. Mayhew said that the book is “not a memoir and it’s not directed at Jill’s experience in any way.” News of the book was first reported by The New York Post.Ms. Mayhew declined to disclose what the publisher paid for the book in an auction, but said that the rumored figure of $1 million that was reported by The Post is “not accurate.”