Unlike the heroes of DC Comics, which often protect fictional cities like Gotham and Metropolis, the heroes of Marvel Comics tend to cluster around New York: Spider-Man, or rather Peter Parker, grew up in Queens, the Avengers and the Fantastic Four are headquartered in Manhattan, and the X-Men have a school for gifted youngsters in Westchester.Marvel is celebrating the New York roots of its heroes in May with a series of covers that showcase the city and its colorful champions. “Each cover is carefully considered to make a statement about New York,” said Axel Alonso, the editor in chief of Marvel Comics. The images include Ant-Man hanging out atop a hot dog cart, agents of the intelligence agency S.H.I.E.L.D. in aerial combat near the Statue of Liberty’s torch and the Incredible Hulk catching some non-gamma rays in Central Park. There will be New York-themed covers on 15 series.These covers are known as “variants,” because the 15 series will also have a traditional cover, which typically depicts a moment from the story contained in that issue. Variant covers are often themed and are popular with a segment of collectors interested in their collectability because of their more limited print run. Past Marvel themes have included zombie depictions of its heroes. In April, 20 covers will have a “What the Duck?!” theme in honor of a new Howard the Duck series that begins in March. Mr. Alonso looks at variant covers as a tool for getting a comic more attention. But “what really matters is the story,” he said. DC Comics is no stranger to variant covers. In March, 22 of their series will have covers that are based on movie posters, including a group shot of the Justice League based on the poster for “Magic Mike.” And comic book lore pinpoints Issue No. 1 of “Man of Steel,” published by DC Comics in July 1986, as the first comic with a marketed variant cover. The story, by the writer and artist John Byrne, presented a fresh take on Superman, stripping away years of convoluted continuity. The standard cover featured a full figure of Clark Kent, opening his shirt to reveal the Superman costume. The variant cover was an extreme close-up of the pulled-away shirt revealing the S-emblem. 