Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.POUL RUDERS: ‘Nightshade Trilogy’
Capricorn, Oliver Knussen, conductor; Odense Symphony Orchestra, Paul Mann and Scott Yoo, conductors
(Bridge 9433; one CD)
When the masterly Danish composer Poul Ruders wrote “Nightshade,” a work for 10 instruments, in 1986, he did not know it would be the first of three related scores written over 18 years, his “Nightshade Trilogy,” as he later called it. “The Second Nightshade,” a Symphonic Nocturne for chamber orchestra, came in 1991. “Final Nightshade,” an Adagio of the Night for full orchestra, ended the series in 2003. All three works explore extreme contrasts of high and low, loud and soft, fast and slow, and such, as the composer explains in liner notes. But nothing can explain the cosmic allure, audacious inventiveness and gripping strangeness of Mr. Ruders’s ingenious music. This recording album brings together three recordings of the three works made over 17 years, conducted respectively by Oliver Knussen (with the Capricorn ensemble), Paul Mann and Scott Yoo (with the Odense Symphony Orchestra). (Anthony Tommasini)HAYDN: String Quartets
The Schneider Quartet
(Music & Arts, CD-1281(15))
Many string foursomes have set out to record all of Haydn’s quartets, and almost as many have failed. But the Schneider Quartet’s truncated efforts from the early 1950s, as Tully Potter’s booklet notes put it, have “acquired a patina of legendary quality.” Rightly so, on the evidence of Lani Spahr’s gorgeous restorations of over 17 hours of charming, joyous playing. It’s hard to believe that this quartet — led eloquently by Alexander Schneider and featuring Isidore Cohen, Karen Tuttle, Madeline Foley and, later, Herman Busch — met just occasionally, elegantly to make funny, humane and consistently insightful music. (David Allen)VILLA-LOBOS: Symphony No. 10 ‘Ameríndia’
Leonardo Neiva, baritone; Saulo Javan, bass; São Paulo Symphony Orchestra and Choir; Isaac Karabtchevsky, conductor
(Naxos 8.5732)
Massive, glittering and intricately coiled, Villa-Lobos’s 10th, “Ameríndia,” is an anaconda of a symphony. Commissioned to commemorate the 400th anniversary of the founding of São Paulo in 1954, it’s a sprawling oratorio that draws on Tupi, Portuguese and Latin texts to celebrate the Jesuit missionary José de Anchieta. This fine recording makes the most of the drama and simmering energy of Villa-Lobos’s dense score, but the work remains a perplexing, heavy heap of good intentions. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim) VAUGHAN WILLIAMS: Symphony No. 3, Fantasia on a Theme by Thomas Tallis, other works
Sarah Fox, soprano; the Hallé, Mark Elder, conductor
(Hallé, HLL 7540)
The Hallé, based in Manchester, England, is one of the world’s few orchestras with a genuine specialty, and the orchestra I grew up with is in glorious form on this new release. Vaughan Williams’s war-tinged Third Symphony moves with its memories of bugle calls and the soprano Sarah Fox’s melismatic wail, but the works for strings — the Tallis Fantasia and the “Five Variants on ‘Dives and Lazarus,’ ” which had its premiere at Carnegie Hall in 1939 — glow with an exceptional, resonant warmth. (Allen)MOHAMMED FAIROUZ: ‘Follow, Poet’
Kate Lindsey, mezzo; Paul Muldoon, speaker; Mike Truesdell, percussionist; Ensemble LPR; Evan Rogister, conductor
(Deutsche Grammophon; one disc)
 This captivating album is not only Mohammed Fairouz’s debut recording for Deutsche Grammophon, but also this label’s first release in what is to become a series, titled “Return to Language,” dedicated to the interrelation of words and music. Much of Mr. Fairouz’s music engages with political themes. Here, he ties together two statesmen whose lives were cut short by assassination. He frames the first musical work, “Audenesque,” with recordings of speeches by John F. Kennedy and follows with a musical tribute to Anwar El-Sadat. The music for the instrumental five-movement “Sadat” is more colorful and rhythmically alive than “Audenesque,” a song cycle performed elegantly by the mezzo Kate Lindsey but lacking something of an emotional edge. (Fonseca-Wollheim)SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)