By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 26, 2015
10 P.M. (CBS) THE VICTORIA’S SECRET SWIM SPECIAL Adriana Lima, Candice Swanepoel, Lily Aldridge, Behati Prinsloo, Alessandra Ambrosio, Joan Smalls and other beauties brave jungle treks and underwater shoots in Puerto Rico as they are photographed for the Victoria’s Secret swimwear campaign, accompanied by music from Maroon 5 and Juanes.9:15 A.M. (Cinemax) THE DEEP END (2001) Tilda Swinton plays a mother who shields her gay son (Jonathan Tucker) from a blackmailer (Goran Visnjic) after the death of her son’s former lover (Josh Lucas). “Her work is magnificent,” Elvis Mitchell wrote of Ms. Swinton in The New York Times, “an actress burrowing inside herself to play a woman doing the most horrible thing in the world to restore order to her life.”8 P.M. (CBS) THE BIG BANG THEORY As a joke, Sheldon (Jim Parsons) and Penny (Kaley Cuoco-Sweeting) undertake an experiment designed to make participants fall in love. In “The Odd Couple,” at 8:30, Felix (Thomas Lennon) offers to help Oscar (Matthew Perry) ghostwrite an autobiography about a former baseball player. And in “Mom,” at 9:30, Christy (Anna Faris) realizes that sex is more exciting when there’s a chance of being caught.8 P.M. (Starz Cinema) CLOSER (2004) Julia Roberts, Jude Law, Clive Owen and Natalie Portman star as entangled Londoners in this Mike Nichols adaptation of Patrick Marber’s play about toxic romance. “They are four characters in search of an objective correlative, their intimacies obstructed by lofty words — honesty, cowardice, love — that seem, after a while, to mean nothing at all,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.Advertisement9 P.M. (ABC) HOW TO GET AWAY WITH MURDER Flashbacks reveal what happened the night of Lila’s murder in this two-hour season finale, while in the present day Annalise (Viola Davis) takes on the case of a priest accused of killing one of his own.Advertisement10 P.M. (NBC) ALLEGIANCE Alex (Gavin Stenhouse), who in the last episode got close to the truth about his parents while investigating a dormant sleeper cell, struggles to align his theories with new evidence. Mark (Scott Cohen) and Katya (Hope Davis), meanwhile, have some explaining to do when the Rezident (David Vadim) questions their loyalty.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (Pivot) FORTITUDE An unnerving discovery threatens to destroy the Sutter family in this murder mystery set on a fictional Arctic island where the polar bears outnumber the people and crime is thought to be nonexistent. Stanley Tucci, Richard Dormer and Michael Gambon star.10 P.M. (Flix) THE MUSE (1999) Albert Brooks directed, wrote (with Monica Johnson) and starred in this satire on the creative process, playing Steven Phillips, the kind of Hollywood screenwriter who is lauded with humanitarian awards rather than Oscars. In other words, he has lost his edge. Then, at the suggestion of Jack (Jeff Bridges), a much more stellar writer, Steven takes on a muse named Sarah (Sharon Stone). She’s the answer to Steven’s prayers, Jack insists. Just look what she has done for Martin Scorsese. “Although Sarah is played dreamily by Ms. Stone, who wafts through the film with an alarming mix of nymphlike abandon and horse sense, ‘The Muse’ does reach a philosophical dead end when it comes to appeasing her,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times.What’s Streaming NowFIRST PERSON Kristin Russo, a founder of the youth organization Everyone Is Gay, hosts this new series, a collaboration of WNET and PBS Digital Studios, exploring sexuality and gender identity. The artist Skylar Kergil is interviewed in this first episode, which examines transgender visibility and transitions. (youtube.com/firstpersonpbs)BEHIND THE MASK Season 2 of this Emmy-nominated series follows four sports mascots to glean what’s going on inside and outside of their suits. (hulu.com)SOUND ADVICE Vanessa Bayer of “Saturday Night Live” plays an image consultant to musicians — despite knowing nothing about music. Among those seeking her advice: Chromeo, Haim, Nick Jonas and Weird Al Yankovic, who kicks off Season 2. (ifc.com/comedy-crib)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 26, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Thursday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.