By SIOBHAN BURKEFEB. 25, 2015
In the decade since she founded her company, the choreographer Kate Weare has definitely figured out how to make a duet — a certain kind of duet, with lots of tension, sexual and otherwise, between the parties. This became clear last Thursday at BAM Fisher, where her troupe is offering a retrospective of sorts: three duets from 2007 to 2010; a new duet inspired by one of those older ones; and the early stages of a developing trio.The program also gave Ms. Weare an opportunity to honor her dancers, whom she called in her introduction “a very special species, as you’ll see.” (We did.) Two of them, Leslie Kraus and Douglas Gillespie, have been with her since the beginning. In the life of a dancer, 10 years is a long time, and their fluency in Ms. Weare’s style — their whole-being commitment — shone through in excerpts from “Bridge of Sighs” (2008) and “Bright Land” (2010), which they danced together.Yet that style, despite its sparkling execution and Ms. Weare’s careful craftsmanship, wore increasingly thin. The four duets, which made up the first half of the evening, depicted nearly identical relationships through similar means: two people (usually a man and a woman), locked in an erotically charged tug of war. The prevailing message, shot through with pregnant pauses: “I’m angry. Now I’m not. Or am I?” (In her program notes, Ms. Weare writes that lust is “a choreographic obsession I’ll likely never outgrow.”)Lust had the most levity in “Bridge of Sighs,” which opened the program. Aggression blurred with playfulness as Ms. Kraus and Mr. Gillespie exchanged vehement slaps and swipes, creating their own score through well-timed grappling and sharp, audible breathing. Their confrontations had a harder edge in “Bright Land,” set to bluegrass by the Crooked Jades. In the final moments, the chiffon-clad Ms. Kraus, straddling her partner on the floor, delivered a series of wallops to his chest — with her forehead — nudging him from sitting up to lying flat, defeated.Sandwiched between those works were “Drop Down” (2007), performed by Joseph Hernandez and Natasha Adorlee Johnson of the San Francisco company ODC/Dance (Ms. Weare hails from California), and its reincarnation, the premiere of “Volver,” for Mr. Gillespie and T. J. Spaur. Both pieces draw upon Ms. Weare’s passion for tango, though “Volver” is softer, more inviting — a simple turn on the dance floor instead of a protracted fight.The surfaces of Ms. Weare’s work can be so slick, so pretty, as to be alienating — and so full of feeling that they deflect the viewer’s own. But with “Unstruck” (still in “draft” form, she said), she appears to be heading in a slightly new direction. This undulatory trio for Mr. Spaur, Julian De Leon and the striking Nicole Diaz, set to Curtis Macdonald’s alternately growling and pulsing score, is still tense, but more spaciously so. In quiet, luxuriant moments of stillness, Ms. Weare gives the dancers — and us — a little more room to breathe.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.