By STEPHEN HOLDENFEB. 25, 2015
A wrenching adjustment is required to accept performances of classic bossa nova songs sung in a voice more commanding than an intimate near whisper. Even Frank Sinatra, who recorded two albums of songs mostly composed by bossa nova’s founding father, Antônio Carlos Jobim, shed his swinging ring-a-ding-ding persona to adopt the murmur of an enraptured lover.Because the baritone Paulo Szot, who sang a centennial tribute to Sinatra at 54 Below on Tuesday evening, grew up in Brazil, it’s only natural that he would be drawn to Mr. Jobim’s work. He’s done it before. But how much musical sense does it make for him to treat these dreamy meditations as stentorian fusions of opera and soft Brazilian jazz?For the first half of the evening, Mr. Szot, accompanied by a quintet playing standard bossa nova arrangements, reminded me of Robert Goulet in his lounge-lizard mode serenading a high-rolling Las Vegas audience back in the day. Steamrolling the inevitable “Girl From Ipanema,” he crushed it to death.And then something clicked. Mr. Szot mustered his resources and a flood of passion rushed into singing that previously had felt uncomfortably mechanical. The turning point was a courtly bossa nova rendition of Irving Berlin’s “Change Partners.” Songs like “Dindi,” “Once I Loved,” “How Insensitive,” “I Concentrate On You,” “Fly Me to the Moon” and “Old Devil Moon” took on a convincing emotional intensity.It became evident that Mr. Szot has made great strides in his command of English since winning a Tony for his portrayal Emile de Becque in the 2008 Lincoln Center Theater revival of “South Pacific.” The capstone was his mighty performance of “This Nearly Was Mine,” which in recent years has unseated “Some Enchanted Evening” as the musical’s ultimate ballad. It was worth the wait.Paulo Szot appears through Saturday at 54 Below, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 646-476-3551, 54below.com. A version of this review appears in print on February 26, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Bossy Bossa Nova.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.