Season 3, Episode 4: Chapter 30Read all of our “House of Cards” recaps.Do you know who the solicitor general is? Actually, let’s back up a minute — do you know what the solicitor general is?Well, she’s about to become a big part of “House of Cards.” As the episode opens, we are inside the Supreme Court as the solicitor general, Heather Dunbar, is disclosing that, yes, the United States military is carrying out drone strikes and, yes, they sometimes kill innocent civilians. (In case you haven’t figured it out yet, the solicitor general is the government lawyer who argues the administration’s cases before the Supreme Court.)She closes her argument with a grandiose lecture on the importance of the office of the presidency and how “we can prosecute presidents, but not the presidency.”That sets off deafening alarm bells in Underwoodland. Frank is at yet another cemetery, this time Arlington, where he is attending the funeral of some Navy SEALs. Jackie and Remy let Frank in on a few pertinent details about Heather Dunbar. She’s ambitious. She comes from megamoney. And they think she’s going to run for president.Frank has a pretty good plan to short-circuit that. He invites Heather into the Oval Office and tells her he wants to nominate her to the Supreme Court. (Recall Justice Jacob’s visit with Frank from the season premiere when he discloses he’s got Alzheimer’s and would like to retire; Frank didn’t let him.)She accepts. It’s pretty genius.But the line outside Frank’s office is getting pretty long. Next up to pay a visit is the poor soul who was maimed in the American drone strike and is suing the government in that Supreme Court case. Frank, who thinks he’s pretty clever, reads up on a few Koran verses and tries to reason with the guy. He apologizes to no avail. The guy pulls a Frank and tells the president of the United States in the Oval Office that he dreamed about strangling him with his bare hands. But I was just keeping America safe. That’s what presidents do, Frank rationalizes. There’s a fine line between duty and murder, he shoots back at Frank. Sensing correctly that this conversation is going nowhere and that he’ll have to seek affirmation elsewhere, he sends the guy home.But Frank just can’t catch much of a break. Devastatingly, we learn that “America Works” is in trouble.Republicans aren’t going to let it through Congress. Ayla, the reporter who writes for that paper that sounds like it was invented by the writers to avoid a copyright suit from The Wall Street Journal, is all over it. She presses Seth, demanding access to senior administration officials so they can tell her what’s really going on. Seth says no way.So she tears into Frank at the next news conference, questioning his record on gay rights. (And who knew Frank had an issue? Given that little sexual transgression with his Secret Service agent Meechum last season and his experiences in college, this is somewhat surprising.) She presses him again and again on a list of other topics. Flustered, Frank ends the news conference.Seth, determined to get even, corners Ayla in the hallway and tells her that her White House press pass is revoked. Now, this seems ridiculous. However, thanks to a rather deft bit of writing, I actually came away from this scene thinking, “Huh. I could maybe see that.” (As someone who covers Washington for The Times, I have a little inside perspective into how press access is granted and taken away.) Seth tells her he had promised the head of the White House Correspondents Association that he would give everyone in the press corps — but Ayla — the interviews they’d all been asking for on “American Works.” In turn, the correspondents association agreed that Ayla was expendable.In a tart little slap as he is dismissing Ayla from the White House grounds, Seth tells her that she’s free to keep her pass, but that it’s just a useless piece of plastic now.There’s more trouble still for Frank. Justice Jacobs doesn’t want to go anymore. And he tells Heather what’s really going on. This infuriates her. So she marches back over to the Supreme Court (though the location where this scene was shot looks nothing like the actual court) and holds a little news conference announcing her intentions to run for president after all.Who knew the solicitor general was such a big deal?Frank calls Ambassador Underwood, who is traveling on United Nations business, and wonders how everything has turned so sour. Then he realizes it! It’s those dead Navy SEALs. They’ve made him all mopey and weepy. How dare they!So off to church Frank goes, where he hunts down the priest who delivered the sermon at the SEALs’ funeral. Personally, I’m astonished the place didn’t burst into flames as soon as he set foot in the church vestibule. But they have a tense and tedious conversation about the law of man versus the law of God. Frank grumbles that he only identifies with harsh Old Testament justice.Standing there alone at the altar, he really has only one sensible thing left to do: spit in the face of the plaster Jesus statue that’s right in front of him. But when he tries to wipe it off, the whole thing comes crashing down and shatters into pieces. Meecham, alarmed that Frank has been injured, comes rushing in. Frank walks away with the plaster Jesus ear and mutters something about finally having the Lord’s ear. Some Plot Threads to WatchThe creepy hacker is still looking for Rachel at Doug Stamper’s behest. But even with all his computer know-how, he’s coming up cold. So he goes a little entrepreneurial and seeks out her lesbian lover from the previous season. Pretending to be an alcoholic, he shows up at one of her A.A. meetings but comes away without much. I’m betting we get a glimpse of Rachel pretty soon, though.Meanwhile, Doug is making some moves. He tracks down Heather. He’s been waiting for her to get out of a meeting in some government building that resembles a run-down hospital. The imagery here is eerie. He offers his services. But what is he really up to? He complains that the Underwoods have shut him out and he wants to work for her now. I’m skeptical.Read our Episode 5 recap here.