Season 3, Episode 3: Chapter 29Read all of our “House of Cards” recaps.If you’re like me, the last thing you would expect President Frank Underwood’s legacy to include is world peace. But when the Russian president – a steely Putin-like figure named Petrov – pays a visit to the White House, Frank makes the pitch for a pact that would have Russia and the United States at the center of a Middle East peace settlement.“I’m offering you the chance to make history!” Frank pleads. Petrov is unmoved. Frank reeks of desperation, and it is clear that we won’t be seeing him wriggle his way out of his downward spiral anytime soon.In Petrov, he has found a match for his cunning and negotiation prowess. Petrov insults him in one well-timed, emasculating shot after another. They often play out like this:Petrov (standing next to Frank, to Senator Mendoza): “You started with Reagan, no?”Mendoza: “Staffed on his ’84 campaign.”Frank: “He has a portrait of the Gipper in his office, wearing a cowboy hat.”Petrov: “Mmm. When men were men, hmm?”Petrov takes the opportunity to remind Frank of his political mortality whenever he can. And when he broaches the delicate subject of Frank’s lame-duck status, he calls Frank’s bluff, telling him that everyone knows he will run. Victory, however, Petrov coldly says, is not something Frank should expect.If you think I was being overly analytical about the Putin comparison, consider these biographical traits we learn about Petrov: He is a former K.G.B. agent and he likes to pose for ridiculous photographs that show off his virility. There he is surfing! He is even having a dispute back home with Pussy Riot (yes, the real Pussy Riot, who make their rumored appearance in this episode.)In one of the Underwoods’ more tactless and blatant attempts to get inside their adversaries’ heads, they invite two members of that Russian dissident band as guests to an especially drunken, messy state dinner. At one point the punk rockers get up to offer a toast and shout at Petrov (via an interpreter) about his human rights abuses.Petrov, as we’ve come to expect, is unfazed. And his plan to make the evening as uncomfortable as possible for everyone involved is going off without a hitch. After plying the Underwoods and their guest with shot after shot of vodka we are told costs $750,000 a bottle (solid gold, you know), he ends the evening with a rousing performance of a Russian song and then plants a sloppy kiss on Claire. (Kevin Spacey, for his part, doesn’t pass up an opportunity to play Bobby Darin yet again.)Frank, his manhood in tatters, sends everybody home. But before he calls it a night, he makes one last futile and painful attempt to get Petrov to sign onto his Middle East peace plan. The two steal away into a White House stairwell and smoke Cuban cigars.Petrov has one final indignity left in him. “Francis, I don’t get softened up by a nice dinner,” he purrs. Then he stubs out his Cuban on the wall and walks off. The next morning, Frank is in a foul mood. When he and Petrov meet again, he has no time for diplomatic niceties. So he cancels their joint news conference and dismisses the Russian president from the White House.  He’s getting a little of his audacity back. I just wonder how long it will do him any good because the deck in this house of cards seems so stacked against him. At the same time, two side stories are playing out. One seems worth paying attention to, the other is rather bizarre. The one that seems to be developing into a plot twist involves Gavin. You’ll remember him as the creepy hamster-loving hacker from last season who is pulling double-duty as an F.B.I. informer. Doug, who is feeling even more isolated and shut out of the White House, is using Gavin to track down Rachel, who is on the run after smashing Doug’s skull in with a brick last season.The second story here is the blossoming relationship between Claire and Cathy, the secretary of state. While Frank and Petrov are off smoking their Cubans, the two ladies share a heart-warming game of beer pong in the White House. (Harvard v. Tulane.) Claire is working her, trying to soften her up and having much more success than her husband has had with Petrov. Like her husband, Claire is often a little too clever for her own good. We’ll be watching to see how her diplomatic career fares.Read our Episode 4 recap here.