Ta-Nehisi Coates, Hanya Yanagihara, Lauren Groff and Sally Mann are among the shortlisted finalists announced Wednesday for the 2015 National Book Awards.Ms. Yanagihara’s “A Little Life” is one of the five finalists in the fiction category. The novel, which was also shortlisted for this year’s Man Booker Prize (won by Marlon James on Tuesday), follows the lives of four friends in New York, one of them dealing with the profound trauma left by childhood abuse. (Ms. Yanagihara is the deputy editor of T magazine.) Ms. Groff’s “Fates and Furies,” also a finalist, tells the story of a marriage from two perspectives: first the husband’s, and then the wife’s. The other fiction finalists are Karen E. Bender, for “Refund,” a collection of short stories; Angela Flournoy, for “The Turner House,” about a family in Detroit; and Adam Johnson for the story collection “Fortune Smiles.” (Mr. Johnson’s novel “The Orphan Master’s Son” won a Pulitzer Prize in 2013.)“Between the World and Me,” Mr. Coates’s best-selling book about what it means to be black in America today, written in the form of a letter to his son, is among the nonfiction finalists. The others are “Hold Still,” a memoir by the photographer Sally Mann; “The Soul of an Octopus,” by Sy Montgomery; “If the Oceans Were Ink:  An Unlikely Friendship and a Journey to the Heart of the Quran,” by Carla Power; and “Ordinary Light,” a memoir by Tracy K. Smith, who a Pulitzer Prize for her book of poetry “Life on Mars” in 2012. The poetry finalists for this year’s National Book Award are Ross Gay (“Catalog of Unabashed Gratitude”); Terrance Hayes (“How to Be Drawn”); Robin Coste Lewis (“Voyage of the Sable Venus”); Ada Limón (“Bright Dead Things”); and Patrick Phillips (“Elegy for a Broken Machine”).In the category of young people’s literature, the finalists are Ali Benjamin (“The Thing About Jellyfish”); Laura Ruby (“Bone Gap”); Steve Sheinkin (“Most Dangerous: Daniel Ellsberg and the Secret History of the Vietnam War”); Neal Shusterman (“Challenger Deep”); and Noelle Stevenson (“Nimona”).