Getting Hollywood types to speak on the record about the behind-the-scenes details of filming sex scenes was no easy feat — about a dozen people, Oscar and Emmy winners among them, said no — but once some filmmakers agreed to talk, they had a lot to say about the logistics. Read more.Here are more secrets of on-screen coupling from Judd Apatow (the director of “Knocked Up” and the coming “Trainwreck,” the executive producer of “Girls”); Sarah Treem (the co-creator of “The Affair”); Seamus McGarvey (the cinematographer of “50 Shades of Grey”); Adrian Lyne (the director of “Fatal Attraction” and “9 1/2 Weeks”); Amy Schumer (the writer and star of  “Trainwreck”) and Jean-Marc Vallée (the director of “Wild” and “Dallas Buyers Club”).  Is there ever real-life jealousy around a sex scene? Judd Apatow: Sometimes you’re working with someone, they just got married and you can tell it makes them uncomfortable; sometimes people are single and it’s not a big deal. Some people’s boyfriends, girlfriends or spouses don’t mind and sometimes they do, and I try to keep that in mind. I never had a partner want to watch except me [when filming with his wife, Leslie Mann] and I have to because I was the director. But I’ve heard about that — the day you shoot that scene, and suddenly someone’s girlfriend shows up, the only time they came to watch on the entire shoot.Sarah Treem: These four actors [in “The Affair”] — they have all been around the block before and they won’t let their partners come, and the partners don’t want to come. [Joshua Jackson’s girlfriend] Diane Kruger doesn’t want to be there. Why is an actually sexy sex scene so hard to shoot? Seamus McGarvey:  It’s really difficult for an actress or an actor in those scenarios because you are physically re-enacting the private in public, and that’s an extraordinarily difficult thing, whatever you do in the editing to preserve their dignity. Anytime there’s an extreme physical situation, there is contact whether you like it or not, and that was tough. [In “Fifty Shades”] occasionally the crop slipped and in the tying scene, sometimes a rope was tightened too hard. Actually doing it on set is at once perfunctory because you have to do it a number of times for different camera angles, but my heart goes out to the actors because you have to banish these hairy camera operators and grips and directors from your vision and your imagination, and they have to get lost in the one on one.Jean-Marc Vallée: There’s a  thing where we’re trying too hard. It’s as if there were a way to shoot a sex scene — to put some music over it, or have some angles over it, and the  curves and the lighting. I’m turned off when I see a sex scene like this.  If it’s on TV, I change it.  It’s a sensitive point of view, to try to capture this and make this feel like, “Wow that was beautiful, and I want to have sex like this.”Apatow: Shooting a comedic sex scene is much different than shooting “Fifty Shades of Grey.”  We’re trying to point out how awkward it is  most of the time, and we’re showing what happens when it goes really wrong. Seth Rogen used to say to me, it’s impossible to make people laugh if they’re aroused. I can’t imagine shooting a serious sex scene where it’s not humiliating – that’s a nightmare for me. Is lighting another character in the scene? Treem: Absolutely. When we were shooting one of those scenes from his and her perspectives, his has this beautiful romantic mood lighting and hers was starker and less flattering.  It was all about how he experienced it differently from her. If you want to change your sexual experience, just change the lighting.Adrian Lyne: It’s everything, really, because if it’s shadowy then there’s mystery. Then your imagination can fill in, and your imagination is obviously way better than the reality, always. I always think the 10 seconds before somebody is going to have sex is way more erotic than actually doing it. Where do you get inspiration? Treem: I go around, like a vulture, for other people’s sexual experiences, because I’ve kind of exhausted my own. “Tell me about the weirdest sex you’ve ever had!” I think my friends are scared of me at this point.  What scenes or movies do you find sexy? Treem: People are probably going to kill me for saying this: “The Notebook.” Which I know is very heightened sex, very romantic sex. There’s something about those sex scenes, where they just kind of went for it in terms of the emotions of the characters. That kiss in “The Notebook,” that iconic kiss in the rain  – I say that to the writers a lot, I want us to go to that level.McGarvey: I love the way that Nic Roeg shot sex in “Bad Timing,” and that was a film that we looked at. I think that in sex, time becomes immaterial, if you’re lucky.Apatow: “Can’t Buy Me Love,” starring Patrick Dempsey – I like any move when the nerd gets the girl.Amy Schumer: I love “True Romance,” the phone booth one with Patricia Arquette and Christian Slater. Sometimes the hottest scenes, there’s no sex – in “Laurel Canyon,” Christian Bale is talking to the blond chick [Natascha McElhone] and it’s the hottest thing ever. I’m like the LeBron James of masturbating to that scene.