Dance Transit
HELLERAU – European Center for the Arts Dresden.
Through March 6.A small but impressive lineup of dance companies from the Czech Republic and Germany will perform in this festival, which previously appeared in Prague and Leipzig. Czech visitors include VerTeDance Company, who will perform a piece featuring both able-bodied and disabled performers, and Tereza Ondrova and Peter Savel, who will show “Boys Who Like to Play With Dolls,” a playful riff on the limits of gender. German dancers include Wolfgang Kurtz, Romy Schwarzer and Irene Schröder. Sharjah Biennial
Various venues. March 5-June 5.Danh Vo, Haegue Yang, Julie Mehretu, Mark Bradford and other international art world superstars will present work at this biennial, which opens with a weekend of interdisciplinary performances. The event has emerged in recent years as a prominent contemporary art outlet, despite intermittent run-ins with the local authorities: In 2011, the Sharjah Art Foundation was ordered by the ruler of Sharjah to fire its director after the biennial showed a work by Mustapha Benfodil that included sexually explicit graffiti. A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.The Indian Queen
English National Opera at the London Coliseum.
Through March 14.The American director Peter Sellars reworked Purcell’s unfinished 17th-century score for this production, adding elements by the writer Rosario Aguilar and others and shaping the opera into a tale of Europeans’ first encounters with the Mayans. The production crowns a busy season for the company, which, despite prominent collaborators and strong reviews, has been dogged by management issues and internal conflicts. (The Arts Council, Britain’s largest arts financing body, has said it will take a stronger role in overseeing the company’s activities.) Neo-Impressionism, From Light to Color
Tokyo Metropolitan Art Museum.
Through March 29.Monet, Seurat, Signac and Matisse are among the names on show in this exhibition, which traces Impressionism’s evolution in the last years of the 19th century. Around 100 works are showing in all, with a particular focus on the pointillist style developed by Seurat. The Double Kirchner
Kunsthalle Mannheim.
Through May 31.Several years ago, as Ernst Ludwig Kirchner’s “Gelbes Engelufer” underwent restoration, researchers discovered the painting “The Moroccan,” from around 1910, on the other side of the canvas. The discovery inspired this exhibition, which places 17 of the Expressionist master’s double-sided works on display — he made well over 100 in his lifetime. In addition to the artworks, the show provides context on the continuing discussion in the museum sector about how best to display such work. Sophie Calle: For the Last and First Time
Musée d’Art Contemporain de Montréal.
Through May 10.For her 2010 series “The Last Image,” the French artist (born 1953) — who revels in creating artwork that intertwines her life with those of strangers — photographed a series of blind people and asked them about the last image they remembered seeing. Those images and answers are showing here alongside “Voir la Mer,” a 2011 film series in which Ms. Calle took subjects who had never seen the sea before to the coast and filmed their reactions. Grammar of Freedom/Five Lessons: Works From the Arteast 2000 + Collection
Garage Museum of Contemporary Art.
Through April 19.After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Moderna Galerija in Ljubljana, Slovenia, began to assemble a collection of works by artists from the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and its satellites. An array of those pieces are on display here, by artists ranging from the well-known — Marina Abramovic and Ilya and Emilia Kabakov — to the virtually unheard of. WOMADelaide
Botanic Park.
March 6-9.Major performers like Sinead O’Connor and Rufus Wainwright will appear at this festival alongside quirkier acts like “Live Live Cinema,” which provides live scores for cheesy Hollywood slashers, and Balkan Beat Box, a company of Israeli musicians who meld rap, jazz and electronic sounds. Each year, the festival — which bills itself as a music, art and dance event, though it leans heavily toward the former — travels to several countries worldwide. Its next stop is Taranaki, New Zealand. 