Season 3, Episode 2: Chapter 28Read all of our “House of Cards” recaps.Ambassador Underwood? Like the ring of it?Republicans sure don’t. And as Claire faces down a Senate committee — mostly male, mostly white, and mostly accurate in its portrayal of the actual United States Senate — it’s clear a diplomatic career may not be in her future. The hearing quickly goes south when Claire makes a clumsy comment about American troops being “irrelevant.” (No Claire! Why do you hate our troops!?) The Underwood’s political nemesis, Hector Mendoza, smells blood and questions her until she loses her cool. The back and forth is a bit over-wrought with hackneyed lines like, “Is this what we’re to expect from our ambassador? A hothead?” Still, we are left with an irreparably politically damaged Claire, her chances at confirmation fatally wounded.Back at the White House, things are not going swimmingly for Frank either. While he watches Claire’s hearing from the Oval Office, the Democratic leadership from Congress arrives at the White House for a scheduled meeting. Frank wants to discuss his domestic agenda, which leads to this exchange: “We need to redefine our party,” Frank tells them. That’s exactly what they intend to do, one of them tells Frank, by dumping him from the ticket in the next election.The Underwoods’ rapid descent into political disfavor is pretty remarkable. It might even be painful to watch, if they weren’t such irredeemably, monstrously selfish murderers. We certainly aren’t drawn to like them any better after Claire goes for a run “to clear my head,” as we know is her custom. First, she barks at her (and Frank’s) Secret Service boy toy — who’s back for another season — to get the security detail ready for her so she can run on the National Mall. At night. When she gets back to the manse, she finds Frank hunched over on the floor sobbing. Claire moves in to take care of her man. She mounts him; they make love. He stops crying. It’s revolting. But this is an episode that is ultimately about the ladies. All the egg symbolism makes that abundantly clear. If Episode 1 filled out Doug as a character and established a potentially central role this season, we switched focus here to the show’s women. Our other female anti-hero is making moves. Jackie, Frank’s former deputy, has turned. She was there in the Oval Office when the Democratic leadership told Frank he had to go. But she was quiet, signaling that, as always, she has a price. She reminds Frank (through Remy) how she whipped the votes for President Walker’s impeachment last season and expects to “cash that in,” as she subtly puts it. She stirs the pot by tipping off the reporter (another one of the show’s confident and successful female characters) who writes for the newspaper that sounds like The Wall Street Journal but isn’t. That meeting in the Oval Office? It lasted only five minutes, Jackie teases, refusing to say more.We see Claire pull off an envious feat of multitasking, juggling her domestic responsibilities as first lady with her political ones as a nominee. It’s time to pick out the official eggs for the annual White House Easter Egg Roll. But the Senate is voting on her confirmation. So she gets real-time reports from the floor on the vote totals as she’s trying to make her selection. Pink? Beige? That creepy-looking black one? Her aide comes in to deliver the news. And in a head-fake twist fit for “American Idol,” the aide tells her “52-48. (PAUSE) Against.”“Have you ever tried to balance an egg?” Frank asks. “You can’t change the laws of physics, can you?” And so Frank has his political epiphany: He won’t run for re-election. Or at least that’s what he’ll tell the country in a speech that would completely close the door on any chance of getting elected again in the real world. He goes to find Claire to tell her. He knocks on the door. Conspicuously, she doesn’t answer and will later tell Frank she was just taking a nap. I don’t buy it, but I don’t know what she was doing in there.  Frank addresses the nation, saying he’ll forgo re-election to tackle entitlement reform — cutting back on the costs of Social Security and Medicare. “You are entitled to nothing,” he says, in a line that is impossible to imagine any politician uttering. Ever. Doug, who watched the speech from home, isn’t buying it. And after a visit from Seth, who has been checking up on him at Frank’s request and seems quite comfortable filling in in Doug’s absence, Doug takes another squirt of whiskey from his syringe.  But back to Claire. She wants that ambassadorship, she tells the now politically unburdened Frank. “I prepared for it. I can do this,” she pleads, asking for a recess appointment. “What if this is as far as we get? What if this is all over in 18 months?” A truly terrifying thought for the two of them. She prevails. “O.K. I’ll do it,” he says.So she must be thrilled? Not exactly. She retches in the kitchen sink. When she pulls herself together, she’s feeling hungry. So she cracks some eggs in a frying pan, and it’s off to the United Nations.Most Washington Moment: The cute, catchy little title Frank gives to his jobs plan: America Works.

Most un-Washington Moment: When Frank says, with complete sincerity, “We can’t allow ourselves to be held hostage by public opinion.”Read our Episode 3 recap here.