Season 3, Episode 1: Chapter 27The writers of “House of Cards” have never much cared for subtlety. And so, appropriately enough, the third season opens with Frank Underwood, now the president of the United States, unzipping his fly and urinating on his father’s grave. That moment tells us a lot about Frank’s daddy issues and profound lack of sentimentality. But setting the opening scene in a graveyard also seems appropriate for how it telegraphs the rest of the episode’s tenor and mood, which are as dark and bleak as anything from the first two seasons. It’s not inconceivable that Beau Willimon, the showrunner, and his fellow writers are signaling that we will be burying some cast members in due time.That brings us to Doug Stamper. We’re not burying him. Not yet, at least. Stamper wakes up from a coma months after Rachel bludgeoned him and left him for dead in the woods to a sight that probably made him wish she’d finished him off: President Frank and First Lady Claire. They sent a lovely bouquet of flowers and a get-well card to his hospital room. And when the doctor tests Stamper’s cognitive skills with a battery of questions like “What color is Rudolph’s nose?” and “Who is the president?” (again, no subtlety here!) he stumbles over Frank’s name.I winced more than once watching Doug struggle with his recovery this episode. His ears are constantly ringing. His mood is erratic. He struggles to walk. He snaps at the doctor and slaps her arm when she tells him he has a long recovery ahead. Might this emotional basket case eventually be too much of a liability for the Underwoods? We know how they prefer to handle political liabilities. When Claire shows up at his hospital room, she wastes little time getting down to the real reason she is there. She coaches him to give the cops a fake story about getting carjacked. Later on, when he is recalling this fabricated account to the police, they seem skeptical. “What were you doing driving in that part of Maryland?” His answer about liking to drive to clear his head leaves them clearly unsatisfied.Doug’s devotion to the Underwoods is beginning to crack. And as he struggles to prove himself to them — he falls in the bathtub and breaks his arm, refusing to call 911 so he won’t miss his appointment with Frank at the White House — he is rebuffed. Frank tells him he doesn’t want him back at work so quickly. He could never forgive himself, he tells Doug without the slightest hint of sincerity, if he put too much on his plate before he was ready. Doug hobbles out of the White House with his cane and his broken arm held together by a brace he fashioned from duct tape and a wooden spoon. Then it’s back to the emergency room.At one point he’s staring in the mirror at home and sees what we do: another casualty of the Underwoods — broken, battered and discarded. He throws away years of sobriety and finishes all the Percocet the doctors gave him for his arm at the hospital. Then, in a truly creative display of self-punishment, he hires a prostitute and has her squirt a syringe full of whiskey into his mouth.With Doug’s story line consuming much of the episode (almost the entire first half), we don’t see much of the Washington wheeling and dealing that drove the plot along last season. I cover Congress for this newspaper, and I get enough exposure to that. The showcasing of Doug’s frail humanity was a welcome reprieve for me.But in watching the Underwoods interact, we do get a glimpse of a uniquely Washington display of insecurity and vulnerability, the two emotions that power so much in the capital. They’ve realized their dream and moved into the White House. But Frank’s popularity is slipping. He has troubles with moving his agenda through Congress. He worries about a Supreme Court confirmation fight he might lose.We learn that he and Claire have cooked up a scheme to nominate her to become ambassador to the United Nations. He wants to prove how tough being in charge can be, so he drags her into the Situation Room and makes her watch him order an airstrike where children will almost certainly be killed.  The Underwood White House is off to a blossoming start. Most Democratic Moment: When Frank talks about pursuing campaign finance reform, making everyone on Netflix doze off at once.Most Republican Moment: When, after breaking his arm, Doug tries to put the bone back in place by making a splint out of household items. No need to put a strain on the healthcare system.Read our Episode 2 recap here.