By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 27, 2015
11:55 A.M. (MoreMax) MOONRISE KINGDOM (2012) In this Wes Anderson tale, 12-year-old Suzy (Kara Hayward) and her soul mate, Sam (Jared Gilman), fall in love and run away, while on an island, sending the adults in charge — Suzy’s parents (the Bishops, played by Bill Murray and Frances McDormand), Scout Master Ward (Edward Norton) and Captain Sharp (Bruce Willis) — into a panic as a storm approaches. “Written by Mr. Anderson and Roman Coppola (they worked together several times before), ‘Moonrise Kingdom’ breezes along with a beautifully coordinated admixture of droll humor, deadpan and slapstick,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. But, she added, as in all of Mr. Anderson’s films, “there’s a deep, pervasive melancholia here, too, a sense of regret evident in Mr. Bishop’s slouch (with his plaid pants, he is a walking John Cheever tragedy) and in the way Captain Sharp and Mrs. Bishop look, and don’t look, at each other. Adulthood can seem so desperately painful, so maybe Sam and Suzy shouldn’t be quite as eager to grow up.”9 P.M. (Fox) GLEE The New Directions choir gives a command performance at a bar mitzvah. Spencer (Marshall Williams) urges Roderick (Noah Guthrie) to lose weight.9 P.M. (13) LA DOLCE VITA: THE MUSIC OF ITALIAN CINEMA The pop vocalist Josh Groban; the soprano Renée Fleming; the violinist Joshua Bell; and the New York Philharmonic, conducted by Alan Gilbert, perform songs and suites from Oscar-winning films including Federico Fellini’s “8 1/2” and “La Dolce Vita” (starring Marcello Mastroianni and Anita Ekberg), Sergio Leone’s “Once Upon a Time in the West,” Giuseppe Tornatore’s “Cinema Paradiso” and Michael Radford’s “Il Postino.” Film clips compiled by Giampiero Solari and animated graphics by Giuseppe Ragazzini accompany this “Great Performances” presentation.9 P.M. (Nat Geo Wild) CESAR 911 A second season begins as Cesar Millan works with dogs that have been reported to him by non-owners while also helping to heal the rifts they’ve caused in relationships between their owners and others.10 P.M. (ABC) HIDDEN AMERICA: A NATION OF WOMEN BEHIND BARS In this “20/20” special, Diane Sawyer and her team visit the Tennessee Prison for Women, in Nashville; the Maryland Correctional Institution for Women, in Jessup; the Washington Corrections Center for Women, in Gig Harbor; and the Lowell Correctional Institution, near Ocala, Fla., over eight months to examine the issues facing incarcerated women, now the fastest-growing group of prisoners in the country. Among the topics addressed is the sentencing of Emilia Carr, who at 30 is the youngest woman on death row; the mental health of inmates; their interaction with guards; and the ways they find access to food, cosmetics and even sex.10 P.M. (13) 66TH & BROADWAY K T Sullivan, the artistic director of the Mabel Mercer Foundation, performs cabaret before an audience at the Tisch WNET Studios at Lincoln Center. In “Theater Talk,” at 1 a.m., Jake Gyllenhaal and Ruth Wilson talk about their roles and working relationship in “Constellations,” a new play by Nick Payne at the Samuel J. Friedman Theater. Karen Ziemba and Bruce Landry perform Irving Berlin’s “You’re Just in Love.”What’s Streaming NowHOUSE OF CARDS As Season 2 wrapped up, Vice President Frank Underwood (Kevin Spacey) was sworn in as commander in chief after scheming his way into the Oval Office with the help of his coolly calculating wife, Claire (Robin Wright). Season 3 finds Frank actually having to govern, and it’s not as easy as it seems — especially when no one wants him in power in the first place. “The writers (including the show runner, Beau Willimon) try to bring the same outsize drama and mystique to governance as they did to power mongering, and it doesn’t hold up as well,” Alessandra Stanley wrote in The Times. “When the action is so overstated and static, it makes the show’s inherent weak points stand out.” But then a bullying Russian president and two members of Pussy Riot show up, and things get livelier. Still, “it’s a punishing wait,” she said. “This time there is no instant gratification. Binge viewers get the government they deserve.” (netflix.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page C17 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.