AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel GraeberKids Food FestivalEating isn’t like romance. When it comes to the table, first loves can easily become lifelong passions. That’s why Cricket Azima wants to make sure that young people choose their affections wisely.Hence the Kids Food Festival, which Ms. Azima first produced in 2012 and which brings its annual bounty to Bryant Park in Manhattan this weekend. As the founder of the Creative Kitchen, an organization teaching cooking and nutrition to children, she wanted to give the festival an irresistible menu: education through fun.“Someone asked me, ‘What panels are you having, and who are your speakers?’ ” she said. “And I just giggled. I don’t know of any kid who’s going to sit through a panel. It’s a kids’ food festival.”That means hands-on cooking lessons with renowned chefs and activities like the balanced plate scavenger hunt, in which children visit various exhibits to collect food-group stamps on a plate-shaped diagram. Health-conscious goody bags go to those who get the required stamps for a balanced diet. Other games will include the Cutie Curl, a challenge to peel a mandarin orange so that the skin unwinds in an unbroken curve, and, on Sunday, a Build a Better Sandwich family competition. “There will be categories like the most creative and the tallest” sandwich, Ms. Azima said.These will be on the main stage, along with workshops like Bill Wurtzel’s Funny Food (Saturday), in which Mr. Wurtzel will prove that a plate can be a canvas for comic artistry, and Abby Rosenswaike’s Veggiecation (Sunday). Baby Loves Disco (Saturday) and the Dirty Sock Funtime Band (Sunday) will provide musical entertainment. After all, dancing is healthful.While the stage events are free, the chefs’ classes cost $25 for each parent-child pair. (Some proceeds will go to the nonprofit Alliance for a Healthier Generation.) Inside the James Beard Foundation Future Foodies Pavilion, they include, on Saturday, meatballs and spaghetti with Daniel Holzman of the Meatball Shop, and on Sunday, peanut butter and banana quesadillas with Thiago Silva of Catch NYC.On Saturday, “Rozanne Gold is hosting a class called Every Kid’s a Critic,” Ms. Azima said. “She’ll teach what different flavor components are, and the recipe they’ll do will have each of the flavor profiles, like sweet and salty.”Yes, sweet. Ms. Azima has nothing against a little sugar. As she put it, “Life’s too short to not have cupcakes.”(Saturday and Sunday, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., Bank of America Winter Village, Avenue of the Americas at 40th Street; kidsfoodfestival.com.) LAUREL GRAEBERFor Children‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’  (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Blaaast’ Into the New Year With Museum of Chinese in America (Saturday) Is that how a sheep would say it? It’s the Year of the Sheep (or the Ram or the Goat; it’s a matter of interpretation). But however you view it, the museum will celebrate it with many activities, including a lion dance, performances by the Red Silk Dancers, zodiac-theme art workshops, craft demonstrations and storytelling. From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., 215 Centre Street, between Howard and Grand Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-619-4785, mocanyc.org. (Space is limited; advance purchase online is recommended.) ‘Blast Off Into Purim’ (Sunday) This is a very appropriate concert title, considering the name of the band: Tim and the Space Cadets. And the Jewish holiday Purim is definitely an occasion that seems to run on rocket fuel. The group will offer its high-energy pop to celebrate the heroes of the holiday at this event at the Museum of Jewish Heritage, and children are encouraged to come in costume. The songfest is at 2 p.m., but families wishing to make an afternoon of it can enjoy Purim crafts from 1 to 4 p.m. and a mini-tour of the museum at 1:30. 36 Battery Place, at First Place, Lower Manhattan, 646-437-4200, mjhnyc.org.‘Blocks’  (Saturday and Sunday) You can build a lot with blocks: buildings, bridges, roads and even relationships in this show from Teater Tre, a troupe from Sweden visiting the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Part of the academy’s BAMkids series, the production features three lively buffoons in workmen’s overalls who experiment onstage with huge, colorful blocks. Intended for ages 3 through 7, their comic adventure is intended to bring big laughs and little lessons. At 10:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m., BAM Fisher, Fishman Space, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org/kids.‘The Bully’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company is reviving this ever-topical musical, by John Gregor and David L. Williams, which refreshingly avoids the trap of bullying its own audiences with heavy moralizing. Instead, the many pitfalls of the typical middle school relationship of victimizer and victim are revealed through wit, humor and a killer of a sly twist. (Through April 26.) At 3:30 p.m., McGinn-Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org. Bunny Hop (Tuesday) This event will benefit children as well as entertain them. Presented by the Society of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and Gucci, it will raise funds for the center’s pediatric initiatives. Activities will include crafts, a live-animal show, a petting zoo, balloon art, a D.J., magic and three acts from the Big Apple Circus. From 5 to 7 p.m., 583 Park Avenue, 583 Park Avenue, at 63rd Street, 212-639-7972, thesocietyofmskcc.org.‘Can Do Duck: The Musical’ (Saturday and Sunday) You’ve heard about the little engine that could — now comes the little duck. Arielle Sosland, writer and director of this musical, based it on “The Can Do Duck” series of children’s books by her father, Morton Sosland, a child psychiatrist. The hourlong show, for ages 3 through 11, focuses on a duck family and a human family as they learn to face challenges with self-confidence and optimism. (Through March 8.) At 11 a.m., Lynn Redgrave Theater at Culture Project, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, candoduckthemusical.com.Dr. Seuss: ‘The Cat Behind the Hat’ (Friday) The Cat in the Hat and Horton the Elephant are old friends to many children, but this free exhibition, closing on Friday, will allow Dr. Seuss’s fans to meet characters and images they’ve probably never seen before. Pop International Galleries Midtown is showing paintings and sculptures that Theodor Geisel, a.k.a. Dr. Seuss, created for his own enjoyment and rarely, if ever, displayed. Fans of his picture books can expect to encounter some familiar faces too. From 11 a.m. to 7 p.m., the Atrium, the Citicorp Building, 153 East 53rd Street, Manhattan, 212-533-4262, popinternational.com.EcoCruises: Winter Seals and Waterbirds of New York Harbor (Sunday) A lot of tourists visit New York in the winter, but some of the most interesting won’t be found in the crowds at Times Square. These two-hour cruises from New York City Audubon focus on birds that migrate to this region at this time of year, like many ducks and geese. They also visit the harbor seals that can be found around Governors, Hoffman and Swinburne Islands. (Seal behavior researchers will take part in several of the tours.) An Audubon naturalist narrates the adventures, which include complimentary hot tea and cocoa and are conducted via New York Water Taxi. Warm clothing and binoculars are recommended, as is advance purchase. (Through March 8.) Sundays at noon, Pier 16, South Street Seaport, 89 South Street, near Fulton Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-742-1969, nywatertaxi.com/tours/audubon-winter.‘Fancy Nancy the Musical’  (Saturday and Sunday) One of the arts’ youngest divas has returned to the McGinn/Cazale Theater. This musical from Vital Theater Company focuses on a little girl who wants everything to be fancy — especially herself. Based on the book series written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, the production explores the predicament that ensues when Nancy finds out that she hasn’t been cast as the glamorous mermaid she’d hoped to be in the coming dance show. With a book by Susan DiLallo, a score by Danny Abosch, and lyrics by both, the musical humorously follows Nancy’s attempts to cope with a most unfancy role: that of a tree. (Through April 26.) At 1:30 p.m., 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.Game On! A Day of Sports for Girls (Saturday) Female athletes have been fighting for a level playing field for years, and this free event will celebrate their efforts as part of National Girls and Women in Sports Day. Collegiate athletes will offer instruction in games like volleyball and soccer, and children — boys are welcome, too — will hear some encouraging success stories. The activities will include fitness classes for parents and water sports for all, so those interested should take along swimsuits, bathing caps and towels. From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., Chelsea Recreation Center, 430 West 25th Street, 212-408-0243, nyc.gov/parks.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com. ‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Hot Feet’ (Saturday) Warm toes sound pretty good at this time of year. And even if there’s no heat outside, the Paper Bag Players will generate plenty in this show for ages 3 to 8, a celebration of the troupe’s 56th anniversary. Known for their signature props and sets made out of brown paper and cardboard, the players will present highlights of their past productions, song-and-dance skits like “Move Over,” which makes rush hour on the subway something to laugh about, and “Happy Day,” involving a chicken on the loose. At 2 p.m., Leon M. Goldstein Performing Arts Center, Kingsborough Community College, 2001 Oriental Boulevard, at Oxford Street, Manhattan Beach, Brooklyn, 718-368-5596, onstageatkingsborough.org.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one will sprout indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which is reviving Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays at 1 p.m. Reservations required. (Some performances are sold out.) 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.‘The Light Princess’ (Friday through Sunday) Sandra Bullock found a way to get herself back to earth in “Gravity,” but what’s this poor princess to do? Based on a Scottish fairy tale from the 1800s, this musical by Lila Rose Kaplan and Mike Pettry centers on a royal heroine who’s forced to float everywhere because of a witch’s curse. In the show, being performed at the New Victory Theater by the actors of the A.R.T. Institute at Harvard, she has to discover a solution by her 16th birthday or remain suspended forever. (Through March 8.) Friday at 7 p.m., Saturday and Sunday at noon and 5 p.m., New Victory Theater, 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com. ‘Masked Marvels’ (Sunday) Halloween isn’t the only holiday you’ll see children frolicking in costume. The festival Purim, which celebrates how the Jewish people were saved by the brave actions of the biblical Queen Esther, involves much joyful masquerading. To help children get ready for the holiday, which begins at sundown on Wednesday, the Jewish Museum is offering this workshop, in which they can use fabric, wire, papers and other colorful materials to make masks, drawing inspiration from objects in the galleries. From 1 to 4 p.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.‘New Beginnings’: Lunar New Year Festival (Saturday) It may be the Year of the Ram (or the Year of the Sheep or the Goat, depending on whom you consult), but it will come roaring in like a lion in this festive celebration at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Highlights will include a performance by the Chinese Center on Long Island Lion Troupe; a show by “Sesame Street” puppeteers; a martial arts demonstration; art activities; and gallery stations where children can investigate the Chinese tea ceremony, Chinese sculpture and Korean sound. From noon to 5 p.m., 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through May 9.) At 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, 13thstreetrep.org.Sesame Street Live: ‘Make a New Friend’ (Friday through Sunday) Everyone is welcome on Sesame Street, and in this new musical stage production, closing this weekend, that sunny neighborhood is opening its doors to a visitor from afar: Chamki, a friend of Grover’s from India. The only problem is that she’s so busy sharing good times with all the local residents, including Abby Cadabby and Cookie Monster, that Grover is afraid he won’t be able to show his pal the town. Little audience members, of course, can help, as they join in some multicultural fun. Friday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 5:30 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 10:30 a.m. and 2 and 5:30 p.m.; Theater at Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, theateratmsg.com/sesame.Spirituality for Kids Family Fun Day (Sunday) It’s not often that you can spend a few hours having a good time and come out a better person. That’s the intent of this celebration, presented by Spirituality for Kids International, a nonprofit offering a program to teach children values like tolerance and charity and instill in them a sense of purpose. The setting will be a life-size arcade game with booths and stations that reinforce the program’s principles. In addition to activities like rock climbing, meditation, martial arts and children’s yoga, the event will offer art projects, entertainment and a talent show. From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., Metropolitan Pavilion, 125 West 18th Street, Chelsea, spiritualityforkids.com.Step Into: Purim (Sunday) Dancing or leaping into Purim might be more like it, considering the boisterousness of this Jewish holiday. Hannah Senesh Community Day School will celebrate the occasion with this festival, which will offer crafts, face painting, a production of “The Wonderful Wizard of Oz” by the troupe Play Me a Story and a performance by Timbalooloo, the clarinetist Oran Etkin’s preschool music program. From 9 a.m. to noon, 342 Smith Street, between First and Second Places, Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn, 718-858-8663, hannahsenesh.org.‘A Taste of Magic’ (Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests in between courses; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. At 8 p.m., Ben & Jack’s Steakhouse, 225 Fifth Avenue, between 28th and 29th Streets, atasteofmagicnyc.com. (Also on March 14 and 28 at Gossip Restaurant.)‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘To Kill a Mockingbird’ (Friday and Saturday) That intrepid and peerless young observer, Scout Finch, is back again, this time onstage, in Downtown Art’s adaptation of Harper Lee’s novel about courage and bigotry in a Depression-era Southern town. Directed by Ryan Gilliam, this all-female “Mockingbird” features seven teenage members of the troupe, playing multiple roles and using minimal props. On Saturdays only, audience members are invited to stay after the show for some Southern food and a discussion about the work’s themes with Ms. Gilliam and Emily Gallagher, a historian. (Through March 7.) Fridays at 7:30 p.m.; Saturdays at 6 p.m.; Downtown Art, 61 East Fourth Street, East Village; downtownart.org.‘Tunes With Tina’ (Sunday) That’s Tina deVaron, a jazz musician and singer, whose musical brunch for young people at the Measure Lounge at Langham Place, Fifth Avenue, a hotel in Midtown Manhattan, has returned. Ms. deVaron, who often sings show tunes for children, also improvises and gears her performances to the audience. On selected Sundays throughout the season, she will be accompanied by Broadway performers. Singing along is encouraged. (Through May 31.) At noon, 400 Fifth Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-695-4005.‘Vashti! The Musical’ (Sunday) Esther, the young queen of Persia who saved her people, the Jews, from the evil machinations of her husband’s minister, Haman, has always been the undisputed star of the Purim holiday. But this new show from the always inventive Poppy Seed Players focuses instead on Esther’s predecessor: Vashti, the king’s first wife. A woman with a mind of her own — she was banished after she refused to be paraded before her husband’s guests at a feast — Vashti shares the holiday spotlight here, in a comedy that packs in television and theater parodies as well as biblical lore. At 11 a.m., Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, kaufmanmusiccenter.org/mch.‘The Very Hungry Caterpillar and Other Eric Carle Favorites’ (Saturday) Children tend to devour the books of the author and illustrator Eric Carle with the same kind of enthusiasm that one of his famous characters, the Very Hungry Caterpillar, brings to munching all kinds of food. Now the Tribeca Performing Arts Center is presenting this production, from the Mermaid Theater of Nova Scotia, which uses projections, puppetry, black light and other special effects to bring to life the caterpillar and Mr. Carle’s characters Little Cloud and the Mixed Up Chameleon. At 1:30 p.m., TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, Borough of Manhattan Community College, 199 Chambers Street, near Greenwich Street, 212-220-1460, tribecapac.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Monday through Wednesday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. (The museum is closed on Sunday for the museum’s annual dinner and closed on Thursday for Purim.) 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum. LAUREL GRAEBERAdvertisement