By JOSHUA BARONEFEB. 26, 2015
Museums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and other diseases? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out diseases. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.BRIC and the Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Mapping Brooklyn’ (through Sept. 6) This exhibition features artworks that incorporate themes of mapping and cartography in historical maps. The artists here are exploring the ways maps represent the practical and metaphoric aspects of life. The show is on view at BRIC House through May 3. Tuesdays through Saturdays from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Sundays to 6 p.m., BRIC House, 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. The show will also be at the Brooklyn Historical Society through Sept. 6. Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5 p.m., Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Morgan Library & Museum: ‘Lincoln Speaks: Words That Transformed a Nation’ (through June 7) Bring a good pair of reading glasses to this engrossing exhibition, which features dozens of Abraham Lincoln’s written documents — letters, speeches, ephemera. The aim is to show Lincoln’s careful use of language whether he was playing the role of politician, military leader, consoler in chief or family man. Just being in the same room as so many documents that the great man touched is a bit thrilling. 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org. (Neil Genzlinger)New-York Historical Society: ‘Chinese American: Exclusion/Inclusion’ (through April 19) In his review for The New York Times, Edward Rothstein called this show a “vigorous and imaginative new exhibition,” that includes a look at “how Chinese-American identity came to be, how immigration and discrimination were followed by recrimination and conflict, and how, finally, a people’s trials give way to celebration.” Tuesday through Thursday and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Friday until 8 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.AdvertisementNew York Public Library: ‘Becoming the Man in the White Suit: The Tom Wolfe Papers’ (closes on Friday) The New York Public Library has been exhibiting highlights from Mr. Wolfe’s archive. The display, which closes Friday, includes his correspondences with John Glenn about “The Right Stuff,” a notebook he carried to “Black Panther Night” at Leonard Bernstein’s apartment, and notes from an interview with the Grateful Dead’s Jerry Garcia that would be used for “The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test.” From 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/events/exhibitions; free.AdvertisementNew York Public Library for the Performing Arts: ‘Emily Dickinson: Musician and Poet’ (through next Friday) Emily Dickinson’s poems and letters as well as the library’s collection of her work provide the backdrop for this exhibition, which focuses on the musical side of her writing. Dickinson’s musical identity encompassed piano performances, the collection of sheet music and concert outings, and those experiences are detailed here. Friday, Saturday, Tuesday and Wednesday from noon to 6 p.m.; Monday and Thursday from noon to 8 p.m.; 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/lpa; free.Red Bull Studios: ‘Alone Together’  (through April 12) The artist Ryder Ripps has created a site-specific work that acts as sculpture and performance. It’s a system that spans two floors: Below are six performers whose computer activity is sent above to a collective, frenzied display. Visitors to the exhibition play the part of voyeurs. Mr. Ripps’s idea is that the Internet creates a paradox in which the more connected we are, the more physically withdrawn we become. Thursdays through Sundays from noon to 7 p.m., 220 West 18th Street, Chelsea, redbullstudios.com/newyork; free.EventsBlack Artstory (Friday and Saturday) The Myrtle Avenue Brooklyn Partnership has been celebrating Black History Month with an art walk spanning 12 blocks. The theme is “Where I’m From: The Black Artstory of Myrtle and Beyond,” about the long history of black art and its contributions to the area. The art walk map, as well as a schedule of events, is at myrtleavenue.org/blackartstory.‘I Cried, Power!’: The Limits and Possibilities of Black Life (Saturday) Black Artstory, the Black History Month celebration from the Myrtle Avenue Brooklyn Partnership, concludes with this film event incorporating digital media and a live sound installation. The aim is to reimagine the idea of Afrofuturism in light of recent cases of police brutality in New York and elsewhere. Artists will explore the reality of revolutionary social movements and how they can be sustained. At 8 p.m., the Emerson, 561 Myrtle Avenue, 718-230-1689, myrtleavenue.org/blackartstory; free.Neighborhood Movie Night (Friday) Trinity Wall Street hosts its monthly movie night at St. Paul’s Chapel. Up this time around is “West Side Story,” the 1961 Academy Award-winning film adaptation of the beloved Broadway musical. Drinks and popcorn will be served. At 6:30 p.m., St. Paul’s Chapel, Broadway at Fulton Street, Lower Manhattan, trinitywallstreet.org; free.7 Days of Genius Festival: Venture Into the Extraordinary (Sunday through March 8) This festival brings together luminaries from a variety of fields — including science, art, religion, business and literature — to discuss the concept of genius and all that goes with it. On Wednesday at 8 p.m., for example, the economist Thomas Piketty joins Paul Krugman, a Nobel laureate and columnist for The New York Times, and Joseph Stiglitz, also a Nobel winner. Other speakers include Cardinal Timothy Dolan and Rabbi Peter J. Rubinstein (Tuesday at 8:15 p.m.), as well as a panel of MacArthur Fellowship recipients (Wednesday at 8:15 p.m.). The complete lineup is at 92y.org/genius.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesdays) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotes (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win free drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videology.info.AdvertisementSpoken Word‘Art of the Brooklyn Bridge: A Visual History’ (Tuesday) The National Arts Club hosts a celebration of the Brooklyn Bridge, one of this country’s most commonly depicted landmarks. The night’s centerpiece is Richard Haw’s book “Art of the Brooklyn Bridge: A Visual History,” which explores artists’ relationships with the bridge, including works by the photographer Henri Cartier-Bresson and the painter Joseph Stella. At 8 p.m., National Arts Club, 15 Gramercy Park South, 212-475-3424, nationalartsclub.org; free.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tom Brokaw and Thomas McGuane (Wednesday) Thomas McGuane discusses his latest short-story collection, “Crow Fair,” which explores fresh takes on timeless conflicts — man against man, man against nature, and so on. He will speak with Tom Brokaw, the longtime NBC journalist and anchor who was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom last year. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.‘I Was Here’ (Friday) Stars of the young adult fiction world celebrate Gayle Forman’s latest novel, “I Was Here.” Ms. Forman, known for “If I Stay,” will be joined by E. Lockhart, author of “We Were Liars,” and Libba Bray, author of “The Diviners.” Maria Russo of The New York Times Book Review will moderate the conversation. At 7 p.m., Housing Works Bookstore Cafe, 126 Crosby Street, near Houston Street, SoHo, 212-334-3324, housingworksbookstore.org; free.Joseph O’Neill (Thursday) Mr. O’Neill reads from his fiction, which includes novels and short stories. His most recent novel, “The Dog,” was published last year. His debut, “Netherland,” from 2008, went on to win the PEN/Faulkner Award for Fiction and the Kerry Group Irish Fiction Award. At 6 p.m., New York University’s Abu Dhabi House, 19 Washington Square North, cwp.fas.nyu.edu; free.Tuna the Chiweenie (Tuesday) Tuna, whom Buzzfeed called “the most inspiring dog on the Internet,” comes to the Strand Book Store for the release of “Tuna Melts My Heart: The Underdog With the Overbite.” It’s safe to say there won’t be a reading. But do expect to say hello to one of the most popular pups on Instagram (@tunameltsmyheart). Volunteers from the animal shelter Social Tees will give out information about pet fostering and adoptions. At 7 p.m., 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.‘The Untold Stories of Broadway’ (Monday) The musical theater historian Jennifer Ashley Tepper discusses her book series “The Untold Stories of Broadway,” a look behind the curtain of some of the Great White Way’s most widely known shows. She will receive help from Broadway veterans like Baayork Lee of “A Chorus Line,” Jose Llana of “Here Lies Love” and Taylor Trensch of “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time” and “Matilda.” Ms. Tepper will sign books before the event, at 5:30 p.m. At 6 p.m., New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, Lincoln Center, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/lpa; free.Gabrielle Zevin (Tuesday) Ms. Zevin discusses her latest novel, “The Storied Life of A.J. Fikry,” about a man who is struggling to keep his bookshop in business and his life in one piece after the death of his wife. He receives an unexpected gift that gives him a second chance at life and love. After a reading, Ms. Zevin will sign copies of the book, which is on The New York Times’s best-seller list. At 7 p.m., Barnes & Noble, 150 East 86th Street, at Lexington Avenue, 212-369-2180, barnesandnoble.com.Walking ToursFlatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.The Ghosts of Grand Central (Saturdays) This tour offers shelter from the cold, though discovering the ghosts of Grand Central Terminal may bring a different sort of chill. There will be history of the Vanderbilts, as well as August Belmont, Franklin Roosevelt and his dog, Fala. The tour meets west of the M.T.A. information booth under the four-faced clock in the station’s Grand Concourse. (Through March 28.) At 7:30 p.m., 646-493-7092, ghostsofny.com.AdvertisementHistory of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.Opening the Way: A Women’s History Walk (Sunday) This tour, just in time for Women’s History Month, covers 21 stops related to the history of Manhattan and the influence women had in its development. The women cover a broad range of time and professions, including writers, abolitionists and suffragists. The tour, which will continue on Saturdays through March, is presented by Women’s eNews. It was researched by Betsy Wade, a former editor at The New York Times, and the historian James Boylan. Registration is required. At 11 a.m., 6 Barclay Street, 212-244-1720, womensenews.org/openingtheway; free.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.Upper East Side Gallery Tour  (Saturday) This tour covers upscale galleries spanning fewer than five blocks. Highlights include the usual, like photography and painting. One stop is at a haunted house installation that occupies an entire three-story townhouse. The tour meets at 1 p.m., at 1018 Madison Avenue, near East 78th Street; 212-946-1548, nygallerytours.com. JOSHUA BARONEInformation on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. A version of this schedule appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page C28 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.