FEB. 26, 2015
Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Accidental Movement/Mariangela López  (Friday) Now settled in its new downtown home, Gibney Dance kicks off the space’s inaugural spring season with 22 artists performing over 14 weeks under the title “Making Space.” The series begins with Mariangela López, who helped organize Gibney Dance’s community outreach and has often worked with large groups in her work. In the solo “El Regreso (The Return),” the Brooklyn-based, Venezuelan-born Ms. López internalizes that broad communal intelligence in her own body, giving personal expression to big ideas. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Brian Schaefer)Ballet Flamenco Sara Baras  (Wednesday through March 7) The celebrated Spanish dancer Sara Baras presents “Voces, Suite Flamenca,” which should be a rousing close to City Center’s three-week festival “A Bailar.” Riding the line between innovation and tradition, between theatrical glamour and flamenco’s Gypsy roots, Ms. Baras will be joined by her large ensemble of dancers and musicians, including the guest artist José Serrano. Wednesday and Thursday at 7:30 p.m., next Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org. (Siobhan Burke)★ The Bang Group  (Friday through Sunday) The annual Harkness Dance Festival continues with this percussively adventurous troupe led by David Parker. Through a new initiative, Tap Lab, Mr. Parker and his dancers respond rhythmically — with the voice, the feet, the whole body — to music by Mozart, Steve Reich and Morton Feldman. Like all of the festival’s performances, this one unfolds in two parts: “Stripped,” in which Mr. Parker breaks down his process, and “Dressed,” a more polished showing of the work. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Burke)Advertisement★ Ronald K. Brown/Evidence (through Sunday) Mr. Brown was just 19 when he started his dance company; this week that troupe marks its 30th anniversary. In those three decades, Mr. Brown has distinguished himself with a singular style combining African, African-American and modern dance, often with keen social insight and a spiritual halo. To celebrate the milestone, Mr. Brown revives classics and acclaimed newer works over two programs, and will unveil New York premieres, including the solo “Through Time and Culture,” which he will perform. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement★ Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui  (through Sunday) Long after the sun sets in Buenos Aires, the dance halls awaken with tango. The milonga, as these late-night gatherings are called, is the inspiration for a scintillating new work by Mr. Cherkaoui, an acclaimed contemporary choreographer and tango aficionado. “M¡longa” pairs Mr. Cherkaoui’s fluid gestures and intricate partnering with tango’s spiky precision, performed by a dozen dancers who are serenaded by a five-piece Argentine tango band. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org. (Schaefer)★ ‘Dancers, Buildings and People in the Streets’ (through March 28) Ballet and contemporary dance sometimes seem like estranged relatives, but with its latest platform, inspired by the dance critic Edwin Denby, Danspace Project collapses the space between them. The curator Claudia La Rocco, a critic and poet who contributes to The New York Times, paired artists from different choreographic traditions — those of Merce Cunningham, George Balanchine and Judson Dance Theater — and left them to their own devices. The results so far have been fascinating. The next set of collaborations (Thursday through March 7 at 8 p.m.) features two New York City Ballet principals: Sara Mearns, who teamed up with the former Cunningham dancer Rashaun Mitchell, and Sterling Hyltin, who’s been working with the contemporary choreographer Jodi Melnick. The former City Ballet dancer Kaitlyn Gilliland leads a workshop in Balanchine’s “Serenade” (Friday at 2 p.m.), open to the public for observation and participation. Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)★ Digital Dance Festival  (Friday and Saturday) To attend this festival, simply tune in on your device of choice. Performances that have been staged for live audiences at New York Live Arts over the past year return for an online encore, shot and edited for optimal impact, and screened at a specific time each night at 2ndLine.tv. The choreographers Bill T. Jones (Friday) and Elena Demyanenko and Dai Jian (Saturday) present works that deal with duality — whether performed as a duet or inspired by a dialogue. At 7:30 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Schaefer)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Eye on Dance  (Monday) In 1981 the dance journalist Celia Ipiotis created this talk show, which aired on public television until 2006. Lately she’s been screening episodes from the archives as part of Gibney Dance Center’s Sorry I Missed Your Show series. The next installment, “The Language of Dance,” features a 1990 episode in which Christine Dakin, Neil Greenberg and Vicky Shick — who danced with Martha Graham, Merce Cunningham and Trisha Brown, respectively — discuss the vocabulary, verbal and physical, used by those choreographers. The video guests will be there in person, too, for a more current conversation on similar topics. At 6:30 p.m., Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Burke)Hong Kong Dance Company  (Thursday through March 8) Known for its large-scale productions, this troupe returns to the David H. Koch Theater with the United States premiere of “The Legend of Mulan.” Directed by Yang Yuntao with an extensive creative team, the show is billed as “an inspiring retelling” of the ancient folktale about a humble and heroic peasant girl. Departures from the Disney version may be in store. Thursday through March 7 at 8 p.m., March 8 at 1 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com. (Burke)Sam Kim  (Wednesday through March 7) In “Sister to a Fiend,” Ms. Kim conjures a ritualistic space that she shares with two enigmatic dancers, Amanda Kmett’Pendry and Joanna Kotze. The three could be siblings or strangers, friends or foes; in an earlier version at New York Live Arts, Ms. Kim kept us guessing. She performs as part of Gibney Dance’s inaugural spring season, titled Making Space, in its new downtown space. At 7:30 p.m., Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Burke)Malpaso Dance Company  (Tuesday through March 8) Founded three years ago by former members of Danza Contemporánea de Cuba, this appealing troupe, based in Havana, returns to the Joyce Theater with two premieres. “Despedida,” by the artistic director Osnel Delgado, takes cues from the Jorge Luis Borges poem. It blends contemporary ballet and capoeira and is performed to an original score by Arturo O’Farrill, who will play live with the Afro Cuban Jazz Ensemble. Adding to the company’s small but growing repertory, the inventive Trey McIntyre offers “Under Fire,” an exploration of resilience to music by the singer-songwriter Grandma Kelsey. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday and next Friday at 8 p.m., March 7 at 2 and 8 p.m., March 8 at 2 and 7:30 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)★ New York City Ballet (through Sunday) The winter season concludes with a healthy dose of Balanchine on two separate programs: “Donizetti Variations,” “La Valse” and “Chaconne” on Saturday night, and on Saturday afternoon and Sunday, the sprightly pairing of “Harlequinade” and “Square Dance.” But first, on Friday, the company offers one more look at its newest arrival, Justin Peck’s well-received “Rodeo: Four Dance Episodes,” alongside Alexei Ratmansky’s “Pictures at an Exhibition” and Christopher Wheeldon’s “Mercurial Manoeuvres.” Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Burke)White Road Dance Media (Friday and March 7) What does dancing look like from the dancer’s perspective? In “Neon Brave,” the women of White Road Dance Media attempt to share that viewpoint with their audience by wearing cameras as they move. Live and recorded projections augment solos and group vignettes that address themes of courage, vulnerability and self-actualization. Performing once a week over three weeks, the troupe intends to see what happens when choreography has room to breathe between showings. At 8 p.m., Muriel Schulman Theater, 106 Calyer Street, near Franklin Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, wrdm2015.brownpapertickets.com. (Burke)Because of an editing error, a dance entry in the Listings pages on Friday about an Eye on Dance event at the Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center in Manhattan misstated the date. It is on Monday, not Sunday.A version of this schedule appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page C16 of the New York edition with the headline: Dance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.