FEB. 26, 2015
Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera★ ‘Carmen’ (Wednesday) Perhaps an exciting new addition to the cast — the star tenor Jonas Kaufmann, singing the first of just two performances at the Metropolitan Opera this season — will spark the rich-toned but blank mezzo-soprano Elina Garanca, in the title role of Bizet’s classic. The strong-willed, strong-voiced soprano Ailyn Pérez joins them as Micaëla in this revival of Richard Eyre’s stony Met production. Louis Langrée conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)‘Les Contes d’Hoffmann’ (Saturday and Thursday) The Metropolitan Opera’s music director, James Levine, takes over the reins for the second cast of this season’s revival of Offenbach’s masterpiece. The winningly earnest tenor Matthew Polenzani sings the title role and Audrey Luna, Susanna Philips and Elena Maximova are the three women in his life. Karine Deshayes plays Nicklausse and Laurent Naouri, the opera’s four villains. Saturday at 8 p.m., Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)★ ‘Don Giovanni’  (Friday, Monday and next Friday) Although acclaimed for his adventurous work in England, the director Michael Grandage presided over a surprisingly tame new Metropolitan Opera production of this opera by Mozart in 2011. That staging, dominated by a three-tiered set, is back, and still lacks a strong point of view. But the cast, headed by the charismatic baritone Peter Mattei in the title role, is excellent, and Alan Gilbert, in his second appearance with the Met, conducts a vividly detailed, urgent and elegant performance. The soprano Elza van den Heever as Donna Anna and the bass-baritone Luca Pisaroni as Leporello are also standouts. At 7:30 p.m., 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)Advertisement★ La Donna del Lago (Saturday and Tuesday) The mezzo-soprano Joyce DiDonato is magnificent as Elena, the winsome heroine of this Rossini melodrama, which is having its premiere production at the Metropolitan Opera. The story is set against the 15th-century rebellion by some clans of Scottish highlanders against their king, James V. As the daughter of the king’s former tutor, who is now allied with the rebels, Ms. DiDonato brings affecting sensitivity and brilliant coloratura to her performance. The tenor Juan Diego Flórez is at his best as the king, who, disguised as Uberto, falls for Elena, though she loves — and eventually marries, with the king’s blessing — Malcolm, a contralto role, sung here by the rich-voiced mezzo-soprano Daniela Barcellona. The director Paul Curran’s essentially traditional production, atop a shifting floor and against the backdrop of atmospheric videos, gets the job done. The conductor Michele Mariotti leads a stylish and supple performance. Saturday at 1 p.m., Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)Advertisement★ ‘Semele’ (Wednesday, next Friday and March 8 and 10) Handel’s opera about a narcissistic goddess receives a brilliantly irreverent makeover by the director Zhang Huan in this production that blends European costume with Chinese theater, sumo wrestlers and a good dose of sex appeal. Christopher Moulds conducts a cast from the Canadian Opera Company led by Jane Archibald in the title role. Wednesday, next Friday and March 10 at 7:30 p.m., March 8 at 3 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)Classical MusicAmerican Composers Orchestra (Friday) Led by its music director, George Manahan, this adventurous ensemble offers “Sins and Songs,” a program of works by My Brightest Diamond (the alter ego of the composer and vocalist Shara Worden), Daniel Schnyder, Sarah Kirkland Snider, Carman Moore and Kurt Weill (“The Seven Deadly Sins”). At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Woolfe)★ Anna Caterina Antonacci  (Thursday) This passionate, fiercely idiosyncratic singer returns to Lincoln Center’s Alice Tully Hall for an ambitious immersion in the French repertory with the pianist Donald Sulzen. Songs by Debussy, Duparc and Poulenc will be on offer, and most likely keen, but the showcases are Berlioz’s haunting “La Mort d’Ophélie” and Poulenc’s harrowing monodrama “La Voix Humaine.” At 7:30 p.m., 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org. (Woolfe)Avant Music Festival (Friday and Saturday) This adventurous new-music festival presents music that mixes electronics and acoustic instruments by Paula Matthusen on Friday, with performers including Mantra Percussion and Dither Electric Guitar Quartet. On Saturday the virtuosic vocal ensemble Ekmeles takes on the complete eccentric choral works by John Cage. (The series continues on March 6 and 7.) At 8 p.m., Wild Project, 195 East Third Street, East Village, 212-228-1195, thewildproject.com. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Joshua Bell  (Wednesday) This superstar violinist joins forces with the pianist Sam Haywood for a program featuring Beethoven’s Sonata No. 4, Grieg’s Sonata No. 1 in F, Brahms’s Sonata No. 1 and Bartok’s Rhapsody No. 1. At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center (Sunday and Tuesday) The violinist Daniel Hope and the violist Paul Neubauer join the Society’s artistic directors, the pianist Wu Han and the cellist David Finckel, for three piano quintets, one each by Brahms, Schumann and, unusually, Mahler. Sunday at 5 p.m., Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (David Allen)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Clarion Music Society Orchestra  (Monday) Steven Fox conducts this excellent period-instrument ensemble, expanded for the occasion, in Beethoven’s “Pastoral” Symphony. The program also features Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No. 4, which the pianist Nimrod David Pfeffer will perform on a replica of an early 19th-century fortepiano. At 8 p.m., Park Avenue Christian Church, at 85th Street, Manhattan, 212-288-3246, parkavenuechristian.com. (Schweitzer)Composer Portrait: Augusta Read Thomas (Thursday) Of the four works on August Read Thomas’s program in the Miller Theater’s wonderful series, two are world premieres. One is a brief piece for violin and viola, “Capricci,” the other a more ambitious work for percussion and string quartet, “Selene.” Also on the docket are “Resounding Earth,” a percussion symphony of sorts, and an excerpt from “Sun Threads” for string quartet. Third Coast Percussion and the Jack Quartet do the honors. At 8 p.m., Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (Allen)AdvertisementInternational Contemporary Ensemble (Friday and Saturday) This intrepid ensemble continues its residency at the Abrons Arts Center, where it celebrates the centennial of the Henry Street Settlement with two free concerts. The lineup on Friday includes works by Salvatore Sciarrino, Toshio Hosokawa, Marcos Balter and Andrea Agostini. On Saturday the saxophonist Steve Lehman and the pianist Cory Smythe collaborate on a program inspired by the New York composer Alvin Lucier. At 8 p.m., Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side, 212-352-3101, abronsartscenter.org. (Schweitzer)Locrian Chamber Players (Thursday) This impressive contemporary music ensemble assures audiences that its free programs will be fresh through its defining mission: The group only plays works written within the last decade. These musicians have a good record of choosing interesting pieces. The concerts are presented in the intimate 10th floor performance space at Riverside Church. During intermission you can enjoy a spectacular view of the Hudson River from the balcony outside the hall. The next program offers works by John Adams, Daniel Bernard Roumain, David Macbride, Robert Cohen and Matthew Hough. At 8 p.m., Riverside Drive at 122nd Street, Morningside Heights, 212-870-6700, locrian.org. (Tommasini)New York Philharmonic  (Friday and Saturday) A quiet week at the Philharmonic features just two concerts, with the same program. Frank Peter Zimmermann is the soloist in Sibelius’s frosty Violin Concerto, while Sakari Oramo leads Sibelius’s “The Oceanides” and Brahms’s Symphony No. 2. Friday at 11 a.m., Saturday at 8 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Allen)Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment (Saturday) This ever-fresh ensemble presents two crowd-pleasers, Dvorak’s “New World” Symphony and Brahms’s Violin Concerto, with the fiery Viktoria Mullova as the soloist. The program also includes the overture to Smetana’s “The Bartered Bride.” Adam Fischer conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Roman Rabinovich and Michael Brown (Monday and Thursday) SubCulture hosts two noteworthy young pianists this week. On Monday, in a series curated by Andras Schiff, Mr. Rabinovich performs Bach, Brahms, Bartok and Smetana. On Thursday, as part of a series featuring laureates of the New York International Piano Competition, Michael Brown plays one of his own works as well as pieces by Couperin, Haydn, Copland, Ravel and Nathan Shields. At 7:30 p.m., 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 212-533-5470, subculturenewyork.com. (Schweitzer)Stile Antico  (Saturday) This fine vocal ensemble performs music written for the courts of the Hapsburg rulers over the course of two centuries, with works by composers including Thomas Tallis, Cristóbal de Morales and Josquin des Prez. At 8 p.m., Church of St. Mary the Virgin, 145 West 46th Street, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Andrew Tyson (Wednesday) This accomplished young American pianist, a recent winner of the Young Concert Artists competition, presents an afternoon recital in collaboration with the Morgan Library & Museum. He will play Mozart’s Rondo in F, Schumann’s great and seldom-heard suite “Humoreske,” and four selections from Ravel’s glittering and challenging “Miroirs.” At noon, 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org. (Tommasini)★ Vienna Philharmonic  (Friday through Sunday) This venerable orchestra continues to make special claims to the music of Brahms, and reasonably so, as it debuted the Second and Third Symphonies. This storied band’s annual Carnegie Hall residency is devoted to the composer, with the Italian conductor Daniele Gatti at the helm. On Friday, there’s the First and Third Symphonies; on Saturday, the Second and Fourth; and on Sunday, the “German Requiem,” with the soprano Diana Damrau and the baritone Christian Gerhaher. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page C15 of the New York edition with the headline: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.