AdvertisementSupported byPrices may not reflect ticketing service charges. For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Ghost of a Saber Tooth Tiger  (Saturday) After venturing down numerous experimental paths, including his morose piano-pop album, “Friendly Fire,” and a stint in the dance-hop group Cibo Matto, Sean Lennon has found the ideal outlet for his reedy voice and bohemian sensibilities. He croons in dewy-eyed unison with his girlfriend, the musician-model Charlotte Kemp Muhl, in this band’s fanciful take on 1960s psychedelic pop. They released “Midnight Sun” in April. With Summer Moon, Tall Tall Trees and Invisible Familiars. At 8 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, babysallright.com. (Stacey Anderson)★ Pepito Gómez  (Sunday) This timba singer and bandleader is a former member of the popular Cuban band Pupy y Los Que Son Son. Onstage his high, chirped vocals are paired with joyous conga percussion and brass, inviting a nonstop dance party, which was the case during his exhilarating recent performance as part of the World Music Institute’s World to Brooklyn series. At Drom, he performs a tribute to the Buena Vista Social Club. At 5:30 and 8 p.m., 85 Avenue A, East Village, 212-777-1157, dromnyc.com. (Anderson)Holy Ghost! (DJ Set)  (Thursday) The breakout dance-pop act of 2011 pulls its stage antics from Freddie Mercury and New Order; its disco-ready riffs from the Bee Gees and LCD Soundsystem; and its cameos from, unfathomably, Michael McDonald. He’s fantastic, incidentally, on “Some Children,” which was one of the many addictive moments on this duo’s self-titled debut; the follow-up, “Dynamics,” released in 2013, was a more atmospheric effort. With Le Youth. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Anderson)Lady Lamb the Beekeeper  (Tuesday) On her second album, “After,” which arrives the day of this show, the singer-songwriter Aly Spaltro, a.k.a. Lady Lamb, weaves plenty of anecdotes — on heartbreak, on familial love, on U.F.O. sightings. The disparate topics are grounded in Ms. Spaltro’s adroit folk-pop guitar playing and wintry vocals, which recall somber peers like Angel Olsen and Sharon Van Etten. With Cuddle Magic. At 9 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, at Kent Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. (Anderson)Maroon 5  (Thursday and next Friday) Loyal listeners of FM radio generally exist in a perpetual twilight loop of the current Maroon 5 hits “Animals” and “Sugar,” which blend amiable, poppish guitar riffs with the singer Adam Levine’s falsetto. The band joins another flashy, genetically blessed group, the reggae-rockers Magic! (whose “Rude” was a hit single last year), for two nights at Madison Square Garden. With Rozzi Crane. At 7:30 p.m., 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)★ Punch Brothers  (Thursday) This inventive young folk-bluegrass band opens its latest album, “The Phosphorescent Blues,” with the striking “Familiarity,” a 10-minute roots suite that beautifully captures the full bliss and terror of new love. The rest of the album is equally masterly, especially the singer-mandolist Chris Thile’s hearty vocals and the deft interplay of guitars, fiddle and banjo. It also churns along with fresh country and rock flair, courtesy of the producer T Bone Burnett. With Gaby Moreno. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 212-465-6500, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)★ Sleater-Kinney  (Friday) Many an indie-rock fan lamented the summer of 2006, when Sleater-Kinney announced its indefinite hiatus after 12 years together. Last month, the members, Corin Tucker, Carrie Brownstein and Janet Weiss, released their eighth album, “No Cities to Love,” and it’s a gripping comeback. The album is filled with taut punk riffs and its dauntless, alternately wailed and growled vocals are an exhilarating reclamation of feminist power. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)Soul Clap and Dance-Off with Jonathan Toubin  (Saturday) DJ Jonathan Toubin, one of the most popular spinners in Williamsburg and the founder of the New York Night Train dance parties, is a knowledgeable student of American pop and soul music history. He reprises his soul dance party with Nick Waterhouse, an R&B and soul singer-songwriter from California. At 11:59 p.m., Brooklyn Bowl, 61 Wythe Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-963-3369, brooklynbowl.com. (Anderson)Suuns  (Saturday) These prog-rockers from Montreal take Hemingway-like economy with their tunes, stacking small fragments of dissonant melody into dense, enormous waves. Their 2010 debut album, “Zeroes QC,” merely suggested the sensational power of their live jams; the follow-up, “Images Du Futur,” carried a sinister pace and came closer to mirroring their thundering stage shows. With Disappears and Christines. At 9 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, at Kent Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. (Anderson)★ Synth Nights: Morton Subotnick  (Wednesday) The Kitchen is consistently brilliant in its booking of avant-garde performances, but it outdoes itself with this series, whose curators have included Laurie Anderson and Nico Muhly. This installment features the pioneering composer Morton Subotnick, a godfather figure in the world of electronic multimedia. His first full-length album, “Silver Apples of the Moon,” was a defining release for Mr. Subotnick and his label, Nonesuch, in 1967. Ahead of his 82nd birthday in April, he presents this light and sound duet with the visual artist Lillevan. At 8 p.m., 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org. (Anderson)Tibet House Benefit Concert with Debbie Harry  (Thursday) The 25th installment of this annual fund-raiser features performances by a surprising crop of pacifists: Who knew that Debbie Harry followed such Zen pathways? She tops a roster that also includes the Flaming Lips, Laurie Anderson, Tenzin Choegyal, Sturgill Simpson, Ira Glass, Dev Hynes and the longtime Tibet House supporters Patti Smith and Philip Glass. At 7:30 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Anderson)★ Trash Talk  (Tuesday) A few years back these hard-core punk stalwarts from Sacramento signed to Odd Future’s label, which they nodded to on their 2014 album, “No Peace,” via a scabrous, minute-long instrumental track (“Amnesiatic”) with hip-hop undertones. The rest of the album plunges into the breakneck punk thrashings the band has perfected over the past decade, topped by the singer Lee Spielman’s self-flagellating yet defiant lyrics. With Ratking and Lee Bannon. At 9 p.m., Palisades, 906 Broadway Street, at Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, palisadesbk.com. (Anderson)Matthew E. White  (Tuesday) This spacey folk singer-songwriter delivers low, minimalist mumbles and bright peeks of falsetto over snug strings and brass orchestration. His lovely admissions, like “You give me joy like a fountain deep down in my soul” (from “One of These Days”), cause a few heartstrings to flutter. His debut album, “Big Inner,” landed in 2012; his full-length follow-up arrives on March 10. At 8 p.m., BRIC House, 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. (Anderson)Charlie Wilson  (Thursday and March 7) This funk veteran and former Gap Band frontman remains a prominent force in R&B: In recent years he has collaborated with Kanye West on the Grammy-nominated hit “Bound 2” and received a BET Lifetime Achievement Award, presented by Justin Timberlake. This smooth showman makes two stops in the area as part of his “Forever Charlie” national tour, with Kem and Joe. Thursday at 7 p.m., Barclays Center, 620 Atlantic Avenue, at Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, barclayscenter.com. March 7 at 8 p.m., Prudential Center, 165 Mulberry Street, Newark, 800-745-3000, prucenter.com. (Anderson)Advertisement