AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleThe premise of “Sex Box” is twofold. Troubled couples receive valuable advice from a panel of “leading sex and relationship experts.” They also have sex in a box, onstage, before a live audience. This is why groups like the Parents Television Council are giving the show free publicity by demanding its cancellation.Having watched the first episode (scheduled for Friday night on WE tv), I can say that the only demonstrably true thing about the premise is that there’s a box onstage. It’s about the size of a backyard utility shed, and its outside is veined with blue light that turns to flashing red when a couple enters.What do the couples actually do while they’re inside? It’s anyone’s guess, but I’d like to think they spend the time talking about how no one with any self-respect or basic notion of hygiene would have sex in a box, onstage, before a live audience.Based on a short-lived British series, “Sex Box” is tamer than an average episode of “The View” and considerably more boring. Married couples briefly describe their unfulfilling sex lives, then are sent to the box, on the theory that the release of endorphins following sex will put them in the mood for a frank postcoital discussion of their problems. In the premiere, none of the men fall asleep after leaving the box, though this is a distinct possibility for viewers of any gender.The panelists — all Dr.’s — are Chris Donaghue, a “cutting-edge sex therapist”; Fran Walfish, a “relationship psychotherapist to the rich and famous”; and Yvonne Capehart, a “renowned pastor and spiritual adviser.” The inclusion of the minister is an American innovation. Also American in spirit are the panel’s retrograde reactions to the hoary “Joy of Sex” scenarios. When there’s blame to be distributed, it’s more likely to go to the wives. Brandon may be lazy, but it’s Elle’s job to tell him that she, too, wants an orgasm. Christopher and Alexia’s formerly sizzling sex life is fizzling, post-childbirth, because “there’s a large piece of this puzzle that’s missing in Alexia.” When the seemingly rational and open-minded Rebecca says she’s O.K. with her husband’s desire to bring another woman into the relationship, the two female panelists berate her, refusing to believe that she knows her own mind. “You are trying to convince yourself when deep down in your heart you want your man and you want your man only,” the pastor tells her, based on no evidence that we can see.One authentic thing about “Sex Box”: Watching it is kind of like bad sex — the clock watching, the profound embarrassment, the desire to check your email. Engage in too much of it, and you’ll have to repair your relationship with your TV.Sex BoxWE tv, Friday nights at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Produced by Relativity Television. Tom Forman, Brad Bishop, Jon Beyer, Molly Milton, Russell Barnes, Andrew Scher and Mike Maloy, executive producers. Marc Juris, Lauren Gellert, and Kate Farrell, executive producers for WE tv.Advertisement