AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck9 P.M. (NBC) LAW & ORDER: SPECIAL VICTIMS UNIT Attention, “Hamilton” fans: Leslie Odom Jr., who portrays Aaron Burr in Lin-Manuel Miranda’s Broadway musical, and Daveed Diggs, who plays Thomas Jefferson and the Marquis de Lafayette, do guest turns as a pastor and lawyer seeking justice for an unarmed black man shot by the police — 35 times. Benson insists the officers, who had pegged the man as a rape suspect, followed procedure. Barba isn’t so sure. (Image: Isiah Whitlock Jr. and Mariska Hargitay.)11:20 A.M. (Showtime 2) WHAT ABOUT BOB? (1991) Richard Dreyfuss plays Dr. Leo Marvin, a New York psychiatrist, and Bill Murray is Bob, his patient, who follows him to rural Vermont for a month. The doctor says Bob has to go; the doctor’s family members insist he stay.6 P.M. (Starz Cinema) CHILDREN OF A LESSER GOD (1986) In this slick adaptation of Mark Medoff’s Broadway play, William Hurt is a teacher at a school for the hearing-impaired in Maine who uses unconventional methods to reach his students. Marlee Matlin, in her Oscar-winning role, is the school employee, deaf from birth, whose shell he might not be able to crack. Cue walks on windswept beaches and naked frolics in a heated pool.8 P.M. (13, 49) SOUL OF THE ELEPHANT After stumbling upon the skulls of two large bull elephants with their ivory tusks intact in the Botswana wilderness, the conservationists and filmmakers Dereck and Beverly Joubert celebrated. The animals had died of natural causes at around age 70 and not at the hands of poachers or hunters. But how? The Jouberts spent the next two years following elephant herds to help reconstruct the lives of the deceased from birth: their childhood interactions, their migrations for water with their families, and their potentially fatal encounters with predators. They also watched as elephants mourned their dead, suggesting that they feel emotions.9 P.M. (Fox) EMPIRE It’s business first as the Lyon factions put aside their differences to make some cold cash off Hakeem’s leaked album. Lucious, meanwhile, feeling constricted by his federal murder case, decides to make Vernon vanish.9 P.M. (ABC) MODERN FAMILY Phil becomes obsessed with hatching duck eggs. Gloria becomes obsessed with her favorite telenovela actress. And Cam becomes obsessed with the frat guys upstairs. In “black-ish,” at 9:30, Dre and his colleagues come up with an alternative to Father’s Day.10 P.M. (FX) AMERICAN HORROR STORY: HOTEL Couture comes to the Hotel Cortez, and with it Naomi Campbell as a fashion editor whose critiques can be deadly.10 P.M. (CNBC) JAY LENO’S GARAGE Mr. Leno checks out California car culture, matching the hydropneumatic suspension system of a 1971 Citroën DS against some souped-up Los Angeles lowriders.11:35 P.M. (NBC) THE TONIGHT SHOW STARRING JIMMY FALLON Vin Diesel, who has spent the week fending off body-shamers, is a guest. Selena Gomez performs.MIDNIGHT (TCM) A CLOCKWORK ORANGE (1971) In a futuristic Britain, a sadomasochistic teenager jailed for murder takes part in a rehab program that leaves him defenseless against those he tortured. Malcolm McDowell “is splendid as tomorrow’s child,” Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times, but it is always Stanley Kubrick’s picture, “which is even technically more interesting than ‘2001.’ ” (Image: Mr. McDowell.)What’s Streaming NowAMERICAN HORROR STORY: FREAK SHOW To Seasons 1 (“Murder House”), 2 (“Asylum”) and 3 (“Coven”) of this anthology series, Netflix adds Season 4, which might have been the scariest yet, with its cast of carnival grotesques like Twisty the Clown. (netflix.com)CURB YOUR ENTHUSIASM HBO Go has chosen “12 must-watch episodes” starring Larry David and gang — among them, “Palestinian Chicken,” “The Bare Midriff,” “The Ida Funkhouser Roadside Memorial,” “Opening Night” and “The Baptism.” (hbogo.com)Advertisement