
Friday File By                     
 MARY JO MURPHY
 
FEB. 26, 2015
80 YEARS AGOIf the haunting “Goodnight Irene” is your new earworm, you’ve either watched “Legend of Lead Belly,” out this week on the Smithsonian Channel, or picked up a copy of the five-disc boxed set “Lead Belly: The Smithsonian Folkways Collection,” released on Tuesday. Lead Belly, “the hard name of a harder man,” as Woody Guthrie described him, is having a bit of a comeback.His name — his real one, Huddie Ledbetter — first appeared in The New York Times in 1935, in a newsy column of nuggets from the publishing world. The musicologists John and Alan Lomax had visited him in prison two years earlier, making the first recordings of him, and now, after helping to get him released, they were compiling a book of his songs with him.“Ledbetter,” The Times reported, “is the Negro who sang himself out of two penitentiaries and into matrimony. He sings songs of his own composition and accompanies himself on a twelve-string guitar.”In 1939, Compton Pakenham reviewed the album Lead Belly made with Lomax:“Musicraft scores another bullseye with an album by that remarkable character known as Lead Belly,” Mr. Pakenham wrote. “Negro songs fall into one of two categories: spiritual or sinful.” The notes, he wrote, quoting from them, make it clear that Lead Belly “ ‘early decided that he preferred frankness, flesh and the devil to sanctimoniousness without a guitar.’ ”AdvertisementMr. Lomax “believes that this is the first authentic album of American folk music,” Mr. Pakenham added, “and in all probability it is. As he points out, radio and gramophone have encouraged distortions. Hearing these records is enough to confirm his claim. There is nothing quite like them on any other list.”As for live performance, Howard Taubman reported on a benefit concert for Spanish Children’s Relief at the Mecca Auditorium in Manhattan in 1940: Ledbetter “sang songs of the South with rousing informality; he even induced the audience to join him in several choruses.”AdvertisementLess than 10 years later he was dead at 60. His Times obituary noted that “he was acclaimed by critics and untutored music lovers, a tribute to the universality of his art.”A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page C27 of the New York edition with the headline: Friday File.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »