AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken JohnsonYou may not know the name Paul Rand (1914-1996), the immensely influential 20th-century advertising art director, illustrator and graphic designer, but it’s a safe bet you’re familiar with some of his works. After shaking up American advertising and book cover design in the 1940s and ’50s, he created the logos for UPS, IBM, Westinghouse and other American corporations, symbols that remain ubiquitously familiar today. His admirers called him “the Picasso of graphic design”; the Museum of Modern Art named him one of the 10 best art directors of all time. Mr. Rand didn’t invent branding, but he did it as well as anyone ever has or is likely to, a point driven home in an entertaining and enlightening way in “Everything Is Design: The Work of Paul Rand” at the Museum of the City of New York. Organized by Donald Albrecht, the museum’s curator of architecture and design, the exhibition does a good job of tracking Mr. Rand’s progress over six decades. In chronological order, it presents in waist-high vitrines about 150 examples of vintage magazines, book covers, three-dimensional containers, children’s books and books by Mr. Rand about principles of design. It’s engaging because of Mr. Rand’s peppy and humorous combinations of drawing, painting, photographic montage and lettering. You also see how adroitly he borrows from Bauhaus, de Stijl and Constructivist design and from fine artists like Klee, Miró, Mondrian, Matisse and others. The show generates a lot of historical and nostalgic resonance, too, as many pieces look so distinctly and redolently of their time. Some of his magazine advertisements are comically dated. In a campaign for El Producto cigars in the 1950s, he added hand-drawn hands, hats and other accouterments to cutout photographs of cigars, turning them into goofy characters. Yet a cigar box designed by Mr. Rand for that company in 1952 is seriously elegant. Its cover bears a ghostly black-and-white photogram of cigars and an ashtray, and the words El Producto are rendered along the bottom edge in stenciled, multicolored block letters — a typographical style that Jasper Johns later used to great advantage. That box isn’t in the show, but it’s pictured in an excellent book by the design historian and former art director for The New York Times Steven Heller, “Paul Rand” (Phaidon, 1999), available in the museum bookstore. Mr. Rand started his career as a 20-year-old wunderkind and never stopped being brilliant. Born Peretz Rosenbaum in Brooklyn to an Orthodox Jewish family, he changed his name early in his career to get around the anti-Semitism that prevailed in the advertising industry. While in high school he attended nighttime art classes at Pratt Institute and later took courses at Parsons School of Design and at the Art Students League, where he studied with the erstwhile Weimar New Objectivist George Grosz. He began producing illustrations for newspaper and magazine ads when he was just out of his teens, and by the age of 23 he’d been appointed art director for Esquire magazine and its sister publication Apparel Arts. A 1939 issue of Apparel Arts in the exhibition has a page introducing summer fashions in Mr. Rand’s cheerfully witty style: a jaunty, anthropomorphic figure composed from a canoe paddle crossed with a length of thick rope. Wearing a bathing suit and sunglasses, this jaunty character hoists a cocktail using a frayed rope end as a hand, all against a background of red and white stripes. If those stripes are meant to signify patriotism, it’s a rare instance of anything in Mr. Rand’s oeuvre referring explicitly to events outside the advertising bubble, like World War II, the Korean War or the Vietnam War. Mr. Rand’s politics aren’t directly addressed by the exhibition, and he wasn’t a political artist. But it’s hard not to think of his works completely apolitically. Considering the punchy, wildly inventive covers he created in the 1950s for books by Henry James, Albert Camus, Jean-Paul Sartre and Herbert Marcuse, you might suppose that he aligned with the liberal intellectual wing of that period’s culture. From the late ’50s on, when he began working directly for corporations to shape their public identities, it seems he pledged allegiance to corporate America.What he did for companies like IBM, ABC and, unfortunately, Enron, was to give each a unified public identity by visual means. He didn’t just create logos; he applied his designs to many facets of a businesses, from business cards and letterheads to product packages, and he required absolute uniformity in all those aspects. What was the secret of Mr. Rand’s success? One of several books about design that he wrote and illustrated is open to a page where he talks about the logo he created in 1962 for ABC, the image of three sans-serif, lowercase letters on a disc. Referring to a picture of the logo that’s heavily, almost but not quite illegibly blurred, he asks, “How far out of focus can an image be and still be recognized?” Pretty far, if it’s a Rand design. That’s important because, unlike fine art works, graphic images are meant to survive less than ideal conditions. Awareness of that necessity is a big part of what makes Mr. Rand a godfather of today’s image-saturated media world. If it gives some politically oriented viewers pause to think of his evidently unwavering faith in American capitalism and of how he imprinted corporate identities on the minds of millions, that just makes his story all the more interestingly complicated. “Everything Is Design: The Work of Paul Rand” runs through July 19 at the Museum of the City of New York; Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street; 212-534-1672, mcny.org. Advertisement