AdvertisementSupported byAntiquesBy Eve M. KahnThe British glass historian David Burton has created a 1,740-page set of books to analyze a seemingly narrow topic: antique bottles that bear raised markings identifying the original owners. Mr. Burton, 77, has spent decades hunting for intact and broken vessels in private and institutional collections and deciphering their codes of numbers, letters and family coats of arms for his new three-volume set, “Antique Sealed Bottles 1640-1900 and the Families Who Owned Them” (Antique Collectors’ Club).During the research, Mr. Burton said in an interview, his family wondered if he would ever finish poring through the back stories of bottles.“You can scratch the surface and get a huge amount of history out of them,” he said.In the books, he describes how fashions in bottle shapes evolved over centuries, from spheres to onions and cylinders. The markings were customized for businesses, like schools and inns, and for aristocrats, farmers, merchants and intellectuals. In 1663, the politician and diarist Samuel Pepys recorded visiting a tavern to admire “my New bottles, made with my Crest upon them, filled with wine.”Bottles with owners’ markings were so treasured that American Indians, as early as the 1660s, placed them ceremonially at burial sites. Around 1714, the corpse of James Tillie, a Cornwall castle owner, was posed seated upright in a mausoleum, per his dying wishes, alongside a table set for a luxurious meal with wine in his personalized bottles.Vessels with these kinds of markings now typically cost a few thousand dollars each. Mr. Burton lists institutions and collectors that acquired particular bottles, and prices paid. Hardly any of the pieces are on public display. An especially impressive green shard from the 1770s, excavated in Manhattan near City Hall and bearing the name of Evert Byvanck, is now tucked away in city storage.Fakes have emerged to meet the market demand. Among the hardest forgeries to detect, Mr. Burton said, are plain antique bottles with antique seals salvaged from elsewhere glued onto their necks and bodies.Enough new information to fill a hundred more pages has emerged since he finished the publication. In November, at a Bonhams sale in London, sealed bottles from the 1600s brought up to $33,000 each. He is considering setting up a website for the latest finds that set him off on research trails.“If someone sends me a seal,” he said, “whatever I’m doing, I have to drop everything.”A ROYAL COUPLE REUNITEDA ceramic royal couple, separated for four decades and reunited last year, will go on long-term public view in their native Netherlands in a few weeks.The Gemeentemuseum in The Hague has acquired the two blue-and-white statues, made in Delft around 1690 and depicting the newly crowned Mary and her husband, William. The queen and king wear flowered robes and striped slippers and clutch flower baskets. The museum acquired the pair from the Aronson Antiquairs gallery in Amsterdam, which had displayed them at the Winter Antiques Show in Manhattan last month.The asking price then was $950,000. Benno Tempel, the museum’s director, declined to disclose the amount paid. “Let’s just say there was a museum discount,” he said.The dealer Robert D. Aronson said that the queen was found last February; it had passed through collections in Brussels and Antwerp over the years. The king surfaced in May at a French auction house, as property of a French family in the chocolate trade. The family most likely acquired the pair in the 1870s. The figures were restored around 1950 and then, in the 1970s, the queen was inexplicably sold off.Mr. Tempel first saw the pair a few weeks before Mr. Aronson shipped the statues to New York. His initial reaction, he said, was along the lines of: “Why is it going to leave the Netherlands? Why is nobody reacting?”The museum rounded up foundation grants to cover the purchase. It will display the statues this spring in a gallery of Delft wares.“They will be free-standing,” he said, “so they will be getting all the attention.”CHINESE ARTIFACTS ON LOANChinese museums have been lending to their American counterparts quite a bit lately, and now the John and Mable Ringling Museum of Art in Sarasota, Fla., will benefit from the trend. For “Royal Taste: The Art of Princely Courts in 15th-Century China,” opening in October, Ringling will borrow provincial Chinese artifacts that rarely travel.Fan Jeremy Zhang, Asian art curator at the museum, has helped negotiate loans from museums around his original home, Hubei Province in eastern China. The Ringling exhibition will focus on the possessions of Ming dynasty princes who were sent to Hubei by the Beijing court. These include statues of deities, landscape paintings and jewelry and gemstones found in tombs.The show will explore the challenges of staying in power in Hubei. Princes content with their middling status were allowed to prosper. But if they came under suspicion of too much ambition, they would be forced to commit suicide. If a prince had no son, Dr. Zhang said, “the family line was discontinued and the princely title was revoked.”Among other institutions that have secured major Chinese loans in the last year, including imperial goods and burial site items, are the Musée Guimet in Paris, the British Museum, the National Museum of Scotland, the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, the Bowers Museum in Santa Ana, Calif., and the Clark Art Institute in Williamstown, Mass.Next month, shows and auctions for Asia Week in New York will offer Ming furniture, ceramics, metalwork, jade carvings and deity statues reflecting the quality of princely workshops. Their provenance trails, however, are rarely traceable back more than a few decades.Advertisement