AdvertisementSupported byInside ArtBy Randy KennedyIn the 1970s, the desolate streets of SoHo were home to many brands of weirdness. (The character Paul Hackett, stranded there in Martin Scorsese’s “After Hours,” complains: “I just wanted to leave, you know, my apartment, maybe meet a nice girl. And now I’ve got to die for it?”) But even world-wise SoHo residents were stopped in their tracks by the early outdoor performances of the Trisha Brown Dance Company. In “Man Walking Down the Side of a Building” in 1970, a dancer used ropes and a harness to walk perpendicularly from the top to the bottom of a Wooster Street building. In “Roof Piece” (1971), performers positioned on rooftops over 10 blocks functioned like ancient signal fires, passing choreographic messages from street to street.The sculptor Donald Judd, who made his home and studio in a grand building at 101 Spring Street, was deeply connected to the dance world of those years, and now the Judd Foundation and the Trisha Brown Dance Company have organized performances of five seminal pieces, on May 1 and 2, inside 101 Spring. The dancers will use four of the five floors in the building, which was painstakingly renovated and opened to public tours in 2013, to perform among not only Judd’s sculpture and furniture but also among permanently installed works by artists he knew and admired, like Carl Andre, Dan Flavin and Frank Stella.“The way that all those people Don knew bounced off each other was one of the reasons why the ’60s and ’70s were so beautiful and radical,” said Flavin Judd, Judd’s son and co-president of the Judd Foundation along with his sister, Rainer Judd. “A lot of that is long, long gone, but we still love those ideas.”In 2013, amid health problems, Ms. Brown, now 78, retired from active involvement with the company, and it has since been fund-raising for the preservation of her work and a farewell tour that includes a focus on site-specific performances. “Just as Trisha went from early site-specific work to the stage, we’re now going back to creating programs that take place in particular, nontraditional spaces,” said Diane Madden, an associate artistic director of the company. Spring Street was a natural choice, she said, because of its art-historical importance but also because of Judd’s work with Ms. Brown, as visual designer for important pieces like “Son of Gone Fishin,’ ” from 1981.Last year, the Brown company approached the foundation about conducting a benefit, and the company held a private performance of several of the dances inside the studio, learning how to adapt the pieces to what is essentially a residential and work space and how to gently migrate the audience — groups of about 20 people — through the floors to watch the dances.“The same stairs people are using going up are the ones used by people going down,” Ms. Madden said. “We have to choreograph the crowd as well as the performers. It’s quite a mathematical feat.” And one that the precisionist Judd, who died in 1994, would undoubtedly have admired. (Information about the $50 tickets for the dances is at juddfoundation.org.)40 YEARS OF 4 SISTERSA completely different kind of Brown company will soon be coming to the auction floor, in a rare appearance. On April 1, Sotheby’s will offer a complete set of “The Brown Sisters,” the photographer Nicholas Nixon’s groundbreaking series in which he has taken a black-and-white group portrait of his wife, Bebe, and her three sisters — Heather, Mimi and Laurie — every year for the past 40 years, a project that has evolved into a poetic composite of American womanhood, family, aging and the act of photography itself. Sets of the photographs, growing annually, are in the collections of several museums, including the Museum of Modern Art, which organized an exhibition that closed last month. Sets are also in the hands of a small number of private collectors, but only two have come to auction recently, both in 2005. “I think it’s one of those things where you almost have a relationship with an entity, with a growing body of work — it’s like a commitment,” said Joshua Holdeman, Sotheby’s worldwide head of 20th-century design, photographs and prints. “I think that’s why it’s so rare to see them.”The set headed to auction, with all 40 portraits to date, is estimated to sell for $200,000 to $300,000 and comes from the collection of Mary Robinson and her husband, C. David Robinson, who died in 2008. The Robinsons collected minimalist art before amassing renowned holdings in 19th- and 20th-century photography; many of their works were donated or sold to the National Gallery of Art in Washington in 1995. The couple first bought a set of Brown sisters portraits in 1985, when the project was a decade old, and acquired a new portrait every year, a practice Ms. Robinson continued after her husband’s death.SKYLINES ON THE HIGH LINEAs far as views are concerned, the High Line is an odd bird. That former train line turned elevated park is only about 25 feet above street level, so it’s not a place where tourists flock to point cameras into the distance. But vistas of the Manhattan skyline and the Hudson River from just that far up sometimes differ strikingly and surprisingly from what can be seen down among the taxicabs and trash cans. This small but significant change of scenery provided the inspiration for the High Line’s spring art exhibition, “Panorama,” a group show of sculpture and installation by a roster of mostly established international artists, opening April 23 and running through March 2016. The duo of Michael Elmgreen and Ingar Dragset will plant a tall, inaccessible telescope at a spot in the park known as 10th Avenue Square, where a little-known peek of the Statue of Liberty can be had. Yutaka Sone will show “Little Manhattan,” a stunningly intricate nine-foot-long marble sculpture of Manhattan.And Olafur Eliasson, in what will probably be the showstopper, plans to recreate “The Collectivity Project,” an installation of miniature buildings made from more than two tons of Lego pieces, a toy cityscape that the public will be invited to add to, alter, completely reimagine — or dismantle. “It’s an entropic piece, but that’s the point,” said Cecilia Alemani, the High Line’s curator. “It needs to fall apart, because that’s what makes it come alive.”Advertisement