By ROBERTA SMITHOCT. 13, 2015
Wolfgang Tillmans may be moving toward total transparency in his life and his photography. He is at least trying to get the most out of both.These are two of the big ideas to be extracted from Mr. Tillmans’s enveloping debut exhibition at David Zwirner’s gallery in Chelsea through Oct. 24. It is hardly his first gallery solo show in New York. That occurred in 1994 at the Andrea Rosen Gallery, where he had subsequent exhibitions.But this show is Mr. Tillmans’s first with Mr. Zwirner’s high-octane multinational gallery, and it brims with ambition. It takes advantage of the gallery’s big side-by-side spaces, without being overbearing, or making us wonder how much it cost. (Unlike, say, the Mike Kelley extravaganza one block away at Hauser & Wirth.) It is unusually personal, even for an autobiographical artist, and details what Mr. Tillmans’s work has always implied: Photography has no limits.The show is titled “PCR,” an abbreviation for “polymerase chain reaction,” in molecular biology the technique that finds and multiplies tiny fragments of DNA and is used by crime labs everywhere. This multitudinous metaphor reaffirms that today every photographic image can not only be dispersed everywhere, and be seen by anyone. It can also spur people to take more photographs, creating networks of experiences, feelings and ideas that connect people. This show is one such network.AdvertisementWhile his previous exhibitions have tended to feel like walk-in magazines, this one feels like an open book of his life during the last few years. Basically, if we walk in knowing nothing about the artist, we learn from looking that he has many friends and special relationships, travels widely, is openly gay and actively political on several fronts. We can infer from “17 Years’ Supply,” a photograph of a cardboard box with scores of prescription bottles, some bearing his name, that he is also living with H.I.V. (Through the gallery, the artist agreed that this inference could be made.)Yet Mr. Tillmans is also a connoisseur of beauty, who has a camera almost always at the ready, whether he is attending a protest in Berlin against the Nigerian extremists Boko Haram or reaching into the red gym shorts of a lover. (He takes us in close to the two men’s bodies — we see no one’s face — while printing the image nearly seven feet across.) He also makes abstractions in the darkroom; goes to the Faroe Islands to see a total eclipse of the sun; and visits his parents, photographing them individually in what seems to be a big studio or office.AdvertisementMr. Tillmans’s photographs are both documentary and diaristic, romantic and realistic, widely aware yet focused, and always demonstrating the physical ways and means of the medium. The Zwirner show presents around 175 images, ranging in size from snapshot to mural. They are matte or shiny; framed or pinned directly to the wall; chromogenic, inkjet or laser prints.Each says what a photograph inevitably says: I was here. And here. And also here. I was flying over the Sea of Japan when the clouds formed a spiral, and also at lunch when a watermelon was eaten down to the rind. I was in Warszawa Bar in St. Petersburg when Klara put her hand on Anders’s head and they leaned back toward a wall covered in sagging brocade. I was here to take this large photograph of the beautiful rounded form of a reclining man’s naked posterior. It has already been compared to “The Origin of the World”: Gustave Courbet’s small 1866 painting of a reclining woman’s naked pelvis.Mr. Tillmans also visited the great Brazilian architect Oscar Niemeyer when Mr. Niemeyer was as old as the hills and slumped in a wheelchair but still looking fierce and alert. (The artist’s interest in architecture continues in “Book for Architects,” a two-screen slide show of buildings in 37 countries, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art through Nov. 1.)Mr. Tillmans’s attention to physical facts includes, on eight narrow tables, a display of 43 sheets of generic paper (letter-, legal- and ledger-size) that is a study in whites. But the larger fact of living is his chief concern, as suggested by a short double video projection titled “Instrument” that gives the show a coda at once unexpected and right.The instrument in question is Mr. Tillmans’s body. It is seen in one projection from the back, beautiful and fit but soft, wearing only underwear (tighty-whities). He bounces rapidly in place from one foot to the other, to percussive music he programmed from the sound of his footfalls. He’s like a boxer in training, or someone relentlessly determined to get the most out of every second. The second projection shows only his shadow engaged in the same exercise. Disconcertingly, this insubstantial body is slightly out of sync with the fleshly one. It is a ghost, a shade, the specter that drives us all.“PCR” continues through Oct. 24 at the David Zwirner Gallery, Manhattan; 212-727-2070, davidzwirner­.com.A version of this review appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: One Photographer’s Life as an Open Book.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.