By STEPHEN HOLDENFEB. 26, 2015
Early in his centennial tribute to Billie Holiday on Wednesday evening at the Appel Room, Joey Arias, the beloved downtown cabaret singer and performance artist, marveled that he had finally been welcomed into the hallowed halls of Lincoln Center.More than once in this American Songbook show, he turned his back on the audience to take in the room’s glamorous view.Mr. Arias, 65, has long been admired for his ability to “channel” Holiday — there is no other appropriate word — in concerts seasoned with bawdy humor and audience interaction. In a hide-and-seek dialogue, he disappears into Lady Day, then reappears as himself, then disappears again. His version of Holiday isn’t a reverent re-creation, like Audra McDonald’s eerily perfect imitation of Holiday in her final days in “Lady Day at Emerson’s Bar and Grill.” It is full of enthusiasm and largely avoids morbidity.His aim is to evoke the breadth of Holiday’s career, emphasizing the frisky, spontaneous jazz singer, with only an occasional glimpse of the tragic diva. Mr. Arias brought a suitcase that he said had belonged to Holiday and from which he extracted a fur (to sing “Violets for Your Furs”) and other paraphernalia.AdvertisementMr. Arias has Holiday’s scratchy voice and slinky behind-the-beat jazz phrasing down cold. More up-tempo Holiday favorites, like “Them There Eyes,” “Easy Living,” and All of Me,” conveyed a kittenish delight that brought the program’s darker moments into sharper relief.In his devastating version of “Strange Fruit,” the words “blood” and “crop” become guttural expressions of horror and disgust, as if he were choking on them. During “You’ve Changed,” heartbreak and disappointment almost overcame him. Mr. Arias had wonderful support from an ensemble, led by Matt Ray on piano, whose classic, well-oiled swing was sweetened by violin and cello.AdvertisementTo my eyes and ears, Billie Holiday is an eternal mystery, who looks different in every photograph. Even at her most vocally ravaged, she conveyed a dangerous yet irresistible sensuality. More than most, Mr. Arias understands the risks and rewards of playing with fire.A version of this review appears in print on March 2, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Capturing Billie Holiday's Essence in Every Scratchy, Jazzy, Lyric.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.