AdvertisementSupported byBy David Allen“Xin nian kuai le!” That’s a happy Chinese new year from the New York Philharmonic, which celebrated on Tuesday with its fourth annual gala concert at a packed Avery Fisher Hall.Evenings like these have become commonplace among American symphony orchestras as they try to develop new audiences connected to one of the few markets where classical music is booming. Still, the key test is musical, not commercial. On that front this gala, briskly conducted by Long Yu, was decidedly mixed. Happily the main work was contemporary, Zhao Lin’s listenable “Duo” (2013), for cello, sheng and orchestra. A sheng is a mouth organ, played here by the Silk Road Ensemble member and sometime rock star Wu Tong. He joined Yo-Yo Ma.Mr. Lin’s double concerto is most ambitious toward the end, when resolutely tonal sound blocks from the tuned percussion and brass evoke a still landscape, crossed by flutters from the woodwind, cello and sheng. The piece is elegant and often feisty, but Mr. Ma’s recognizable sound was neutered by amplification here, and balances between the soloists and orchestra were unsteady. “Zun,” an encore for the same duo also by Mr. Lin, was charming.While Mr. Lin is clearly experimenting, traditional works on the program suffered from syrupy orchestrations by Ye Zou, a composer noted for film scores. “In Praise of Cattle” was one of two Shaanxi songs impressively sung in local style by Lei Jia, but only a clop of hooves bore much relation to the text. In “Fantasy on Maqam Themes,” Gulinaer Yiming’s gracious, artful playing of the ghijak — a bowed, upright fiddle — battled with melodramatic outbursts. Opening the concert, Li Huanzhi’s “Spring Festival Overture” (1955-6) romped along energetically, its folky idiom halfway between Dvorak and Rimsky-Korsakov. Perhaps Rimsky-Korsakov — an orchestrator of Borodin — explains the incongruous presence of the program’s sole non-Chinese piece, a “Polovtsian Dance” from “Prince Igor.” Advertisement