By KATHRYN SHATTUCKFEB. 28, 2015
8 P.M. (TCM) A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT (1992) Craig Sheffer portrays the writer Norman Maclean as a quiet young man and Brad Pitt is Paul, his wilder, more magnetic brother, in this adaptation of Mr. Maclean’s 1976 autobiographical story about the sons of a Presbyterian minister coming of age in Montana between Prohibition and the Great Depression — and finding expression for their emotions through fly-fishing. “These are men for whom the physical is inseparably entwined with the spiritual, men for whom both aspects of life are best appreciated knee-deep in a rushing river on a glorious day,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times about this visually stunning film, for which Philippe Rousselot won an Oscar for best cinematography. “Between the novella’s well-known first sentence (‘In our family, there was no clear line between religion and fly-fishing’) and its elegiac last line (‘I am haunted by waters’), ‘A River Runs Through It’ circled gracefully among the landmarks of Mr. Maclean’s early years without violating the distant perfection of those memories.” She added: “It’s easy to recognize Robert Redford’s reverent film version of this beautifully spare novella as a labor of love. While the film is more lavish than Mr. Maclean’s story, and hence less commandingly precise, it radiates much the same seriousness of purpose. The same thoughts embraced by Mr. Maclean — of family and history, of the unbridgeable distances between men, of a wild natural landscape as a pathway to spiritual grace — are ably reflected on the screen.” The evening’s lineup, part of TCM’s “31 Days of Oscar,” continues with “A Few Good Men” (1992), at 10:30; “The English Patient” (1996), at 1 a.m.; and “The Fisher King” (1991), at 4.3 P.M. (TNT) IT’S COMPLICATED (2009) Meryl Streep plays Jane Adler, a successful California restaurateur who is about to settle into life as an empty nester when she is blindsided by advances from her ex-husband (Alec Baldwin), who left her a decade earlier for a pretty young thing (Lake Bell). Steve Martin is thrown into the mix as Jane’s architect, and he is not without his own charms. Writing in The Times, Manohla Dargis called this a “pleasurable, daffy if at times daft” comedy from Nancy Meyers that “transforms a divorced couple into a romantic couple, which suggests a belief in love enduring even after a marriage dies.” The truth, she added, is “that everyone needs a little coddling, which could be the key to Ms. Meyers’s peculiar talent: She pampers her audience shamelessly.”8 P.M. (Hallmark) GOOD WITCH Catherine Bell reprises the role of Cassie Nightingale, the title conjurer in the channel’s “Good Witch” movie franchise. This new series finds Cassie and her teenage daughter, Grace (Bailee Madison), wondering whether a little magic has brought the handsome Dr. Sam Radford (James Denton) and his dishy son, Nick (Rhys Matthew Bond), to the house next door to theirs.9 P.M. (ABC) SHANIA: STILL THE ONE LIVE FROM VEGAS In December, after 105 performances, Shania Twain wrapped up her two-year residency at the Colosseum at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas. This concert special ventures into meetings, rehearsals and costume fittings before heading onstage with Ms. Twain, where she is accompanied by a 13-piece band, dancers, trained horses and a flying motorcycle.Advertisement9 P.M. (CUNY) RACHIDA (2002) A schoolteacher (Ibtissem Djouadi) refuses to bow to intimidation during a reign of terror in Algeria in this debut feature by Yamina Bachir.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS: BLAMING MELISSA Erin Moriarty reports on the case against Melissa Calusinski, who was found guilty of killing a 16-month-old boy at a suburban Chicago day care center in 2009, and the lawyer who argues that she was wrongfully convicted.Advertisement10 P.M. (American Heroes) THE MEN WHO CHANGED THE WORLD Tom Brokaw looks back at his interviews with George H. W. Bush, Colin L. Powell, Nelson Mandela, Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Bill Gates.11:30 P.M. (NBC) SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE Dakota Johnson is the host, and the musical guest is Alabama Shakes.What’s Streaming NowGHOST IN THE SHELL (1995) In 2029, a female cyborg hunts a hacker who robs humans of their memories — leaving the cyborg to wonder if she’s perhaps more than merely artificial — in this high-definition 25th-anniversary edition of the manga directed by Mamoru Oshii. (hulu.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on February 28, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.