By SIOBHAN BURKEFEB. 27, 2015
In “milonga,” the Belgian choreographer Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui explores the social aspects of tango as thoroughly as the steps. The show, which had its United States premiere at City Center on Thursday (part of A Bailar, a three-week Latin dance festival), takes its name from late-night gatherings of tango dancers and musicians. With the set and video designer Eugenio Szwarcer, Mr. Cherkaoui goes to great lengths to conjure that bustling atmosphere, populating the stage — and several screens — with silhouettes of people lounging, socializing, standing around. But all of that could go, and the essence of this impassioned production would remain: its 12 exceptional dancers and their supercharged relationships.Mr. Cherkaoui, who often ventures outside of contemporary dance — he’s collaborated with kathak and flamenco stars, among others — enlisted five Argentine tango couples and two contemporary dancers for this project, allowing their languages to cross-pollinate. (Nélida Rodríguez de Aure, his tango consultant and rehearsal assistant, helped make that happen.) At first, you can’t tell who’s who, but over 90 minutes, “milonga” gradually reveals its secrets, the different kinds of information these bodies hold.Though each couple gets a turn in the spotlight, propelled by five marvelous musicians (Fernando Marzan and Szymon Brzoska composed the score, which flirts with tradition, much as the dancing does), the most imaginative choreography is for groups of more than two. Early on, all of the dancers congregate in a loosely knit maze of flicking legs and swiveling pelvises, making fleeting moments of contact as they cycle through different partners. Later, the ensemble fissures into threes, leading to an electrifying trio for German Cornejo, Martin Epherra and Claudio González, a break from mostly male-female confrontations.But those confrontations, ranging from slapstick to furiously sensual, can be fascinating, too. The contemporary-dance interlopers, Jason Kittelberger and Jennifer White, skillfully fuse Mr. Cherkaoui’s molten movement with tricky, tango-inspired lifts, but their partnering is not effortless, which makes it interesting. They have a lot to learn before matching, say, the intimacy between Mr. Cornejo and Gisela Galeassi, whose searing duet defied at least a few laws of physics.Intent on transporting us to Argentina, Mr. Cherkaoui sets much of the show against high-definition projections of Buenos Aires. At one point, Mr. Kittelberger turns photo-browsing gestures — swiping, enlarging, discarding — into a mellifluous dance. But the images, like those manufactured silhouettes, often feels extraneous. With dancing like this, being right where we are is enough.“Milonga” continues through Sunday at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan; 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org.A version of this review appears in print on February 28, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Genres of Movement Spend the Night Flirting.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.