AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleThe end of the world definitely comes with a whimper in “The Last Man on Earth,” Will Forte’s sitcom subversion of the ubiquitous apocalypse drama, whose first two episodes have their premiere on Sunday night on Fox.Mr. Forte, the longtime “Saturday Night Live” cast member and “MacGruber” star, created the series and wrote the first two episodes, which were directed by the hot feature-film team of Phil Lord and Chris Miller (“The Lego Movie,” the “Jump Street” films). Writing about “Last Man” is a tricky exercise in spoiler avoidance — certain things will be revealed here in the name of criticism. Such as: The distinctive, charming first episode is very nearly a solo half-hour for Mr. Forte, who stars as Phil, seemingly the only survivor of a pandemic that struck the planet in 2018.Set in 2020, the first half-hour is a self-contained comic gloss on solitude scenarios like “I Am Legend” and, particularly, “Castaway,” which is directly invoked. Phil travels the 50 states in an RV looking for other humans, driving down the center of an empty mall (that’s New Jersey) and leaving Utah until the very end. Unsuccessful, he goes home to Tucson and does what your average middle-aged male former temp worker would do: moves into a suburban McMansion, stockpiles porn and uses the pool as a toilet.This initial episode is unusual not so much for its story line and relative quiet (though Phil does talk to himself) as for its wistful tone and its reliance on sly visual jokes over written gags. It feels like a cable comedy that’s found its way onto a broadcast network — you’d expect it on FX, home of “Louie” and “Wilfred,” but it’s surprising on Fox.Some of the show’s appeal dissipates after that, however. It’s not giving away too much to say that Phil eventually does find another survivor, Carol, who’s played by Kristen Schaal (“Bob’s Burgers”), with her crazy eyes and dentist’s-drill voice. The second episode takes the show in a different and more ordinary direction. Fulfilling the wordplay in the title, “Last Man” becomes a kind of essentialist romantic comedy: A couple who seem destined to be together — because they are, after all, the last man and the last woman on earth — are kept apart by their pride and prejudices.This part of the story, an allegory for the modern world of dating and marriage, with Carol representing civilization (she wants running water) and Phil representing id (he’s happy to keep urinating in the pool), is distinctly less inventive than the opening. And the writing is condescending to Ms. Schaal’s character. Phil is slovenly and lazy in an average-Joe kind of way; Carol, who forces him to stop at stop signs and insists on making eye contact when they clink glasses, is uptight in a stereotypically neurotic way. (She also comes across as not very bright.)A third episode extends the rom-com theme, and leaves you wondering where the story will go, until a last-minute surprise that pretty much tells you. (If you’re curious, Google which other actors have been signed for the cast.) “The Last Man on Earth” is well made, meticulous in its comic details and pleasantly acted by Mr. Forte and Ms. Schaal, but you may wish that it really had been about the last man on earth.The Last Man on EarthFox, Sunday nights at 9:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 8:30, Central time.Produced by 20th Century Fox Television. Created by Will Forte; Mr. Forte, Chris Miller, Phil Lord and Seth Cohen, executive producers.WITH: Will Forte (Phil Miller), Kristen Schaal (Carol Pilbasian).Advertisement