AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen Holden“Whiners and bleaters defiling the air.” That’s how Cardinal William Henry O’Connell, the Archbishop of Boston, described radio crooners, as reported in The New York Times in 1932. His denunciation, seconded by the New York Singing Teachers Association, dismissed crooning as “a degenerate form of singing” containing “the basest appeal to sex emotions in the young.”That quaint nugget of journalism prefaced Monday evening’s performance of “Croon,” a show at the Metropolitan Room by the Los Angeles-based singer Todd Murray. This suave, handsome baritone, who bears a strong physical resemblance to George Clooney, is such a confident singer that his performance, directed by the pianist Alex Rybeck, leading a quartet, is the real deal. There wasn’t a hint of a smirk.The show is a breezy, informal history of crooning, from the invention of the microphone to the present. It would be a disservice to describe Mr. Murray’s singing as generic. With his strong, smooth baritone, reminiscent, at its lower end, of Bing Crosby in his prime, Mr. Murray has the attitude and the body language to go with the voice. His gesticulation was relaxed and natural, and his unadorned interpretations of standards like “The Nearness of You,” “You’ll Never Know” and “How Deep Is the Ocean” were impeccable. But when called upon, he could also muster considerable vocal heft.Mr. Murray pointed out that rock ’n’ roll stars in the ’50s and ’60s had grown up in the heyday of crooning and knew how to do it right. His prime example was Elvis Presley, whose ballad style came right out of Crosby, via Dean Martin, and infused “Love Me Tender” and “Can’t Help Falling in Love.” His most daring song choice was Leonard Cohen’s “I’m Your Man.”Although Mr. Murray’s set included a couple of Frank Sinatra standards, he mostly shied away from the very soft, intimate style of the ’40s Sinatra, a seductive murmur whispered into a lover’s ear with a trembling sensitivity. The quiet intensity of that sound was the purest crooning of all, and as practiced by Sinatra, expressed the devotional fervor of a prayer.Todd Murray continues on Wednesday and Nov. 3 at the Metropolitan Room, Manhattan; 212-206-0440, metropolitanroom.­com.Advertisement