By RACHEL DONADIOFEB. 27, 2015
LONDON — In “The Clock,” a hypnotic 24-hour-long video that caused a sensation in New York in 2011, the artist Christian Marclay deconstructed time. For his new show at the White Cube here, he has deconstructed sound — and generated it.Mr. Marclay, 60, has been a musician as long as he has been an artist. He was one of the first people in the late 1970s and early ’80s to scratch records on a turntable — late Fluxus meets early hip-hop. His new show breaks ground by expanding on the dualities always central to his work: liquid and solid, sound and silence, presence and absence, improvisation and fixity.The show, which runs through April 12, involves different media and operates on different levels. There are colorful paintings inspired by Pop Art, video installations and performances of original music commissioned to respond to Mr. Marclay’s art. These are performed live on the weekends by the London Sinfonietta and recorded on vinyl records pressed in-house by the Vinyl Factory. This collaborative arts group has set up shop in a former shipping container inside the gallery — creating artisanal analog fetish items in a digital world.The show’s centerpiece is “Pub Crawl,” an installation of 11 videos playing continuously in loops along the gallery’s main white-walled hallway. Shot with a Canon S100 camera the size of a cigarette box, it shows the artist’s feet as he walks down the street in the morning light, crunching empty beer cans and leaning down to tap a metal pen against beer bottles.Advertisement“I wanted to make something musical out of this stuff that to me, as an outsider, looked kind of strange, but, to a Londoner, is kind of a typical street landscape,” Mr. Marclay said as he stood in the gallery on a recent afternoon, with the video’s soundtrack clanking in the background. (Born in California, raised in Switzerland, and then a longtime New Yorker, Mr. Marclay now lives in London and New York.)AdvertisementHe filmed the videos early on weekend mornings, after the sun was up, but before the street cleaners had arrived. “It has a kind of drunken quality, the hand-held quality of the camera,” he said. The 11 videos are each between 10 and 15 minutes. “They never play the same way twice,” he said. “So there’s this chance, randomness. You’re never quite sure what’s going to happen.”As viewers walk along the hallway, their shadows are projected into the video. “So you become sort of an accidental participant to the whole thing,” he said.One afternoon, toddlers taken by their mothers wandered through the installation, transfixed. Nearby, schoolchildren were doing sketches of works in which the artist framed sheet music from drinking songs behind bull’s-eye glass.Nearby, a press whirred, and craftsmen pressed the hot vinyl into disks. “It’s like a dying craft,” Mr. Marclay said. Across the room, other assistants were printing a yellow and purple design on album covers for the previous weekend’s live performance of music by Thurston Moore, one of the founders of Sonic Youth and a longtime collaborator of Mr. Marclay’s, for which more than 1,800 people had shown up.The composer and performer Elliott Sharp, who has performed with Mr. Marclay since the early 1980s, composed a work that was performed at the gallery one Sunday. In an interview, he said his collaborations with the artist were based on improvisation.“You experiment by making a sound, and someone else answers in a certain way,” Mr. Sharp said. “But are they reinforcing, disrupting, contradicting, ignoring?”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The concerts are held in a room with a shelf of empty beer glasses along the walls, creating an after-the-party feeling. The composers were asked to create music responding to Mr. Marclay’s work, especially the soundtrack to “Pub Crawl.” Produced in a limited edition of 500, the records of each weekend’s performance are available for sale at the gallery shop and online for 25 pounds, or about $38.One Sunday afternoon this month, several hundred people gathered to hear a 12-minute work by the musician and composer Mica Levi, who has won plaudits for her soundtrack to Jonathan Glazer’s “Under the Skin,” starring Scarlett Johansson. For Mr. Marclay’s show, Ms. Levi wrote a work for drums, violin, clarinet and cello.Advertisement“I was thinking about drinking and pouring originally, so I wrote these surging, getting-louder-and-softer things,” Ms. Levi said.On Fridays, students from the Royal College of Art perform Fluxus pieces from the 1960s and ’70s. One recent afternoon, John Kannenberg was performing “Water Music” (1965), by Mieko Shiomi, whose only instructions are: “1. Give the water still form. 2. Let the water lose its still form.”First, Mr. Kannenberg hit a metal rod against a glass of water, eliciting different sounds. Later, he came back with a glass in which water had frozen, and cupped it with his hands to melt the ice. “He’s going to freeze his hands,” Mr. Marclay said.Two rooms are filled with paintings in mixed media, a combination of drop painting and silk-screen, created between 2007 and 2014, incorporating the exclamatory words from cartoons: Squish! Splat! Glop! Some were previously displayed at the Paula Cooper Gallery in New York.“I use the words as a score for painting,” Mr. Marclay said. “They’re made by action heroes instead of action painters.” Evoking the works of Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein, Mr. Marclay calls them “parodies of paintings” that at once send up and celebrate the form.Citing the influence of John Cage, Yoko Ono and Vito Acconci, Mr. Marclay has long explored the rituals around making and collecting music. In “Five Cubes” (1989), he melted vinyl records into cubes. In the 1980s and early ’90s, he invented album covers. “The Sound of Silence” (1988) is a black-and-white photograph of the Simon & Garfunkel single of the same title. In a series of cyanotypes (2007-9), white negatives against a blue background, he unspooled cassette tapes.Mr. Marclay has also explored the juxtaposition of sound and image. In another video on display at White Cube, “Surround Sounds” (2014), the words of comic-book sounds — Tic. Ssshhhh. Beep!— are projected onto the four walls of a darkened room, with no sound — visually loud but aurally still, like watching cartoons with the sound off.The artist stood in the darkened room, as the words raced across the screens. “You become musicians in your own mind,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Splat! Beep! This Artist Sees in Sound.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.