AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil Genzlinger“Secrets and Lies,” the 10-episode thriller that begins Sunday night on ABC, gets points for style but not many for originality. It’s a crisply paced suburban potboiler with a murdered child at the center, and if you’ve been sucked in by other shows in this genre you may find yourself sucked in by this one. But also feel free to be vaguely annoyed that those clever TV makers are seducing you with formulas rather than freshness.Ryan Phillippe is Ben Crawford, who is jogging in the dim light of early morning in the suburbs of Charlotte, N.C., when he finds the body of a young neighbor boy in the woods. You know what’s coming next: Ben himself is turned into the chief suspect by a relentless detective (Juliette Lewis), the news media goes crazy, and all sorts of subdivision secrets emerge. That Ben had a fight with his wife (KaDee Strickland) and had been blackout drunk the night before his fateful jog (who goes jogging in that condition?) are only the least of these scandalous tidbits.It’s the “Broadchurch/Gracepoint” setup with a wrong-man trope thrown in. Ms. Lewis’s dour detective character, Andrea Cornell, is a cliché stretched beyond the point of believability; Ben hears variations of the phrase “We need you to come down to the station” so often that he ought to be filing a harassment complaint.“Why does she keep wanting to talk to you?” his wife asks. Probably because she watched “Columbo.” Somehow, though, she picked up that character’s technique without acquiring any of his likability. The best TV detectives have a human side; through Sunday’s two-hour premiere, Cornell exhibits none.The series, which is based on an Australian one, may have similarities to “Broadchurch” but doesn’t remotely aspire to that show’s depth; the unremarkable characters are all refugees from a daytime soap opera. Yet despite all that, viewers who like a certain amount of predictability in their mysteries could easily find themselves losing 10 hours to “Secrets and Lies.” Far more substantive shows are available on Sunday nights, of course, but maybe some people are just looking for a nontaxing way to pass the time until the summer beach reading hits the shelves. Secrets and LiesABC, Sunday nights at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time.Produced by ABC Studios. Developed by Barbie Kligman, based on the Australian series “Secrets & Lies,” created by Stephen Irwin; Ms. Kligman, Aaron Kaplan, Tracey Robertson, Nathan Mayfield, Timothy Busfield and Charles McDougall (pilot only), executive producers.WITH: Ryan Phillippe (Ben Crawford), Juliette Lewis (Detective Andrea Cornell), KaDee Strickland (Christy Crawford), Natalie Martinez (Jess Murphy), Dan Fogler (Dave Lindsey), Indiana Evans (Natalie Crawford) and Belle Shouse (Abby Crawford).Advertisement