Season 6, Episode 13: “Dark Money”How awesome would it be to have Lemond Bishop and Kalinda Sharma as your parents? That thought arose near the end of “Dark Money,” Sunday night’s episode of “The Good Wife,” as the series returned from hiatus for a season-ending 10-week run.In the episode’s tertiary but most engaging plot, Lemond called in the favor Kalinda owed him and it didn’t involve stealing evidence or killing a rival drug dealer. He needed her to pick up his son, Dylan, from school for two weeks and drive him home. Tight-lipped Lemond didn’t say why and Kalinda, still nervously calling him sir, didn’t ask. But there were obvious dangers: a black SUV following Kalinda and Dylan, and a schoolmate bullying Dylan, giving him a black eye.It was fun to see Kalinda as surrogate parent, throwing the bully up against the school wall, worrying about Dylan’s safety and his feelings but also worrying about what Lemond would do to the other boy if he found out. (In an odd glitch, the question of the mysterious SUV, which we saw several times, was simply dropped — presumably to be picked up again in a future episode.) The scenes were sensitively written and benefited from the fact that Mike Colter (Lemond) and Archie Panjabi (Kalinda) have the best chemistry on the show right now, at least in an episode where Chris Noth doesn’t appear. (And young Eric Ruffin is excellent as Dylan.)Eventually Kalinda had to make a stand — having effectively snitched on the bully and been dismissed by Lemond, she turned around, went back to his house and knocked on the door. He, of course, was in the middle of making a perfectly civil call to the other boy’s father, asking him to have a talk with his son. Then he poured a drink for Kalinda and mused to her about being a father. It was a nice if predictable scene — the two damaged tough guys (that’s a gender-free usage) sharing a tender moment. It also paralleled another scene in which Alicia had to make her own decision about standing up for what’s right. More about that later.In the case of the week, we had the pleasure of watching Dylan Baker play two roles: his recurring one as the amusingly despicable businessman and probable wife-murderer Colin Sweeney, and another as a look-alike actor who had played a Sweeney-like role on a ripped-from-the-headlines television show, “Call It Murder.” (That the actor was Australian was, perhaps, a little dig at current American casting practices.) Sweeney was suing the show for defamation, and Diane and Cary were representing him. Having two named partners at the table didn’t satisfy Sweeney, who wanted Alicia there, too. (Mr. Baker and Julianna Margulies have good chemistry too, though in a more comic, theatrical manner.) Still busy with her campaign for state’s attorney, she couldn’t appear in court, but she agreed to help, after he blackmailed her by threatening to expose who was funding her political action committee. (It’s Lemond, right? I’m sorry, but my attention strays whenever the election story line comes up.) After some less plausible than usual twists — including the defense’s abrupt 180-degree shift in strategy, from trying to prove that the show wasn’t based on Sweeney’s life to admitting that it was and trying to prove that Sweeney did, in fact, kill his wife — Sweeney won a public apology with a crucial assist from Alicia. (She noticed that the logo of the Florrick Agos client ChumHum appeared repeatedly in the television episode, and apparently this was potentially damaging enough to ChumHum to allow Diane and Cary to threaten a countersuit against the production company. Hmm.)Mr. Baker was as drolly enjoyable as ever, and it was entertaining to see Sweeney’s vanity exposed and undercut as he listened to the barrage of testimony against him. Even better was Laura Benanti, doing her purring-sex-kitten thing as Sweeney’s current wife, who testified against him and had to be bought off. Of course they were nuzzling like newlyweds once the case was settled.One minor aspect of the Sweeney story was to illustrate the continuing can-she-have-it-all question surrounding Alicia’s political campaign — Sweeney blamed her for not being able to give him her time. Oddly, there was no echo in the episode of the blistering confrontation among Alicia, Diane and Cary at the end of the previous episode in January, when Alicia accused them of sexism for not consulting her when they allowed David Lee back into the firm (thereby keeping ChumHum as a client) and they countered that she was distracted and unreachable. Everyone seemed to be getting along fine.The campaign story line was a self-contained episode with a fairly pat moral lesson. Both Alicia and her rival, Frank Prady, lobbied a crude, homophobic, sexually harassing Democratic mega-donor and noted supporter of Israel for some off-the-record campaign cash (the “dark money” of the title). The donor, a Phoenix-based moneybags named Gus Redmayne, was played by Ed Asner, who appeared to be enjoying himself immensely. (No immediate real-life models come to mind, though the major Republican donor and Israel supporter Sheldon Adelson is based in nearby Las Vegas.)Redmayne, who couldn’t keep his hands off Alicia, told her he’d give her the money ($1 million) not because she was attractive but because he didn’t like gays. He praised a gay-baiting telephone robo-call that had been paid for by her PAC and said, “Kick that fruitcake when he’s down.” (Alicia tried to point out that Prady wasn’t gay, but Redmayne wasn’t having it.) When he met with Prady, he launched into a vividly phrased description of sex with Alicia. Prady called him disgusting and walked out. Alicia put on a pained smile and took the money. And on top of it, she worried that she had once again helped Colin Sweeney win even though it’s almost certain that he killed his wife.The episode ended with a scene that was touching despite some clunky writing, mainly because Makenzie Vega as Alicia’s daughter, Grace, has so fully taken over the role of the show’s moral center. Drinking red wine (the alternating symbol of joy and despair), Alicia sat morosely on the couch as Grace, sensitive to her mother’s moods, asked how she was doing. Soon a sobbing Alicia was saying “I don’t like when people do bad things” (ouch) and being comforted by her daughter. Alicia: “I was bad today.”
Grace: “No, Mom, you weren’t. You can’t be.”
Alicia: “Why? Why can’t I be?”
Grace: “Because you’re the best person I know. Is she? The current danger, as I see it, isn’t that we lose our affection for Alicia because of her compromises but that we lose our interest in her because the campaign plot is so unswervingly dull. It also feels like the writers are trying to have it two ways — Alicia angry, resolute and hard-changing at the end of one episode, then Alicia sobbing, conflicted and in need of comfort the next. Is that a realistic depiction of a character’s complexities, or is it inconsistency? (In the previous episode, Alicia said Diane would never question her about taking on the campaign if she were a man. Would the producers of “The Good Wife” portray their main character crying on a daughter’s shoulder if he were a man? Sure, it’s a completely unfair question — the show’s about a woman and her fight to operate in these male-dominated worlds. But still.)Please tell me how wrong I am and offer any other observations, questions and recriminations in the comments. Next week’s episode, “Mind’s Eye,” is probably an important one. It was written by Michelle and Robert King, the show’s creators, and directed by Mr. King.