Season 5, Episode 12 ‘Remember’The beast in me
Has had to learn to live with pain
And how to shelter from the rain
And in the twinkling of an eye
Might have to be restrained.
God help the beast in me.
Forgive the melodramatic lyric-quoting but it seems appropriate this week. That somber Nick Lowe song, which found its greatest interpretation via Johnny Cash (one man’s opinion), ran through my head throughout most of Sunday’s episode. Which isn’t a bad thing — c’mon, Johnny Cash — nor did it feel out of place. Not with the return of special guest star Electricity making the notion of pop songs seem plausible again, nor, of course, with the predominant tone of the episode suggesting a group of feral adapters straining against the bounds of polite existence. Because even as the survivors were plied with showers (hallelujah), fresh clothes, haircuts and video games upon their arrival in Alexandria, they fretted over the weakness such creature comforts might confer. They also served notice that they weren’t to be trifled with as they embraced their inner darkness. They shot a possum in front of lily-livered weekend warriors and called it dinner. They provoked and killed walkers for sport. They shrugged at the notion of displacing an entire group of softies if it suited their whim. They dropped a pretender like a sack of dirty clothes in front of his own mom. They acted, in other words, as if one or more of them might eventually have to be restrained, in the twinkling of an eye or otherwise. I wondered last week if Rick was still fit for civilized life. Turns out he’s not alone, as signaled most amusingly by Daryl gutting the possum on the porch of the group’s new McMansion. (Violating like 11 different neighborhood association policies in the process, I’m guessing.)Of course, no one expected Daryl to emerge in khakis and a popped collar — the beast is in him, and good. More revealing was Carl joining his dad on a wild-eyed jag of zombie bloodlust. Or Carol, going through all the motions, with her sensible cardigan and new job feeding seniors, but also reminding everyone that she’s still plenty tough. “This place is gonna make us weak,” she said derisively, echoing Carl’s comment from earlier.Gaze into the abyss long enough and the abyss gazes into you, as the saying goes, and our heroes have been staring at nothing but for most of their time on the road. Their new hosts, on the other hand, have been holed up in an ecological dream subdivision. They’re unfit to tangle with road-tested survivors. Rick noted early on that on the outside, people take what they want. By the end, he was the one ready to do some taking.“We won’t get weak,” he replied to Carol. “That’s not in us anymore. We’ll make it work. If they can’t make it, then we’ll just take this place.” I was on board with all the brutishness — it’s more fun when “The Walking Dead” complicates its heroes’ morality. But I’m not sure Team Rick and the Alexandrians won’t be united in opposition to some other mutual foe, and I don’t mean walkers. Their leader, Deanna Monroe (played by the great Tovah Feldshuh), knows exactly what kind of people she’s bringing in and she did so for a reason. She wasted no time making Rick and Michonne her constables. I think she’s expecting some sort of trouble, perhaps involving one of the people she exiled. “Good thing we’re here,” Rick quipped after Sasha coolly dispatched a zombie. He may feel differently before long.But on the bright side: Love connection! Both Rick and Carl have some solid prospects. Rick’s new friend Jessie is married, of course, but everything about her husband says “my days are numbered.” Enid, meanwhile, is just the sort of sullen ingénue who can help young Carl become a man, and he can always play the “I killed my own mom” card for bad-boy cred. A FEW THOUGHTS WHILE WE NOD WITH VIGOR
• Aidan, the loathsome son-of-a-congresswoman, described himself with the exact word I’d jotted in my notes only seconds earlier. So that was a nice moment of synchrony for me and probably plenty of others, too.• Speaking of the “run” crew, are we sure we trust Deanna’s judgment when it comes to human resources? I know she claims to have a professional poker-level ability to read people, but we already wondered about the choice of oddball Aaron as the camp recruiter. Now she’s putting gimpy Noah on the supply team?• “We brought dinner.”• How are the lawns of Alexandria so green? • R.I.P. Rick’s beard, which was a thing of lumbersexual wonder. • Any guesses about who made off with the blender gun? Morgan? Enid? Some malcontent to be named later? Please fire away about this or anything else in the comments.