Everything may not have been awesome when Phil Lord and Chris Miller’s film “The Lego Movie” was snubbed for an Oscar nomination in the animated feature category. But the busy writing and directing team has already moved on to new things. (Their film, nominated for best song, still managed to steal the show on Oscar night.) After presenting a sky full of meatballs and turning an ’80s cop series into two (and counting) successful movie comedies, the team has now taken on a new challenge: the apocalypse. They are executive producers and directors of the first two episodes of “The Last Man on Earth,” a Fox comedy created by Will Forte that features Mr. Forte as the main character, cleverly named Phil Miller, a combination of the names of the directors. The series, about a survivor of a virus that has wiped out the rest of the human race, takes an uncommon approach to the post-apocalypse survival genre by playing it for laughs. The first episode has Mr. Forte trying to determine how to make the most out of his lonely situation, which involves stockpiling pornography and turning an inflatable pool into a giant margarita, complete with a salt rim along the pool’s edge. The visual gags are wacky, existential and of a type not often seen on network comedies. Ahead of Sunday’s premiere, Mr. Miller and Mr. Lord spoke by phone from Los Angeles about their work on the show. So did you watch the Oscars?  Chris Miller I don’t know, did anything happen? (Laughs)Phil Lord We worked really hard with the Oscar producers and the Lonely Island and Tegan and Sara to try to come up with a performance that was memorable. It came together at the last second and we couldn’t be prouder of how it all worked out. With “The Last Man on Earth,” did you work with Will on the genesis of it? Miller We’ve been friends with Will for 18 years now and we’ve worked together on some animated things. When we decided we wanted to get back into the TV space, he was the first person we talked to. We thought his voice really needed to be on television. We talked about a few different ideas and this idea of a post-apocalyptic comedy was something Phil and I had been tossing around as a feature. Will took a spark to it and took it in his own direction. He spent the weekend and wrote up a treatment of what would happen in the entire first season. We pitched it around town and people really loved it. At first glance, when you have a show with an “only-man-on-earth” premise, some might ask the question, how far can you go with this idea? Was there a concern about running out of material with the concept? Lord It’s certainly a risk and that was what attracted us to it. All of our movies are really pranks that seem to have paid off. But they always feel like something that maybe doesn’t entirely belong in the landscape yet. That always seems exciting to us. We like when we discover something that feels like it couldn’t have possibly gone through some huge corporate machine. The challenge to us was, yes, we knew our hipster friends would like it. But how do we make it so that my mom likes it? Can we tap into something universal even though, on the surface, this feels like an insanely stupid concept. Usually, the answer to how to do that is to take it really seriously. We tried to basically make a series about finding companionship. The first episode is pretty on the edge in comparison to what you usually see on network TV, with Will’s character using a pool as a toilet, etc. Was there any push back from the network about the edginess of the comedy? Miller  When we pitched the show around, we pitched it to cable and Internet places and networks. At first, Will was nervous about doing it at a broadcast network because he was worried that the standards were going to keep it from being as outrageous as he wanted it to be. But the people at Fox assured us all that they wanted to do something different and they wanted it to feel like Will’s vision. And amazingly they did. This show is a great reflection of the show that was in Will’s head.  The introduction of Kristen Schaal’s character, as not quite the ideal woman Mr. Forte’s character was hoping to meet, really creates a shift in the show. Was it always the plan to introduce her so early in or did you consider waiting more episodes? Lord We thought about that. But something about understanding that their whole relationship was going to be fraught with conflict made the whole episode into a sentence. It made you understand that this is a show about a relationship that they have to make work.Miller What’s really interesting about the show is that it’s designed as a serial comedy and there’s a surprise at the end of every episode. It keeps changing and getting more different. It’s a little odd having a show that’s filled with so much mystery. We were hiding the first reveal. And there are 13 reveals this season. The show that it ends up being is very different from where it started out. Any more news on “23 Jump Street?”  Lord Rodney Rothman is off writing a script. He had a really outrageous idea for what to do and how we could take our scorched-earth sequel policy from the end of “22 Jump Street” and do something that hadn’t been explored in those 22 sequels and simultaneously tell the next chapter in the story.  Any decisions on whether or not you will direct it? Lord We don’t know what the future is going to bring in terms of that, but we are definitely involved, and certainly part of the producing team. We’re really excited about the movie and will be a big part in bringing it in front of audiences.