AdvertisementSupported byCritic's NotebookBy Alastair MacaulayWhat’s “Swan Lake” about? And what did its composer, Tchaikovsky, have in mind? Like innumerable 19th-century works, this ballet concerns infidelity: Prince Siegfried no sooner finds true love with his one-and-only, Odette, than he betrays it by swearing love for her look-alike, Odile. But this story, set in the Germany of medieval romance, is complicated by aspects of pathos, wildness, doom, tragedy, malice — all of which Tchaikovsky’s score responds to passionately. By breaking Odette’s heart, Siegfried condemns her to an eternity of turning back into swan form by day and only regaining human form, with her female companions, at night.Sooner or later, most balletgoers learn that the “Swan Lake” they admire is based on the 1895 St. Petersburg production, which — after Tchaikovsky’s death in 1893 — Marius Petipa and Lev Ivanov choreographed to a version of the score arranged by Riccardo Drigo. When you listen to Tchaikovsky’s original 1877 score (it’s the one on most audio recordings), it seems unstageable, its narrative puzzling, its dance logic awkward. Petipa, Ivanov and Drigo were superlative show doctors. By cutting, moving, revising and adding, they turned this unwieldy idea of a ballet into a theatrical classic.Yet the 1877 original was staged in Moscow, and was by no means the fiasco that used to be supposed. After its Moscow premiere, it was revived there for six of the first seven years of its existence. Recent discoveries by Sergei Konaev, principal researcher at the Institute for Art Studies in Moscow, at the old Bolshoi building there, give us a new wealth of detail about it. In particular, a rehearsal score has notes beginning in 1876, while connected materials describe original costumes, casting and more. These were announced after a symposium in Moscow last week.The musicologist Simon Morrison, a professor at Princeton University who is completing a history of the Bolshoi Ballet, attended the symposium. He wrote in an email that the discoveries’ significance pointed in many ways:“They give us full and correct descriptions of the sets and costumes, with dozens of staging cues and indications, and new details about the cacophonous final flood. They finally establish that Vladimir Petrovich Begichev (1828-91), intendant of the Moscow Imperial Theaters, was the author of the ballet’s scenario. They confirm the score was played in its original order for the original 1877 choreography by Wenzel Reisinger. They give us the name of the dancer for whom the ballet was conceived, the prima ballerina Lidiya Geyten, whom Tchaikovsky admired and who rehearsed the ballet until she decided its music was not for her. And they tell us plenty about the second Moscow staging, in 1880, by Joseph Peter Hansen.”Neither Reisinger nor Hansen was a leading light of choreography; Tchaikovsky’s chief enthusiasm for the production seems to have been for the brilliant scenic effects by the Moscow stage designer Karl Valts. That admiration was mutual. Valts wrote in his memoirs:“In the storm scene, when the lake bursts its banks and floods the whole stage, Tchaikovsky insisted that we recreate a real whirlpool — the branches and boughs of the surrounding trees were to break off, fall into the water, and be swept away by the waves.”This final flood is just one element that, since 1895, has almost invariably been omitted from “Swan Lake.” It might help to remind readers of the plot that leads (or fails to lead) to this denouement. There are four acts. In Act I, Prince Siegfried is told by his mother that it’s time to choose a bride. In the nocturnal Act II, a hunt for swans leads him and his friend Benno to the lakeside. There he meets Odette, who explains to him her swan/human conundrum and how it can be solved only by a man’s vow to love and marry her.In Act III, at a ball, Siegfried rejects various princesses as potential brides. But then he falls for Odile, who, to fool him, has magically been given Odette’s outer form, and whom he swears to love and marry. In the final scene, back at the lake, Odette is heartbroken. When Siegfried joins her, he again shows his love — but he is now forsworn.The biggest puzzle about the 1877 score has always been the famous so-called Black Swan pas de deux, the music usually used for Siegfried’s ballroom dances with Odile. Tchaikovsky wrote it for Act I — when Siegfried has not met Odile or even Odette. And what music did Tchaikovsky intend for Odile to dance in Act III?From the rehearsal score, we now understand that Siegfried simply danced this Act I pas de deux with a young woman described as the “first villager.” Yet this character, despite her momentous music, was a dead end; she does not return.As for Odile, as soon as she arrived in the Act III ballroom, she immediately took part in a complex suite of dances that the score calls the pas de six. The new discoveries confirm that Reisinger included this suite’s most surprising single item, the beautifully poignant andante con moto number. When this builds to a colossal, tragic climax, it makes the ballet’s scale seem briefly cosmic. If you listen to this number with the knowledge that Tchaikovsky intended it as part of the enchantress Odile’s dances, you find that it completely transforms our idea of her; this music is as poignant, doom-laden and vast as anything written for Odette.The score moves on to a suite of national dances from different parts of Europe. And its climax, the fifth, is the Russian dance, featuring a sensationally Gypsy-type solo violin. In 1877 it was Odile herself, after changing costume, who reappeared to perform this — and with it she evidently completed her seduction of Siegfried.It will take time to absorb and check this trove of “Swan Lake” data. The new discoveries will probably complicate rather than solve this ballet’s mysteries. The chief effort in modern times to stage the 1877 score has been a 1953 Moscow production by Vladimir Bourmeister, which has been occasionally revived and is viewable on DVD. Now, however, there is already talk of better-informed efforts to bring Tchaikovsky’s original conception to life. Though “Swan Lake” is the world’s most familiar ballet, we have much to learn about it.Advertisement