Season 4, Episode 7: “Ask Me My Name”The last two episodes of “Girls” were dream-like, almost ethereal, chronicling not just the breakup of Hannah, played by the show’s creator, Lena Dunham, and Adam (Adam Driver) but also the seeming end (for now) of Hannah’s writing career. What a difference a week makes. Here to chronicle this week’s action-packed episode are your faithful recappers, Joe Coscarelli and Lydia Polgreen. The HBO comedy by Lena Dunham.Lydia: After last week’s sprawling check-ins with characters in their disparate places, this one brought (almost) the whole gang together in a satisfying, tour-de-force ensemble unrivaled since Jessa’s misbegotten nuptials. The episode opens with Hannah in a classroom at St. Justine’s, a private school that seems to be modeled more than a little bit on Ms. Dunham’s Brooklyn Heights alma mater, St. Ann’s School. Even though she is just a substitute, Hannah shows real enthusiasm discussing “Oedipus Rex,” that old high school chestnut, with her precocious charges. She likes the kids and they seem to like her. Joe: The nepotism police will have noticed the charming Maude Apatow, the daughter the “Girls” executive producer Judd Apatow, as Cleo, Hannah’s “favorite.” Considered along with last week’s cameo by Marc Maron, the extended Lena Dunham friend circle has been well represented and tastefully used of late.Hannah, meanwhile, seemed absolutely electrified in front of a classroom — maybe more in her element than we’ve seen her since she was dancing on her own.Lydia: After class she walks into the impossibly stylish faculty lounge to find a hunky fellow teacher, sipping on a juice box, eager to chat, and, it seems, flirt. Fran (played by Jake Lacy, who also starred in “Obvious Child” with another “Girls” guest star alum, Jenny Slate) asks Hannah if she’d like to get a drink, which of course she would like very much. Up to this point the episode seems bent on showing us how Hannah is being rewarded for her new life of selflessness. Giving up her art — writing — and her tortured romance with Adam has thrown her in the path of this charming, funny, if slightly vanilla guy. Maybe, she tells her roommate Elijah, this is why she and Adam broke up — so she could marry Fran. Their date is off to a promising start — there is a very funny bit about a former music teacher who was an extra in a pornographic movie — when Hannah suggests they go to an art opening. Joe: Why must every fictional date between youngish people in urban areas include an art opening? Have I been doing dates wrong?Lydia: We get to the opening and know that something is about to go very wrong. The featured artist is none other than Mimi-Rose Howard (Gillian Jacobs), new girlfriend of her ex-boyfriend, Adam. “Hannah? What are you doing here?” asks Hannah’s best friend, Marnie, played by Alison Williams. “The wounds are all healed,” Hannah insists. “And we’re all just part of one big friend group.” Adam definitely doesn’t think so. “What the hell!” he blurts out when he spots Hannah at the opening. Fran very quickly realizes that he has been had and leaves, with Hannah barely noticing. This sets up a rollicking, claustrophobic evening that was for me one of the most memorable and enjoyable “Girls” episodes since the first season. Joe: The rest of their night was like a game of relationship Risk, with each ex trying to out-position the other corners of this bizarre love square using  various manipulation tactics. Hannah’s attempts to sabotage the opening seemed crazy at first — and not unexpected, because no one matures that much in a few days — but the games being played by the too-perfect Mimi-Rose and her “former partner,” Ace, played by Zachary Quinto, really dwarfed the sociopathic tendencies of our main characters. First, Mimi-Rose insists that the four of them go to the after party, but makes sure that they travel in the most awkward pairs possible, divided by gender, because “past relationships are part of who we are.” In one cab, Ace gets into Adam’s head by planting seeds about Mimi-Rose’s act: “pretending she’s some sweet weirdo girl from Maine,” with a “bitten-up lip and Asperger’s,” only to reveal that she’s really a “bad, bad girl who knows what works.” Lydia: The guest star game has been super on point this season, and Quinto’s Ace is a standout in a crowded field. I loved the total non sequitur of him gnawing on a toothbrush, proposing he and Adam get really weird and start taking selfies. Joe: Meanwhile, Mimi-Rose puts on an absolute clinic of negging technique with Hannah, insisting “I’m not a real writer like you,” even though she has a book deal to write a “psycho-sexual thriller” on the side. (She also eats the last coconut ice pop in the bodega, a power move if there ever was one.) Lydia: I don’t know about you, but seeing this side of Mimi-Rose, the dark side I just knew was there, was pretty satisfying. The writing of her character is some of the most finely wrought I’ve seen on the series. Joe: The girls’ cab driver hitting an old woman and trying to pin the blame on Hannah was somehow the least insane thing that happened in this episode. Top honors go instead to Mimi-Rose’s performance at the laundromat: giving a stranger a poem — “I was in the bathroom less than two minutes,” Hannah deadpans — before unleashing a kaleidoscope of extreme emotions on Hannah with the zeal of Hannibal Lecter doing a number on Clarice. “Are you mad because you gave up on art or gave up on Adam or is it both?” Mimi-Rose asks, baring her fangs, before slipping into a sob story about Japanese internment camps. She then essentially offers Adam back to Hannah if Hannah will admit that she still loves him. Hannah is baffled, and how could she not be? I only hope this isn’t leading to a “we’re crazy, but everyone else is crazier” reunion for Hannah and Adam. When everyone finally makes it to the bar, Hannah tells Adam she’s going to “get out of here before I make it bad again” — maybe the most grown-up decision she’s ever made. Falafel and a seltzer are always the best option.