Season 3, Episode 5: Chapter 31Excuse me, but did we just skip an episode? There are so many new plot threads and characters in the first few minutes that I actually clicked back to the main menu to see if I’d mistakenly jumped ahead. Nope.But let’s get caught up. So Frank is running for president – to absolutely no one’s surprise. And we learn about his little scheme with Jackie to use her as a stalking horse candidate. She pretends she’s running. Then she quits. Frank jumps in, takes her place and then makes her his veep. Not so fast, Frank. Heather Dunbar is on the move. Over at the bustling Dunbar campaign headquarters, Doug is still trying to get on board. Dunbar and her campaign manager are skeptical. It’s clear he’s still got to earn their trust. We learn a little about Dunbar’s strategy. She wants to run to Frank’s left. And to do that, she’s playing up her support for gay rights. The husband of that activist imprisoned in Russia from a few episodes back is going to be her prop on the campaign trail.Oh, and I know everyone is dying to know what’s happening with “America Works.” So let’s get right to that. Frank is doing an Obama and circumventing Congress because they won’t give him the votes. He has somehow figured out how to raid disaster-relief funds to pay for it all. His Homeland Security secretary evidently threw a fit and Frank fired him. (We don’t actually see this on the screen. So when Frank mentions it to his cabinet as if they all know and we all know what happened, it was a bit disorienting.)We meet Ayla’s replacement, a tough-as-nails Pulitzer winner named Kate. She’s full of zingers like “I’m going to hit twice as hard as she ever did because I can and someone should.” And, regarding Frank compared with his bland predecessor, President Walker, “I think we replaced a dud with an atom bomb.” It feels as if the writers are compensating here for giving female reporters a bad rap when they had Zoe sleeping with Frank during the first season. It’s refreshing to see a portrayal of a no-nonsense, sharp-witted woman journalist here who isn’t using her body to get what she wants. As a personal aside, I know the writers extensively researched how journalists in Washington work as they wrote this. They actually sent Mozhan Marno, the actress who plays Ayla, to shadow my coworker Peter Baker, who is the chief White House correspondent for The New York Times.Kate knows something is up with the Homeland Security secretary. And she confirms that Frank fired him for not going along with the America Works plan. She breaks the story and Frank is furious.Claire continues to have trouble up at the United Nations. The United States’ allies are getting cold feet about her plan to sandbag Russia and put a peacekeeping force in the Middle East. Despite all the setbacks, she’s growing more and more audacious. She manages to get Frank to agree to commit troops without going through Congress. Then she pulls an L.B.J. and invites the Russian ambassador into the bathroom. And for the second time this season, we get to see an Underwood urinate.There, with the stall door open, she informs the ambassador he’s been outmaneuvered. Then, adding one last little twist of indignity, she asks him to hand her a towel after she’s finished washing her hands.Speaking of Claire, the writers plant a little seed that could prove to be very troubling for her and Frank. Or it could become nothing at all. Doug, in one of his meetings with Dunbar, gives Dunbar proof that Claire lied about her abortion last season. Remember, she claimed it was because she was raped? Dunbar insists she wouldn’t ever use information like that against another woman. Now here’s a question for you careful watchers: What’s Doug doing here? Does he know Dunbar would never use it, and shows it to her to conceal the fact that he’s a double agent? Or is he really trying to screw Frank and Claire? Also, we learn that Frank wants to write a book. Why not? If he’s running for president he’s got to have a book. So he hires this hunky novelist, Thomas Yates, as his ghost writer and tells him he wants a story that will sell his jobs plan. Anything to make America Works a little sexier, please. As we close out this episode, we see one of the ghosts of the Underwood’s past: Freddy, the loyal barbecue restaurant owner who Frank discarded after learning of his rough past. His restaurant now gone, he’s waiting in line for a job as part of America Works. Read our Episode 6 recap here.