AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10 P.M. (CBS) BATTLE CREEK Two mismatched law-enforcement officers — Russ Agnew (Dean Winters), an old-school detective who dislikes anything new, and Milt Chamberlain (Josh Duhamel, above right with Mr. Winters), a debonair F.B.I. agent assigned to set up a high-tech satellite office — are forced to work together as partners in a dilapidated Michigan city best known for Kellogg’s cereal. This new series “lies somewhere between a lighthearted procedural and a black-lined comedy,” Alessandra Stanley wrote in The New York Times. A collaboration between Vince Gilligan, who created AMC’s “Breaking Bad,” and David Shore, who came up with Fox’s “House” — and with reminders of both shows — it’s “a mixing of rare breeds that works,” she added.10 A.M. (ABC) THIS WEEK Secretary of State John Kerry discusses the identity of the Islamic State member known as “Jihadi John” as well as the congressional address by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel scheduled for Tuesday.10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Representative Steve Scalise, Republican of Louisiana, discusses financing for the Department of Homeland Security. Gov. Scott Walker, Republican of Wisconsin, talks about the 2016 presidential election.9 P.M. (Food Network) ALL-STAR ACADEMY Ten home cooks undertake culinary challenges with the help of chefs including Bobby Flay, Alex Guarnaschelli, Curtis Stone and Michael Symon for $50,000.9 P.M. (Fox) THE LAST MAN ON EARTH After a virus ravages the planet, Phil Miller (Will Forte) goes in search of anyone else who may be alive — and finds no one. So he returns to his hometown, Tucson, where he settles into a McMansion, stockpiles porn and uses the pool as a toilet. Then he discovers Carol (Kristen Schaal). “Fulfilling the wordplay in the title, ‘Last Man’ becomes a kind of essentialist romantic comedy: A couple who seem destined to be together — because they are, after all, the last man and woman on earth — are kept apart by their pride and prejudices,” Mike Hale wrote in The Times. It is “well made, meticulous in its comic details and pleasantly acted by Mr. Forte and Ms. Schaal, but you may wish that it really had been about the last man on earth.”9 P.M. (ABC) SECRETS AND LIES Ben Crawford (Ryan Phillippe), a suburban family man, finds the body of a neighbor boy in the woods while jogging the morning after an alcohol-fueled blackout — and becomes the chief suspect in this thriller. Juliette Lewis, above, plays Detective Andrea Cornell, who turns Ben’s life upside down as he struggles to prove his innocence.9 P.M. (13, 49) DOWNTON ABBEY In this season finale, the Crawleys visit Lord and Lady Sinderby (James Faulkner and Penny Downie) at Brancaster Castle in Northumberland for a shooting party before returning to Downton for Christmas.10 P.M. (Al Jazeera America) FREEWAY: CRACK IN THE SYSTEM (2015) Marc Levin chronicles the rise, fall and redemption of (Freeway) Rick Ross — a child of South Central Los Angeles who dreamed of becoming a tennis pro and who, as a central player in the importing of Nicaraguan drugs into Los Angeles, is considered by many to be responsible for bringing crack cocaine to that city and ultimately the United States. Snoop Dogg wrote and performed the title track of this two-part documentary.What’s Streaming NowTHE BLETCHLEY CIRCLE Season 1 of this mystery series begins as four women put their extraordinary talents to use at Britain’s code-breaking headquarters during World War II. Flash-forward nine years, as London is swept by a wave of murders and Susan (Anna Maxwell Martin), now a homemaker and mother of two, thinks she has detected a pattern. But after being dismissed by Scotland Yard she turns for assistance to her former colleagues — Millie (Rachael Stirling), conversant in 14 languages and good with maps; Lucy (Sophie Rundle), with her photographic memory; and Jean (Julie Graham), their onetime supervisor — who have returned to civilian life and kept their intelligence work secret from even those closest to them. (netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement