AdvertisementSupported byBy Melena RyzikOn the VH1 series “Hindsight,” Sarah Goldberg plays Lolly, the high-living best friend to Becca (Laura Ramsey), who passes out on the eve of her present-day wedding and awakens back in 1995, able to live her life over, scrunchies and all. In real life, Ms. Goldberg was barely 10 in ’95, but she still felt a part of the era. “I was obsessed with ‘Reality Bites’ and ‘My So-Called Life,’ ” she said. Being in her 20s in the ’90s is “like a fantasy of mine,” said Ms. Goldberg, 29, who describes her style as “Winona Ryder- and Bridget Fonda-based.” A Vancouver, British Columbia, native, she spent her actual 20s in London, as a theater actress, sometimes coming to New York to perform. She was in Bruce Norris’s Pulitzer Prize-winning “Clybourne Park” on Broadway and in the West End, and she will be seen this spring in “The Qualms,” a new sex-driven play from Mr. Norris, at Playwrights Horizons. To star in “Hindsight,” which has its season finale March 11, Ms. Goldberg moved to Brooklyn Heights and dyed her blond hair brown. “It’s a very strange experience actually, as a social experiment,” she said. Gentlemen may prefer blondes, but as a brunette, she said, “I feel like women are warmer to me.” For a new part, “you want to feel like a new person,” she added. “When someone throws amazingly uncomfortable high-waisted jeans and patent Docs on you, and they’ve dyed your hair and you’ve got plaid tied around your waist, you feel different.” These are excerpts from a conversation with her over coffee on a frigid New York afternoon. Q. Why do you think the ’90s are having a cultural resurgence right now?I feel like it’s easy to romanticize this time, pre-technology and pre-mobile phones, essentially. People had to really commit. If you made a plan to meet at a bar, there was no texting five minutes before saying, “I’m not showing up.” There’s something — to me, in hindsight — so sort of sexy and free about it [the ’90s], because you had to make a bolder gesture. You had to vote with your feet. You couldn’t just vote with your thumbs.Why did the part appeal to you?You read so many scripts, especially pilots, that really feel like marbles in your mouth when you go to read them out loud. And the first time I read that character out loud, I felt a click. My first scene as Lolly is puking in a garbage bin in an alley, and I felt like I could probably bring some color to that. Um, I’ve barfed — I’ve left my mark on a few garbage bins around London.Did you get to explore this character as much as for stage roles?That was the joy, in realizing that you can have that creative freedom in television as well. The thing I love about theater is the fact that everyone’s complicit. We’re either there as a storyteller or we’re there as a listener, and it’s basically a campfire situation. What I found is that that happens on set as well. I was in awe of our crew — it’s like this massive undulating octopus, these big burly men and women with all these machines, kind of moving together. “Hindsight” is set in New York but now tapes in Atlanta, which is famous for its strip clubs. Did you go?We went, as research. We went to the Clermont Lounge, because there was a ’90s grunge band playing, and you could smoke inside. And there was just a lot of naked ladies walking around, really expressive, really into their nipples in many ways. I’d never been to a strip club before — it wasn’t really the experience that I’ve seen in movies. It felt much more immersive. [Laughs] I thought I was going to feel some moral dilemma, and I didn’t. I had a great night.Advertisement