Season 1, Episode 5: Alpine Shepherd BoySo it turns out that when you advertise a law practice through a publicity stunt, some of the potential clients you lure will be crackpots. The leads generated through Jimmy’s staged act of bravery in last week’s episode — a TV-ready rescue drama that was an ad for his foundering firm — didn’t amount to much. Unless you consider awkward moments to be valuable.
Jimmy visits the gated home of a would-be secessionist, who wants to pay him in greenbacks marked “Sovereign Sandia Republic.” “Son, you are getting in on the ground floor,” the future president of Sandia (Joe Berryman) tells Jimmy. Then there is the aspiring inventor of Tony the Toilet Buddy, a device that will potty train your child, though the psychosexual toll can only be guessed at. (Sample lines of Tony the Toilet Buddy’s positive reinforcement prompts: “Oh yeah, that’s the way.”; “Gosh, you’re big. You’re so big.”; “Fill me up, Chandler.”)Much of this episode concerns Jimmy’s efforts to jump-start his business, and he does manage to scare up a few clients. They include  Mrs. Strauss (Carol Herman), an older woman who wants a will drafted so that she can bequeath her collection of Hummel figurines, among them, the alpine shepherd boy that gives this episode its title.What’s underscored here is Jimmy McGill’s gift for shape-shifting. Like any great salesman, and any great con artist, he can instantly summon a new persona for any occasion. He can play radical libertarian, or patent attorney or specialist in “elder law,” sporting an outfit inspired by Andy Griffith in “Matlock.” Of course, his days as Saul Goodman, flamboyant plaintiffs’ attorney, still lay ahead.This guy has range.But if the series is about metamorphosis, Jimmy is not the only character to consider. There is also Chuck, his older brother. We know that his legal career had modest beginnings, that he later became a named partner at a hugely successful white-shoe firm, Hamlin, Hamlin & McGill, and that he suddenly and inexplicably developed a catastrophic aversion to electricity, turning him into a shut-in.What caused that change? How do you suddenly switch from over-achieving attorney to a life of Coleman lanterns and space blankets? And in late middle age, no less. After episode five, these are among the show’s most intriguing puzzles. An answer might be subtly hinted at in “Alpine Shepherd Boy.” It happens when Chuck returns from the hospital, where he winds up not long after the cops are summoned by a neighbor, angered that her newspaper has been snatched from her front yard and swapped for a five dollar bill. (Oh, for the days when a man would risk his health for a newspaper!) When Jimmy settles Chuck back into his home, he sees the local newspaper on the floor. It features a credulous story about Jimmy’s PR sham.“You got sick because you saw this story,” he tells Chuck. “When you think I’ve done something bad, something questionable, you get worse.”Never mind Tuco and his desert assault on the skateboard twins — this might be the “Breaking Bad”-est moment of the series so far. Because in the cosmology of “Breaking Bad,” someone always paid for wrongdoing, but it was rarely the wrongdoer. Karma was blind and cruel and usually harmed the innocent. So, for instance, it was Walter White who let Jane Margolis die, allowing her to choke on her vomit during an overdose in season two. That fatal act of omission led to a fatal act of negligence by Jane’s father, an air traffic controller. A mid-air collision ensued and 167 people died. The fallout for Walter? A plush toy from one of the planes landed in his pool.Maybe “Breaking Bad”-style karma is at work in “Better Call Saul.” If so, Chuck is suffering for someone else’s sin.What might be most noteworthy about “Alpine Shepherd Boy” is how mundane parts of it feel. The show started off by harkening back often to “Breaking Bad,” but the writers are now suffusing “Better Call Saul” with its own more subdued tone. There are no guns or scams in episode five, and not a sociopathic Mexican in sight. The meatiest scene is the one in the hospital, where Chuck is recovering from the agony inflicted by the wired world after his arrest.It’s a TV staple: A relative and a friend hover around a bedridden patient, while a doctor tries to solve a medical mystery. In this case, the mystery is whether the root of Chuck’s ailment is physical or psychosomatic.It’s the latter, we learn, as the doctor, played with the right mix of steel and sympathy by Clea DuVall, surreptitiously turns on a medical device while Chuck isn’t looking. Chuck doesn’t even blink, let alone writhe in the agony he believes electricity inflicts on him. Out of Chuck’s earshot, the doctor urges Jimmy to have his brother committed to a mental institution. Jimmy won’t have it.And this leads us to what may be the central conflict of Season 1. Chuck’s former law partner, Howard Hamlin (Patrick Fabian), shows up at the hospital with assurances that Chuck isn’t going to any funny farm. “Chuck is of sound mind,” Howard says, “I think we can all agree on that.”This prompts Jimmy to accuse Howard of worrying only about the finances of Hamlin, Hamlin & McGill. If Chuck were committed to an institution, the reasoning goes, Jimmy would become his legal guardian and then cash out his brother’s share of the firm. Let’s not stint on the nuances of this confrontation, and more generally, the dispute over Chuck’s future. Is Jimmy really acting entirely in his brother’s best interests? (Psychiatric care is what Chuck needs, not coddling.) Is Howard really just worried about having to pay his former partner? (He is, after all, just doing what Chuck wants.) It says something great about this show that the answers to those questions are complicated. Motives are mixed. (In part, Jimmy just hates Howard, perhaps because he has the looks, the money and the respectability that Jimmy craves.) There are no angels or devils here. A few words about Mike Ehrmantraut, who is the focus of the last chunk of this episode. We are about to learn, at last, why he left, or perhaps fled, the Philadelphia police department. The show ends with what appear to be detectives from Philly knocking on Mike’s door. Is he a fugitive? Unless those guys drove across the country to say, “You could save 15 percent or more on your car insurance,” there’s trouble.Before that ominous knock, we see him parked outside a home. A woman leaves the home, gets in her car, pulls up to Mike and stops to warily eye him. Then she drives on. There are many possibilities here. Mike had a granddaughter he doted on in “Breaking Bad,” a show set six years in the future. Is this her mother? Is she also his daughter? And has the granddaughter been born yet? In “Breaking Bad,” the mother of Mike’s granddaughter appeared on the periphery, seeming to want to keep her distance. Jonathan Banks has said in interviews that he always believed that the mother was the wife or lover of Mike’s son, and that the estrangement between father and son explained the air of tragedy that surrounds Mike.But Jonathan Banks is an actor, not a writer. If nothing else, we are going to learn more about Mike’s history. This alone is worth the price of admission.Some favorite moments to note. The scene where Jimmy enters the rec room of a retirement community, to troll for clients, could have been unremarkable, or slapsticky. Instead, it is elevated to something elegant and cinematic, thanks to clever camera work, cheeky dialogue and the perfect song, “The Harry Lime Theme” from the movie “The Third Man.” Favorite LineMrs. Strauss: “If I were 40 years younger, I’d have you buy me a piña colada.”Jimmy: “Well, if you want me to draw up a DNR, I’ll bring a blender and some pineapple.”To close, a question to ponder. I mentioned that “Better Call Saul” is developing its own tone. Part of that, I think, is avoiding locations that were part of “Breaking Bad.” The shows are set in the same city, but I have yet to spot any overlap.Have you?Anyone notice a tableau, a storefront, a house, even a street that has been re-used?