By NEIL GENZLINGEROCT. 13, 2015
The television series with the most incisive take on the 21st-century economy returns for its third season on Thursday night, but it’s not from Bloomberg or CNBC. Look for it on Comedy Central.It’s called “Nathan for You,” and if its star, a Canadian comic named Nathan Fielder, wasn’t shortlisted for the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science, he should have been. That prize just went to Angus Deaton of Princeton for improving the way some economic indicators are measured, but it could have gone to Mr. Fielder for illuminating the relationship between the economy and absurdity.In “Nathan for You,” Mr. Fielder spends most of his time trying to help small-business owners improve their bottom lines, using techniques that presumably are not being taught at Princeton or anywhere else. There was, for instance, an episode last season in which he deduced that a liquor store owner’s problem was that he wasn’t selling to minors.“No business should ever have to turn away a paying customer,” he explained.And so he came up with a system that, he thought, could give a minor the thrill and social cachet of buying alcoholic beverages but avoid the problems associated with drinking them. He told the store owner to sell booze to children, then put the bottles in storage while giving the young customers claim checks — they could come back and retrieve their purchases when they turned 21.AdvertisementThe same episode, by the way, also featured a carwash that was short on customers. Mr. Fielder’s solution: Increase the nearby bird population. Because — well, bird droppings, cars; you get the idea. When he concluded that pigeons weren’t delivering in sufficient quantity, he brought in an assortment of chickens — yes, they can perch in trees — and eventually a peacock.Mr. Fielder scored several coups with the show in its first two seasons. A staged video he made in advance of the premiere in 2013, showing a pig rescuing a baby goat that was stuck in a petting zoo pond, fooled some news organizations and enjoyed viral fame. In 2014 a “Dumb Starbucks” store also resulted in a publicity bonanza.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He sometimes indulges other whims in the show, as in a Season 1 episode in which he challenged himself to escape from handcuffs before a robot could remove his pants in front of an audience of children.“Everyone said the technology doesn’t exist for a robot to undo someone’s pants,” he said in a video made for The New York Times about that episode. Now it does. So perhaps a Nobel in physics or some such as well?AdvertisementAs for that Nobel in economics, Mr. Fielder is way ahead of the curve in acknowledging that ludicrousness is the defining feature of our age. Companies that have no revenue and produce no tangible product are hot Wall Street commodities. Traders make millions in split seconds via arcane number-crunching. In that climate, putting advertisements for a pet store on tombstones in a pet cemetery — Season 2, Episode 3 — seems downright sane.That none of Mr. Fielder’s business solutions ever work should not disqualify him from laureate consideration, because his deadpan genius is in defining the age, not solving its problems. As for the Season 3 premiere, he takes on a problem that has been vexing small-business owners ever since Walmart and Costco and other behemoths appeared on the landscape: How does a lone shop owner compete with the cost efficiencies of a big-box store?Specifically, he tries to help a small electronics store that has been losing business to a Best Buy. His plan involves exploiting Best Buy’s price guarantee — it claims it will match any competitor’s prices — a solution that ultimately involves an alligator, a door so tiny customers have to crawl through it, a fake dating show and a salsa lesson. Professor Deaton should be taking notes.A version of this article appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Business Bent With a Comic Edge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.