Season 3 Episode 7 Recap: Chapter 33Read all of our “House of Cards” recaps.The episode is a bit disorienting — jumping around in time in a way the show hasn’t done before. As it opens, the Underwoods are renewing their vows in Frank’s hometown of Gaffney, S.C. Claire’s hair is a different color. They seem tender toward each another. Then we go back a month to see how they got to that point of reconciliation.Their political and personal lives in shambles, the Underwoods are back from Moscow and still nursing grudges from their fight on Air Force One. They pose for their official White House portrait. As Frank places his hand on Claire’s shoulder, she recoils. “A little more of a smile, please,” the photographer asks them. Claire gives a little more, while Frank remains stone-faced.Frank continues to get closer to Yates, the blond, chiseled-jaw novelist. They’re up late getting loaded in the White House one night, playing video games (Frank remains ever the gamer, playing some first-person title and Monument Valley several episodes back) and talking shop. Frank remarks that the last time he was as drunk he broke into a library at his alma mater, The Sentinel. We all remember that episode well — Frank and an old classmate talk about hooking up with each other in college. (Tim: “We were kids, Frank. Messed around a couple of times.” Frank: “I was so drawn to you.”) And it casts the scene in a different light. Yates and Frank wake up Claire, who is getting suspicious of the writer. She storms out of her separate bedroom to tell them to keep all the noise down. “Francis, I don’t like him being up here,” she complains. That, and Claire’s statement during their flight back from Moscow that she is the reason he is president, continue to put Frank in a foul mood. When Claire speaks up at a cabinet meeting to recommend how to get around Israel’s attempt to scuttle the Jordan Valley plan by paying off Zimbabwe, he retaliates by trying to humiliate her. “This is ill conceived. You should think before you bring a proposal such as this.”Throughout, the camera returns again and again to a group of Tibetan monks who are working on a Mandala sand painting project in the White House. This painstaking art of using colored dust to create a mural-like work that is then promptly wiped out is linked to the operative metaphor here:  impermanence, something the Underwoods are grappling with in their marriage and their political careers. As we jump forward in time again, Frank, still dressed in his white wedding suit, takes Yates to the site of his former home. It’s no longer standing – a casualty of a strip-mining development. He tells Yates how his mother cleaned houses. They hired her because she was white and they presumed she wouldn’t steal. They were wrong. He seems especially proud but then tells Yates he can’t put that in the book. This book is either going to be great – meaning it could ruin Frank’s career with all the stuff he doesn’t want in there – or the watered-down, sanitized pamphlet that’s typical of political books. I’m hoping it’s the first of those.Frank has a marriage counseling session of his own with Yates, the mirror image of what we saw in the previous episode between Claire and Corrigan. After the pair visit Frank and Claire’s first home, in Gaffney, Yates admits that he only wrote half of the book that made him famous. “My entire career is based on a lie,” he says. “You don’t have a monopoly on secrets.” This convinces Frank to open up a bit more. He says he was half the man before he met her; she knows him better than he knows himself.This exchange, along with the presence of the monks, seems to snap Frank back into a more generous mood. He returns to the White House one day to find the monks and their sand painting gone. Dismayed, he asks for a picture of it, which he then presents to Claire along with the note “Nothing is forever. Except us.” (And maybe life in prison. But we’ll leave that for later.)Back to Doug Stamper, whose ears are ringing again. Sparks have been flying between him and his physical therapist, who bears a striking resemblance to Rachel. They spend the night together. And speaking of Rachel, Gavin has finally tracked her down. He presents Doug with a picture of her crossing the street in Santa Fe, N.M. Neither this development nor how Doug manages to secure a live streaming feed of a surveillance camera in Santa Fe on his laptop are especially well explained. But he’s got what he’s been searching for. What he does with this information is for next time. What’s he going to do? Take a leave of absence from the Dunbar campaign, fly to Santa Fe and strangle Rachel?Read our Episode 8 recap here.