Ticket sales were off to a slow start last week for the new Broadway revival of Wendy Wasserstein’s “The Heidi Chronicles,” starring Elisabeth Moss of “Mad Men” fame, according to box office data released on Monday. “The Heidi Chronicles,” which won both the Tony Award for best play and the Pulitzer Prize for drama in 1989, grossed $305,345 for eight performances, or 34 percent of the maximum possible amount – on the low side for a well-known play with a star performer. Ms. Moss is an Emmy Award nominee for her years as the copywriter Peggy Olson on “Mad Men.”About three-quarters of the seats were full; average paid admission was $51.05, however, the lowest of any show on Broadway, indicating that many tickets were sold at a discount. The box-office question for “Heidi” is whether a sizable number of Broadway theatergoers will see relevance or resonance (or a good time) in the show, a funny and bittersweet look at a young woman’s coming of age from the 1960s to the 1980s as she confronts tradeoffs in feminism, romance and career aspirations.The Broadway revival of the musical “Cabaret” has lost some heat at the box office, meanwhile, since Emma Stone left  the starring role of Sally Bowles in mid-February. With Ms. Stone in the cast, the show was regularly grossing close to $1 million a week this winter; ticket sales have declined steadily since, with the show grossing $674,524 last week. Sienna Miller replaced Ms. Stone, starring opposite Alan Cumming as the M.C.Per usual for late February, when most school vacations are over and the weather is grim, Broadway musicals that appeal to families – like the Disney shows “Aladdin” and “The Lion King,” as well as “Wicked” and “Matilda the Musical” – were down at the box office last week, several by 20 percent or more compared with the previous week. Another musical, “Honeymoon in Vegas,” had its lowest gross – $284,648 – since starting performances in mid-November, despite good reviews.Over all, Broadway musicals and plays grossed $18.6 million for 26 productions last week, compared with $18.5 million for 28 productions for the same week in 2014. Attendance was 189,652, compared with 203,099 a year ago.