“Do not be scared of science.” That is the message of “The Infinite Monkey Cage,” according to one of its hosts, the comedian Robin Ince. The science-meets-comedy radio show, which has been broadcast on BBC’s Radio 4 since 2009, has also become one of Britain’s most popular podcasts, and is gaining a following in the United States. This month, Mr. Ince and his scientist co-host, Brian Cox, are taking the show on a brief American tour, kicking off on Thursday night at the Skirball Center for the Performing Arts in New York, where the guests will be the astrophysicists Neil deGrasse Tyson and Janna Levin, the comedian Lisa Lampanelli and the actor Tim Daly. “Monkey Cage” has the loose format of a lighthearted round table, with topics like parallel universes, neurology and probability and chance. Each episode features practicing scientists and curious outsiders, often comedians with some science background. Mr. Cox and Mr. Ince pose questions in the open-ended, gently skeptical way of BBC presenters, and the show’s guests expound on complex ideas in easy-to-follow conversations. The hosts aren’t afraid to revisit ideas over multiple episodes, helping to reinforce concepts.The series was originally intended to be a more straightforward look at current science news, but the network decided to go for, as Mr. Ince put it, “someone who was very wise, and an idiot to then say facetious things about physics.” Mr. Cox is a professor and particle physicist at CERN, the European Organization for Nuclear Research, and, in the last five years, has become a pop culture figure in Britain  with his television documentaries, awe-inspiring looks at space that are inspired by Carl Sagan’s PBS series Cosmos. Mr. Ince has been a fixture of Britain’s alternative comedy scene for decades, and he’s demonstrated a long-running fascination with science and rationality in his work — his current stand-up tour is “Happiness Through Science.” On “Monkey Cage,” the duo, who were interviewed last week via Skype, have adopted the rhythms of a modern double act, bouncing off each other while constantly subverting their presumed roles. Mr. Cox seems endlessly game for self-depreciation and gentle mockery, playing along with running jokes about his contempt for chemistry and his growing status as a pop culture figure. But he also finds himself passionately involved in the science of the show, snapping at guests who doubt certain facts or jumping at the chance to figure out calculations on air. Mr. Ince, while careful to pepper the show with jokes, is mostly happy to be the facilitator of conversation, and his thoughtful, open-minded questions belie his self-described status as the show’s dunce. The format also encourages the comedic guests, who serve as audience surrogates, to challenge the experts at every step. “One of the successes is that you see scientists on the back foot, thinking on their feet, and I think that’s unusual,” Mr. Cox said. “Our format is very fluid, and one thing the comedians do is shake it up, and drive it off in different directions that none of us were expecting. They’ll ask a simple question that really can put you on the spot and be the key to a more complete understanding of subjects.” “StarTalk Live!,” an Internet radio show and podcast hosted by Mr. Tyson, is the United States’s closest cousin to “Monkey Cage.” “StarTalk” also has a comedian co-host, often the “Bob’s Burgers” star Eugene Mirman. Both series seek to popularize scientific ideas through approachable, humorous programs. “The ideas should be entertaining and available in the same way that people are entertained by watching talent shows or watching sports,” Mr. Cox said. “If we cede popular culture to other areas, then that means, by definition actually, that science becomes less popular, and less discussed, and less enjoyed, and that’s to the detriment of everybody.” Their visit to the United States is driven by their desire to feature more international academics on the series. “We would want to just get round the world,” Mr. Ince said. “Go to every country and find the best people in every single one, and have the chance to kind of quiz them and get as many viewpoints that come from that particular rational mind.” “Monkey Cage” arrives as science seems to be permeating hipster pop culture. As Mr. Tyson’s “StarTalk” prepares for a move to National Geographic Channel, Top 10 podcasts like “Radiolab” and “Stuff You Should Know” mix scientific concepts with culture and curiosity. YouTube channels like Vsauce, SciShow and MinutePhysics have millions of subscribers, while the Bell House in Brooklyn is packed each month for the free scientific lectures series Secret Science Club. All of these seem to be produced with the same objective, to make science playful and welcoming to everyone. “We want to create a kind of honey trap to ideas,” Mr. Ince said. “Basically, we’re trying to create a machine to manufacture extreme enthusiasm about being part of the universe.” 