Season 3 Episode 6 Recap: Chapter 32Read all of our “House of Cards” recaps.“House of Cards” is always at its strongest when it probes the vulnerabilities and insecurities of its characters, not when its plot veers off into wormholes about backroom legislative disputes or diplomatic dust-ups. So it’s a relief to see the show taking us back inside the tormented brains of Frank and Claire. At first we see them on Air Force One. They’re in separate rooms. Claire is gazing off contemplatively at the northern lights en route to Moscow. Frank is in his private office making eyes at his hunky ghostwriter, Tom Yates. He’s very intrigued by Yates’s past as a hustler. Meechum would be fuming with jealousy if he could see this. They’re on their way, in part, to see Michael Corrigan, the gay-rights activist imprisoned in Moscow. Claire has helped secure a deal to get Corrigan out as long as he reads a statement apologizing for exposing Russians to deviant sexual behavior. Once there, she learns it’s a nonstarter with Corrigan, who is committed to taking a stand even if it means he doesn’t get to go home. Claire tells him he’s being naïve. Think of your husband, she tells him.A marriage counseling session breaks out, with Claire coming to a few realizations about the weaknesses of her own relationship with Frank. She tries to lecture Corrigan about the importance of respect. Relationships, he tells her, are about sacrifice; she of all people should understand that. His relationship with his husband actually sounds a lot like Claire’s and Frank’s. This seems to really dawn on her after Michael says he doesn’t even sleep in the same bed as his husband. She’s tiring of this conversation. She tells him to finish his food. He retorts with a well-played quip about the snake telling Eve to eat the apple. It’s getting late. So Claire dozes off while Michael stares out the window, the yellow glow of the light from outside bathing his face. It looks for a minute as if he might burst into song. Before we get to Frank and Petrov, who are in the Kremlin negotiating that Middle East peace settlement while also sparring over Claire’s refusal to leave Corrigan’s cell, the subplot with Gavin the creepy hacker and Lisa, Rachel’s ex-girlfriend, is maturing. He’s “Max” now and Max is suddenly quite worried that he has H.I.V. In an attempt to burrow himself deeper into Lisa’s life, he fakes a positive test result. This gets her to open up a little more about her ex and how she disappeared. After Lisa makes reference to the Jiminez Trail (according to the subtitles — is this a real trail?), a place they fantasized about going off to together, Gavin/Max narrows his search for Rachel to New Mexico.Back in Moscow, things have gone bad. Claire wakes up in the morning to find Corrigan hanging from the window. He used her scarf. Claire, shaken as she heads to a news conference, has one of those momentary bursts of conscience and decides, with Frank right there next to her, to attack Petrov in front of the media.“Shame on you, Mr. President,” she snaps at him. She could be talking to either despot standing there at her side.Frank tries to excuse his wife’s behavior. But Petrov is steaming mad, and the peace deal is dead. So, too, might be the Underwoods’ marriage. After the news conference they have that ugly blow up that’s been teased in all the Netflix previews of the third season. She tells him, “We’re murderers, Francis.” No we’re not, he barks back. “We’re survivors.”Then it gets really nasty. He tells her he never should have made her ambassador. She tells him she never should have made him president. And the way things are going for Frank, he may not be president for very much longer.Read our Episode 7 recap here.