AdvertisementSupported byThe Art of CollectingBy Elizabeth ZachFRANKFURT — When Johann Friedrich Städel, a German banker and spice merchant, decided in 1815 to share his collection of art masterpieces with the public, he turned his home on the Rossmarkt in Frankfurt into a museum and threw open the doors.This year, the Städel Museum — housed since 1887 in a stately building along the Main river, with an architecturally important gallery space added in 2013 — is celebrating two centuries as Frankfurt’s “citizens’ museum,” with exhibitions that showcase its rich holdings of European art. The Städel’s permanent collection reflects 700 years of mostly European masterpieces, from the Middle Ages through Modernism by way of the Baroque and German expressionism.For its 200th anniversary, the museum added two significant pieces to its collection: Guido Reni’s “The Assumption of the Virgin,” from 1596-97, and Edgar Degas’s “Study of a Nude,” from 1888-92. It has also expanded its digital programming, including a Städel app. Städel the collector was also eager to create an art academy. Today, the Städelschule accepts 150 students from around the world and counts among its graduates architects at the German firm that oversaw the museum’s expansion three years ago. “From the beginning, the Städel was based on good will and as a museum that offered a broad education for everyone,” said Max Hollein, who previously worked at the Guggenheim Museum in New York and now, along with the Städel, oversees the Schirn Kunsthalle and Liebieghaus museums in Frankfurt. „The new wing, financed largely with private donations, highlights the expansion of the museum’s contemporary art collection. Twelve columns buttress the ceiling, much like a medieval cathedral. The minimalist gallery space resembles a piazza, with side passages, an imposing staircase and a spacious, airy center. The ceiling of the new gallery, which is on the building’s lower floor, contains nearly 200 skylights, and a grassy rooftop offers an aerial view. “The ’80s: Figurative Painting in West Germany,” an exhibition on view until Oct. 18, features works by 27 artists, including Albert Oehlen, Salome, Ina Barfuss and Martin Kippenberger. It allows the museum to reflect on the pivotal decade in Germany that was bookended on the one hand by student revolts and on the other by the fall of the Berlin Wall and, eventually, a reunified Germany. “These artists were shooting stars then, and there was this subculture, and punk, and this complexity is mirrored in their paintings, which have a certain sex appeal,” said Martin Engler, head of the Städel’s contemporary art collection and curator of the 1980s exhibition. Their rise, he noted, signaled the beginning of the art market hype of the time.Mr. Engler also said that the paintings and artists from the 1980s were often overshadowed by the era’s fascination with the subculture. And he said it would not be easy, or even entirely correct, to categorize the artists, or even to group them together. “They are a heterogeneous group and the artists themselves didn’t want to be pigeonholed,” he said.What they did have in common, however, was a combustive mix of rebellion and success.“Their motifs are often sexually explicit, and they used ‘bad painting’ on purpose,” said Mr. Hollein. “All of these painters came out of a tradition of expressive painting in Germany at this crucial moment in contemporary art and popular culture, and they were trying to grasp this moment, and in doing so, they wanted to be aggressive and in-your-face. “So, you see rough gestures, a method of confronting, even attacking, the viewer. These paintings were meant to trigger mixed responses.” The exhibition uses geography to tease out the artists’ inspirations, focusing on Hamburg, the Rhineland and West Berlin. As with the cabaret era of the 1920s and early 1930s, Berlin of the 1980s was a clearinghouse for erotic self-expression and liberation, as well as a refuge for escaping West Germany’s mandatory conscription. Rainer Fetting’s dreary yet wistful “Erstes Mauerbild,” or “First Painting of the Wall,” is displayed here, as is G.L. Gabriel’s melancholy 1982 rendering of “Blick Nach Osten,” or “A View to the East.” The artists who worked in Hamburg, such as Oehlen and Kippenberger, also responded to the national spirit of the times, but with a more sardonic edge. Kippenberger’s cheekily named “With the Best Will in the World, I Can’t See a Swastika” is among these, with its colors taken from the German flag, as is Werner Büttner’s regretful drunk in “Please Wake at 8:00 p.m.”Artists who worked in the district of Deutz in Cologne are billed as observers of the everyday art scene, but included among the works is a political prophesy: Jiri Georg Dokoupil’s “Red Star in Distress” from 1982.“These paintings still have the power they had thirty years ago,” Mr. Hollein said.„At a time when Germany is seen by many as a fulcrum balancing several moving parts — not least the Greek financial crisis and the mounting pressure to address the influx of refugees from the Middle East and North Africa — the works echo a similar chaos and significance from an earlier time.“The exhibit is a bridge between the past to the present,” Mr. Engler said. Advertisement