By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMARCH 2, 2015
8 P.M. (El Rey) EL REY NETWORK PRESENTS: THE DIRECTOR’S CHAIR The El Rey network founder Robert Rodriguez interviews Francis Ford Coppola about his inspiration, his reluctance to direct both “The Godfather” (starring Marlon Brando, above) and “The Godfather: Part II,” and his struggles with “Apocalypse Now.” The talk is followed at 9 by “The Conversation” (1974), starring Gene Hackman as Harry Caul, a surveillance expert who has been hired to eavesdrop on a married woman (Cindy Williams) and her lover (Frederic Forrest) by her husband, known as the Director (Robert Duvall). But three people have died because of Harry’s work, and now he’s worried that two more may soon die. The film received three Oscar nominations but lost for best picture to “The Godfather: Part II.” Writing in The New York Times, Vincent Canby called “The Conversation” haunting and bothersome: “Haunting because its suggestion that technology has gotten out of hand, though not exactly new, is so convincingly and fastidiously detailed. It’s bothersome because Mr. Coppola, the writer as well as the director, has nearly succeeded in making a great film but has, instead, made one that is merely very good.”12:15 P.M. (Sundance) THE GHOST WRITER (2010) In this tale from Roman Polanski, Ewan McGregor is “at his ingénue best” portraying a scribe for hire, Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. His job is to clean up the memoir of a former British prime minister, Adam Lang (Pierce Brosnan), after the previous writer has washed up on an American beach. Olivia Williams is Lang’s wife. Mr. Polanski delivers “this pulpy fun at such a high level that ‘The Ghost Writer’ is irresistible, no matter how obvious the twists,” Ms. Dargis added.4:20 P.M. (Starz Cinema) WADJDA (2013) A 10-year-old Saudi girl (Waad Mohammed, above, with Reem Abdullah) enters a Quran-reciting contest with a cash prize in the hope of buying a bicycle — a mode of transport discouraged for women, with which she intends to race a boy. Heartbreak hovers over “Haifaa al-Mansour’s sharply observed, deceptively gentle film, reportedly the first feature ever directed by a Saudi woman,” with scenes hinting at the difficulties facing her gender, A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. But “with impressive agility, ‘Wadjda’ finds room to maneuver between harsh realism and a more hopeful kind of storytelling. There is warmth as well as austerity in Wadjda’s world, kindness as well as cruelty, and the possibility, modestly sketched and ardently desired, of change.”8:30 P.M. (BBC America) TOP GEAR Richard Hammond is dropped into the Canadian wilderness to test an emergency beacon that sends Jeremy Clarkson and James May, in a Hennessey Ford F150 Velociraptor and a Chevrolet Silverado 2500HD, to his rescue. Gillian Anderson is the star in a reasonably priced car.Advertisement9 P.M. (Fox) THE FOLLOWING With Joe Carroll (James Purefoy) on death row, Ryan Hardy (Kevin Bacon) has moved on from the past and joined the F.B.I. full time. But his happiness disintegrates when a new round of violence erupts and forces the realization that Carroll was just the beginning.9 P.M. (Logo) RUPAUL’S DRAG RACE Carson Kressley and Ross Mathews join Michelle Visage as judges as new competitors vie for the title of Next Superstar Drag Queen of the World by posing naked in this Season 7 premiere.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowTHE CRYING GAME (1992) When an Irish Republican Army kidnapping goes wrong, a terrorist, Fergus (Stephen Rea), goes into hiding in London, where he takes up with his victim’s lover, Dil (Jaye Davidson). But nothing is what it seems in this thriller. “ ‘The Crying Game’ is full of masks,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times. “Fergus and Dil wear them, as do the people who have shaped Fergus in Ireland, including his I.R.A. girlfriend, Jude (Miranda Richardson), and the English soldier (Forest Whitaker) he comes to know in Northern Ireland. The biggest mask is that worn by the film itself, which pretends to be about the love affair of Fergus and Dil, although it really has more esoteric matters on its mind.” (netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on March 2, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.