By BRIAN SEIBERTMARCH 1, 2015
If tap dancing is music as well as dance, then why not use tap to play musical scores? Such was the plausible idea behind “Tap Lab,” the Bang Group’s contribution to the Harkness Dance Festival. At the 92nd Street Y on Saturday, the company, led by David Parker, attempted to realize scores by Mozart, Morton Feldman and Steve Reich with foot and body percussion. “Tab Lab” was an accurate title for a collection of dogged exercises and weak experiments. Rather than metal on wood or skin on skin, the dominant sound was a kind of silence: the absence of inspiration.Here and there, two or more dancers traded successive notes or rhythms with enough speed and dexterity to approach wit, or two groups locked into a clear and satisfying counterpoint. But mainly Mr. Parker’s choreography kept settling for the same tired gags. Over and over, the dancers got up in one another’s faces, slapping and tapping in pseudo-comical aggression. Or, for variety, someone crawled through someone else’s legs. Every time a dancer smacked his or her own forehead, the gesture was at least appropriate, a sound and motion that signifies “Duh!”Following the festival’s “Stripped/Dressed” show-and-tell format, before the company performed “Marching Orders” it danced to a recording of Mozart’s “Turkish March” to demonstrate how taps were matching the melody. In the “dressed” version, the recording was gone, but it was partially replaced by Mr. Parker’s strained singing (bad on purpose, yet insufferable nevertheless).Before “Settling Scores,” Mr. Parker explained, almost as a kind of disclaimer, the complexity of Feldman’s “For John Cage.” Practically every measure, he showed on an enlargement of the score, is in a different time signature. But the dance, laden with the same shtick, felt like no more than a difficult task.Only in “Tempus Fugit” did the program’s ideas come together. The score is Steve Reich’s “Clapping Music,” in which a 12-count pattern is repeated as the same pattern is shifted by a beat through a cycle of phasing. The lecture-demonstration segment could have explained this better, but the dance, for six performers, was rhythmically coherent, with somewhat engaging visual patterns and formations suggestive of a high-school cotillion.Anita Feldman, in whose company Mr. Parker danced and whom he credits in the written program, made a superior tap version of “Clapping Music” a quarter-century ago. On Saturday, the moderate success of Mr. Parker’s interpretation was immediately followed by a dance to “I Want You Back” that combined the worst of the Bang Group’s mediocre tap technique and forced cheer. (Only the surprising participation of the celebrated contemporary dancer Melissa Toogood was a pleasure.) If the 92nd Street Y wants to allow tap on the beautiful floor of Buttenwieser Hall, there are many dancers who could make far better music there.A version of this review appears in print on March 2, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Tapping Out a Score With Lively Feet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.