Season 6, Episode 7: The HuntDespite the episode’s title, there was precious little hunting going on for the “mercs” our deputy U.S. marshals shot it out with in last week’s episode. Instead, the hunt was all about trust. (And pork.)Some of it was a little touchy-feely. It seems so out of character for Raylan not to join in a manhunt and instead spend the day with his ex-wife Winona and their baby. But that was kind of the point, wasn’t it? So we learn Raylan is good with a baby. Fine. And he’s getting back with his ex-wife. Fine. So he’s humanized. It makes him even more appealing to the ladies. But unless he has the little girl on his knee in a shootout with Markham, can we all agree we’re done with this plot point? With Ty Walker winged by the deputies in the shootout, Avery Markham’s crew is down to one bad guy: Seabass. Markham is forced to buy the trust of Seabass with four stacks of $100 bills. “It’s not about the money. It’s about loyalty,” says Markham. “More than that, it is about freedom.” Don’t you think Seabass got bought rather cheaply since everything is unraveling on Markham? Seabass could have negotiated a little bit more than $40,000 since he could easily go to the authorities and finger Markham in exchange for immunity. It sounds like Markham knows all about trust since the question is frequently raised whether he turned on his boss and also had him killed inside prison. But then, Markham had a pistol at the ready.Then there is Ava and Boyd. They’ve had trust issues this whole season and it finally comes to a head when Boyd orders her to go up to his secluded mountain cabin. “I think we need to talk about commitment, trust, loyalty. Those are important words.” She has got to know he’s going to kill her, but she goes anyway. He forces her to drink. He forces her to slap him. He chokes her hard enough that it leaves marks on her throat. She defuses the violence by having sex with him. The menace continues as he wakes her before dawn to hunt wild hogs in the woods. They finally talk it out — his betrayal of her by leaving her in prison, her betrayal of him by informing to the marshals. Boyd does seem more upset that she might have slept with Raylan than by the fact she may have informed on him. The climax comes when Boyd hands her his pistol and tells her to kill him. (The pistol had an empty magazine in it, but she doesn’t know that.) They come to peace with each other, but somehow I suspect their trust issues haven’t been resolved. Walker’s escape from the manhunt unspools wonderfully. He cuts out a bullet from his shoulder in a rest stop bathroom. When two obnoxious frat boys confront him there, it seems like he’ll kill them. (One even uses the insulting “thank you for your service” line). Instead, he asks the boys to take his Kevlar jacket to an old Army buddy at 1212 Main St. in Orlando. (As you probably knew, there is no such address.) And he gives them $300 cash and his credit cards, a smart move because he hopes it leads the authorities the wrong way.When his car breaks down by the side of the road, he almost puts a bullet in it, evoking the famous World War II Bill Mauldin cartoon of the GI putting his pistol to his broken down Jeep. He calls for EMTs, brutally murders them (with a lot more shots than a trained killer would seem to need), and with medical gear, takes off on foot. That will not end well. Trust me.The show drink.  It’s such a shame that the best bourbon of the season is brought out with such menace. With the red script and red neck wrapper it looked like a rare bottle of the Family Reserve 20 Year, not the rarer 23-year-old. I can find no reference to the warehouse fire that Boyd refers to in 1995 or any year. (Fans, do you know more about that than the Google does?) But warehouse thefts of the prized bourbon have been reported. You can see why thieves want it. Although it carries a suggested retail price of $69, its average price on the secondary market is almost $1,500.