Films covering subjects as diverse as sake and nuclear power plants will be in competition at this year’s Tribeca Film Festival, organizers announced Tuesday. The world narrative competition will feature 12 films, with  James Franco, Faith Hill, Richard Gere and Olivia Wilde among the stars. The dozen films in the world documentary competition include new work from Albert Maysles, Ricki Stern and Annie Sundberg. And the Viewpoints section features 27 films from around the world raising questions of identity.Having its world premiere at the festival is “The Adderall Diaries,” Pamela Romanowsky’s  adaptation of the writer Stephen Elliott’s memoir, with Mr. Franco playing the writer. Also in competition is “Franny” from Andrew Renzi, starring Mr. Gere as a wealthy, aging eccentric who works his way into the life of a young couple. And “Sworn Virgin,” from Laura Bispuri, follows a woman in an Albanian village who seeks to live as a man.The world documentary competition includes “The Birth of Sake,” from Erik Shirai, which explores the traditional ways sake is produced by following the process  over a six-month period. “Democrats,” from Camilla Nielsson, covers  Zimbabwe’s efforts to draft a constitution after Robert Mugabe’s much-criticized 2008 presidential win. “In Transit,” directed by Mr. Maysles, Nelson Walker, Lynn True, David Usui and Ben Wu, takes a look at passengers on the Empire Builder, the long-distance train route that runs from Chicago to Seattle. And “Indian Point,” from Ivy Meeropol, examines the aging nuclear power plant  50 miles outside of New York City.Viewpoints includes the world premiere of Tribeca festival alumnus Onur Tukel’s new film “Applesauce,” a comedy starring the director. And the documentary “A Courtship,” from Amy Kohn, looks at the practice of Christian courtship, in which a woman relies on her parents and God’s will to help her find a husband.This year’s festival opens April 15 with a documentary about “Saturday Night Live” and runs until April 26.