Season 3 Episode 8 Recap: Chapter 34Read all of our “House of Cards” recaps.Hurricane Faith is bearing down on the East Coast. But she’s met her match in Hurricane Frank. Frank, never one to put too much faith in anything but his own ability to persevere, is doubtful this hurricane is really as powerful as the forecasters say it is.He has to believe this, given that he depleted the FEMA fund to create all those “America Works” jobs. So now there’s no money to get ready for the storm. He tries to get Congress to give him an emergency appropriation. But the new Senate majority leader (evidently Hector Mendoza is out; something about an ethics violation after not reporting some paid speeches as income — in reality, the actor Benito Martinez went over to ABC to co-star in “American Crime,” which premieres this week) won’t budge. Frank can’t get the money unless he agrees not to spend another dime on America Works, which Congress wants to shut down. Frank is in a bind: scuttle his signature domestic program (and his raison d’être for running for a second term) or protect the millions of Americans who are in harm’s way because of Faith.On the campaign trail, Heather Dunbar is channeling her inner Elizabeth Warren, railing against corporate greed and calling for a minimum-wage increase. After she finishes her speech, she reaches Doug. He’s at home in bed, creepily watching that camera feed, hoping he’ll glimpse Rachel. Still, he manages to take a break for a minute from his stalking and cook up a plan for Heather. Invite Jackie in for a meeting. She does and presses Jackie to agree to join her in suspending their campaign until after the hurricane passes. Jackie is skeptical. So Heather appeals to whatever motherly instincts Jackie may possess. It works.Heather Dunbar mystifies me. We’re supposed to believe that she’s a strong candidate for president and Frank’s biggest political threat. Yet other than hiring Doug, which of course was his idea and perhaps not what it appears, neither she nor her team has demonstrated much political smarts. Then we see what Doug is up to. I can’t tell if this is misdirection on the writers’ part or not, but it seems he’s still trying to ingratiate himself into Frank’s inner circle. He calls Seth and tells him about Jackie’s meeting. Tell Frank who told you this, he implores. (Seth evidently does not; and when Remy goes in to talk to Frank about Jackie, it seems that Frank thinks Seth is the one who learned about the meeting on his own.)Freddie is back in the mix again. And we learn that his dishwasher job is in jeopardy. If Frank agrees to suspend America Works, Freddie won’t have a job. Frank finds out that Freddie has been a beneficiary of America Works and calls him into the White House to offer him a job. Freddie bring his grandson, who Frank charms with visions of sitting behind his Oval Office desk — maybe he, too, can be president one day. Freddie knows, however, that America does not work. “That’s never gonna happen,” he tells the boy. “No boy, this place ain’t for you and me. It’s good to have dreams, just so long as they’re not fantasies.”His conscience now somewhat less clouded, Frank signs the emergency relief hurricane bill. America Works, for now, is on ice. And he suffers a double indignity after Faith makes a turn out to sea and will spare the East Coast. His conviction that the storm wouldn’t hit land is true. But it’s too late. He can’t pull back on the bill he just signed that halts his signature program.Frank puts a happy face on this with Yates. He thinks he can use his capitulation as a show of integrity that will give him a reason to announce his candidacy in 2016. As his inspiration, he tells Yates to look out the window and points to Freddie, who’s trimming hedges on the White House lawn. A Few Words About YatesThis can’t end well. Yates and Frank are getting closer. But someone else has now has her sights set on Yates. Kate asks him to get a drink and tries to pump him for information. Remember how proud we were of her for showing how much integrity a tough-minded female reporter could have by not sleeping with her sources? Well, that’s out the window. They go to bed together. Even poor Meecham has it out for the guy. He knows he’s being replaced as the favored boy toy. So he snaps at Yates one night when he’s leaving Frank after another one of their long, intimate conversations. Now Yates is caught between these two tenacious characters whose ambition shows no bounds. He never should have let his guard down with Kate. And he definitely shouldn’t have told Frank his first novel was a lie. I’d be rooting for his survival. But I just don’t see it happening when he’s up against these two.Read our Episode 9 recap here.