BEIJING – Sohu, one of China’s leading Internet portals, has joined with Broadway Video Entertainment to recreate America’s most influential sketch comedy show for the world’s biggest online market.The deal for “Saturday Night Live China” was announced on Tuesday by Sohu, which said in a news release that it’s aiming for a “groundbreaking show” that will have “international appeal” while still being tailored for Chinese audiences.The Chinese-language show will be produced by Sohu, which is based in Beijing. Sohu will oversee the recruitment of cast members and writers and oversee production, said Jiang Xin, a marketing representative for the company. Consultants from “S.N.L.” in New York will help with the process, though it is not clear whether Lorne Michaels, who founded Broadway Video Entertainment and is the creator of the original show, would be involved, she added. Details such as length of the show and whether it will be live or prerecorded have not yet been decided. It was also unclear, given censorship restrictions in China, whether the new show would be allowed to include the kind of biting political and social satire for which the original show is known.Sohu will begin recruiting comedians from across China in the coming months with the aim of showing the premiere of ”Saturday Night Live China” at the end of this year or in early 2016, according to Ms. Jiang.Producers may draw talent from China’s own tradition of sketch comedy, called xiaopin. Like many “S.N.L.” skits, xiaopin also makes use of costumes, props and backdrops, though the sketches are usually longer. They are prominently featured on CCTV’s Spring Festival Gala, the annual television extravaganza commonly referred to as the world’s most-watched television program.Sohu brought the American version of “Saturday Night Live” to its online video streaming site in December 2013. Currently, the last seven seasons are available to watch in English with Chinese subtitles; the 2013-14 season has garnered over 36 million views.But the deal is part of a larger push by Sohu and other Chinese video streaming sites to create original content. Local producers have already found great success in adapting foreign formats, including “If You Are the One”, a popular television dating game show based on the British show “Take Me Out,” as well as “The Voice of China”, a reality talent show based on the Dutch program “The Voice of Holland.”A version of this article appears in print on 03/05/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: A New York Institution Gets a Chinese Extension.