AdvertisementSupported byThe Art of CollectingBy Nina SiegalAMSTERDAM — In 1558, a single Portuguese trading ship returning from Asia carried 1,000 pieces of Chinese porcelain. A Dutch ship making the same journey 50 years later brought 60,000 pieces. And by 1638, about 900,000 pieces of Chinese porcelain were transported via Dutch trading vessels.In the span of one century, the fine, thin, white ceramics made from a clay called kaolin and fired in blazing hot kilns went from being a unique treasure for a handful of wealthy European connoisseurs to a common household item, especially in the Netherlands. Today, this porcelain is known in everyday English usage as china, and as early as the 17th century it was already being copied throughout Europe.How did china and other Asian commodities, such as Japanese lacquer chests, Ceylonese ivory cabinets and Indian silks, first come to the Western world, and what impact did the European appreciation for them have on the kinds of products that were produced? These are the questions raised in “Asia in Amsterdam,” an exhibition that opens at the Rijksmuseum on Oct. 17 and runs until Jan. 17, when it will move to the Peabody Essex Museum in Salem, Mass.The concept behind the show was developed by Karina H. Corrigan, curator of Asian export art at the Peabody, who had originally planned it as a kind of sidebar to an exhibition focused on Dutch art. With the support of the museum’s director, and the subsequent offer of collaboration from the Rijksmuseum, it grew to become a larger exploration of the relationship between Asia and Amsterdam, the primary trading center for Eastern goods in Europe in the 17th century.“I’m really intrigued to think about the tangible impact that these Asian luxuries had on people’s lives,” Ms. Corrigan said.“Think about brightly colored Indian cottons and the visual allure of that gossamer-thin cloth on your body or in your interior in a country where there would’ve been much heavier wools and linens usually dark in color,” she said. “The cool feel of a porcelain cup on your lips when up to that point Europeans would have had only rough clay pots. There was a lot of tangible delight in these commodities.”The Peabody museum has a particular link to the Netherlands because Salem was one of the first American towns to be settled by the Dutch, and also because the museum’s key benefactors are Rose-Marie and Eijk van Otterloo, an American couple with Dutch ancestors.The Van Otterloos are among the world’s leading collectors of Dutch and Flemish old master works. The museum’s audience is typically interested in exhibitions with Dutch themes, Ms. Corrigan said, but this show has a larger resonance.“Fundamentally, it’s relevant to all of us because it’s about global trade and the impact of global trade on our daily lives,” she said. The primary mover of the goods was the Dutch East India Company, known in the Netherlands as the VOC. At its peak, it had 40,000 employees and a fleet of more than a hundred ships. In 1619 the company established its administrative seat in Batavia, in what is now called Jakarta, to oversee the operation of some 600 trading positions in its charter area from the Cape of Good Hope to Japan.Although originally established to trade in Asian spices, the company quickly discovered a market for Asian household goods, for which European connoisseurs would pay handsomely.Chinese porcelain, in particular, had a market that never stopped growing. “Europeans were amazed by the quality of the porcelain material,” said Jan van Campen, curator of Asian export art at the Rijksmuseum and curator of the exhibition. “They didn’t know how it was made, and it was so much better than what they had. To be able to make it so very thin and so very white and to make sure that it couldn’t be deglazed — it was a miracle to them.”The objects also intrigued painters, who were particularly moved by the challenge of rendering such fine material with oil paints on canvas. Many Dutch old master painters, such as Jan Steen and Pieter de Hooch, included Chinese porcelain or Asian rugs and fabrics in still lifes, or even in the backgrounds of household portraits. “They were experimenting with pigments to make it possible to see and experience the thinness and the shine,” Mr. van Campen said. “They were also very interested in the shine of the lacquer bowls and boxes.”The curators found that Western and Eastern consumers had different tastes. Europeans wanted porcelain painted in blue, with landscapes or other decorations that they thought of as typically Asian, Mr. van Campen said, whereas in China, “what was appreciated were things that were monochrome with a perfect glaze.”To meet European demand, Asian artisans created objects designed to appeal to European tastes — which are still prized today, Ms. Corrigan said.“Think about the shine of lacquer in a dimly lit Dutch home,” she said. “It’s difficult to put ourselves into a mind-set of a time that didn’t have all this texture and color. Independent of where they were coming from, they were wonderful. But then knowing that they came from halfway around the world made them much more interesting.”Advertisement