AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (TCM) THE ARTIST (2011) George Valentin (Jean Dujardin, in an Oscar-winning performance), a silent-screen star, finds his luster fading when he refuses to speak on film with the arrival of sound, while Peppy Miller (Bérénice Bejo), a young extra he helped get a break, becomes the next big thing. Then Peppy insists that Valentin star in her next movie. This film, written and directed by Michel Hazanavicius, also won for best director and best picture. “Though its protagonist mourns the arrival of sound, ‘The Artist’ itself is more interested in celebrating the range and power of a medium that can sparkle, swoon and suffer so beautifully that it doesn’t really need to have anything to say,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times, choosing the film as a critics’ pick. And because of the expressiveness and dexterity of Mr. Dujardin and Ms. Bejo — “they dance beautifully and also portray emotion with just the right blend of naturalism and melodramatic exaggeration — ‘The Artist’ is more than a clever pastiche of antique amusements,” he wrote. “It may be something less than a great movie, but it is an irresistible reminder of nearly everything that makes the movies great.”11:30 A.M. (Sundance) THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS (1989) The brothers Beau and Jeff Bridges play Frank and Jack Baker, a two-piano lounge act with an awful stage wardrobe, an even worse repertory and rock-bottom morale. Then a club owner offers to pay off their contract if they will agree not to play. Michelle Pfeiffer is Susie Diamond, who helps the guys reinvent their act as a trio. Writing in The Times, Janet Maslin called this film, directed by Steve Kloves, a “slow, teasing, rapturously moody romance.”11:30 A.M. (Flix) GREEN CARD (1990) Brontë (Andie MacDowell), an American botanist, and George (Gérard Depardieu), a French musician, construct an instant marriage so she can get a plant-filled New York apartment unavailable to a single person and he can find work in the United States in this comedy directed by Peter Weir. Then the Immigration and Naturalization Service comes knocking. “The film’s charms are as picture-perfect as anything George and Brontë manage to manufacture,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times.4:30 P.M. (Oxygen) JULIE & JULIA (2009) In yet another of her Oscar-nominated performances, Meryl Streep plays the chef Julia Child in this film written and directed by Nora Ephron. Amy Adams is Julie Powell, who spends a year working her way through “Mastering the Art of French Cooking” (Child was one of the authors) and blogging about it. “By now this actress has exhausted every superlative that exists, and to suggest that she has outdone herself is only to say that she’s done it again,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times about Ms. Streep. “Her performance goes beyond physical imitation, though she has the rounded shoulders and the fluting voice down perfectly.”8 P.M. (Fox) HELL’S KITCHEN Season 14 begins as 18 new contestants compete for a career-changing grand prize by creating their signature dishes in front of a live audience. The winning team will then dine with William Shatner. In “New Girl,” at 9, Jess (Zooey Deschanel) and Cece (Hannah Simone) take a walk of shame back to the loft — and encounter a familiar face — after partying all night with Bearclaw (Josh Gad). And in “The Mindy Project,” at 9:30, Mindy (Mindy Kaling) has a hard time attracting patients to her new fertility clinic since she hasn’t actually ever succeeded in helping anyone conceive.8 P.M. (13) THE JEWISH JOURNEY: AMERICA Andrew Goldberg chronicles Jewish immigration to North America, from arrivals in the mid-17th century through World War II, the creation of Israel and beyond.10 P.M. (Lifetime) BORN IN THE WILD Women give birth outdoors.What’s Streaming NowJOYCE DiDONATO MASTER CLASS AT CARNEGIE HALL As part of her Perspectives residency at Carnegie Hall, Ms. DiDonato is a mentor to four young opera singers — the sopranos Alison King and Narea Son, the mezzo-soprano Kayleigh Decker and the tenor Gerard Schneider — across three days in solos and duets by Mozart and Handel. (medici.tv)Advertisement