AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimNot every work of music written during the so-called Romantic period fits the most common definition of that word: describing something expressing, or conducive to, amorous feelings. Perhaps the Highly Strung period would be a more accurate way to characterize the 19th century, when raw sensitivity and indulgence in heightened emotions — be they anger, foreboding or desire — prevailed in music.Although highly strung would be an excellent way to sum up the pieces by Mahler, Schumann and Brahms in “Romantic Piano Quartets,” which the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center presented on Sunday at Alice Tully Hall, there was, tucked into the roiling, brazen music, one moment of unabashed, swoon-on-a-fainting-couch romance: the Andante of Schumann’s Quartet in E flat. With a melody that rises and falls in big, sighing gestures, it’s a visceral expression of yearning, hopeful and heavy-hearted.The society’s artistic co-directors, the cellist David Finckel and the pianist Wu Han, joined the violinist Daniel Hope and the violist Paul Neubauer in a performance of deep tenderness, passing the melody from one player to another with a sort of protective pride. When Mr. Neubauer took over the theme, Mr. Hope spun gossamer ornamental scales around it; for Mr. Finckel’s late-movement solo, Ms. Wu created a piano sound so subtle that it registered only as a warm glow.The concert was recorded for Deutsche Grammophon, and will be played on an extensive North American tour. The one curiosity was Mahler’s well-made quartet from his student days, which has a flashy violin cadenza.In moments like this, Mr. Hope’s tart, slightly sharp-edged tone could seem grating. But mostly, the string players’ careful voicing benefited from a sound that held back on vibrato. The Scherzo of Schumann’s quartet began in an agitated whisper from which the lyrical melody rose, polished and shapely. Their reading of Brahms’s Quartet in G minor was structurally convincing, allowing the listener to observe how a decorative element gains emotional weight and becomes, for a while, the focus of attention. They brought a wonderfully weird and gnomish quality to the equestrian theme of the Andante and a bracing dose of testosterone to the Gypsy-inflected last movement. There was more Gypsy swagger in the encore, an arrangement of Hermann Schulenburg’s “Puszta-Märchen,” with which Mr. Neubauer, in the guise of a cafe fiddler, serenaded the delighted front row of the audience.The “Romantic Piano Quartets” program repeats on Tuesday at Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center; 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. Advertisement