By NEIL GENZLINGERMARCH 2, 2015
Take the time restrictions off of a playwright — “Don’t worry about saying what you have to say in two-and-a-half hours or less” — and what do you get? Something that looks like “Billy & Billie,” a new half-hour, 10-episode series about stepsibling romance from Neil LaBute that begins Tuesday on DirecTV’s Audience Network.That’s not so much a criticism as a warning. Mr. LaBute is of course a playwright, often an attention-getting one, with a résumé that includes “Fat Pig” and “reasons to be pretty.” The word “provocative” tends to be attached to his theatrical work.“LaBute’s plays are, in fact, so provocative,” one article in The New York Times Magazine explained, “that some past audience members have walked out midplay or screamed out ‘kill the playwright’ or slapped an actor’s face after a performance.”Don’t expect to have that reaction to “Billy & Billie.” The premise might seem tabooish — it’s the basis of a whole subgenre of heavy-breathing romance novels — but Mr. LaBute is going for something more subtle. Yes, Billy (Adam Brody) and Billie (Lisa Joyce) are trying to figure out how guilty they should feel, but at the same time they’re interacting like feuding brother and sister and like ordinary young people navigating the casual hookup scene. It’s a multiple-personality pileup in rom-com form, drolly served.AdvertisementWe don’t get to see this relationship start; the show opens with a morning-after scene. And, lest we think passion is going to be the point, that scene quickly focuses on a toilet that won’t flush.Billy is catnip to women — in addition to bedding his stepsister, he is involved with a co-worker, and the waitress at a diner everyone frequents also wants him. That diner is telling. A “Seinfeld” sensibility reigns here: Nothing much happens in any given episode of “Billy & Billie.” Mr. LaBute is in no hurry.AdvertisementThat’s sometimes frustrating; you’re left wanting a bit more pith, as well as more back story. But there are wry rewards in the exchanges between Billy and Billie, Mr. Brody (“The O.C.”) embodying reticence, Ms. Joyce (“A Master Builder”) working a profanity-laced mumblecore. Should they feel shame? Should they stop? Are they allowed to be jealous? Are they allowed to be needy? These themes might have fit tidily into a play, but life is rarely tidy.Billy & BillieDirecTV, Tuesday nights at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time.Created and written by Neil LaBute; Chris Long, Bart Peters, Mr. LaBute and Tim Harms, executive producers.WITH: Adam Brody (Billy) and Lisa Joyce (Billie).A version of this review appears in print on March 3, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Taboo Love That’s All in the Family.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.