Season 2, Episode 1What happens to a whodunit after the case is cracked?By the time it ended nearly two years ago, the first season of “Broadchurch” had established itself as one of the all-time great TV murder mysteries. The series became the highest-rated drama in Britain in 2013 and the finale was a full-fledged cultural phenomenon, breaking Twitter records that not even “Downton Abbey” had approached. The episode ended with closure and justice: the killer of young Danny Latimer revealed himself. The mystery was over.The challenge for the show’s creator, Chris Chibnall, in Season 2 (read Mike Hale’s review here), then, was to create something from the rubble. He wastes no time: Episode 1 is a taut exercise in frantic world-building that immediately attempts to recreate last season’s high-wire act. A court case begins, a slew of new characters is introduced, and an old murder mystery is reopened; the cycle starts anew.At the beginning of the episode, we are reunited with the odd couple detective team of Alec Hardy (David Tennant) and Ellie Miller (Olivia Colman), both haggard and grieving. Despite Hardy’s success on the case, redemption and good health are nowhere to be found. Meanwhile, Miller has been reduced to going after speeding violators with frosty fury while wearing a little green smock.The Latimer family remains at home, in recovery mode, and is pulled back into despair when Danny’s killer, Joe Miller, decides to plead not guilty.“Nobody’s innocent,” Joe, in jail, tells the vicar Paul Coates. “Everyone’s hiding things.” This truth — that everybody in this quiet seaside town has something lurking behind the charming facade — essentially drove the first season. But by refusing to separate himself from the pack, Joe drags the whole town through the legal mud.In doing so, he launches the show’s courtroom plot line, which at this point still feels out of place — and not just because we’re briefly transported to London legal offices, their startling shininess at odds with the feel of Broadchurch. After submerging ourselves deeply into the small town’s wonky set of characters, we’re yanked right into an ego showdown between two lawyers: the slick, cheeky defense attorney Sharon Bishop (Marianne Jean-Baptiste), who seemingly has sins to atone for herself, and the out-of-retirement prosecutor Jocelyn, played with stubborn dignity and bitter regret by the great Charlotte Rampling. They look to be a dynamic pair in their chilly, sarcastic tête-à-tête on the beach, but here’s hoping they don’t take precious airtime from Colman and Tennant, one of television’s greatest nonromantic couples.Chibnall knows he can’t simply turn the show into a legal drama. (“They’ve got to go through the indignity of a full trial,” the reporter Maggie complains, perhaps speaking for the audience.) So he also turns to the elephant in the room from last season: Sandbrook, the murder case that slipped through Hardy’s fingers, causing him to flee to Broadchurch in the first place. After nibbling around that case’s edges for an entire season, the show wastes no time in introducing the major players: the accused killer Lee Ashworth (James D’Arcy), who arrives on a hillside like an apparition, and his terrified wife Claire (Eve Myles). It might seem too easy for Chibnall to use a back story to drive the present one — but at this point, it’s not surprising that the show would be constantly looking over its shoulder — and the characters, too, for that matter. At any rate, we still get plenty of peak-form Tennant, far more Barty Crouch Jr. than Doctor Who: accent as knotty as the seaside cliffs, eyes bulging, struggling to keep up with the narrative’s accelerated pace. Last season, evidence unfolded in snatches of dialogue and tight camera angles. Now, like an overeager prosecutor, the show presents lots of information and characters all at once.The symbolism is still potent: the episode ends with the digging up of Danny Latimer’s body.New couples: Paul Coates and Becca Fischer get together wholesomely, while Mark Latimer and Tom (Ellie’s son) sneak out to the trailer park to play FIFA.Funniest moment: Ellie rejects a stilted hug offer from Hardy, cementing Colman and Tennant’s delightful non-chemistry:
 “You want a hug?”
 “What? No! What’s the matter with you?”
 “People do that.”
 “Not you.”