AdvertisementSupported byThe Art of CollectingBy Hannah OlivennesAfter opening his first gallery in Paris more than 15 years ago, Kamel Mennour, who was born in Algeria and raised in France, now represents some of the most established artists in the world, including Martin Parr, Huang Yong Ping and Anish Kapoor. He has showcased his artists’ work at fairs in New York, Hong Kong, Abu Dhabi and Basel. This year he is adding London by taking part in the Frieze Art Fair.Mr. Mennour spoke recently with Hannah Olivennes about his background, his work and what happens when art and politics collide.Q. What made you decide to come to Frieze London this year? A. All our fair booths are statements — a very precise selection. For a long time, I preferred to only take part in the FIAC fair in Paris. But this year, I was thinking that we should bring [the French artist] Camille Henrot to the English audience and bring it to an interesting spot like Frieze London. I asked her if she could bring something for Frieze, and she created what is the next step of the project she presented at the Lyon Biennale. I thought it could be a very interesting project for people who saw her there, to see the next step in her process.Q. Is the French audience different from the English one? A. That’s what I’ve been told. I’m ashamed to say I have not been visiting fairs in London so much, so I’ll have to let you know what I think after I go this year!Q. Where is the next big place for art? A. We are in the Internet generation. People are connected all over the world. So a good artist can be in Botswana or Greenland and still show his art. Before, you had big cities like Paris or New York, but that’s finished now. You can live anywhere. It’s interesting to see how the art world has become so global — thanks to the Internet, but also thanks to cheap travel tickets.Q. What does being in Frieze London mean for your gallery? Are you expanding globally? A. One day I’ll be in Shanghai, the next I’m in Beijing and then back in Paris. We need to go and promote our artists all over the world. It’s a very interesting life, even if sometimes I’m afraid. I’m ambitious and excited but I also have five kids, young ones. It’s also important not to forget where your roots are, and part of that is taking your children to school every morning. So even though I love spending time at fairs, I will only be in Frieze for three days, and will go back to Paris, and to my real life, to take my children to school.Q. What is your real life? Can you tell your story in a few lines? A. I’m living my dream. When I started, I was 23 and studying economics to become a banker. To pay my university fees, I started to sell small paintings door to door and it became an obsession. I just wanted to be in this beautiful world that is art, and so I persevered. And I became addicted; learning about what art meant before and what art means today, from Rembrandt’s “The Night Watch” to new cutting-age artists.Q. Is your success an example of French integration? A. Absolutely not. I could have been called Patrick or Michel. I was raised in France and was lucky enough that my mother always pushed me to work. If I’m good, I want people to say I’m good. If I’m bad, I want people to say I’m bad, never mind if my name is Kamel. It’s not about being from an Arab background. I’m very proud of my origins and never saw them as a complex. I’m like everyone else. I’m not one to say I was held back by the fact that I come from a minority. If anything, it empowered me. I am totally French but also totally Algerian and I love that combination. And my work is international so it gives me a lot of perspective.Q. What advice would you give a young person who wants to succeed in the art business? A. It’s all down to work, work and work. And drinking in all the books, shows, museums and exhibitions. You can’t achieve your passion if you are not working with all your heart. But also you must meet with artists, listen to them, speak with them. It’s always about the artists, not about collectors. It’s about being with your artists and trying to understand as much as you can what they want to express to the world, because artists are the windows and the witnesses of our society and its fragility. But yes, I also work like a madman.Q. The latest exhibit by Anish Kapoor in Versailles was vandalized last month with anti-Semitic graffiti. Mr. Kapoor had decided to integrate the graffiti into his work as a reflection on hate, but a court ordered the inscriptions to be removed. How did this incident affect you, and how does politics intersect with your work in general?A. In this case it’s not politics, because Mr. Kapoor had the support of the president and of the culture minister, Fleur Pellerin. It came from a push by a certain fringe of politics, the radical far-right extremists that exist in our country now, who can’t understand that creation can be part of the dialogue.Mr. Kapoor simply wanted to create a debate around a crime that was a demonstration of racism. He didn’t want to quickly wash it away, he wanted to recreate something around the inscriptions, because it’s extremely important not to forget. Yes, it was violent and it was cruel, but we mustn’t forget that it happened.It’s a tragedy because people were not talking about the art — they were just talking about the controversy around it. And that’s a shame. As a gallery owner, but also as someone who wants to give art a role in society, I was very upset about it.And Mr. Kapoor was upset, too. Initially he was calling me several times a day; he was shocked and couldn’t understand. He was angry that they took his creation away. My job was to calm him down and find the best way for him to have the last word. He found the idea of masking parts of [the graffiti] with gold leaf, a delicate material that reflects the fragility of creation, but also a connection to the gold leaf that covers the fountains of Versailles. So while you can’t read the profanity, the visitor can still see that something is there.And that is art, in a way. Art needs to correct society sometimes. It may be a utopian view of art, but that’s definitely what I’ve learned.Advertisement