•PhotoTori (Callie Thorne),  Stan (Noah Emmerich) and Corningware in the "Born Again" episode of  "The Americans" on FX.Credit Craig Blankenhorn/FX


Season 3, Episode 6: ‘Born Again.’Товарищи, вы все во внимании?
(Comrades, are you in the moment?)“Paige, this is your most defiant act of protest yet,” Pastor Tim says of her baptism.As she is submerged, looking (for a chilling moment) dead, she calls to mind the scene from the first episode this season when her mother, in another tub, remembered when she had flung a young and frightened Paige into a swimming pool. This time, Paige has chosen for herself, but there are plenty of grown-ups waiting to subvert the initiate.Her spiritual rebirth sets the tone for the episode, which is short on sex and casual violence but full of tectonic shifts for the characters and hints of what may  be in store for the remainder of the season. The writers are teasing us with past and future strands that flick at the next generation and a post-Cold War world around the corner.What’s the opposite of bride of Christ?
Philip’s focus this week is to come up with ways to distract Kimmy from sex — and from the woman in rubber gloves taking an excruciatingly long time to put a bug in her daddy’s briefcase. Philip comes armed with Pink Floyd on cassette, which Kimmy adores, but not as much as she would enjoy a bath with Philip.
She goes solo to the tub while he stands watch for Rubber Glove Lady and then is thrown into the arms of a towel-wrapped Kimmy in an effort to keep her from looking out the door of her room.Finally, he has to tell her the truth about why he doesn’t want to splash in the Mr. Bubble with her. It’s because he wants a new life with God.Her reply: “Are you breaking up with me?” (O.K., that was intentional comic relief, right?)In the master bedroom.
Elizabeth and Philip enjoy the superspliff he produces when he arrives home after his visit with Kimmy. Smoking it in the window together — “House of Cards” style — Philip and Elizabeth  giggle more than Paige has all season.“Jesus really came through for me tonight,” Philip says, breaking into a Woody Woodpecker laugh.In a way, this scene was more intimate than many others they had shared, and it broke the tension we see in Elizabeth each time Philip is out with his minor major asset.Guess who came to dinner.
Tori, a.k.a. the coming-on-strong ESTie who asked Stan out. And so we’re back to the Jennings dining room. When Henry, that adroit little master of dinnertime chat, brings church into an explanation of EST, we get a big eye roll from Elizabeth as she passes the Corningware.Back at Stan’s for some après-dinner sexercise, Tori detects that his mind may be wandering. A big clue? He won’t take her to the bedroom, and his glassy eyes reflect something other than desire. Silly Stan. Hasn’t Sandra taught him anything? Hasn’t EST taught him anything? Can he ever live in the moment? When Tori asked, “Where is your head at?” I had a ready, if impertinent, answer. At the Bureau.
What does it mean when Agent Aderholt swings into action, moving the classified files from the stand in the Bureau corridor? Is it simply a way to see more of Martha? Does it make it harder for her to spirit away bonbons of information for Clark?And why is he talking to Stan’s old classmate and then delivering bad news about another friend from his past? Is this Aderholt’s idea of being a pal — or is his interest more strictly professional?Were you proud of Stan when, after calling Sandra, he simply listened to the greeting on her answering machine and hung up without talking? (Of course he sort of erased that by later impulsively strong-arming her about attending the memorial service in Chicago.)It occurred to me that now that he seems to acknowledge his marriage is over, and he thinks his son didn’t miss him when he went undercover for three years, that he might be ready to disappear again. What does he do best? Undercover work. I know it’s hard to believe and maybe it won’t turn out to true, but if that is his area of expertise, perhaps there is an opportunity for Stan now?Gabriel, not the angel.
The charming, avuncular Gabriel tightens the screws on Philip by telling him his son (remember, his old flame Irina said the baby she had years ago was his child?) is fighting in Afghanistan now. So Philip has a stake in the war, and now he knows that Gabriel knows about the son. But Elizabeth doesn’t. Philip belongs to Gabriel now, I think.This news comes in the same breath as Gabriel’s blunt order to Philip to get moving with the sex, already, or he won’t have access to Kimmy’s father’s briefcase frequently enough. Somewhere in there is a new euphemism for sex.Later, when Gabriel entertains Elizabeth, she assures him she is grooming Paige for a K.G.B. career, despite Philip’s objections. “He knows I’m going ahead without him,” she says confidently.“But you’re not going ahead,” says Gabriel. What does he know that we don’t?Gabriel relates that the National Intelligence Service of South Africa is said to be planning violent attacks on the United States. He sounds righteous, dripping disdain as he talks about the most racist government on the planet, and we want him to be righteous, but for him, even fighting apartheid is only a means to an end: humiliating Reagan (who really didn’t need much help with that).And so we have a reason for the existence of Hans Hopley, who is a bundle of barely restrained passions and is positively rabid about the grave injustices back home. He is ready to act, with very little training, on the first opportunity that arises. It turns out he was right in identifying a 19-year-old as a spy for P.W. Botha’s South African white minority government. Elizabeth scoffs at the idea (how quickly we forget), but Gabriel, supplying some exposition for viewers who don’t have the history of South Africa at their fingertips, takes note of the fact that the movement against apartheid at the time was centered on campuses.A new Paige.
Paige, even more prized as a pawn than usual this week, is smothered with unaccustomed admiration by both parents. At the same time, they fairly thwack her on the head with their strong but vague-sounding opinions about her future, leaving her confused as to what they are talking about. Drinking and drugs?Elizabeth makes a renewed effort to connect with Paige, drawing a parallel between her own civil rights activism in the past and the protests against South Africa  conducted by  Paige’s church. Elizabeth introduces the concept of the next level of activism (and by this she probably means the actions of Angela Davis and friends, a leap of 10 or 12 levels, at least) another idea that appears bewildering to Paige, who may have her own plans.In the garage, earlier, when she spoke with her mother, was there an air of finality in Paige’s comment: “It’s been really nice hanging out with you.” Is she going somewhere?Great moments.• Nina is positively Garboesque (in “Camille,” perhaps?) as she seals her betrayal … er, development … of her cellmate, Evi. Curled up against the wall, refusing the food Evi presses on her so she can keep up her strength, Nina declaims: “For what? I have nothing. No one.” After the job is done, it’s happy hour for Nina with wine and lots to eat.• Philip lurking near the school-bus stop in his Jimmy-James identity. It’s a good thing the police didn’t roll by. To call his look suspicious is an understatement.Comments on the comments.The analysis of the pivotal scene about Philip’s flashbacks to his house-of-horrors sex education was nothing short of exceptional. Readers, your parsing of the aftermath that unfolded in bed with Elizabeth showed a trust in the honesty of their intimacy that had eluded me.I still think the violent, coerced initiations to sex they both endured must underlie their every encounter, and that they can never be fully open with each other. Elizabeth seemed to have her deepest relationship with Gregory, and we only saw a glimpse of it, in Season 1, although she does go back to the old neighborhood with an uncomprehending Paige this week.And thank you, Comrade, for your précis on cannabis cultivation in Afghanistan in the 1980s. The details you marshaled are such that I can almost hear Cheech and Chong in the background.Projecting Paige into national politics via Bob Jones University is by far the best trajectory predicted so far. I am envisioning the T-shirts.Товарищи, мы все часть этой борьбы.
(Comrades, we are all part of the struggle.)