For the last eight years the veteran New York magazine art critic Jerry Saltz has built a lively and enviable following on Facebook, which he has described as his 21st-century version of art haunts like the Cedar Tavern or Max’s Kansas City. But on Wednesday, Mr. Saltz was seized by the elbows and shown the door, digitally speaking.He said he received a standard message informing him that access to his account had been suspended because of complaints registered with Facebook. While his public page remains, he cannot post to it. Although the nature of the complaints was not spelled out, Mr. Saltz said he believed them to have been generated by funny, provocative pictures and captions he has been posting for several months, poking fun at the art world (and sometimes at himself). A spokesman for Facebook said in an email that the company would not comment on specific accounts like Mr. Saltz’s but added that members can temporarily lose access to their profiles for violating Facebook’s community standards.One post last month showed a pornographic image from a Pompeian fresco, with the exhortation: “Stay on top of things.” One from last year, linked to an article he had written criticizing what he saw as an increasingly conservative viewpoint in the art world, included images from medieval manuscripts and paintings showing images of penises and people defecating and being gruesomely martyred.“It’s a cumulative thing,” Mr. Saltz said in an interview.  “The posts are called sexist, misogynistic and abusive,” he said. “And then I’m called sexist misogynistic and abusive. So it’s both.”He has built up 55,000 followers and friends on Facebook and more than 150,000 followers on Twitter and Instagram.//t.co/ymql21Jd67— Jerry Saltz (@jerrysaltz) 4 Mar 15Mr. Saltz admitted that he sometimes posted the images on all of his social-media accounts to push buttons, particularly ones in the art world.“Some of these images I know are pretty weird,” he said. “No question. Some of them get under my skin.” He added that a friend had complained to him recently that too many of his images were either sexual or of women (medieval or otherwise). But he said he believed his followers and readers were simply being too literal about the posts and should lighten up.“A lot of people are taking their energy to police other people’s energy, and I find that a bit perverted — to enforce your morality on someone else,” said Mr. Saltz (he is married to Roberta Smith, co-chief art critic of The New York Times).The online reaction to his ouster seemed to be generally on his side, though with an undercurrent of tongue-in-cheek schadenfreude. “For now, it looks like we’ll all just have to live with the cruel fate of a Saltz-less Facebook,” wrote Cait Munro on Artnet. “Mark Zuckerberg, can you hear our cries of agony?”Of whether he plans to appeal to the Facebook gods for re-entry to the fold, Mr. Saltz said he was unsure: “For today at least, good riddance. It’s the land of like.”