Season 3, Episode 10: Chapter 36Read all of our “House of Cards” recaps.We must be getting near the end of the season, because there’s a lot crammed into this episode. To review: Petrov continues to run circles around the White House over the Jordan Valley peacekeeping mission. And with matters going to hell abroad and at home, the Underwood 2016 campaign looks as if it’s in deep trouble.We open with Frank, wearing that Potus bomber jacket that’s too big, taking questions from voters at a town hall meeting. An older woman with a concerned expression on her face takes the microphone. She looks like trouble. Was the United States behind that covert mission that went awry in the Jordan Valley? Frank won’t answer. That’s classified. But sir, she presses him, why are we even asking questions if you won’t answer them? Frank, back at the White House, acknowledges that the mess overseas is knocking him off message. Remy suggests screening the questions at future town halls. (Yes, this actually happens in politics. But more on that later.) Then Frank really gets flummoxed when he’s given a message: Tim, his crush from Season 1’s Sentinel episode, called and wants to speak with him. In his private quarters, Frank pours himself a stiff drink. He calls Tim and finds out that Yates has been calling him asking for an interview. “What did he say?” Frank practically screeches, his voice ringing in panic. After he hangs up, he demands to see Yates right away. In person. His personal entanglements continue to cloud his better judgment. And with the Jordan Valley situation escalating, this is no time for a foggy head. He’s being impetuous. When Petrov announces that he will violate an Israeli order for a no-fly zone by flying through it in his own personal plane, Frank insists he’s going to visit the Jordan Valley himself and meet Petrov on the ground. Claire warns him that this is a horrible idea. She even pleads with Alexi, the Russian United Nations envoy, on the phone. But she learns that he’s being recalled to Moscow. Dismissed, he implies to her, because he tipped her off that the Russians shot up their own troops to sabotage the peacekeeping mission.On his way over to the Middle East, Frank gets a sense of how dangerous this is going to be. His military advisers tell him he’d better get suited up in a helmet and a Kevlar vest. When he rolls into Petrov’s compound, a shabby scattering of concrete bunkers, Frank makes note of the atmospherics. “You do have a flair for the theatrical,” Frank goads him.Petrov asks for Frank to scale back missile defense, as they previously agreed, and then stuns him with a final condition: Claire must be removed as U.N. ambassador. When Frank resists, Petrov plays the situation masterfully, sowing doubt in Frank’s mind about whether he and Alexi played Claire. Did we blow up our own men? Petrov asks. Maybe. But she believed it and in doing so, persuaded Frank to believe it. Petrov makes Frank believe that he believes they are intellectual equals (though I seriously doubt Petrov actually thinks this). He retells an old war story about slitting a man’s throat and then tells Frank that he always leaves out the kicker: He decapitated the guy and put the severed head on a donkey. See, you’re just like me, Frank, Petrov tells him.Frank flies back to Washington. Claire is waiting up when he returns. He delivers the bad news. “I told you it was a mistake to go.” He tells her she was played – though he delivers the news with more certainty than Petrov gave him. He decides to get loaded and call Yates. Hey, the guy is on a roll with bad decisions, so why not just go with it?I had to cover my face with a pillow watching Frank look adoringly into Yates’s eyes during this scene. They talk about Yates’s hustler days. They talk about Tim. Frank starts caressing Yates’s hand. Frank finally exercises some sound judgment and sends Yates home. We still don’t know Yates’s real motivations. Are they mercenary or genuine? Given the answer to that question with most characters on this show, I’ll leave that to you careful readers/watchers. But as I’ve said before, this can’t end well.The Claire/Frank story line in this episode ends with humiliation for Claire. We see her talking with a campaign adviser, about which hairstyle tested better with focus groups. Iowans like her blond. And now, with no ambassadorial duties to discharge, Claire goes back to being just first lady. We know she’s not one to sit idle, however. And there are still three episodes left.The two other story lines that are left wide open here are Doug and Gavin/Max. Gavin/Max fesses up to not really having AIDS and not really being Max. Lisa can’t understand. You don’t need to, he tells her. Just call this guy Doug Stamper if you ever get in trouble, he says, handing her Doug’s number. (He also leaves her a guinea pig as a parting gift. Is it Cashew himself? Recall how creepily he stroked Cashew last season as if he were Dr. Evil.)Then there’s Doug. He seems to find something freeing in his family. He enjoys a little quality time with his nieces. We actually see him smile. And his brother makes one of the most revealing lines of the season, “You’ve always been running from something.” Will he stop?Most realistic political moment: When Frank’s campaign adviser suggests screening the questions at the town hall meetings so there aren’t any more pesky old ladies demanding answers about sensitive matters like war and peace. This actually happens from time to time. (I know. As a campaign reporter, I’ve seen it.) Town hall meetings and many other public events that have the appearance of being spontaneous often aren’t.Most unrealistic political moment: When Frank rolls into the Jordan Valley in a little convoy wearing a flak jacket and a helmet. It was kind of laughable to see the man who is supposed to be president bouncing around inside a Humvee as he is driven through one of the most dangerous regions in the world, guarded by just a few armored vehicles. I’ve seen President Obama taken around Washington in bigger motorcades. And that bunker Petrov was in? Osama bin Laden had nicer quarters. Read our Episode 11 recap here.