Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.SCHUMANN: String Quartets No. 1, 2 and 3
Ying Quartet
(Sono Luminus DSL-92184)
Though the 200th anniversary of Schumann’s birth was celebrated in 2010, this year, for whatever reasons, has seen a burst of new Schumann recordings, especially of the four symphonies. Now the impressive Ying Quartet offers this rewarding recording of Schumann’s three string quartets (No. 1 in A minor, No. 2 in F, No. 3 in A). The ensemble, originally comprised of four siblings, came to attention in 1992 upon the members’ graduation from the Eastman School of Music. (Three of the siblings remain; Ayano Ninomiya has been first violinist since 2010.) These insightful performances balance Romantic impetuosity with refinement and intelligence. (The album comes with a standard CD and an additional Pure Audio Blu-ray version.) (Anthony Tommasini)BRUCE LEVINGSTON: ‘Heavy Sleep’
Bruce Levingston, pianist
(Sono Luminus DSL-92183)
Death and rebirth are the themes of this deeply personal, exquisite album. The pianist Bruce Levingston brings heart-wrenching vulnerability and tenderness to a series of preludes, fugues and fantasies by Bach that form the spiritual nucleus of the CD. Layered around them are Bach arrangements by Reger, Siloti and Gyorgy Kurtag that offer dreamlike glimpses of the master’s music and allow Mr. Levingston to draw on his extraordinarily nuanced palette of pianissimos. The first and last track are two contemporary works, both meditative and beautiful: Timo Andres’s “Heavy Sleep” and Mohammed Fairouz’s “El Male Rachamim,” offered as a prayerful tribute to Mr. Fairouz’s mentor Ligeti. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)BACH: Well-Tempered Clavier, Book I
Pierre-Laurent Aimard, pianist
(Deutsche Grammophon 479 2784; two discs)
In 2008, the brilliant French pianist Pierre-Laurent Aimard’s Deutsche Grammophon recording of Bach’s “The Art of Fugue” became an improbable chart-topper on iTunes. His new recording of Bach’s Well-Tempered Clavier, Book I could follow suit. As he demonstrated when he played Book I at Carnegie Hall in November, Mr. Aimard is a probing and imaginative interpreter of Bach. While projecting the internal workings — the physics of the music, especially its ingenious contrapuntal intricacy — of these preludes and fugues is paramount for Mr. Aimard, he revels in the contrasts of character, beauty and joy in this towering work. (Tommasini)FRANÇOIS DEVIENNE: Flute Concertos Nos. 1 to 4
Patrick Gallois, flutist; Swedish Chamber Orchestra
(Naxos 8.573230; one disc)
A breezy, graceful cheer suffuses this lovely recording of flute concertos by François Devienne, one of the late 18th-century masters of the genre. This is home territory for the French flutist Patrick Gallois and the blazing, fleet-footed Swedish Chamber Orchestra, and their collaboration feels natural and joyful. (Fonseca-Wollheim)‘VISIONS FUGITIVES’
Works by Prokofiev, Medtner and Chopin
Anna Gourari, pianist
(ECM New Series 2384 481157)
I can’t imagine why Prokofiev’s 20 tart, strangely quirky piano miniatures “Visions Fugitives” so seldom turn up in performance, even individually, let alone as a complete set. Prokofiev described the pieces, completed in 1917, many of them portraits of friends, as “doggies” because of their musical bite. The Russian pianist Anna Gourari plays them with plenty of bite as well as pianistic flair on this new recording, which includes a Nikolai Medtner miniature, “Fairy Tale,” and a spacious, poetic account of Chopin’s Third Piano Sonata. (Tommasini)SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)