Season 3, Episode 9: Chapter 35Read all of our “House of Cards” recaps.Spoilers ahead.Doug is fully off the wagon. The Middle East peace deal is in flames. Petrov cannot be talked off the ledge. And the Underwood campaign is imperiled in Iowa. There’s a lot to digest here. But before we get to the various political and international crises, it feels worth pausing to take in the opening scenes with Yates, Kate and Frank. Frank’s antennae are up. He knows something’s going on between those two after he catches them in a flirty moment on Air Force One. As I said last time, I don’t see this ending well.Another problematic relationship rears its head here: Remy and Jackie. He loses it after getting pulled over by the cops (his ire is already up after being called a chauffeur by Harlan Traub, who we’ll get to below) and gets thrown in the back of a squad car. After the police realize who he is and let him go, he shows up in the lobby of Jackie’s apartment and kisses her. Remember, she’s a family woman now with kids, a husband. She even cooks every now and then we’re told. She doesn’t pull away exactly. But she’s got too much on her plate: a fake campaign to run, keeping Frank happy so he names her veep and the whole domestic thing. But these are minor diversions in the larger chaos enveloping the main characters. Frank’s campaign swing through Iowa has to be cut short after eight Russian soldiers are killed in an attack of murky origins in the Jordan Valley. Frank is in such a rush to get back to Washington that he ignores the advice of one of his campaign advisers and insists on bringing Traub, the chairman of the Iowa Democratic Party, on Air Force One – a no-no with the Federal Elections Commission. Frank had to cancel their meeting and wants to make it up to the guy. But Kate sees him on the plane and starts asking questions. Claire heads to the U.N. to find out what’s going on with the Russians. They won’t let anyone else near the site of the attack, raising questions about who’s really behind it. The Russian ambassador, playing coy, says in essence that Petrov is behind the attack. He sabotaged his own troops so he could have an excuse to pull Russia out of the peacekeeping mission. Claire rushes back to Washington to tell Frank and his military commanders. They’re dubious of her intel. They think it’s a trap. Frank overrules them and orders an American covert mission to investigate what really happened. From the situation room, they all listen as it goes terribly awry. (The shock on Frank’s face when he hears that shot is one of the few times on this show we’ve actually seen him surprised.) One American is killed. Petrov calls and accuses Frank of trying to humiliate him again. He’s still sore over the Corrigan episode and Claire. Frank accuses him of killing his own men. He denies. Rattled by the mission’s failure, Frank can’t seem to get a read on Petrov. But Doug, not Petrov, is where the real implosion is this episode. Gavin finally gets a location on Rachel. But it’s not good news. She’s dead. Doug at first refuses to believe it. He stares at the bloodied face in a picture Gavin hands him as proof. Doug loses it. He gets bombed at a bar and almost gets his face beaten in again. He stumbles home, barfs on the floor and then watches that black-and-white feed from Santa Fe again hoping he’ll glimpse her. (But we saw her crossing the street there a few episodes back, didn’t we? I’m not resigned to the idea that she’s dead yet.)Doug calls Seth and asks him to tell Frank that his mother has died. Frank gets the message and, realizing that it’s a signal, invites Doug into the Oval Office. Doug hands him the envelope with Rachel’s picture. Frank asks if it was Doug who did the deed but then stops asking questions. You never know what kind of incriminating stuff is going to end up coming back to haunt you from the Oval Office. Doug tells Frank he’s drunk and fesses up to working for Dunbar. He says that all he ever wanted was to be useful to Frank again as some kind of double agent inside her campaign. Doug insists he won’t go to rehab. He tells Frank he’s “not Peter Russo” and that he “won’t go like he did.” In a tender (sad? pathetic?) moment, he doubles over and rests his head on Frank’s knee, grasping his leg for dear life.With a few episodes left and a body count that’s low by Underwood standards, I’m guessing someone still has to be this season’s Peter Russo. We’ll see if it’s Doug or not.Read our Episode 10 recap here.