AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8:05 P.M. (Starz Cinema) THE DREAMERS (2004) Louis Garrel (top), Eva Green (center) and Michael Pitt (above) portray the points of a photogenic triangle in this drama from Bernardo Bertolucci (“Last Tango in Paris”) about an American who befriends French twins in Paris during the 1968 student riots. This adaptation of Gilbert Adair’s novel “The Holy Innocents” is “disarmingly sweet and completely enchanting,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “The sex in this movie is, as measured by the display of body parts and the amount of time the actors spend out of their clothes, more explicit than even the most notorious scenes in ‘Last Tango,’ ” he said. “But it is hard to imagine a voyeur more benevolent than Mr. Bertolucci, whose eager scrutiny of the eros of the young is, like Jeremy Irons’s in ‘Stealing Beauty,’ less a matter of prurience than of an honest, nostalgic appreciation of natural human vitality.”8:30 P.M. (TV5Monde) ELLES ÉTAIENT EN GUERRE (1914-18) Nathalie Baye narrates this 2014 French documentary, which examines World War I from the perspective of Marie Curie, Edith Wharton, Mata Hari, Rosa Luxemburg and Louise Bodin. 9 P.M. (Cooking) EXTRA VIRGIN The actress Debi Mazar and her musician husband, Gabriele Corcos, scour a Tuscan flea market for traditional cooking utensils to take back to their Brooklyn kitchen.9 P.M. (HBO) THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY (1999) Starting with the loan of a jacket with a Princeton insignia, Tom Ripley, a New York men’s room attendant played by Matt Damon, begins his ascent of the social ladder — then murders his way up the rest of the rungs — in Anthony Minghella’s adaptation of this Patricia Highsmith thriller. Jude Law is Dickie Greenleaf, the scion of a rich American family, whose father has hired Tom to bring him back to the United States from Italy; Gwyneth Paltrow is Marge, who must share Dickie’s affections with his new friend. And Philip Seymour Hoffman is Freddie, who isn’t buying Tom’s act. Writing in The Times, Janet Maslin said the film “offers diabolically smart surprises wherever you care to look.” 9 P.M. (ABC) MODERN FAMILY Jay (Ed O’Neill) and Claire (Julie Bowen) have creative differences when they shoot a commercial for Pritchett Closets in response to their competitor’s clever advertisement. Phil (Ty Burrell), Manny (Rico Rodriguez) and Luke (Nolan Gould) set out to destroy the drone used by a neighbor to spy on Gloria (Sofia Vergara) as she sunbathes. In “black-ish,” at 9:30, Dre (Anthony Anderson) tries to make up for his last-minute wedding with Bow (Tracee Ellis Ross) by planning an elaborate vow-renewal for their 15th anniversary. Then her hippie parents (Anna Deavere Smith and Beau Bridges) show up unannounced.9 P.M. (Fox) EMPIRE Cookie (Taraji P. Henson, left) declares war when she learns how Anika (Grace Gealey) back-stabbed her. Lucious (Terrence Howard) confronts his longtime rival, Billy Beretti (Judd Nelson). And the Lyon sons go to extremes to save Empire Entertainment.10 P.M. (ABC) NASHVILLE Vince Gill and Lorrie Morgan help Rayna (Connie Britton) celebrate the anniversary of her induction into the Grand Ole Opry. Tensions arise when Will (Chris Carmack) is asked to collaborate with a gay songwriter who has made his sexuality public. 10 P.M. (USA) SUITS Harvey (Gabriel Macht) revisits his past after Sean Cahill (Neal McDonough) fails to link Eric Woodall (Zeljko Ivanek), his corrupt boss at the Securities and Exchange Commission, to the corporate raider Charles Forstman (Eric Roberts). What’s Streaming NowTHE NANNY DIARIES (2007) In this adaptation of Emma McLaughlin and Nicola Kraus’s beach read, Annie (Scarlett Johansson), an anthropology student from New Jersey, becomes the latest in a string of nannies hired by the Park Avenue socialite Mrs. X (Laura Linney) to care for her rotten little son. Paul Giamatti is Mr. X, the husband from hell. Writing in The Times, Stephen Holden called Ms. Linney the film’s “one unassailable asset.” (amazon.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement