AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike Hale“CSI: Crime Scene Investigation,” now chugging along in its 15th season, keeps leaving its spinoffs in the dust. “CSI: Miami” gave up after 10 seasons, “CSI: NY” fell away after nine. But the hope for advertising dollars springs eternal, so here we have “CSI: Cyber,” making its debut on CBS on Wednesday night.“Cyber” gives a few tweaks to the old forensics formula. As the title implies, the evidence of the weekly crimes is mostly electronic rather than grossly physical. And where its three forerunners were set in metropolitan police departments, “Cyber” features an F.B.I. unit based in Quantico, Va., that jets off to wherever the action is, like the F.B.I. profilers in CBS’s “Criminal Minds.” (How long until we see a triple crossover among these two shows and “NCIS” involving a terrorist attack on Washington?)The most significant change is at the top of the credits: Patricia Arquette, playing special agent in charge Avery Ryan, is the first female headliner in 35 “CSI” seasons. (Marg Helgenberger’s Catherine Willows was the boss for two seasons of the original, but Ms. Helgenberger was still second banana to Laurence Fishburne, who played one of her subordinates.) In the ways that matter, though, “Cyber” is pure “CSI” — a slick but wooden fantasy of middle-American paranoia in which aberrant criminals face off against hilariously competent crime solvers. The soul of the franchise is summed up by an exchange in the second episode between Ryan and her boss, Simon Sifter (the always welcome Peter MacNicol, with his perfectly calibrated hamminess): “I believe that our target is part of a deviant peer group that encourages violent urges,” Ryan said. Replied Sifter, “And that’s the motive: harm innocent people going about their daily lives just to arouse some sick, exclusive group.” Is that a description of cybercriminals or the producers of CBS police procedurals? “Cyber” is actually less gory than the “CSI” norm, partly because it has to devote so much time to computer code whizzing by on wall-size screens and discussions of Bluetooth sniffers and phishing attacks. Despite their digital aspects — hacking a baby monitor, duping an Uber-like car service — the crimes are reassuringly old-fashioned: child abductions, revenge killings.Ryan’s team is small by ensemble crime drama standards but still requisitely diverse: a pretty-boy weapons guy (James Van Der Beek), a heavyset tech guy (Charley Koontz), a black hacker who was supposed to go to jail (Shad Moss, a.k.a. the rapper Bow Wow) and a social media specialist named Ramirez (Hayley Kiyoko), who ticks off the female, Asian and Latino boxes. The two minority characters are 2015 versions of reform-school kids.Ms. Arquette, who just won an Oscar for “Boyhood,” is perfectly fine in a part that requires very little of her. Alternating tough love for her team, worry and righteous anger, she’s brisk and likable but not as moving or interesting as she often was in her previous TV series, the underrated “Medium” (for which she won a lead-actress Emmy in 2005). To answer what will be the most burning question for some fans of the “CSI” shows: the Who song chosen as the theme for “CSI: Cyber” is the band’s biggest American hit, “I Can See for Miles.” Not bad, though they might have considered “Substitute”: “Substitute your lies for fact/I can see right through your plastic mac.”CSI: CyberCBS, Wednesday nights at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Produced by CBS Television Studios in association with Jerry Bruckheimer Television. Carol Mendelsohn, Ann Donahue, Anthony Zuiker, Pam Veasey, Jerry Bruckheimer and Jonathan Littman, executive producers.WITH: Patricia Arquette (Special Agent Avery Ryan), James Van Der Beek (Agent Elijah Mundo), Peter MacNicol (Simon Sifter), Charley Koontz (Daniel Krumitz), Shad Moss (Brody Nelson) and Hayley Kiyoko (Raven Ramirez).Advertisement