By NEIL GENZLINGERMARCH 3, 2015
Television already has more real estate shows than necessary, but if you can’t get enough of peering inside strangers’ houses, FYI offers a new series on Wednesday night that at least varies the formula. The only trouble is, you have to watch it as if you were touring a fixer-upper. Envision a real estate agent whispering in your ear, “Pay no attention to those holes.”The 10-episode series is “My City’s Just Not That Into Me,” and the gimmick is that Courtney Poulos, described as a “real estate expert,” takes clients who are disenchanted with their current city and tries to find them one they’ll like better. In the premiere, Anne and Tim Miller are thinking about giving up on Nashville.“When I got here, it seemed like a small town,” Ms. Miller says. “It was great. And with the growth of the city, it’s gotten ridiculously expensive to live here.”Ms. Poulos administers a dubious-sounding “My City” personality test and recommends that the couple look at Lubbock, Tex., and Medford, Ore. They do, and we get to compare prices, square footage and lot sizes.The thing is, this show, created in association with Curbed.com (which uses the series to plug itself shamelessly), is of practical value only to the self-employed, the independently wealthy and fugitives, because who else is free to move to any old city that a real estate expert selects? And even if the employment issue were to somehow magically disappear, the show’s cost comparisons don’t go much beyond the sticker price. A house in Lubbock may seem cheap on a Nashville salary, but what is it on a Lubbock salary?Though the premise is thin, “My City” does deliver it with a verve that’s lacking in the real estate shows on Destination America (“Buying Alaska”) and other outlets. Those shows are mostly about the structures, whether a dilapidated backcountry camp or a luxury treehouse. “My City” seems as if it’s going to pay at least a little more attention to the people doing the buying and building.My City’s Just Not That Into MeFYI, Wednesday night at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Produced for FYI by Violet Media. For Violet Media: Melissa Cutlip, executive producer; Jessica Bertulis, co-executive producer. For FYI: Gena McCarthy and Toby Faulkner, executive producers.A version of this review appears in print on March 4, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Looking to Move, but Where?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.