AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Mike HaleTwo years ago I was on the conservative end of the spectrum in my praise for the British mystery series “Broadchurch,” using the words “superior entertainment” but also “intelligent but not particularly original.” Now that the show’s second season has arrived, beginning Wednesday night on BBC America (it finished its run on ITV in Britain last month), I can be in the minority again: I think the second season of “Broadchurch” is better, based on four episodes, in some ways, than the widely, almost slavishly praised first.“Broadchurch” Season 1 had a lot going for it, including excellent performances by its stars, Olivia Colman and David Tennant, and arresting seaside locations that were filmed for a maximum quotient of quiet dread. But its most salient feature was its plot, the extremely well-made, single-minded eight-episode murder mystery (involving the death of a young boy) put together by the show’s creator and writer, Chris Chibnall.That story was like a threshing machine, moving relentlessly through the fictional town of Broadchurch and disposing suspects — the priest, the news vendor, the psychic — like chaff while it exposed the local population’s secrets and resentments. There was something very satisfying about Mr. Chibnall’s sturdy narrative and also something reductive and claustrophobic about it. Everything was a bit too perfect; you could hear the tumblers of the combination falling into place. It rewarded the rational, problem-solving mind but, despite the agonies it depicted, it shortchanged the emotions.Season 2 is, from the start, an entirely messier, more contingent affair, enjoyable in a different and, to me, more appealing way. (Describing it involves some necessary spoilers, beginning now.) By the end of Wednesday night’s premiere, Mr. Tennant’s Detective Alec Hardy is involved in two cases, though his role isn’t quite official in either. One is an unsolved murder and disappearance that rise from his past to haunt him.The other is the murder of Danny Latimer, which was supposedly resolved with the arrest of Joe Miller — the husband of the detective played by Ms. Colman — at the end of Season 1. Mr. Chibnall plays a neat trick on the post-“Killing,” we-demand-a-resolution crowd by having Joe plead not guilty, setting up a season-long courtroom battle in which the entire first season can be re-examined. It enables him to keep all the central characters of Season 1 around without the usual implausibility of plunging the town into a new mystery.It’s also a device to get Ms. Colman’s Ellie Miller back into the center of the story. Having fled to another district and taken a job as a traffic cop, she returns to Broadchurch to hear what she thinks will be her husband’s guilty plea, and the scene in which she rushes to the courthouse and sees Hardy is as moving as anything in Season 1.Once Miller’s there, the pre-emptory, selfish Hardy dragoons her into helping him with his old case, and once again Ms. Colman steals the show. A veteran of British satires like “Peep Show” and “That Mitchell and Webb Look,” she’s a wonderful comic actress, and now even more than before Mr. Tennant is her straight man — Miller has had it, and Hardy has to absorb all of her (amusing) petulance and disgust. Joining most of the Season 1 cast are no fewer than four new regulars. Eve Myles of “Torchwood” and James D’Arcy of “Marvel’s Agent Carter” play figures in the old case, and two distinguished actresses, Charlotte Rampling and Marianne Jean-Baptiste, are excellent as the barristers squaring off in the trial. Some fans may find these additions just another symptom of overstuffing and needless confusion in the new season. I say the more the merrier.Advertisement