By MICHAEL KIMMELMANMARCH 3, 2015
This week, lawmakers in Goshen, N.Y., have a last chance to save an archetype of midcentury modernist architecture — and themselves from going down as reckless stewards of the nation’s heritage.The plan is to gut Paul Rudolph’s Orange County Government Center, strip away much of its distinctive, corrugated concrete and glass exterior and demolish one of its three pavilions, replacing it with a big, soulless glass box. Rudolph, who died in 1997, at 78, was a leading light of American architecture when this building, one of his best and most idealistic, opened nearly half a century ago. Like Rudolph, the center suffered abuse over the years but is now being championed by new fans that recognize his genius, and the latest plan as vandalism.Thursday is the deadline for legislators to override a veto by Steven Neuhaus, the Orange county executive, who seems hell-bent on demolition. In January, Mr. Neuhaus vetoed a bill that would have allowed county officials to consider selling the disputed building to a Manhattan architect who wants to preserve it. The architect, Gene Kaufman, would turn the center into an artists’ residence and exhibition space, a no-brainer.Mr. Kaufman has also proposed designing a new government center, just next door, for millions less than what the county’s present plan is projected to cost. His offer would accomplish everything legislators say they want, and even add Rudolph’s building to the county tax rolls. The center has been closed since 2011: having allowed it to deteriorate for years, county leaders closed it after Hurricane Irene, citing leaks.AdvertisementThis past weekend, The Times Herald-Record, a leading newspaper in the region, pleaded with legislators to reconsider Mr. Kaufman’s proposal.Advertisement“Legislators owe it to the people of the county to listen to his plan, to test the assumptions and to compare it to the plan they are in such a hurry to implement,” the editorial argued.The lawmakers should have second thoughts. Bids for demolition came in last week at nearly twice the price estimated by the design firm, Clark Patterson Lee, that Mr. Neuhaus and his allies have enlisted. Instead of $3.9 million, as Clark Patterson predicted, the two bids topped $7.4 million and $7.7 million, The Times Herald-Record reported on Saturday.Officials backing demolition say that debates over the Rudolph center have gone on too long. Entertaining an alternative now would mean more delays. It’s a curious argument, since county legislators themselves are the ones who have the power to expedite, or drag out, consideration of Mr. Kaufman’s plan. As the newspaper’s editorial also noted, “This urge to move on has surfaced repeatedly.” Each time, local officials have “resisted, and each time they avoided doing something irrevocable and more costly than necessary,” it said. “This time is no different.”So what’s the real problem?The building, now on the World Monuments Fund’s global watch list, along with Machu Picchu and the Great Wall of China, is rigorous and abstract, beautiful but unlike what’s around it. It wasn’t designed to win a popularity contest.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After I first wrote in defense of Rudolph and the building, a former legislator from Goshen, Rich Baum, reached out to me. Mr. Baum was a minority leader in the county during the 1990s. He believes the current fight is about more than aesthetics — that Rudolph’s architecture makes concrete certain values that irritate lawmakers desperate to demolish it. Mr. Baum gave a few examples.The building’s atrium, he told me, was where “people interacted with county government, including the Department of Motor Vehicles, the records office and the passport office; a balcony above the main floor led to the legislature, the county executive and the primary county government decision-makers,” he said. “What this meant was that, as the leaders of county government went about their business, there was always the din of people coming in and out and doing their business. Critics said this was impractical. I think it was a purposeful and an inspired idea by Rudolph.”The legislative chamber was designed so that lawmakers sat in rows facing each other, as in Britain’s House of Commons, not facing in the same direction. The consequence, Mr. Baum said, was that “as the leader of a disempowered minority, my only real opportunity to effect change was to force my colleagues literally to face arguments against their actions.” He added: “The setup of the chamber was constructed to maximize the discomfort and awkwardness of strong disagreements. The building reminded leaders of democratic ideals and fostered tough debate.”In other words, Rudolph’s design was about openness, transparency, accountability. It was thereby a daily rebuke to how legislators “now run the county,” Mr. Baum said. “That’s why they really hate it.”This is a provocative theory. Legislators can try to prove it wrong.They can do the right thing Thursday. They can overturn the veto and reconsider demolition.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Landmark’s Last Hope for Rescue.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.