AdvertisementSupported byThe Art of CollectingBy Jake CigaineroBAZOCHES-SUR-GUYONNE, France — A friendship struck almost 60 years ago at the Venice Biennale. Shared aesthetic tastes that ran counter to prevailing trends in art and architecture. A collector’s desire to create a proper setting not only for his masterpieces but also for the artists who would be guests in his home.Down a country road lined with thatched-roof stone houses, Maison Louis Carré stands as the Finnish architect Alvar Aalto’s sole work in France. Louis Carré, a Paris gallerist who died in 1977, commissioned the private residence for his third wife, Olga, and their art collection, which included many of the great names of the modern period.Though the property, as well as the art, has changed hands, the Alvar Aalto Association in France has been preserving the spirit of the house, opening it to the public in 2007 and, just last year, to occasional contemporary art exhibitions.“Maison Louis Carré is one of Aalto’s finest private houses,” said Asdis Olafsdottir, director of the association. “It’s a more mature work designed at the peak of his career.”Representing artists like Raoul Dufy, Paul Klee and Henri Laurens, Carré was a champion of modern art and the Paris School at a time when institutional tastes for classicism ruled the market. So finding the right architectural comrade in aesthetics was no small task.When Carré met Aalto at the 1956 Venice Biennale, where the architect had opened the Finnish Pavilion, they discovered shared predilections in modern art. After correspondence and visiting some of Aalto’s works in Finland, Carré locked in plans for his house.Carré and Olga moved into the house in 1959. Pierre Bonnard paintings hung in the living room alongside works by Calder, Degas, Giacometti and Picasso — all artists he represented. Marcel Duchamp was among the honored houseguests.After Carré died, he left the house to Olga, who lived in it until her death in 2002. Her heirs sold the powerhouse art portfolio through an Artcurial estate auction the same year.The house also went on the market, but buyers were deterred by rigid renovation and construction restrictions that came with the property’s historical landmark listing. The Finnish Cultural Foundation bought the property in 2006 on behalf of the Alvar Aalto Association in France for 1.5 million euros, or about $1.7 million — around half the original asking price. Paavo Lipponen, a former prime minister of Finland and the current board chairman of the association, pushed for Finnish ownership of the house.“The museum is an important satellite of Finnish culture in France,” said Tommi Lindh, director of the Alvar Aalto Foundation, an umbrella organization in Helsinki. Maison Louis Carré, he added, “is an important example of Aalto’s great villas, like his Villa Mairea in Finland.”At the house in Bazoches-sur-Guyonne, a picture-postcard village about an hour west of Paris, pure materials and small details make sophisticated statements.This three-bedroom, three-bath main residence on the ground floor measures 350 square meters, or 3,767 square feet, with a small second-floor maid’s quarters. The limestone of the walls comes from the same quarry that produced Chartres Cathedral, and the roof is blue slate from Normandy. Unvarnished oak floors and red copper fireplaces throughout ensured cozy winter evenings.Carré had said he wanted a house that looked small on the outside but felt big on the inside. In the main hall, a curving ceiling mimics the surrounding terrain and contradicts the boxy exterior’s sharp angles. Two Finnish craftsmen custom-installed the ceiling using a red pinewood that grows in Lapland, Finland’s northernmost region.Carré called the vaulted entry — the only free-form element of the house — a “masterpiece.” Ms. Olafsdottir notes that Aalto, in Finnish, means “wave.”Descending into the living room from the airy foyer, lower ceilings were intended to be calming and invite people to sit, a concept Ms. Olafsdottir said was part of Aalto’s “humanist” approach to architecture.A small split-level study served as a sanctuary where Carré could be with his beloved books, many of which are inscribed by authors, such as Jean Cocteau.Carré’s private bathroom features a sunken tile shower and a small en suite sauna. Walk-in closets still contain the original owners’ clothes, and perfume bottles line Olga’s bathtub.“We wanted it to look like Louis and Olga had just gone out for the afternoon,” Ms. Olafsdottir said. “It was the idea from the start to keep the home feeling.”“Louis Carré was a perfectionist,” she added. But he had such faith in Aalto’s vision that he entrusted him with every detail from the furniture down to fixtures. Short, deep armchairs are true to modern form, and Scandinavian tables in birch, ash and teak evoke stripped-down Art Nouveau.One of the light pendants, known as the Bilberry, became an Aalto signature and is still in production today. Even the door handles got the Aalto treatment: they are bronze imitations of the house’s geometry, wrapped in thin strips of leather.All of the ground-floor rooms have direct access to the outdoors, where wide asymmetrical steps leading down to the pool create an amphitheater in the backyard. The tiled swimming pool and pool house are now languishing in decadent decay. But that will soon be remedied as renovation begins this fall.Meticulously kept guest registers speak of the house’s vibrant first life, as well as the lifelong friendship between Aalto and Carré. Instead of signatures, creative guests, including Aalto himself, doodled on the pages.Like the Maeght Foundation in St.-Paul de Vence, Carré left an architectural legacy; unlike the Maeght, the Carré house is missing its original collection, so visitors don’t see it as it was in its glory. But now that the house is open to new exhibitions, contemporary artists have the opportunity to show their work against an iconic backdrop.In the current show, “Les Femmes de la Maison Carré” (“The Women of Maison Carré”), on view until Nov. 29, the Finnish photographer Elina Brotherus shows portraits she made in the house during a brief residency this year. In her series, Ms. Brotherus portrays otherworldly, almost ghostly, characters in intimate scenes around the house. A stone-faced woman stares at her reflection in the polished mahogany dining table at dusk. She dances on the stepped hillside at dawn, and watches the horizon through the living room window.In a 1967 interview, Carré, speaking about what the house meant personally, imparted his view on the driving force and value of aesthetics.“I built this house because of an inner need,” he said. “It is the most beautiful — and therefore, not the most costly.”Advertisement