With each passing year, raging against the invasion of brands at the South by Southwest music festival feels more futile. Once known as a pre-Internet launching pad for emerging independent musicians, the industry bacchanal in Austin, Tex., taking place this year from March 17 to 22, has grown into a sometimes uncomfortable hodgepodge of acts still striving to make it big and more established stars performing amid an onslaught of hashtags, according to some veteran observers.But as the corporate money flows in, with it can come expectations from some musicians that the dollars will trickle down. On Wednesday, the band Ex Cops, from Brooklyn, took to Facebook to single out McDonald’s for its Austin offer: The group could play the company’s sponsored stage but would be compensated only with free food.Brian Harding, one half of the duo, wrote: “In lieu of being paid like a real artist, or anyone who is employed to do a service, McDonald’s assures us that we will ‘be featured on screens throughout the event,’ as well as POSSIBLY mentioned on McDonald’s social media accounts like Facebook (57MM likes!).”In December, the fast food behemoth vowed to “improve the SXSW experience for everyone” with its corporate patronage, in the form of the McDonald’s Lounge, offering coffee and Wi-Fi, and the “Fry-Fi” food truck, with fries and even more Internet access.But while many bands agree to perform at SXSW for exposure alone — “It is our choice (pretty much) to fly to Austin, play shows without soundcheck, and get paid nothing to a little,” Mr. Harding wrote — the request from a multibillion-dollar company crossed a line, he said in an interview.“To not offer a band one penny is completely disrespectful,” Mr. Harding said.Amalie Bruun, the singer for Ex Cops, added, “McDonald’s wants to be a part of this exciting thing that artists created, but not pay the bands that made it so.”In a statement, Becca Hary, the director for global media relations at McDonald’s, said: “We follow the same standard protocol as other brands and sponsors by inviting talented and emerging musicians to join us at the SXSW Festival. We look forward to serving McDonald’s food, drinks and fun in Austin.”She added, in SXSW-ready hashtag form, “#slownewsday.”Mr. Harding, in his open letter, noted that Doritos received a lot of flak for its stage – a reference to an earlier corporate arrangement at the festival — “but I’m going to assume they paid Lady Gaga.” (Indeed, the pop star reportedly received $2.5 million for the appearance.)Ex Cops, which has traveled to SXSW once before, currently has six showcase appearances scheduled in Austin, including one sponsored by Pandora. “They’re paying us,” Mr. Harding said.