Season 3, Episode 11: Chapter 37Read all of our “House of Cards” recaps.One of my major gripes about this season of “House of Cards” is how little character development it’s given us. There have been far too many tedious digressions into “American Works” and the Mideast peace pact. The Gavin/Max subplot has taken up more screen time than it warranted. Jackie and her mute husband? Enough already. There’s been a lot of treading water trying, it seems, to fill enough minutes to get to that 13th episode. Maybe next time Netflix should try the British model of producing half as many installments.“House of Cards,” at its core, is about the sick codependency between Frank and Claire. And for much of this season, their interactions have been unsatisfying. Part of the problem is that having them grow apart (a major development this season) deprives the show of what made it so powerful to begin with. Thankfully, as we approach the end of this season – only two more episodes left after this one – the old Frank and Claire are coming back to life. Back to blonde and out on her duff as United Nations ambassador, Claire is assuming her old role as Frank’s right hand. We see her at a fund-raiser with a tough group of ladies who lunch when one of them poses the question that seems to have been nagging at Claire: How can I trust your husband?Even if she weren’t married to him, she reassures the woman, she would vote for him. I’m not so sure she means that. Yates is watching, smiling. He follows her on her way out to the car, but she says she doesn’t want to do an interview. Not yet.Meanwhile, Frank has a big CNN debate to get ready for. The prep seems to be going well. He and Jackie, who will also be participating in the debate, are scheming on Air Force One. He wants Jackie to be the pit bull and go after Heather Dunbar for sending her kids to private school. He will play the above-the-fray cooler head. She’s not so sure. She has stepkids in private school, after all. We see just how real Jackie’s reservations are when her sport utility vehicle pulls up to Heather Dunbar’s for a clandestine meeting. “I want to endorse you,” Jackie tells Heather, reasoning that with all her supporters behind Heather, Heather jumps into first place. But Jackie wants something Heather isn’t prepared to give: a senior job in the Dunbar administration. I’m going to win, Jackie, just not your way, Heather says. Meeting adjourned.Frank, Heather and Jackie meet on the debate stage. In a season that has so far lacked many riveting moments, this scene is one of the best. It’s sharp, well-timed dialogue is almost Sorkin-eqsue. It held me rapt the entire time. It starts out predictable enough: Frank and Jackie gang up on Heather just as they planned; Heather holds her own, saying Frank has an “ultraconservative” agenda that would destroy the social safety net. She ticks through a list of his administration’s failures in foreign and domestic affairs. (She doesn’t have to think very hard and neither do we; it’s basically the script from this season.) Jackie is really relishing her role. She goes after Heather for inheriting a huge fortune without ever really having to work. She goes for the kids in private school. Frank piles on: What have you ever done, Heather?We see Claire watching at a campaign event with a bunch of Underwood supporters. But when the debate turns to her appointment as United Nations ambassador, things get uncomfortable fast. Heather questions her fitness for that job and Frank’s judgment in naming her. Claire can’t watch it all anymore. She leaves.Back on the stage, Jackie is getting a little too fired up. And she crosses the line when she takes the whole over-privileged line of attack against Heather too far. Maybe you sent your kids to boarding school because you didn’t want to raise them yourself, she snaps. We all gasp. Jackie is toast. Frank adds a signature twist of the knife: But Jackie, don’t your stepkids go to private school too?What Frank’s achieving in these two split scenes with Claire and Jackie is not just political. His reckless and selfish behavior is driving the two most important women in his life away from him. Let’s check in with Doug. We see him watching that feed again. Eerily, all Doug’s phones start ringing at once. Guess who? Gavin gives him the only explanation possible for why this whole story line has been drawn out for a dozen episodes: Rachel isn’t dead. He’ll tell Doug where she is, but Doug has to get Gavin’s friend sprung from prison. He can’t resist.The rest of the episode ties up a few loose ends.Jackie, steaming mad over the debate, insists on seeing Frank in the Oval Office. She thinks Frank has her on a leash. She’s tired of rolling over and doing tricks on his command. Frank, who seems to grow more and more imperious by the minute, reminds her theirs is not a partnership of equals. The next we see Jackie, she’s on television endorsing Heather Dunbar. Remy, whose doubts about Frank’s judgment have been growing, finally quits. He’s been a largely peripheral character this season anyway. But he leaves Frank with a warning worth considering: If you keep up like this, you won’t have anyone left.And that brings us to Claire. She’s donating blood as part of a campaign photo-op. Yates is with her. We watch her blood trickle into the bag. Yates wonders why she’s still working so hard for Frank, especially after he betrayed her by firing her. Still suspicious about Yates’s motives and the true nature of his relationship with her husband, she observes of the two men, “You’ve shared a lot. But the procedure is making her light-headed. Yates continues to ask questions about their marriage. She explains that she views it something like a term in public office: Every seven years, she reevaluates. It’s like she’s standing on a bridge and wondering whether to jump.“What I hate,” she confesses, “is how much I need us.” She passes out. Yates relays some of this back to Frank. And in the final scene we see Claire reading to a group of children. The story is about a critter named Tina that is captured and kept in a shoebox. “Should I leave Tina in the shoebox or set Tina free?” she asks the kids. “My goodness, I don’t know what to do.”She looks at Frank, who’s looking back at her adoringly. She smiles. What we’re left to contemplate with just two more episodes is whether she can keep smiling. Now that she’s back in the service of Frank & Claire Inc., he’s happier than ever. Her, I’m not so sure.Read our Episode 12 recap here.