Gerhard Richter, Arvo Pärt, Björk, Douglas Gordon, Charlotte Rampling and Damon Albarn are among the artists participating in this year’s Manchester International Festival, which announced its schedule on Thursday.The festival, which runs from July 2 to July 18, is devoted to new work. It was founded by Alex Poots, who will leave as director after this year’s edition to take up a new post, as the artistic director and chief executive of Culture Shed, a center for the visual and performing arts planned for the Far West Side of Manhattan.In “Richter/Part,” at the Whitworth Gallery, Mr. Richter and Mr. Pärt will exhibit work inspired by and dedicated to each other.The British composer Mark Simpson will present the world premiere of his oratorio “The Immortal,” his first large-scale commission. The work, an inquiry into death obsession based on John Gray’s book “The Immortalization Commission,” will be performed by the BBC Philharmonic performing at Bridgewater Hall.Mr. Gordon, the Scottish conceptual artist, and the French pianist Hélène Grimaud, who recently worked together at the Park Avenue Armory on “Tears Become … Streams Become …,” will present “Neck of the Woods,” a portrait of the wolf that combines visual art, music and theater. The event will take place in Home, a new arts center scheduled to open in May. Ms. Rampling will narrate.The festival also includes a new musical, “wonder.land,” with music by Mr. Albarn and book and lyrics by Moira Buffini, at the Päalace Theater. The work, a coproduction with the National Theater, is inspired by Lewis Carroll’s “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland.” Rufus Norris, the National Theater’s new director, will direct.Caryl Churchill’s 1994 play “The Skriker, ” a blend of fairy tale and social analysis, brings the actress Maxine Peake and the director Sarah Frankcom together again. The two collaborated on “The Masque of Anarchy” at the 2013 festival. The play, at the Royal Exchange Theater, will feature specially commissioned music by Nico Muhly and Antony.Björk will perform at the Castlefield Arena, and Reggie Gray, known as Regg Roc, will travel from Brooklyn with a team of flex dancers to make his European debut. Tickets for the festival go on sale March 6.A version of this article appears in print on 03/06/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Manchester Festival Unveils Starry Lineup.