New films featuring Patricia Arquette, Oscar Isaac, Jessica Biel and Matthew Broderick will screen in the Spotlight section of the Tribeca Film Festival, organizers announced Thursday.The festival also announced its Midnight section, and a number of special screenings, including one featuring Mary J. Blige, that combine an evening of cinema with live performance.  Ms.  Arquette, the recent Oscar winner, plays a mob moll in the world premiere of Nick Sandow’s fact-based “The Wannabe,” about a couple who robs New York’s mafia elite. Mr. Isaac stars in William Monahan’s “Mojave,” about a Hollywood director who encounters a drifter on a trek through the desert. The writer and director Neil LaBute returns to the festival with “Dirty Weekend,” a comedy featuring Matthew Broderick and Alice Eve as work colleagues who share a secret. Some notable films from other festivals that will also be screening in the Spotlight section include “Drunk Stoned Brilliant Dead: The Story of the National Lampoon,” Douglas Tirola’s look at the comedic institution, using archival footage and interviews with fans and founders. “Good Kill,” from Andrew Niccol, stars Ethan Hawke as a depressed drone pilot. And Paul Weitz’s “Grandma” features Lily Tomlin as a poet who goes on a road trip with her teen granddaughter.Special screenings include “Mary J. Blige — The London Sessions,” about the recording of her 13th studio album. Ms. Blige will perform after the screening. The classic silent comedy “Speedy,” with Harold Lloyd, will be shown in a restored print by the Criterion Collection accompanied by a new soundtrack from the mashup friendly  DJ Z-Trip. And “A Ballerina’s Tale,” from Nelson George, takes a look at the process of the dancer Misty Copeland, the first African-American female soloist at  American Ballet Theater in two decades.The midnight section will include “Stung,” about giant killer wasps, and “Emelie,” about a twisted babysitter. And the comedy group Rifftrax will provide live commentary at a screening of Tommy Wiseau’s ultimate midnight movie “The Room.”The festival will run  April 15 to 26.A version of this article appears in print on 03/06/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Tribeca Festival Adds Selections.