LONDON — Jake and Dinos Chapman’s sexually explicit artwork “Bring Me the Head Of …” — a video, played on loop, of a 10-minute lesbian sex scene — was banned by the police when it was first displayed at the Ridinghouse Editions gallery here in 1995.Now the artwork is showing again in London for the first time since then, in an unlikely peep show in a basement gallery in the posh Mayfair district. It’s one of the features of “Rack ’Em Up,” an exhibition of works from the Young British Artists movement at Shapero Modern, a year-old gallery founded by the rare-book seller Bernard Shapero. Unlike in 1995, when the work was visible from the street, this time it can be viewed only by looking through a small round hole in the wall. (The work was shown at the Tate Liverpool in a similar setup in 2006.) A gallery attendant is on hand to prevent anyone under 18 from looking in.Mark Inglefield, the exhibition’s curator, explained that Shapero Modern added the peephole feature to comply with Britain’s obscenity laws. Those would-be spectators who don’t appear to be over 18 will be asked for proof of identity, “in the great old American-style tradition,” he said. “So yeah, you have to prove you’re 18 to peep through the hole. We also made it a little bit high,” he added, to keep the very short from stealing a glance.The 1995 work was an “act of revenge” on the part of the Chapmans, Mr. Inglefield said. In it, the two performers make use of a sex toy modeled on the head of Franco Toselli, a gallerist who had refused to display a work by the Chapmans featuring two figures festooned in genitalia. The piece is fairly typical for the artists, British brothers whose artworks — like full-size Ku Klux Klan mannequins with smiley faces stamped on their arms, or a wool tapestry showing Ronald McDonald flying an airplane toward the Manhattan skyline — often straddle a line between irreverent and censorable. Another Chapman piece, a metal head with a penis coming out of its mouth, is also on display at Shapero Modern.Though “Bring Me the Head Of …” can’t be seen by everyone in the gallery, it can be heard. “I don’t think it is in any way offensive,” Mr. Inglefield said. The work is showing alongside pieces from 17 other artists from the Young British Artists movement of the late 1980s and early 1990s, including some editions from Damien Hirst and Tracey Emin. Mr. Shapero and Mr. Inglefield, both native Londoners, described many of the artists on view as erstwhile acquaintances from their pubbing and clubbing days.A VHS copy of “Bring Me the Head Of …” signed by the artists is available for purchase at the gallery for 4,000 pounds (about $6,000).