AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck6:35 P.M. (Starz Cinema) FAREWELL, MY QUEEN (2012) Sidonie Laborde (Léa Seydoux), the reader to Marie Antoinette (Diane Kruger) at Versailles, watches as the French monarchy falls in this drama directed by Benoît Jacquot from a novel by Chantal Thomas. Noémie Lvovsky portrays the queen’s lady-in-waiting; Virginie Ledoyen is the woman rumored to be the queen’s lover. “If the rules and the players of this continuing, increasingly dangerous court intrigue remain obscure, it’s because ‘Farewell, My Queen’ is told through Sidonie’s eyes,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “Tapping her palace sources, notably an archivist (Michel Robin) and a dressmaker (Anne Benoît), Sidonie learns of news known only to the nobility and their trusted stewards: that the Bastille has been seized.” Mr. Jacquot, she added, “has always been a sensitive director of actresses, his sympathies evident in his caressing, sometimes ogling camerawork and the time and space he gives women and their stories. That sympathy is evident here too, though crucially, while he doesn’t demonize Marie Antoinette, he doesn’t turn her into a spurious feminist martyr.” In French, with English subtitles.9:10 A.M. (MoreMax) A GOOD YEAR (2006) Max Skinner (Russell Crowe) is an aggressive London bond trader who inherits a small vineyard from his Uncle Henry (Albert Finney). Soon enough, Max, soothed by the memories of summers spent amid the grapevines, has morphed into a bon vivant who has fallen for a beautiful bistro owner (Marion Cotillard). Then a young Californian (Abbie Cornish) shows up and announces that she is his uncle’s previously unknown daughter — which would make her Henry’s true heir. Writing in The Times, Stephen Holden advised viewers “to make a reservation at an upscale French restaurant immediately after seeing the film or risk going home feeling deprived.”4 P.M. (Flix) JEFFERSON IN PARIS (1995) In this gilded Merchant-Ivory film, with a script by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, Nick Nolte portrays Thomas Jefferson as an American renaissance man decamped at Versailles. Greta Scacchi is Maria Cosway, the object of his invigorating romance, despite his promise to his dying wife that he would never again marry; Thandie Newton is Sally Hemings. The film is “overshadowed by its own ambition and not-quite-ironic pageantry,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times.8 P.M. (CBS) THE BIG BANG THEORY Amy (Mayim Bialik) isn’t pleased to discover that Sheldon (Jim Parsons) has applied for a one-way mission to colonize Mars. In “The Odd Couple,” at 8:30, Oscar (Matthew Perry) forgets the birthday of Felix (Thomas Lennon).8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY Amelia (Caterina Scorsone) operates on Dr. Herman (Geena Davis) in what could be the surgery of her career. In “Scandal,” at 9, the White House deals with its troublesome vice president (Jon Tenney) as tragedy grips Washington.9 P.M. (ABC Family) NICK & NORAH’S INFINITE PLAYLIST (2008) Nick (Michael Cera) and Norah (Kat Dennings), a couple of music-loving New Jersey high school students who while away their evenings in New York rock clubs, go in search of their favorite band — and try to decide what they want from each other in the process. “The movie is so friendly that you may wish for a little more conflict: higher emotional stakes, riskier jokes, a touch of danger in the night air,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. But “why begrudge them their fun, or wish premature heartache upon them? There will be plenty of time for the blues later on.”9 P.M. (Fox News) THE KELLY FILE Megyn Kelly interviews Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer of Facebook, about the new public awareness campaign for Lean In and the organization’s partnership with the N.B.A.What’s Streaming NowTHE LAST DAYS OF DISCO (1998) The director Whit Stillman plumbs the malaise of the young and privileged in this tale about the New York nightclub scene of the early 1980s and two young denizens, the confident Charlotte (Kate Beckinsale) and her less-secure college chum Alice (Chloë Sevigny). “We look really good tonight,” Charlotte tells Alice. “I’m sure we’re going to get in.” (crackle.com)Advertisement