By MIKE HALEMARCH 4, 2015
A red calf is born in Norway, an eerie 12-year-old boy is raised in captivity in New Mexico and a young American archaeologist is murdered in Jerusalem. The connection? Too early to tell, but all signs point to the world being saved 10 weeks from now.“Dig,” a new series starting Thursday night on USA, is the latest post-“Da Vinci Code” thriller that combines a murder mystery with an ancient-history primer. Conspiracies are afoot, and prophecies are finally coming true. The show, an American-Israeli coproduction, kicks off with a quote from the Torah (“Tell the people of Israel to bring you a red heifer without defect”) and encompasses squads of rabbis, a desert Christian cult, Essenes (kind of like biblical ninjas), tunnels under the Temple Mount and the breastplate of a high priest.It also features cops and F.B.I. agents doing quite a bit of standard crime-drama investigative work. We can guess that this is the province of Gideon Raff, the “Homeland” and “Prisoners of War” producer who is one of the two creators of “Dig.” The nighttime Jerusalem streetscapes and chases, some actually filmed in Jerusalem, and the central buddy-cop relationship between the F.B.I. agent Peter Connelly (Jason Isaacs) and the Israeli detective Golan Cohen (Ori Pfeffer), are also reminiscent of Mr. Raff’s previous work.The other creator is Tim Kring, of NBC’s “Heroes,” who presumably supplied the more fantastical and metaphysical elements. Perhaps his influence can also be seen in how the show jumps between its different locales and story lines and in the way conspicuously humble characters are charged with altering the course of history, both characteristic of “Heroes.”AdvertisementThis type of globe-spanning spiritual-procedural narrative was recently seen on television in ABC’s “Zero Hour,” a show that took the route of over-the-top comic-book heroics. “Dig” is a more sober affair, and through three episodes it’s generally polished and intelligent. It’s also not terribly exciting — the revelations and shocks are a little too subdued, as if good taste were the most important quality in a story about the apocalypse.The pace and the stakes should pick up as the show goes along, though, and in the meantime it’s thoroughly watchable. That has a lot to do with a better-than-average cast that includes David Costabile and Lauren Ambrose as the cult leader and one of his followers, Anne Heche as Connelly’s boss and lover, Regina Taylor as the American ambassador to Israel and Omar Metwally as a reluctant killer.Advertisement“Dig” is the latest step in USA’s diversification of its scripted programming, which until recently has been dominated by frothy workplace dramedies like “Suits” and “White Collar.” The channel now has its own competently made, complexly plotted short-season thriller, like just about every other major cable network and streaming-video service. There must be a saturation point for these types of shows, but apparently we’re not quite there.DigUSA Network, Thursday nights at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central timeProduced by Universal Cable Productions. Created by Tim Kring and Gideon Raff; Mr. Kring, Mr. Raff, Gail Berman, Avi Nir, Gene Stein and S. J. Clarkson, executive producers.WITH: Jason Isaacs (Peter Connelly), Anne Heche (Lynn Monahan), Alison Sudol (Emma Wilson), David Costabile (Tad Billingham), Richard E. Grant (Ian Margrove), Regina Taylor (Ambassador Ruth Ridell), Lauren Ambrose (Debbie), Omar Metwally (Yussef Khalid), Ori Pfeffer (Golen Cohen) and Angela Bettis (Faye).A version of this review appears in print on March 5, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Murder Investigation in Jerusalem Takes an Apocalyptic Turn.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.