By GIA KOURLASMARCH 4, 2015
Last spring, New York received a gift from Cuba: a premiere by Ronald K. Brown courtesy of Malpaso Dance Company. For its return visit to the Joyce Theater on Tuesday, the troupe, formed in 2012 by Osnel Delgado, Daile Carrazana and Fernando Sáez, hosts another impressive guest choreographer, Trey McIntyre. This prolific and much-admired dancemaker expresses playfulness without settling into a frivolous place.Leading off the opening-night program, which includes a premiere by Mr. Delgado, is Mr. McIntyre’s “Under Fire,” the choreographer’s first new dance since he decided to shift the focus of his Boise, Idaho, troupe  from a traditional company model in order to pursue individual projects. (He’ll still make dances, and that’s a good thing.)Set to music by Grandma Kelsey, or Kelsey Swope, an Idaho singer and songwriter with an unadorned voice, “Under Fire” is inspired by Mr. McIntyre’s transitional status. As he writes in a program note, he made a bonfire to burn his documents; when the fire went out, he discovered white paper under the ashes, which led to a realization that the more we try to change, “the more our essential born selves become evident and manifest.”Throughout the piece, which builds gradually while never relinquishing its silky flow, Mr. McIntyre mirrors his ideas about transformation with the choreographic structure of peeling away. Dancers stand in a cluster and dash offstage, leaving others behind to melt against one another and then separate in windswept abandon. There’s a meditative quality to his swinging, circular patterns, in which slicing arms and legs serve, rather than hinder, an illusion of weightlessness.At times, the music feels manipulative; it’s so raw, so personal that the dancers’ gestural movements — at best tender, at worst premeditated — tend to mirror the songs rather than lend deeper shading. A duet for Dunia Acosta and Joan Rodríguez struggles to match up to the rough, untainted way Ms. Swope sings Dolly Parton’s “Jolene”; still, “Under Fire” manages to hold its spark to completion.In the program’s other work, “Despedida/Farewell,” Mr. Delgado takes inspiration from Jorge Luis Borges’s poem about the end of a relationship. Set to music by Arturo O’Farrill — his cheerful Afro Latin Jazz Ensemble performs live — this work for 10 relies on repetitive loops of movement in which agile dancers rise and spill to the floor with resiliency.Mr. Delgado, showing off his elastic legs and a plush spine, is at the center of it all: the first to move and the last one remaining after the others roll into the wings. In between, “Despedida” is both overpowered by its music and underpowered by its choreography, which at times resembles an accelerated stretch class. These lissome dancers approach each lunge and hip thrust with a winning sincerity, yet even their conviction can’t mask the fact that beyond farewell, “Despedida” runs out of things to say.Malpaso Dance Company continues performances through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-242-0800, joyce.org.A version of this review appears in print on March 5, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Gift From Cuba, by Way of Idaho.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.