AdvertisementSupported byBy Palko KaraszVIENNA — This summer, a message appeared in the lobby of a leading museum here. Shaky hands had written “cer variabil,” Romanian for “changing skies,” with candle smoke, on the white stucco ceiling.The graffiti was in fact a painting by Mircea Cantor, a fitting foreword to a rare showcase of Romanian works at the Austrian Museum of Applied Arts/Contemporary Art, or MAK, which ended this month. The exhibition combined works by artists like Mr. Cantor, whose art is collected and often displayed internationally, with that of artists not often seen by people outside Romania, giving them crucial exposure.Through this and similar events, Vienna has gained a reputation as a cultural hub for the region east of its borders — an image that many of its arts institutions have been working to promote, benefiting from funds from local and federal governments.The Vienna Business Agency, which is financed mostly by the city, organizes shows in contemporary art galleries set up by international curators every fall. Local companies, which were among the first to expand eastward when the Iron Curtain came down more than two decades ago, also offer support through foundations and sponsorships.“It’s very important that curators come to Romania and integrate the artists’ work in exhibitions” elsewhere, said Bärbel Vischer of MAK, who traveled the country during a year spent researching for the show. “It’s all one cultural sphere in Europe and the separation was political and not cultural,” she added, referring to the political barrier that cut East from West during the Cold War.For centuries, this cultural space was defined by a multiethnic empire with Vienna at its center. Reminders of this past are rife throughout the region, from architecture to dining, and have defined Vienna’s current identity.Even as the Iron Curtain divided this region, artists continued to trickle across. Austria has long been a transit point for hundreds of thousands of people making their way to the West — as the world has been seeing again in recent months with the most serious refugee crisis since World War II. But since the borders of former Soviet bloc countries opened in 1989 and border controls were eased within the European Union, Vienna has truly become a platform and stepping-stone for artists on their way to Paris, London or New York.Viennacontemporary, the city’s main art fair, is a prime example of how the city has become a showcase for East European artists. When it took place late last month, it attracted close to 28,000 visitors and just shy of 100 galleries, with a third of the galleries from Central or Eastern Europe. While four days of dealing resulted in modest numbers compared with the big international fairs like Frieze London and Art Basel, artists and collectors alike praised the event as successful.“People are not aware that this region has so much sophistication,” said Christina Steinbrecher-Pfandt, the artistic director of the fair.Among this year’s dealers at the fair was Vesselina Sarieva, who in 2004 founded a contemporary art gallery with her mother in Plovdiv, Bulgaria. As the focus of the art scene moved to Sofia, the capital, and to the West, she refused to go with the flow. She stayed and worked to promote Bulgarian artists through her gallery, Sariev Contemporary, and a foundation she started.The tiny gallery space in Plovdiv is not enough to gain influence and a wider audience, so she works through international contacts. Her gallery first exhibited at the Vienna fair in 2011. This year Sariev Contemporary was the only Bulgarian exhibitor at Art Brussels.“Now Plovdiv is on the map,” Ms. Sarieva said, speaking passionately of the work she does in her native city as she leaned over a wooden counter in the shape of her country. The counter was the centerpiece of a stand that showcased Bulgarian artists and curators, with many of the works reflecting on corruption, among the most pressing issues in one of the poorest countries in the European Union.One of the artists was Kamen Stoyanov, who moved here on a university scholarship 15 years ago. He said that moving to Vienna helped him adapt to the Western art market and find business models for his work. “It’s totally different if you produce a piece of art and don’t have the pressure of the market,” he said of his time back in Bulgaria.A generation earlier, Pravdoliub Ivanov first came to work just outside Vienna on a grant from Kultur Kontakt, a government organization that has funded residencies for artists from the region for more than 20 years. When the grant ended in 1996, he returned to Bulgaria. “Maybe I had illusions, maybe I was afraid to be an immigrant and wash dishes,” he said. As a lecturer in Sofia, he has seen his best students, including Mr. Stoyanov, migrate to the West. But he refused to complain. “Vienna is really not far,” he said, adding, “We need to focus on a way to take this process and use it in our favor,” suggesting that today’s students could become tomorrow’s teachers or exhibitors back home.“It’s not enough to have good artists or ambitious galleries,” said Annamaria Molnar, a gallery owner in Budapest, explaining that Vienna provided a stronger cultural environment that could attract international collectors. She came to the fair with a curated selection of work by emerging Hungarian artists who explore how humans recede in urban landscapes.Her gallery sold a number of works for 1,000 to 4,000 euros, or $1,140 to $4,550, this year. Such income alone, at first, would not have allowed her, or others, to participate in international fairs like this one. But sponsorships are available in Vienna that enable Central and East European galleries to pay a reduced fair fee. “This fair has grown into a meeting point,” Ms. Molnar said. “There are experts here, leaders of institutions and collectors who are open to this region specifically.”Besides the fair, Vienna offers a rich cultural program for visitors, with a number of art institutions of international standing — the Albertina, the Mumok Museum of Modern Art, the MAK or the Vienna State Opera — that are unequaled elsewhere in the region. The city often tops rankings in terms of quality of life and Austria is by far the wealthiest country compared with its Eastern neighbors. According to data from the European Group on Museum Statistics, museums here have several times more to spend than their Eastern counterparts and are visited by much larger crowds.“We can do a lot for Eastern European art,” said Rainer Fuchs, deputy director of Mumok. “And Eastern European art does a lot for us.”He added: “It’s important for the local art scene to internationalize and to learn political and historical sensibility, for instance, from the artists of the region.”But as the refugee crisis has grown in intensity, many questions about the future were being asked here. Politics came up in most conversations: The far-right Freedom Party made significant gains in regional elections this month, especially in Vienna, a bastion of the left and a bellwether for the country’s voting landscape. With the right gaining momentum from the refugee crisis, many questioned whether Austria would extend the same welcome to people of other cultures as it has to Eastern Europe, and whether decades of generous cultural policies would be upended.“More and more, Europe is like a big country,” Mr. Ivanov, the Bulgarian artist, said in a wishful thought shared by many here. “I still believe in this European project despite the obstacles and challenges.”Advertisement