By ALESSANDRA STANLEYMARCH 4, 2015
The crime doesn’t seem to be about race. But everything around it — the rage of the accused, the grief of the victims’ families, the investigation, the defense and the prosecution — is tinged with prejudice of one kind or another.That’s why a new limited series on ABC is called “American Crime.” It’s a total immersion into the social collisions caused by one shocking, but not uncommon, violent attack. It’s also an intense, spellbinding look at a murder case in Modesto, Calif., where drugs and gangs may be involved, but nothing is simple or clear. Victims aren’t necessarily innocent, and the guilty aren’t always at fault.The 11-episode series, starting on Thursday, looks as stark as the Modesto landscape it is set in: a bleak, bleached stretch of freeway overpasses, industrial smokestacks and strip malls. Yet the people in it are so insightfully etched, their stories so artfully interwoven and drawn out, that it makes “American Crime” stand out. This is an ABC drama that is not just good, it’s startlingly good, as bracing in its own way as “True Detective” was on HBO last year.John Ridley, who wrote the screenplay for “12 Years a Slave,” created the series, and the cast includes Timothy Hutton and Felicity Huffman as Russ Skokie and Barb Hanlon, the divorced parents of one of the victims. They cut off contact long ago, but grief puts Russ and Barb back in toxic proximity. Her fury at Russ is still so sharp that she can’t look at him, and it fuses with her rage over the crime. Russ is shattered by what has happened to his son, but his ex-wife can still uncork his lingering guilt and self-pity.AdvertisementThese are very precise and searing portraits of grief, but the two parents don’t share the same sorrow. Barb is tautly wired for suspicion and instantly feels that the police aren’t doing enough to find the culprits. When she is told that one suspect is Hispanic, she assumes he’s an undocumented immigrant, or as she puts it, “some illegal.” Russ wants to know what was happening inside his son’s head; he can’t believe there isn’t some connection between his life and his death.AdvertisementThey are allied, reluctantly, with Tom Carlin (W. Earl Brown) and his wife, Eve (Penelope Ann Miller), the parents of their daughter-in-law. Tom and Eve are pious and more conventionally middle class but also develop clashing agendas.The parents’ experience is threaded with those of other families drawn into the tragedy. Tony Gutiérrez (Johnny Ortiz), the teenage son of Alonzo (Benito Martinez), is a good kid, more obedient than his older sister, yet his one attempt at rebellion ensnares him in the juvenile justice system.The only happy relationship is also the sickest: Carter Nix (Elvis Nolasco) and his girlfriend, Aubry Taylor (Caitlin Gerard) are drug users who are as addicted to their romance as they are to meth. And the camera mirrors their mood swings: When they are high, the lovers are lighted in a golden glow as dazzling and poetic as a glossy magazine ad. When they come down, shadows, filth and raw need rush in.Carter is black, Aubry is white, and they see themselves as outlaw lovers, a Romeo and Juliet of Modesto, and in some ways they are. Carter’s sister, Aliyah Shadeed (Regina King), is a passionate convert to Islam who wants to help her brother but has zero tolerance for his love life. Aubry also has disappointed relatives, and they are just as intent on detaching her from Carter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This series is at heart a murder mystery — someone has been killed, and the show withholds who did it. But solving the crime isn’t the point. The murder is a clue to the mysteries of character, experience and self-deception. It’s not a procedural. If anything, “American Crime” is a television series that echoes some of the novels of Richard Price, including “Clockers” and “Lush Life.”The story unfolds not in broad, dramatic strokes, but in shifting tempos and cinematic cuts. Lingering close-ups mix with jagged time-lapse montages, and waves of dialogue lap from one conversation into the next.What matters is not just what is said but also the prickly sting of what is left unstated.When Barb, talking to an African-American detective, refers to her son’s suspected killers as “those people,” the detective recoils and turns hostile, hearing the mother’s bigotry, not her anguish. Barb, who has been belligerent from the start, reads the cop’s response as prejudice.Miscommunication, misunderstandings and, on occasion, a stab of ice-cold reality are all part of the bereavement and also the investigation.“American Crime” is a depressing story told so skillfully that it’s almost impossible not to be happy to see it unfold.American CrimeABC, Thursday nights at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Produced by ABC Studios. Created by John Ridley; Mr. Ridley and Michael J. McDonald, executive producers.WITH: Felicity Huffman (Barb Hanlon), Timothy Hutton (Russ Skokie), W. Earl Brown (Tom Carlin), Richard Cabral (Hector Tontz), Caitlin Gerard (Aubry Taylor), Benito Martinez (Alonzo Gutiérrez), Penelope Ann Miller (Eve Carlin), Elvis Nolasco (Carter Nix), Johnny Ortiz (Tony Gutiérrez) and Regina King (Aliyah Shadeed).A version of this review appears in print on March 5, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Justice Far From Black or White.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.