Season 3, Episode 13: Chapter 39Read all of our “House of Cards” recaps.Claire’s realization that her marriage is a sham has built slowly – like much of the rest of this season’s plot. And in this final episode, we get a real idea of just how much she’s come to hate both the relationship and herself for being a part of it. You can’t unsee this, folks: Claire demanding that Frank make love to her, right there, right now, in a hotel room on the campaign trail. “Look at me while you do it,” she says. He can’t. So he sends her off to her own room for the night. “I think you should go back to Washington in the morning.” Back in New Mexico, we see Rachel for the first time this season in the flesh. She’s working in some godforsaken place, mopping floors in a bar and stocking shelves in a supermarket. She’s living in some sort of halfway house and calling herself “Lisa.” She’s been shopping for a new identity, and her paperwork is almost ready.But Doug is on his way. He’s smashed up Gavin, who was in hiding in Venezuela, pretty good. He forces Gavin to hand over Rachel’s whereabouts. And he’s going to finally go through with killing her. Once he gets to New Mexico, he pays cash for a beat up van and buys some bleach and a shovel at the local hardware store. The episode cuts between scenes of Doug stalking his prey, Frank, in Iowa, campaigning just before caucus day and Claire in Washington, stewing in her unhappiness. She summons Yates to the White House. Tell me what you see, she asks him. Somebody who’s lost, he tells her. Without Claire by his side, Frank seems lost too. She won’t answer his calls. He expects her to fly back to Iowa to join him, but she never gets on the plane. In New Mexico, Doug snatches Rachel as she’s leaving work late one night. He puts a rag over her mouth, throws her in the back of his van and ties her up. We’re supposed to believe that she was just about to make her break. She has her new identity, I.D. cards and all, in her pocket. She even has a new name: Cassie Lockhart.She pleads with Doug to release her. She prays. She tells him she knows he doesn’t have it in him. She was so relieved to find out she hadn’t killed him. Just let me go, and you’ll never see me again, she says. But Doug pulls the van off the highway and takes it down a long dirt road into the middle of the desert where he starts digging her grave. Standing there in that hole meant for Rachel, he stops to think. We weren’t really supposed to believe he would go through all that and just let her go, right? This new, supposedly softened Doug with a burst of conscience. So when he drives off leaving Rachel behind and alive, it doesn’t take long for him to turn the van around and finish the deed. The last we will ever see of Rachel is her head being covered in dirt as Doug fills in her grave.Back in Iowa, Frank beats Dunbar. Signaling what could be in store for next season, we see Dunbar vowing to fight on in the primary. “We haven’t lost; we are just getting started,” she says.With Claire holed up in the White House, Frank is forced to give his victory speech alone. He seems distracted. Knowing that people have noticed he is flying solo, he makes up an excuse about her being under the weather. When he gets back at the White House later on, she is sitting in his chair in the Oval Office. He behaves appallingly, throwing the kind of tantrum we’ve seem him pitch a few times before this season. Stop being so selfish, he tells her. You want a man to take charge when it suits you? Without me, you are nothing, he says. And he grabs her by the face. For all his loathsomeness, I don’t think we’ve ever seen Frank come this close to actually striking Claire. He’s given her what she needs: validation that her fears about him were correct. She collects herself. She won’t be going on to New Hampshire. She’s leaving him. The last we see and hear of the Underwoods this season is Frank, despondent, uttering, “Claire.” Looking back on where the main characters were at the start of this season, the only one who seems to have made real strides is Claire. She’s fully grasping the destructiveness of her marriage and finally doing something about it. She may never have been an ambassador in her own right, but she thinks she knows what self-reliance feels like and she is not ready to turn back.Frank and Doug, by contrast, are case studies in codependency. Frank shows us through his violent outburst at Claire that he cannot even fathom the idea of being on his own. So it is probably fitting that Doug returns to him in the end. Though we opened the season with Doug’s healing, we end with him ripping the scab off his wound by killing Rachel. He and Frank’s fates are as inextricably linked as ever.I imagine a lot of people might tune out next season. I’m not sure I’m coming back. The show was never as good as when Frank and Claire were plotting their murderous ascent together. Now that they’ve reached the pinnacle, they can’t keep it together. And the writers seem to be running out of ways to keep them or their scheming interesting and fresh.I’ve burned through these 13 recaps in a week and I suspect many of have already finished the series or will be doing so this weekend. What did you think of Season 3? And what are your hopes for Season 4?It’s been a pleasure. 