By ALASTAIR MACAULAYOCT. 12, 2015
Choreography is theater, and the great choreographers have all been master dramatists. Five ballets that returned on Saturday to the New York City Ballet repertory for the first time this season all exemplified a spare extreme of modernism: drama without narrative, without acting, without scenery; costumes without color; drama in which nothing occurs but the alchemy of dance and music. The music, in four cases, was 20th-century modernist; this lean but high-concentrate dance theater still feels audacious.The five were made by George Balanchine (1904-83); they are the Bach “Concerto Barocco” (1941); the Stravinsky “Monumentum pro Gesualdo” (1960) and “Movements for Piano and Orchestra” (1963); the Webern “Episodes” (1959); and the Hindemith “Four Temperaments” (1946). It’s in their absence of color, curiously, that they’re truly an extreme. By dressing many ballets in just black and white, Balanchine went where very few have dared to follow; once you acquire a taste for this vein of his theater, you can feel that color is not a heightening but a dilution.In these ballets, the way a woman’s foot changes position to show a shift in a musical phrase may prove uncannily momentous; the way a body changes angle at the end of a phrase can have the effect of a punch line. In Saturday afternoon’s performance of “Concerto Barocco,” there were many such moments. Among those marvelous moments were that end-of-phrase change of angle (just 90 degrees, a twist from one diagonal to another), which was a recurrent pleasure in Teresa Reichlen’s dancing of the third movement; the warmth with which Sara Mearns infuses her classical line; and the calm grace and self-effacing authority with which Russell Janzen holds an arm in an arc above his head or slides Ms. Reichlen, feet first, upstage in the second movement.Throughout this “Balanchine Black & White” program, the choreography again proved rich fare. Most of “Episodes” is especially spellbinding. The quiet multiplicities of angle keep leading us into the theater of Webern’s harmonies and rhythms.AdvertisementIn the Ricercata that closes “Episodes” — Webern’s arrangement of Bach — Ms. Mearns (who has often been dancing two ballets a performance this season) was at her most effortlessly luminous, with Adrian Danchig-Waring her lucid partner.Earlier in the same work, Jennie Somogyi’s fluent sureness, perfectly assisted by Craig Hall, made even the strangest inventions of the Concerto (Op. 24) portion look quietly definitive. The tall, blond, long-limbed Claire Kretzschmar, a corps dancer, and Jared Angle made the Five Pieces (Op. 10) segment of “Episodes” an eager, brave adventure. In the opening Symphony (Op. 21), Andrew Scordato’s carriage — neck and arms beautifully clear — was always a pleasure.AdvertisementThat opening “Concerto Barocco” was, however, more contained and less exuberant than the same cast has given us in past seasons. Was the conductor Daniel Capps taking the music — Bach’s Double Violin Concerto in D minor — a tad slower than before? Certainly it seemed so.And, though I’ve found many occasions to praise City Ballet’s return to form over recent seasons, this matinee showed a range of ways in which its mastery of Balanchine style is still incomplete. In “Monumentum” and “Movements,” Rebecca Krohn’s decorative loveliness radiated no energy from the center of her body; and her partner, Ask la Cour, was a mere blank, whose dancing goes immediately in one eye and out the other. Megan LeCrone, who danced the opening Symphony in “Episodes,” is always a presence; but I take no pleasure in the awkward mixture of tension and flamboyance in her line or phrasing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ashley Bouder never lacks energy or assertiveness; but the Choleric variation in “The Four Temperaments” is one of a clutch of roles in which she is currently miscast. The role depicts a force of nature; Ms. Bouder gives us knowing forcefulness. Casting against type can be useful when an artist seizes the opportunity to extend her style. As she does so often, however, Ms. Bouder delivered static arabesque positions (seldom right in Balanchine) instead of making her line stretch and grow gesturally in space. And she kept tucking her chin down, addressing the audience (or, rather, the rehearsal mirror) from under her eyebrows. When she’s dancing center stage with four other women on the peripheries, she often looks like the least free person present.Ana Sophia Scheller, who danced Sanguinic in “Temperaments,” is another of the company’s blanks. She’s a generally efficient one, although neither she nor Ms. Bouder give us her choreography’s gargouillades (rapid circles of the feet in the air during sideways jumps). Occasionally, I’ve seen glimpses in her dancing of some inner delight or need, but usually she’s nothing more than clean, correct discretion.The three leading men of “Temperaments” were all excellent: Anthony Huxley in the Melancholic variation, Tyler Angle beside Ms. Scheller in Sanguinic, and Amar Ramasar in Phlegmatic. To see how Mr. Huxley and Mr. Ramasar have come into their own is instructive: They both look wonderfully free within the rigors of the choreography. Many of us remember when Mr. Huxley was classically impeccable but cautious, while Mr. Ramasar was willing but graceless; now they’re valuable artists.The easy sweep of Mr. Huxley’s phrasing in Melancholic was especially fine on Saturday. And in Sanguinic, just the turn of Mr. Angle’s head as he, kneeling, watched his ballerina pass was one of the dramatic events of the matinee. The three duets of the ballet’s opening Theme were also striking, with Ashley Laracey, partnered by Justin Peck, conferring wonderful lyricism on the third.“Balanchine Black & White” will be repeated on Sunday by New York City Ballet at the David H. Koch Theater at Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, nycballet­.com.A version of this review appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Five by Balanchine, Stark and Dramatic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.