Mark Rothko once said that his formula for a good painting included a dollop of hope – “10 percent to make the tragic concept more endurable.” When bidders gather on May 13 at Christie’s to do battle for the next big Rothko to come to auction – a blazing red and black work, “No. 36 (Black Stripe),” painted in 1958, a banner year for the artist – they will have to bring a lot more than hope.The painting, being sold by the German collector Frieder Burda, who has given it pride of place in his museum in Baden-Baden for several years, is estimated to sell for $30 million to $50 million. But prime Rothkos have become so rare and sought-after that the competition is likely to be fierce. Rothko’s auction record was set at Christie’s in 2012, when “Orange, Red, Yellow,” another of his trademark horizontal color-slab paintings, from 1961, sold for almost $87 million. And two Rothkos from the collection of Rachel Lambert Mellon, known as Bunny, were sold privately last year, each for what some experts believe was more than that record.“There’s a perception that these kinds of paintings come and they come regularly, but in reality they’re becoming more and more rare,” said Brett Gorvy, Christie’s worldwide chairman of postwar and contemporary art, adding: “The year 1958 was probably Rothko’s all-time high as a recognized artist.” (Major paintings from that year are in the collections of the Museum of Modern Art, the Whitney, the Tate Modern and the Metropolitan Museum of Art.)The painting will be put on view in Hong Kong and London before the May auction. A spokeswoman for Christie’s said the work had a price guarantee, which means the auction house pledges to the seller that it will cover a minimum price, a practice used to try to secure plum consignments and also to generate profits above a commission; if a work sells for more than the guarantee the auction house and seller typically split the extra money.The Museum Frieder Burda, which opened in 2004 in a white, glassy building designed by Richard Meier in the spa town of Baden-Baden, is focused primarily on German art and holds extensive collections of the work of Gerhard Richter and Sigmar Polke. But Mr. Burda, whose family made its fortune in publishing and printing, also bought works through the years, by artists like Rothko, de Kooning and Clyfford Still, to give international context to his German collection.In a statement, he said that the decision to part with the Rothko, which he bought in the 1980s and which has never appeared at auction, was difficult “for someone like myself who has a very personal relationship with all works of the collection. But he said he hoped the money it generated would put his museum and the private foundation that supports it on a solid financial footing for years to come. The Rothko is “a solitaire in the collection,” Mr. Burda said, but “it is now strategically the right time and will allow us to expand our ambitious plans and ideas for the future.”A version of this article appears in print on 03/07/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Rare Rothko to Lead A New York Auction.