This weekend, in conjunction with International Women’s Day, the group Art + Feminism will be hosting its second international edit-a-thon, with the goal of improving Wikipedia’s coverage of women and the arts and encouraging more women to contribute to the online encyclopedia.  The flagship event, held at the Museum of Modern Art in New York on Saturday, will feature half-hour tutorials throughout the day. There will also be satellite sessions at more than 70 sites worldwide, including the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, the Art Gallery of Ontario in Toronto, and the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam.“What we really want to do is empower women to edit Wikipedia,” Sian Evans, one of the organizers, said by email.A 2011 survey by the Wikimedia Foundation, which oversees the encyclopedia, found that only about 10 percent of its editors were women.Last year’s event, which drew participants in six countries, resulted in more 100 new articles on female artists, feminist artistic movements and feminist scholarship and improvements to more than 90 articles, according to a news release. And there are signs that similar efforts across other topic areas may be having a broad effect.In a recently published paper, a team of researchers found that the gender balance of articles on Wikipedia was better than that of several other large compilations, like Freebase, a database of 120,000 notable individuals (though such other sources may themselves be biased, the authors said). Similarly, the study found that selection of articles on Wikipedia’s front page did not tilt toward men.“This suggests that Wikipedians are aware of gender bias and make an effort to overcome inequalities,” one of the researchers, Claudia Wagner, a computer scientist at the Leibniz Institute for Social Sciences in Cologne, Germany, said in an email.But the study, “A Man’s Wikipedia? Assessing Gender Inequality in an Online Encyclopedia,” did find evidence of deeper, more subtle biases. While articles about women were on average longer than articles about men, they were substantially more likely to use words indicating gender and to discuss relationship status or family matters. In the English-language version of Wikipedia, for example, an article noting that someone is divorced is 4.4 times as likely to be about a woman than about a man. Similar results were found across the five other language editions surveyed.The study also found significant differences in links, with articles about women linking to articles about men more often than men’s articles linked to women’s. The asymmetry “may potentially lead to lower rankings of articles about women in search results,” Ms. Wagner said.