It has been a big year for Selma, Ala., with the country renewing focus on the city, thanks to an Oscar-nominated film carrying its name, and the celebrations of the 50th anniversary of the civil rights march from Selma to Montgomery, Ala.Now, the city will host its own two-day celebration at the base of the Edmund Pettus Bridge this weekend, then share it via the airwaves.Harry Belafonte, one of the original marchers and star of the 1950s film “Carmen Jones,” serves as co-art director for a three-hour concert that will take place on Sunday, featuring performances by Rick Ross, Kirk Franklin, Tamar Braxton, Doug E. Fresh and others, in addition to appearances by Bill Withers and Cicely Tyson.  The concert is being produced by BET and its sister network, Centric, with both of the channels’ websites live-streaming the event. It will air on television March 13, with historical footage and interviews about issues that continue to impact black Americans.The show has already made waves after it was announced that the rapper Vanilla Ice will also be taking the stage, with some on social media bewildered by his selection and questioning his relevancy to such an event. But according to an interview with Paxton Baker, general manager and executive vice president of Centric TV and president of BET Event Productions, on AL.com, Vanilla Ice is just “a really cool person,” who was available after the network was given only two weeks to put the show together.  President Obama and two former presidents, Jimmy Carter and George W. Bush, are expected to be in Selma for the weekend, along with Representative John Lewis, one of the original organizers and participants in the march. Mr. Lewis said that events like this have been an invaluable tool in imparting lessons from the civil rights movement onto younger Americans.“Fifty years later we can educate, inform and inspire another generation,” said Mr. Lewis, a Democratic congressman from Georgia. “It will remind them of the distance we’ve come and the progress we’ve made.”