Season 3, Episode 11: Chapter 38Read all of our “House of Cards” recaps.Now that they’ve reached the pinnacle of American politics, Frank and Claire and the rest of the country are left to ponder what kind of legacy the Underwoods will leave. It’s a legacy of lies, boundless ambition and murder.Legacy, writes Yates in the first draft of his book, which we see for the first time, is their only child.It is a dark legacy indeed, and as the season reaches its climax, we are beginning to wonder if Claire might want to disavow it altogether.When Yates presents Frank with that draft, he is less than pleased with what he reads. Not all of it is good, especially lines like “the earth’s axis tilted that day,” referring to the day the Underwoods were married. They are “the unsplittable atom of American politics” and have “a union like no other.” Frank agrees with the assessment. Claire isn’t so sure.The problem is, the book was supposed to be about “America Works” – two words I was hoping we wouldn’t hear for the rest of the season. Frank doesn’t want it to be about him and Claire, so he decides to fire Yates and insist that it never be published. But when Yates doesn’t want to go so quietly, Frank reminds him of that little secret they shared outside of the Underwoods’ first house: Yates’ first novel isn’t really his. If you go forward with publishing, Frank warns, litigation will be the least of your problems. And he also knows Yates has been having an affair with Kate.On the trail in Iowa, we see that Frank and Claire are still drifting apart – even if he doesn’t realize it. They take separate bedrooms at the end of the day. You were wonderful, he tells her. They adore you. She dismisses him with a cold, “Good night.”(Also, briefly, did I miss something? Did Iowa move below the Mason Dixon Line? Why does Claire suddenly use “y’all” when she’s trying to pump up the crowd? I know she’s from Dallas, but still.)Dunbar is ahead in the polls. But she wants something to seal her front-runner status. She remembers the diary Doug offered her – the one that lays out how Claire lied about her abortion. She calls Doug. Name a price, she tells him. If she really is the front-runner, I can’t figure out why. Her speeches are so sanctimonious. “I am meant to be the president of the United States,” she tells the crowd. Frank thought that, too, remember?At Dunbar’s urging, she and Frank meet at the White House in the same stairwell where Petrov snubbed out that cigar on the wall. The mark is still there, which Frank doesn’t hesitate to point out. Unimpressed, she tells him she knows about Claire’s abortion. Drop out, or I’ll reveal it. Impressed, he remarks how she has finally become one of them. Then he says, in an aside that only we hear, he will slit her throat if she harms Claire. Unaware that one of her deepest and most personal secrets is about to get out, Claire is dutifully going door to door in Iowa. We meet one of the most bizarre characters we’ve seen so far this season: a lonely wife and mother of an infant who is at home when Claire knocks on her door. There are Underwood signs out front, but the woman tells Claire – within earshot of all the reporters following – that she supports Dunbar. The signs are her husband’s. Claire asks to be let inside, anyway.The woman first tells Claire why she doesn’t trust Frank. And she rambles on about the problems in her own marriage: her cheating, lying husband; her own extramarital affairs. (Sound familiar, Claire?) If I were like you, the woman tells Claire, I’d start over. Then she proceeds to fantasize about smothering her baby with a pillow. She insists that she was only joking as a mortified Claire gets up to leave. Praising Claire’s listening skills, she suggests she run for president someday. Claire’s phone rings. Frank gives her the bad news. Whatever you do, Francis, fix it. He’s already dispatched Meechum to find Doug, the only person who could have the diary. Her hands go numb and she drops the phone. She’s hitting her breaking point. Developments with two other couples are worth pausing on for a minute for how they could factor in later. First is what Jackie and Remy are up to. Both now broken free of Frank, they would make a powerful and dangerous combination if they turn against him. We see them kiss, leaving us to wonder what their next move is. Then we have Kate and Yates. This scene I found baffling. Yates wants her to write a story about his book. She can’t, she tells him. It would be unethical. For someone who’s sleeping with a source, she picked a strange issue to get all high and mighty over.After Meecham locates Doug, Doug comes to the Oval Office, like a kid being called to the principal to explain himself. Doug hands Frank the diary. He still has it. Then he rips out the page about Claire’s abortion and burns it, hoping to prove his loyalty. Bring me back, Doug begs. But how, Frank wonders, can I ever trust you when you told Dunbar about that diary – a diary you were supposed to destroy? Then Doug tells him Dunbar offered him $2 million for it.They’re back together again. And to celebrate they call Dunbar to let her know she’s been played. With Doug back on board, Frank is now emboldened to behave even more ruthlessly than ever. But is he being too reckless? The writers plant one seed that could help undo Frank later on. Under questioning from Kate, he lies about the Jordan Valley mission that went awry. Remember, he covered up the death of the soldier who was killed. Kate has figured out it wasn’t a training mission, as White House officials said. Frank tells Kate that the Pentagon told him all along that it was a training mission, drawing a surprised look from Seth. Frank hasn’t exactly made many friends among his military commanders. Any one of them might leak that later on.Then we get to Claire as the episode closes. She’s on the edge. Standing in front of the fridge to cool what we are led to believe are hot flashes, the depths of her doubts about their marriage, their careers, their paths toward ruination come spilling out. What are we doing all this for, she asks. She doesn’t make any eggs this time.