Gherardo Delle Notti: Most Bizarre Paintings and Merry Suppers
Galleria degli Uffizi.
Through May 24.
The Dutch painter Gerrit van Honthorst (1592-1656) is believed to have spent a decade in Italy perfecting a shadowy, Caravaggio-inspired style that earned him the  nickname ‘‘Gerard of the Night’’  before returning to his native country, where he worked for the rest of  his life. This exhibition brings together a number of works from the artist’s early career. The show will also include van Honthorst’s ‘‘Adoration of the  Shepherds,’’ one of the works that was badly damaged when a car bomb exploded outside the Uffizi in 1993.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Printemps des Poètes
Various venues. 
March 7-22.
Supported by France’s Culture  Ministry, but open to submissions  from independent organizations,  the poetry festival takes place  across the Francophone world and  beyond. This year’s installment focuses on ‘‘poetic insurrection.’’  A  slam  performance organized by  the Lycée Français will take place  in Luanda, Angola, as will a poetry  contest at the Établissement  Liberté in Mali. Most roads lead to  Paris, however, where events include an exhibition of letters by poets like  Baudelaire at the Musée Delacroix  and a performance at the Institut du Monde Arabe inspired  by meetings between the  director Wissam Arbache and Syrian poets.Auckland Arts Festival
Various venues.
Through March 22.
In 2013, the French troupe Groupe F staged a large-scale outdoor spectacle here, complete with fireworks,  dancers clad in electric lights, and  performers rigged to float through  the air. The group will return with ‘‘Skin of Fire,’’ a new pyrotechnic piece created for the festival. Other  performances include a dance work  by the British Akram Khan Company, a performance by the American Cedar Lake Contemporary Ballet and ‘‘Macbeth,’’ staged by the  South African director Brett Bailey,  whose ‘‘Exhibit B’’  —  which features black actors on display in the manner of 19th- and 20th-century human zoos  — attracted large-scale protests and a London cancellation when it toured Europe last year.Dance Massive
Various venues.
March 10-22.
Social issues are at the forefront of  this dance festival  from cutting- edge Australian companies. ‘‘Nothing to Lose,’’ by the director Kate Champion, puts plus-size dancers center stage, looking at  their exclusion from mainstream dance, while Victoria Chiu’s ‘‘Do You Speak  Chinese?’’ focuses on the dancer-choreographer’s experience of being an Australian citizen of Asian  descent. Meanwhile, four  male  choreographers have created ‘‘Kingdom,’’ a piece about their experience of gay life, which they will perform together.Chen Shun-Chu: Coral Stone Mountain
Taipei Fine Arts  Museum.
Through April 26.
The Taiwanese artist Chen Shun- Chu (1963-2014) focused on photography but incorporated other media into his artworks, often to unsettling effect. The installation  piece ‘‘Assembly: Family Parade,’’  for example, includes a gridlike array of   photographs of the artist’s  family and friends, arranged like  tombstones in a graveyard. The exhibition brings together a number  of works from across Mr. Chen’s  career, including sculptures, video  pieces and small trinket-filled  boxes, which evoke the work of the  American  artist Joseph Cornell.El Público
Teatro Real.
Through March 13.
Federico García Lorca called his freewheeling rewrite of ‘‘Romeo and Juliet’’ a piece of ‘‘impossible theater.’’ The composer Mauricio Sotelo and the librettist Andrés Ibañez took on the task of  transforming the work into a full opera, which makes its world premiere  here.  The sculptor and designer Alexander Polzin designed the visually inventive production. It was commissioned by Gérard Mortier, the Teatro’s artistic adviser, who died last year.Abu Dhabi Festival
Various venues.
Through April 2.
The music and arts festival kicked  off this month with events in  venues throughout the city. Highlights of the largely classical lineup include the Budapest Festival Orchestra performing  opera and orchestral works; the conductor Riccardo Muti leading an Italian youth  orchestra alongside the German violinist Anne-Sophie Mutter; and a recital series featuring performers  including the pianist Ah Ruem Ahn and the violinist Aisha Syed Castro.Inventing Impressionism
The National Gallery.
Through May 31.
 A number  of the Impressionist  movement’s best-loved paintings  are showing in an exhibition dedicated to the man who brought many  of them to wider attention across   the world:  the French art dealer Paul Durand-Ruel. Durand-Ruel, who bought around 1,500 Renoirs  in his lifetime, proved to be an early champion of Impressionism  when most people  shunned the  style. The exhibition includes 85 masterpieces, 84 of which passed  through his hands. Artists on view  include Monet, Pissarro, Mary Cassatt and Renoir.Festival Les Jardins Mystérieux
Opéra de Lyon.
March 13-29.
‘‘Sunken Garden,’’ an opera set  against a 3-D film backdrop that  the British author David Mitchell (‘‘Cloud Atlas’’) created with the Dutch composer Michel van der Aa, will appear in this festival, which this year focuses on three operas set around mysterious gardens. The other works are  Schreker’s ‘‘The Stigmatized,’’ about Alviano Salvago, a rich hunchback who builds a paradisiacal island, and Gluck’s ‘‘Orpheus  and Eurydice,’’ parts of which take  place in Elysium.