By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMARCH 6, 2015
8 P.M. (Starz) MALEFICENT (2014) In this live-action back story to the 1959 Disney animated musical “Sleeping Beauty,” a happy young fairy (in a role shared by Isobelle Molloy and Ella Purnell) living in the moors becomes friends — and then something a bit more, involving a kiss — with a human farmhand (played by Michael Higgins and Jackson Bews). But eventually the boy grows into a man (Sharlto Copley) and helps wage war against the mossy wonderland of the fairy (now Angelina Jolie), whose wings are literally clipped. Now in an eternally foul mood, she retreats into a dark place, where years later she plots against his child, Aurora (Elle Fanning), who is destined to fall into a deep sleep after pricking her finger on a spindle. Ms. Jolie “makes a fabulous monster” as “she breezes through the movie, part superstar, part superfreak,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “Consciously or not, coherently or not, ‘Maleficent’ tells a new kind of story about how we live now, not once upon another time. And it does so by suggesting, among other things, that budding girls and older women are not natural foes, even if that’s what fairy tales, Hollywood and the world like to tell us. And while that may sound drippy, it’s exactly the kind of hokey that, movie by movie, may finally make a real difference.”4 P.M. (TMC) HAPPY-GO-LUCKY (2008) The irrepressible optimism of a 30-year-old London schoolteacher (Sally Hawkins) grates on those whose days she’s intent on brightening up — among them, her driving instructor (Eddie Marsan), flamenco teacher (Karina Fernandez) and sister (Caroline Martin) — in this character study directed and written by Mike Leigh, which earned him an Oscar nomination for best original screenplay. Ms. Hawkins’s portrayal is “glorious,” a “gurgling, burbling stream of gasps, giggles and words,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times, choosing the film as a critics’ pick. “Mr. Leigh has a documentarian’s eye for unadorned reality — his people and places look equally lived in — and his dialogue has the ebb and flow, the swells and eddies and logjams of ordinary conversation,” she added. “But the dramatist in Mr. Leigh is always hard at work, aligning his characters for maximum narrative effect and emotional pow. That’s true even if ‘Happy-Go-Lucky’ seems as lighthearted as the bobbing bloom at its center.”9 P.M. (Fox) GLEE After the Dalton Academy burns down, the Warblers join the New Directions to form a supergroup. Rachel (Lea Michele) pleads with Carmen Tibideaux (Whoopi Goldberg) to let her return to the New York Academy of Dramatic Arts. And Michael Bolton and Geraldo Rivera make appearances.9 P.M. (NBC) DATELINE NBC A housewife in an upscale neighborhood in Long Beach, Calif., is killed as police officers surround her home. The suspect claims that a burglary went wrong. But then detectives discover something ominous. Keith Morrison reports.Advertisement10 P.M. (HBO) REAL TIME WITH BILL MAHER Lawrence Wright, a staff writer for The New Yorker and the author of “Going Clear: Scientology, Hollywood, and the Prison of Belief,” which has been turned into an HBO documentary, and John Ridley, the Oscar-winning screenwriter of “12 Years a Slave” and the creator of ABC’s “American Crime,” are the interview guests. The political adviser David Axelrod; the Rolling Stone editor Matt Taibbi; and Genevieve Wood, a senior contributor to the Heritage Foundation’s The Daily Signal, are seated with Mr. Maher at the round table. The Season 3 premiere of “Vice” follows at 11.What’s Streaming NowMY OWN MAN (2015) When David Sampliner learns at 40 that he’s going to become a father to a boy, he decides to “man up” and embrace the traditional masculinity he has rejected his whole life by partaking in warrior weekends, hunting expeditions and even voice lessons. But first he has to come to terms with his own dad. Edward Norton, a longtime friend of Mr. Sampliner, is an executive producer. (netflix.com)AdvertisementBESS OF BOTH WORLDS Bess Denyar (Annie Maynard) — a doctor with a sophisticated mother, an architect husband and 13-year-old twins in a private school — is stunned to learned that she was adopted. But never so much as when she meets her birth parents and siblings, who lead a drag-racing team in this Australian series. (hulu.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page C17 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.