AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertANNANDALE-ON-HUDSON, N.Y. — Imagine that you are about to exit through a narrow doorway just as someone else is about to enter. What’s the polite thing to do? With a semicircular flourish of an arm and perhaps a tip of your head, you indicate an open path for the other person, as if to say, “After you.”Those two words are the title of Mark Morris’s new work for American Ballet Theater. On Friday, when the company gave the piece its world premiere here at the Bard College Richard B. Fisher Center for the Performing Arts, it wasn’t long before Stella Abrera (recently promoted to principal rank) made the titular gesture toward one of the wings, ushering in a line of dancers. A little while later, Gillian Murphy, alone onstage, made the gesture again, but no one took the cue. So she shrugged her shoulders and left.“After You” is a dance of civil behavior, of good manners that include good humor. Its courtesy is the courtesy of ballet, of orderly entrances and exits and the sharing of stage space, but also of classical music. The music is the piano septet in C by Johann Nepomuk Hummel, a student of Mozart and contemporary of Beethoven. Apart from its inclusion of a trumpet in a chamber setting (the source of the septet’s “military” label), the score is conventional, distinguished mainly by the balance among its instruments, politely passing around thematic material like dishes at a dinner party. Even the trumpet is modest.It is this balance that Mr. Morris mirrors. The beauty of the dance, and also much of its gentle wit, arises from the way material introduced by a soloist is taken up and amplified by other members of the 12-person cast. It’s a form of agreement and fellowship, binding everyone into something larger. When the “after you” gesture is adopted by three dancers, the shared door becomes a revolving one, and the dancers weave the courteous flourish into a garland.Counterbalancing that process is its opposite: a group phrase adopted by a soloist. The language is shared, but a measure of independence is reasserted. This happens most delightfully late in the work, when Ms. Murphy repeats a quick, tricky sequence that she and the other women have previously performed only while supported by a man’s hands. It gives her no trouble, and having proven the point without pressing it, she walks off casually.There are solos in “After You” but not much hierarchy. Principal dancers mingle freely with colleagues of lower rank, and on Friday, Ms. Murphy’s stellar performance blended in with the excellent work of the corps members Sterling Baca and Calvin Royal III and the soloists Devon Teuscher and Arron Scott. In this way, Mr. Morris’s premiere was a good introduction to Ballet Theater’s upcoming fall season at the David H. Koch Theater, where, in the absence of the guest stars who tend to dominate the troupe’s spring performances at the Metropolitan Opera House, more company members get chances to shine.That was already happening during the rest of Friday’s blue-chip program. In Paul Taylor’s “Company B,” which draws upon both the innocent humor and the undercurrent of war in recordings by the Andrews Sisters, Luciana Paris was particularly lovely and full of feeling in her melancholy solo to “I Can Dream, Can’t I?” Gabe Stone Shayer in “Tico-Tico” and the impeccable Joseph Gorak in “Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy” were a bit short on charisma, though that was also true of the company’s star of the moment, Misty Copeland, in her restrainedly sexy “Rum and Coca-Cola.” But Christine Shevchenko and Roman Zhurbin danced “There Will Be Never Be Another You” with heart-piercing eloquence.Alexei Ratmansky’s “Piano Concerto No. 1,” originally the concluding piece of his Shostakovich trilogy, made for a brilliant finale, exploding the careful equilibrium of the preceding works with helter-skelter energy of a fireworks display or a high-class circus. As the lead two couples, Ms. Murphy and Cory Stearns were paired against Daniil Simkin and Maria Kochetkova, a more lightweight couple in both neutral and negative senses. Ms. Kochetkova is a principal dancer with San Francisco Ballet who is joining Ballet Theater this fall. When Ms. Murphy embraced her protectively, it was part of the choreography but also a well-mannered gesture of welcome.American Ballet Theater’s fall season runs from Oct. 21 through Nov. 1 at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; abt­.org.Advertisement