MARCH 5, 2015
Reviews of classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera★ ‘Carmen’ (Saturday) The star tenor Jonas Kaufmann was to sing just two performances at the Metropolitan Opera this season in this Bizet classic, and he would certainly have been an exciting new addition to the ensemble. But it was not to be. Mr. Kaufmann was sidelined by the flu, and has had to withdraw from this production completely. (At Wednesday’s performance he was replaced by Yonghoon Lee, who will also sing for Mr. Kaufmann at this Saturday matinee.) The rest of the cast in this revival of Richard Eyre’s stony Met production includes the rich-toned but blank mezzo-soprano Elina Garanca, in the title role, and the strong-willed, strong-voiced soprano Ailyn Pérez. Louis Langrée conducts. Saturday’s performance is the last for the season. At 1 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)‘Les Contes d’Hoffmann’ (Wednesday) James Levine is now conducting the rest of the run of this revival of Bartlett Sher’s phantasmagoric 2009 production. This Offenbach opera has long been a Levine specialty, and he led an elegant and insightful performance. The tenor Matthew Polenzani makes a vocally and emotionally impassioned Hoffmann. Audrey Luna stands out for a dazzling turn as Olympia. Laurent Naouri brings a robust voice and consummate French style to the four villains. At 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)★ ‘Don Giovanni’  (Friday) Although acclaimed for his adventurous work in England, the director Michael Grandage presided over a surprisingly tame new Metropolitan Opera production of this opera by Mozart in 2011. That staging, dominated by a three-tiered set, is back, and still lacks a strong point of view. But the cast, headed by the charismatic baritone Peter Mattei in the title role, is excellent, and Alan Gilbert, in his second appearance with the Met, conducts a vividly detailed, urgent and elegant performance. The soprano Elza van den Heever as Donna Anna and the bass-baritone Luca Pisaroni as Leporello are other standouts in this appealing cast. Friday’s performance is the last for the season. At 7:30 p.m., 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)Advertisement★ La Donna del Lago (Saturday and Tuesday) The mezzo-soprano Joyce DiDonato is magnificent as Elena, the winsome heroine of this Rossini melodrama, which is having its premiere production at the Metropolitan Opera House. The story is set against the 15th-century rebellion by some clans of Scottish highlanders against their king, James V. As the daughter of the king’s former tutor, who is now allied with the rebels, Ms. DiDonato brings affecting sensitivity and brilliant coloratura to her performance. The tenor Juan Diego Flórez is at his best as the king, who, disguised as Uberto, falls for Elena, though she loves — and eventually marries, with the king’s blessing — Malcolm, a contralto role, sung here by the rich-voiced mezzo-soprano Daniela Barcellona. The director Paul Curran’s essentially traditional production, atop a shifting floor and against the backdrop of atmospheric videos, gets the job done. The conductor Michele Mariotti leads a stylish and supple performance. (In repertory, through March 14.) Saturday at 8 p.m., Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)Advertisement★ ‘Manon’ (Monday and Thursday) Her voice peerlessly pure and flexible and her presence always warm and sympathetic, the soprano Diana Damrau will make an intriguing combination with the volatile, charismatic tenor in the Metropolitan Opera’s revival of this Massenet classic. Russell Braun and Nicolas Testé round out the cast, and Emmanuel Villaume conducts. (In repertory, through March 28.) At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metoperafamily.org. (Woolfe)★ ‘Semele’ (Friday, Saturday and Tuesday) Handel’s opera about a narcissistic goddess receives a brilliantly irreverent makeover by the director Zhang Huan in this production that blends European costume with Chinese theater, sumo wrestlers and a good dose of sex appeal. Christopher Moulds conducts a cast from the Canadian Opera Company led by Jane Archibald in the title role. Friday and Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)Classical MusicAmerican Classical Orchestra (Thursday) Soloists including Sherezade Panthaki join this period instrument ensemble for Mozart’s “Coronation” mass. The program, conducted by Thomas Crawford, also includes Schubert’s Symphony No. 9 “Great,” Beethoven’s “Egmont” Overture and excerpts from Beethoven’s oratorio “Christ on the Mount of Olives.” (A preconcert lecture is at 7 p.m.) At 8 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, lincolncenter.org, 212-721-6500. (Vivien Schweitzer)Avant Music Festival (Friday and Saturday) This adventurous new-music festival concludes on Saturday with a three-and-a-half hour meditative “drone epic” by Randy Gibson, with light and video installations. But first, on Friday, a new cantata by the singer-composer Imani Uzuri, based on words by Toni Morrison, will be performed. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 7 p.m., Wild Project, 195 East Third Street, East Village, 212-228-1195, thewildproject.com. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Bach Revisited: Michael Gordon (Thursday) As part of this series, works by the Bang on a Can co-founder Michael Gordon — “Hyper” and “Dry” — are paired with two concertos by Bach. Brad Lubman conducts the Ensemble Signal, and the excellent harpsichordist Kristian Bezuidenhout joins in. At 8 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (David Allen)Sasha Cooke (Thursday) This luminous young mezzo-soprano will be joined by the pianist Julius Drake for a program of works by Haydn, Liszt, Mahler (the youthful “Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen” cycle) and Granados, and the new “Of All the Moons” by Kevin Puts. At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Woolfe)Early Music New York (Saturday) The clarity and grace of Mozart and his contemporaries is the focus of a concert by this organization’s classical orchestra. The program includes Haydn’s “The Philosopher,” an adagio and fugue by Wilhelm Friedemann Bach and a concerto for two flutes by Anton Thadäus Stamitz, with Immanuel Davis and David Ross as soloists. Frederick Renz conducts. At 7:30 p.m., First Church of Christ, Scientist, Central Park West and 68th Street, earlymusicny.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Kirill Gerstein (Monday) This superb young pianist, a recent recipient of the Gilmore Artist Award whose playing is both poetic and virtuosic, offers a program with Bach’s Three-Part Inventions, Liszt’s “Transcendental Etudes” and selections from Bartok’s “Mikrokosmos.” At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)AdvertisementHermès Quartet (Sunday) The Schneider Concerts Series presents this excellent young ensemble from Paris in a program of Haydn’s String Quartet in B minor (Op. 33, No. 1), Schumann’s String Quartet in A minor (Op. 41, No. 1) and Schubert’s String Quartet No. 15 in G. At 2 p.m., the Auditorium at the New School, 66 West 12th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-229-5873, events.newschool.edu. (Schweitzer)Kalichstein-Laredo-Robinson Trio (Sunday) This eminent trio is presented by the wallet-friendly Peoples’ Symphony Concert series in a program featuring Beethoven’s “Kakadu Variations” for Piano Trio, Brahms’s Piano Trio in C (Op. 87) and Tchaikovsky’s Piano Trio in A minor. At 2 p.m., Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, 212-586-4680, pscny.org, the-townhall-nyc.org. (Schweitzer)Meitar Ensemble (Monday) This up-and-coming chamber ensemble from Israel, conducted by Yuval Zorn, asserts its identity with fresh programming and a generous commissioning program. Here they perform American premieres of works by the Israeli composers Ayal Adler and Yair Klartag alongside Hanns Eisler’s “Fourteen Ways of Describing the Rain,” Gérard Grisey’s “Talea” and Spencer Topel’s “Details on the Strasbourg Rosace.” At 8:30 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ MET Chamber Ensemble (Sunday) At the core of an outstandingly ambitious program from the players of the Metropolitan Opera is the premiere of Elliott Carter’s “The American Sublime,” a setting of five poems by Wallace Stevens for baritone and ensemble. Equally making this concert unmissable are a Charles Wuorinen cantata, “It Happens Like This,” John Cage’s “Atlas Eclipticalis” and works by Stravinsky and Ives. At 5 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)★ New York Philharmonic (Thursday through March 14) The Philharmonic gives the American premiere of one of Thomas Adès’s most effective compositions, “Totentanz.” In a work about the inescapability of loss of life, the baritone Mark Stone takes on the role of death, while the mezzo-soprano Christianne Stotijn sings on behalf of humanity. A fine conductor in his own right, Mr. Adès also takes the podium for the overture to Berlioz’s “Les Francs-juges,” and Beethoven’s First Symphony. Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Allen)★ New York Philharmonic: Contact! (Saturday) The next concert in the Philharmonic’s Contact! series of contemporary music programs is titled “New Music From Nordic Countries.” The Finnish composer Kaija Saariaho has organized this program, offering works by Per Norgard, Kalevi Aho and Duro Zivkovic, along with the United States premiere of her own “Terra Memoria” for string orchestra. Alan Gilbert and Courtney Lewis will conduct. At 7 p.m., Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-570-3949, metmuseum.org/tickets. (Tommasini)New York Youth Symphony (Sunday) This ensemble, founded in 1963, offers training and performance opportunities for aspiring music students from ages 12 to 22. Its Carnegie Hall concerts are always ambitious and usually excellent. This afternoon program was to feature the premiere of a commissioned work by the young composer Jonas Tarm, but the youth symphony pulled it from the program after learning that it includes a musical quotation from the “Horst Wessel” song, the Nazi anthem. The group will still perform Beethoven’s Violin Concerto, with Elena Urioste as soloist, and Rimsky-Korsakov’s beloved “Scheherazade,” all conducted by the music director, Joshua Gersen. At 2 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)★ Andras Schiff (Tuesday and Thursday) After his recent Bach marathons, this eminent pianist is taking on something more contrived, if still ambitious. On Tuesday, he plays the antepenultimate sonatas of Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert; on Thursday, the penultimate. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)★ Tenet (Thursday) The queasy, daring harmonies of Gesualdo’s Tenebrae Responsories for Holy Saturday are perfect fodder for this adventurous and expressive vocal ensemble. Sets of the motets will be interspersed by organ improvisations by Eric Dudley. At 7 p.m., Good Shepherd Faith Presbyterian Church, 152 West 66th Street, 646-470-5809, tenetnyc.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Advertisement★ Venice Baroque Orchestra (Wednesday) Avi Avital — that rarity, a star mandolinist — joins this vibrant ensemble in works by Vivaldi, as well as selections by Marcello, Geminiani and Paisiello. At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Woolfe)A classical music entry in the Listings pages on Friday about a concert by the American Classical Orchestra at Alice Tully Hall in Manhattan misstated the date of the performance. It is scheduled for Thursday, not Tuesday.A version of this schedule appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page C15 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.