AdvertisementSupported byBy Joshua BaroneAround TownMuseums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and other diseases? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out diseases. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.BRIC and the Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Mapping Brooklyn’ (through Sept. 6) This exhibition features artworks that incorporate themes of mapping and cartography in historical maps. The artists here are exploring the ways maps represent the practical and metaphoric aspects of life. The show is on view at BRIC House through May 3. Tuesdays through Saturdays from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Sundays to 6 p.m., BRIC House, 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. The show will also be at the Brooklyn Historical Society through Sept. 6. Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5 p.m., Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Chinese American: Exclusion/Inclusion’ (through April 19) In his review for The New York Times, Edward Rothstein called this show a “vigorous and imaginative new exhibition,” that includes a look at “how Chinese-American identity came to be, how immigration and discrimination were followed by recrimination and conflict, and how, finally, a people’s trials give way to celebration.” Tuesday through Thursday and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Friday until 8 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Public Library for the Performing Arts: ‘Emily Dickinson: Musician and Poet’ (Friday) Emily Dickinson’s poems and letters as well as the library’s collection of her work provide the backdrop for this exhibition, which focuses on the musical side of her writing and closes on Friday. Dickinson’s musical identity encompassed piano performances, the collection of sheet music and concert outings, and those experiences are detailed here. From noon to 6 p.m., 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/lpa; free.Red Bull Studios: ‘Alone Together’ (through April 12) The artist Ryder Ripps has created a site-specific work that acts as sculpture and performance. It’s a system that covers two floors: Below are six performers whose computer activity is sent above to a collective, frenzied display. Visitors to the exhibition play the part of voyeurs. Mr. Ripps’s idea is that the Internet creates a paradox in which the more connected we are, the more physically withdrawn we become. Thursdays through Sundays from noon to 7 p.m., 220 West 18th Street, Chelsea, redbullstudios.com/newyork; free.Tenement Museum: First Fridays at the Tenement (Friday) The museum’s First Fridays series offers food and drinks (beer and wine for adults), as well as special programming. This time around it’s “Tenement Inspectors,” in which visitors will play the part of housing inspectors in 1906. They will investigate 97 Orchard Street, the museum’s location, and interview the building’s landlord. At 6:30 and 8 p.m., 103 Orchard Street, at Delancey Street, 877-975-3786, tenement.org.EventsAmerican Showstoppers: An Evening With Irving Berlin (Saturday) Fred Barton and his 14-piece orchestra celebrate the Broadway legend Irving Berlin. The concert will cover decades of history, beginning with his earliest American hit, “Alexander’s Ragtime Band” — which, to put in context, played on the Titanic. Mr. Barton will be joined by a cast of Broadway actors, including Karen Ziemba and Brent Barrett. At 8 p.m., Kingsborough Performing Arts Center, Kingsborough Community College, 2001 Oriental Boulevard, Manhattan Beach, Brooklyn, 718-368-5596, onstageatkingsborough.org.Beat Nite 12 (Friday) Norte Maar, a nonprofit arts organization in Brooklyn, presents its 12th annual gallery night, which will take place at more than 10 locations across Bushwick. The gallery crawl runs from 6 to 10 p.m., and will be followed by an after-party at the Vazquez in Bushwick. More information, along with a map of the galleries, is at nortemaar.org.The Flatiron Follies (Saturday) The Metropolitan Room, the cozy cabaret club in the Flatiron district, goes back in time to when the area was known as the toy district in this old-fashioned burlesque show starring Grace Gotham and Bettina May. The two performers will blend dance, show tunes and more. At 11:30 p.m., 34 West 22nd Street, Flatiron district, 212-206-0440, metropolitanroom.com.High Line Open Studios  (Saturday) To coincide with the Armory Show, more than 50 artists’ studios will be open to the public in various locations in Chelsea from noon to 6 p.m. The self-guided tour is a chance to meet artists and get a behind-the-scenes glimpse at their work. There might even be a chance to buy an artist’s work before it ends up on a gallery wall. A map with the studio locations is at highlineopenstudios.org. At noon, 212-242-1909; free.7 Days of Genius Festival: Venture Into the Extraordinary (Friday through Sunday) This festival, which concludes on Sunday, brings together luminaries from a variety of fields — including science, art, religion, business and literature — to discuss the concept of genius and all that goes with it. The complete lineup is at 92y.org/genius.‘Vintage: What a Difference a Year Makes’ (Thursday) The French Institute Alliance Française hosts a class about what makes a good vintage wine. Tastings will complement instructions about what to look out for when selecting wines that get better (or don’t) with age. This is, of course, for the 21 and older crowd. At 7 p.m., Le Skyroom, French Institute Alliance Française, 22 East 60th Street, 212-355-6100, fiaf.org.Spoken Word‘The Covenant Kitchen: Food and Wine for the New Jewish Table’ (Sunday) Jeff and Jodie Morgan discuss their new book with Mark Russ Federman, of the beloved Russ and Daughters. Mr. and Ms. Morgan are co-owners of Covenant Winery in Napa Valley, so expect to taste their kosher wines and to learn which foods are best to pair with them. Reservations, which are required, should be made by the end of Friday. At 2:30 p.m., Museum of Jewish Heritage, 36 Battery Place, Lower Manhattan, 646-437-4200, mjhnyc.org.Alfredo Jaar With David Levi Strauss (Thursday) David Levi Strauss, an art writer and professor at the School of Visual Arts, interviews Alfredo Jaar, a conceptual artist from Chile. Mr. Jaar, a recipient of Guggenheim and MacArthur fellowships, is inspired by real-life events, and his work is motivated by politics. At 8:15 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org.Muldoon’s Picnic (Monday) The Irish Arts Center continues its series of words and music hosted by Paul Muldoon, the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet and poetry editor at The New Yorker. The evening will feature the writer Kevin Barry, the Tony Award-winning actor Michael Cerveris and music by the Wayside Shrines. At 7:30 p.m., 553 West 51st Street, Clinton, 212-757-3318, irishartscenter.org.‘Serving the Country: Women in Service During World War II’ (Tuesday) The New York Public Library celebrates Women’s History Month with a talk about Navy WAVES, Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service. Lincoln Hallowell, a National Park service ranger at the Gateway Recreation Area in Brooklyn, will lead the discussion about the women and the work they did at Floyd Bennett Field during World War II. At 6:30 p.m., Roosevelt Island Library, 524 Main Street, 212-308-6243, nypl.org/locations/roosevelt-island; free.2015 Whiting Award Winners Reading (Friday) Like Oscar winners following up on their speeches with appearances on late-night TV, this year’s winners of the Whiting Award will read from their works and sign books the night after the award ceremony. The Whiting Foundation chooses 10 emerging writers in fiction, nonfiction, poetry and drama, and gives them $50,000 each. Previous winners include Jonathan Franzen, David Foster Wallace and Jeffrey Eugenides. At 7 p.m., BookCourt, 163 Court Street, between Pacific and Dean Streets, Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, 718-875-3677, bookcourt.com; free.Woman I Am: Radmilla Cody (Saturday) The National Museum of the American Indian, as part of Women’s History Month, presents a concert and discussion with Radmilla Cody, a Grammy Award-nominated artist whose work incorporates traditional Diné music and language. Ms. Cody is a survivor of domestic abuse, and she is an advocate for women’s rights and for the prevention of violence against women. A 2 p.m., 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.Women and Power (Wednesday) Four biographers discuss exceptional women who worked to change the American society they knew. The panelists include: Cindy Lobel, on the education promoter Catherine Beecher; Lara Vapnek, on the free speech and women’s rights campaigner Elizabeth Gurley Flynn; Barbara Winslow, on the activist and presidential candidate Shirley Chisholm; and Robyn Spencer, on the black-power activist Angela Davis. At 6:30 p.m., Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org; free.Walking ToursFlatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.The Ghosts of Grand Central (Saturdays) This tour offers shelter from the cold, though discovering the ghosts of Grand Central Terminal may bring a different sort of chill. There will be history of the Vanderbilts, as well as August Belmont, Franklin Roosevelt and his dog, Fala. The tour meets west of the M.T.A. information booth under the four-faced clock in the station’s Grand Concourse. (Through March 28.) At 7:30 p.m., 646-493-7092, ghostsofny.com.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org. JOSHUA BARONEInformation on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. Advertisement