AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel Graeber‘Letters From Anne and Martin’“There will be a way out,” the first letter writer states. “God has never deserted our people.”The second agrees. “We will win our freedom,” he says, “because the sacred heritage of our nation and the eternal will of God are embodied in our echoing demands.”These two were not actually writing to each other. Yet the courage, outrage and fundamental faith they express in their letters show them to be kindred spirits: Anne Frank and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.“We’re imagining them in kind of this nonexistent place, a nebulous sort of room,” said Hannah Vaughn, who compiled the script for “Letters From Anne and Martin,” a play recommended for children 10 and older that will be performed on Saturday at the Anne Frank Center USA in Lower Manhattan. “They’re aware of each other and sometimes talk to each other.”But everything they say is drawn from works produced two decades apart: “The Diary of a Young Girl: The Definitive Edition,” the unexpurgated version of Frank’s Holocaust journal, and “Letter From a Birmingham Jail,” a rebuke to Southern white clergymen that Dr. King wrote while imprisoned for civil disobedience in Alabama in 1963.“I tried to match passages,” Ms. Vaughn said. She added that when reading Frank’s diary, which is in epistolary form, she would think, “What does she say that might spark a response from him?”Ms. Vaughn first approached the project a few years ago as a program for Martin Luther King’s Birthday. She turned to Dr. King’s letter because he was writing “from a place of confinement,” just as Frank was when she was hidden.“I knew it was the right choice,” Ms. Vaughn said, when she came upon his assertion that “had I lived in Germany at the time, I would have aided and comforted my Jewish brothers.”Rachel Neiheisel and Isaiah Frizzelle star in the performance, which Ms. Vaughn directs. Afterward, they will answer questions, and audience members will participate in a role-playing workshop inspired by the play, presented in commemoration of the 1965 Selma to Montgomery civil rights march.“Anne has this desire to take part in the world, and I think she would have been very interested in what was happening in the civil rights era,” said Ms. Vaughn, who noted that both Frank and Dr. King were born in 1929. If each had lived longer, she added, “who knows if they would have met?”(From 2 to 3:30 p.m., 44 Park Place, at Church Street; 212-431-7993, annefrank.com. Reservations are advised.) LAUREL GRAEBERFor Children‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’  (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Beats, Rhymes and Breaking’ (Saturday and Sunday) So what does all that add up to? Hip-hop! Manzana City Crew, a group of four dancers who have been b-boys for years, will show off their moves in this performance, part of the Just Kidding series at Symphony Space. Young spectators can expect head spins, windmills, pop and lock and much more. At 11 a.m., Leonard Nimoy Thalia Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.‘The Beauty of Ballet’ (Saturday) The best dancers often seem to defy the laws of physics as they leap and twirl across the stage. In this free children’s program from the School of American Ballet, the training academy for New York City Ballet, dancers will show how professional performers stay on their toes (literally) and spin without getting dizzy. The 45-minute event will also present class exercises and excerpts from repertory dances. (Seats are first come first served.) At 2 p.m., Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenteronline.org. Broadway Playhouse: Frank Loesser (Sunday) It’s time for small guys and dolls to learn about the adult ones who shared a spotlight on Broadway — and the man who helped bring them to life. At this program, the season’s conclusion to the Broadway Playhouse series at Merkin Concert Hall, which introduces classic musicals and their creators to the next generation of audiences, they can discover the world of Frank Loesser. The composer and lyricist behind “Guys and Dolls” and “How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying,” Loesser also wrote a famous tune that could be an anthem for this winter: “Baby, It’s Cold Outside.” Singalongs and interactive games are part of the fun. At 11 a.m., 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, kaufmanmusiccenter.org/mch. ‘The Bully’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company is reviving this ever-topical musical, by John Gregor and David L. Williams, which refreshingly avoids the trap of bullying its own audiences with heavy moralizing. Instead, the many pitfalls of the typical middle school relationship of victimizer and victim are revealed through wit, humor and a killer of a sly twist. (Through April 26.) At 3:30 p.m., McGinn-Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org. ‘Can Do Duck: The Musical’ (Saturday and Sunday) You’ve heard about the little engine that could — now comes the little duck. Arielle Sosland, writer and director of this musical, based it on “The Can Do Duck” series of children’s books by her father, Morton Sosland, a child psychiatrist. The charming and interactive hourlong show, for ages 3 through 11, closes this weekend. It focuses on a duck family and a human family as they learn to face challenges with self-confidence and optimism. At 11 a.m., Lynn Redgrave Theater at Culture Project, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, candoduckthemusical.com.EcoCruises: Winter Seals and Waterbirds of New York Harbor (Sunday) A lot of tourists visit New York in the winter, but some of the most interesting won’t be found in the crowds at Times Square. These two-hour cruises from New York City Audubon focus on birds that migrate to this region at this time of year, like many ducks and geese. They also visit the harbor seals that can be found around Governors, Hoffman and Swinburne Islands. (Seal behavior researchers have taken part in several of the tours, which end this Sunday.) An Audubon naturalist narrates the adventure, which includes complimentary hot tea and cocoa and is conducted via New York Water Taxi. Warm clothing and binoculars are recommended, as is advance purchase. At noon, Pier 16, South Street Seaport, 89 South Street, near Fulton Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-742-1969, nywatertaxi.com/tours/audubon-winter.‘Fancy Nancy the Musical’  (Saturday and Sunday) One of the arts’ youngest divas has returned to the McGinn/Cazale Theater. This musical from Vital Theater Company focuses on a little girl who wants everything to be fancy — especially herself. Based on the book series written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, the production explores the predicament that ensues when Nancy finds out that she hasn’t been cast as the glamorous mermaid she’d hoped to be in the coming dance show. With a book by Susan DiLallo, a score by Danny Abosch, and lyrics by both, the musical humorously follows Nancy’s attempts to cope with a most unfancy role: that of a tree. (Through April 5.) At 1:30 p.m., 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m., 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com. ‘Goose!’ (Saturday and Sunday) That’s Mother Goose to all who flock to this ballet, which adapts the tales of characters like Little Bo Peep, Little Boy Blue, Little Miss Muffet and all those other little folk. An hourlong entertainment for ages 3 and older from New York Theater Ballet, part of its Once Upon a Ballet series, the production is choreographed by Keith Michael to a score by Vladimir Shinov. At 11 a.m. and 1 and 3:30 p.m., Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, nytb.org. ‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one will sprout indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which is reviving Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays at 1 p.m. Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.Kids Fleadh at the Craic Fest (Saturday) No, you haven’t encountered a bunch of typos; you’re just reading Irish. Fleadh, pronounced flah, is the Irish word for festival, and craic is slang for fun. The Craic is an annual Irish event with a film fleadh for children 4 to 12. This year it features a selection of award-winning animated and live-action shorts, along with storytelling and Irish step dancing. A reception follows, with free goody bags for children. At 11 a.m., Tribeca Cinemas, 54 Varick Street, at Laight Street, 917-373-6735, thecraicfest.com.La Mama Kids: Buzz Buzz: A Movement and Music Workshop (Saturday) La MaMa, the downtown theater famous for cultivating cutting-edge adults, has in recent years been turning its attention to cutting-edge kids, too. This series for families, which presents interactive workshops and performances, continues this weekend with “Buzz Buzz.” Presented by Meredith Wright, a vocalist, dancer and member of the Great Jones Repertory Company, this participatory performance will celebrate one of earth’s most industrious species: bees. At 11 a.m., Ellen Stewart Theater, 74 East Fourth Street, East Village, 212-475-7710, lamama.org.‘The Light Princess’ (Saturday and Sunday) This musical, performed by the A.R.T. Institute at Harvard (a graduate program founded by the American Repertory Theater), has source material most Disney-saturated young New Yorkers won’t have heard of: a story by the Scottish Victorian George MacDonald. But that’s not the only reason to see it before it closes this weekend. Richly imagined by Lila Rose Kaplan and Mike Pettry, and delightfully acted, this 70-minute production proves unexpected in almost every way as it explores the fate of a fairy tale character with an unusual problem: weightlessness. At noon and 5 p.m., New Victory Theater, 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan; 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com. Lolli-Pops: ‘World Tour’ (Saturday and Sunday) The Lolli-Pops concerts from the Little Orchestra Society, for ages 3 through 5, use friendly characters like Bang, Bow, Buzz and Toot to introduce music. In this new program in the series, little listeners will learn about world music as they go on a global adventure with the orchestra. The instruments featured will include the sitar, the didgeridoo and the erhu, a Chinese fiddle. Saturday at 10 and 11:30 a.m.; Sunday at 11:30 a.m. and 1 p.m.; Kaye Playhouse, 68th Street, between Lexington and Park Avenues; 212-971-9500, littleorchestra.org.‘The Magic Garden, or, the Princess Who Grew Antlers’ (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Antlers are the hook, you might say, for all three stories that make up this show, a new production from the Czechoslovak-American Marionette Theater. Working, as always, with century-old carved puppets (and, in this case, moose and deer antlers), the troupe will explore some fragmentary Czech folk tales, partly improvising to fill in details that have been forgotten or overlooked. The central story concerns a soldier who pays back the king and princess who have cheated him: He gives them enchanted apples that make them grow antlers. (Through March 22.) Friday, Saturday and Thursday at 8 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.; Theater for the New City, 155 First Avenue, at 10th Street, East Village; 212-254-1109, theaterforthenewcity.net. MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.New Museum First Saturdays for Families: ‘Place and Space’ (Saturday) You could say that artists are always creating new places and spaces, either literally or figuratively. Children 3 to 8 are invited to do the same in this free program, linked to the museum’s 2015 Triennial: “Surround Audience,” a celebration of early-career artists. Working in the museum’s Skyroom, young visitors can reimagine its space, taking inspiration from Triennial participants like José León Cerrillo, Avery K. Singer and the artist collective DIS. From 10 a.m. to noon, 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org; tickets are limited, first come first served. New York International Children’s Film Festival (Saturday and Sunday) This celebration of young people’s cinema has never shied away from challenging films, and that’s certainly true this second weekend of the festival, which offers two features that examine the Holocaust: Dennis Bots’s “Secrets of War,” about two Dutch schoolboys whose friendship is threatened by their parents’ opposing views on the Nazis (Saturday, for ages 9 and older), and Nicolas Vanier’s “Belle and Sebastian,” from France, in which a boy and a reviled stray dog become involved in a Resistance mission (Sunday, for ages 7 and older). Options also include the Japanese Pop artist Takashi Murakami’s sci-fi fantasy, “Jellyfish Eyes” (Saturday, for ages 9 and older) and several programs of short films, including two retrospectives of Aardman Animations. (Through March 22. Tickets may be available at the door for screenings listed as sold out.) At various locations; full schedule is on the website; 212-349-0330, gkids.com/fest2015.‘Pilobolus Rules!’ (Saturday and Sunday) Anyone can see a dance performed, but what about seeing it unperformed? In this program from the BAMkids series at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, the renowned troupe Pilobolus will unspool four of its signature works — “Walklyndon,” “Pseudopodia,” “The Transformation” and “All Is Not Lost” — so that children can gain insight into the creative process. Recommended for ages 6 through 11, the show promises to be hands-on and interactive. Saturday at 2 and 6 p.m., Sunday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m., BAM Fisher, at the Fishman Space, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene; 718-636-4100, bam.org/kids.‘The Pinkertonian Mystery’ (Sunday) Young detectives should get their notebooks and magnifying glasses ready. The DiMenna Children’s History Museum at the New-York Historical Society is asking them and their families to help solve a Victorian-era crime. Live In Theater, known for its interactive murder mysteries, will present the case, a premiere production that unfolds throughout the museum galleries. Young visitors will portray members of the Pinkerton National Detective Agency, out to capture a crook called El Diablo in 1875. (Also on April 12 and 26.) From 3 to 5 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.The Pop Ups (Sunday) The rock duo Jacob Stein and Jason Rabinowitz, otherwise known as the Pop Ups, are popping up again for a concert at the Jewish Museum. Featuring tunes from their Grammy-nominated children’s album, “Appetite for Construction,” this interactive show features puppets and colorful props as well as music. It will take their intended audience — 3- to 8-year-olds — on adventures involving treasure, mermaids, stars and the biggest crayons they’ve ever seen. At 11:30 a.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through May 9.) At 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, 13thstreetrep.org.‘Sing Back, Brooklyn! With Lloyd H. Miller’  (Saturday) The Bronx, Queens, Manhattan and Staten Island are invited to sing back, too, in this free family program at the Brooklyn Historical Society. Lloyd H. Miller, a proud son of Brooklyn and leader of the band the Deedle Deedle Dees, known for its tunes celebrating science and history, hosts this event — with singalongs, stories and skits — the first Saturday of every month. March is Women’s History Month, so you can guess this Saturday’s theme. At 11 a.m., 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Society of Young Magicians Show (Saturday) Children have been known to make things disappear, particularly food and homework. But the young people at this event have earned a reputation for far more unconventional disappearances — and appearances — along with sleight of hand involving cards, balls and rope. Ranging in age from 7 to 17, these Members of the Society of Young Magicians will entertain their peers (and adults) with their skills at this show, a fund-raiser for Mount Sinai Hospital’s KidZone, a closed-circuit television studio broadcasting programs for pediatric patients. At 1 p.m., Goldwurm Auditorium, Icahn Research Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1425 Madison Avenue, at 98th Street, 212-280-2703. ‘Steal Away: The Living History of Harriet Tubman’ (Saturday and Sunday) The New Perspectives Theater Company’s World Voices Program is reviving this fascinating and poignant play by Rick Balian, aimed at ages 4 through 12. In about an hour, using puppets and live actors, it covers Tubman’s girlhood as a slave; her relationship with her father, who taught her to use the night sky as a map; the head injury inflicted by a cruel master, which left her prone to narcolepsy; and her rise as a leader of the Underground Railroad. After the production, children will learn two spirituals that contained coded messages for fleeing slaves. At 11 a.m., New Perspectives Theater Studio, 458 West 37th Street, Manhattan, 212-630-9945, nptnyc.org. Seating is limited, and reservations are advised, by phone or via an email to contact@nptnyc.org.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘To Kill a Mockingbird’ (Friday and Saturday) That intrepid and peerless young observer, Scout Finch, is back again, this time onstage, in Downtown Art’s adaptation of Harper Lee’s novel about courage and bigotry in a Depression-era Southern town. Directed by Ryan Gilliam, this all-female “Mockingbird,” closing this weekend, features seven teenage members of the troupe, playing multiple roles and using minimal props. On Saturday only, audience members are invited to stay after the show for some Southern food and a discussion about the work’s themes with Ms. Gilliam and Emily Gallagher, a historian. Friday at 7:30 p.m.; Saturday at 6 p.m.; Downtown Art, 61 East Fourth Street, East Village; downtownart.org.‘Tunes With Tina’ (Sunday) That’s Tina deVaron, a jazz musician and singer, whose musical brunch for young people at the Measure Lounge at Langham Place, Fifth Avenue, a hotel in Midtown Manhattan, has returned. Ms. deVaron, who often sings show tunes for children, also improvises and gears her performances to the audience. On selected Sundays throughout the season, she will be accompanied by Broadway performers. Singing along is encouraged. (Through May 31.) At noon, 400 Fifth Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-695-4005, measurenyc.com.Vered and the Babes (Saturday) This trio — Vered Ronen, Rob Jost and Matt Hilgenberg — play some percussion children can understand: pots and pans. Of course, they’ll also perform on more conventional instruments, like French horn and trumpet, at this free concert, part of the Saturday Morning Show series for families at Brookfield Place. Known for a style reminiscent of doo-wop, they’ll offer tunes from their hit album, “Good Morning My Love.” At 11 a.m., 200 Vesey Street, at West Street, Lower Manhattan, brookfieldplaceny.com/eventscalendar.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. This Sunday’s activities will include a treasure hunt in honor of Purim. Hours: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; to 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Wizard School Scavenger Hunt (Saturday) This weekend the Metropolitan Museum of Art will be an even more magical place than usual. Watson Adventures, organizer of scavenger hunts, has invited children 10 and older (and their adult companions) to explore the museum’s collection in a search for artworks related to the themes, objects, characters and places of the Harry Potter books and films. And in case you hadn’t noticed, dragons, owls, centaurs, unicorns and the like already populate the Met. At 4 p.m., 866-811-4111, watsonadventures.com. Advance purchase is required; R.S.V.P. necessary for meeting location. LAUREL GREABERAdvertisement