MARCH 5, 2015
 Museums and galleries are in Manhattan unless otherwise noted. Full reviews of recent art shows: nytimes.com/art. A searchable guide to these and many other art shows is at nytimes.com/events.Museums★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Kehinde Wiley: A New Republic’ (through May 24) You can love or hate this artist’s bright, brash, history-laden, kitsch-tinged portraits of confident, even imperious young black men and women usurping heroic roles from the generally lily-white history of Western painting. No matter, the two-decade survey of his extravagant, mind-teasing canvases rewards. His career seems to be one of ceaseless ambition, socially conscious generosity and an uncanny skill that he is still harnessing. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Roberta Smith)★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Judith Scott — Bound and Unbound’  (through March 29) Judith Scott’s mesmerizing sculptures sit like large, unopened bundles, contents mysterious, in the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art at the Brooklyn Museum. In a few, solid forms can be made out under wrappings of yarn, string and fabric strips; others suggest gift-wrapped boulders. You can call them abstract and stop there, or go further and connect them to art history, specifically the history of fiber art, or go further and consider them in the light of Ms. Scott’s history: She was born in 1943 with Down syndrome, started making art only in her early 40s and kept making it until her death at 61. However approached, the work is complex and brilliant. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Holland Cotter)★ Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum (continuing) The stately doors of the 1902 Andrew Carnegie mansion, home to the Cooper Hewitt, are open again after an overhaul and expansion of the premises. Historic house and modern museum have always made an awkward fit, a standoff between preservation and innovation, and the problem remains, but the renovation has brought a wide-open new gallery space, a cafe and a raft of be-your-own-designer digital enhancements. Best of all, more of the museum’s vast permanent collection is now on view, including an Op Art weaving, miniature spiral staircases, ballistic face masks and a dainty enameled 18th-century version of a Swiss knife. Like design itself, this institution is built on tumult and friction, and you feel it. 2 East 91st Street, at Fifth Avenue, 212-849-8400, cooperhewitt.org. (Cotter)Advertisement★ Drawing Center: ‘Tomi Ungerer: All in One’ (through March 22) This ambitious survey resurrects the French-born polymath “drawer” (his word) who made a big splash in New York in the late 1950s and ’60s before disappearing. But it skimps on his brilliant children’s books and overindulges on his rather ordinary erotica. Feast on his childhood renderings of Nazis, his acerbic social cartoons and the amazing animations of the children’s books. Savor the real thing in the gift shop. 35 Wooster Street, SoHo, 212-219-2166, drawingcenter.org. (Smith)Advertisement★ Guggenheim Museum: ‘On Kawara — Silence’  (through May 3) The first retrospective of this Conceptual Art giant turns the museum’s spiral into a vortex suffused with the consciousness of time, life’s supreme ruler, in all its quotidian daily unfoldings, historical events and almost incomprehensible grandeur. The presentation of date paintings, “I Got Up” postcards and “I Am Still Alive” telegrams echoes Mr. Kawara’s exquisite sense of discipline and craft. This is an extraordinary tribute. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. (Smith)Institute for the Study of the Ancient World: ‘From Ancient to Modern: Archaeology and Aesthetics’ (through June 7) Small but bursting with ideas, this show tells a fascinating tale about the 20th-century excavation and interpretation of some ancient Sumerian artifacts. It focuses on about 50 objects that were unearthed in the 1920s and ’30s in Mesopotamia, including sumptuous jewelry and wide-eyed, bearded men carved from stone. Along with these are profuse archaeological documentation; paintings and sculptures by 20th-century artists like Willem de Kooning and Henry Moore who were inspired by Sumerian art; and politically fraught works by two contemporary artists, Jananne al-Ani and Michael Rakowitz. Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, 15 East 84th Street, Manhattan, 212-992-7800, isaw.nyu.edu. (Ken Johnson)★ Jewish Museum: ‘Helena Rubinstein: Beauty Is Power’ (through March 22) The first museum show devoted to the life and art collection of the cosmetics magnate Helena Rubinstein is a master class in modernism-as-marketing — one that comes with a strong female perspective on 20th-century visual culture. It shows us how Rubinstein adapted Cubism, Surrealism and other avant-garde art and design movements for her personal brand, highlighting new and different standards of beauty and exhorting women to control their own images through makeup and grooming. Mixing biography, business, art, fashion and décor, it recreates rooms from Rubinstein’s salons and reassembles parts of her diverse collection, which included African, pre-Columbian and Oceanic artworks. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Karen Rosenberg)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Madame Cézanne’  (through March 15) Cézanne’s paintings of his wife, Hortense Fiquet, have long stumped would-be psychologists, offering few indications of intimacy or interior life. (The poet Rainer Maria Rilke, enthusing over “Madame Cézanne in a Red Armchair,” focused on the work’s color scheme and called the chair “a personality in its own right.”) But assembled at the Met, and supported by more tender and informal graphite sketches, these portraits are more forthcoming. They suggest that numbing familiarity was actually, for Cézanne, a form of intimacy; that he could connect with portrait subjects only when they were as reliable a presence in his life as Mont Sainte-Victoire. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Making Pottery Art: The Robert A. Ellison Jr. Collection of French Ceramics (ca. 1880-1910)’  (through March 15) Nearly all the 40 works in this show — from a collection recently donated to the museum — are in a traditional form of vases, bowls and platters. They represent a marvelous variety of styles and influences, including Art Nouveau, Arts and Crafts, classic Chinese traditions and European folk art. What they share is a love for processes and materials and a candid way with the human touch. Most intriguing of all is a curiously clunky small vase by Paul Gauguin, who might have been the George Ohr of European ceramics if he’d stuck with it. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Reimagining Modernism: 1900-1950’ (continuing) One of the greatest encyclopedic museums in the world fulfills its mission a little more with an ambitious reinstallation of works of early European modernism with their American counterparts for the first time in nearly 30 years. Objects of design and paintings by a few self-taught artists further the integration. It is quite a sight, with interesting rotations and fine-tunings to come. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Thomas Hart Benton’s “America Today” Mural Rediscovered’ (through April 19) The prickly American Regionalist Thomas Hart Benton had his share of detractors. But even they would probably acknowledge that his early mural “America Today” is the best of its kind, a raucous, cartwheeling, wide-angle look at 1920s America that set the standard for the Works Progress Administration’s mural program and has remained a New York City treasure. Now installed at the Met in a reconstruction of its original setting (a boardroom at the New School for Social Research), it captivates with period details (from the cut of a flapper gown to the mechanics of a blast furnace) and timely signs of socioeconomic and environmental distress (exhausted coal miners and hands reaching for coffee and bread). 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Rosenberg)Advertisement★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Warriors and Mothers: Epic Mbembe Art’ (through Sept. 7) If a dozen masterpiece Renaissance sculptures, done in an unknown and wildly unorthodox style, suddenly turned up in the Italian countryside, the find would make the news. You’ll encounter the equivalent of such a discovery in this show of spectacular weatherworn, wood-carved figures, some dating to before the 17th century, that were made by the Mbeme in southeastern Nigeria and taken to Paris by an African dealer in the early 1970s. They caused a sensation among collectors and scholars at the time, and you can see why. But the effort to find more of them proved fruitless. The examples at the Met, which include the original dozen, represent all the fully intact stand-alone Mbembe figures known to exist. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)MoMA PS1: ‘Bob and Roberta Smith: Art Amnesty’ (through March 23) Bob and Roberta Smith is the cognomen of a British artist who specializes in humorously mocking art institutions and the conventional attitudes they tend to promulgate. The ostensible idea of this show is to give people an opportunity to officially retire from making art and to ceremonially discard works of art they own but no longer want. Unloaded works are displayed along with jazzy signs painted by Mr. Smith on all kinds of surfaces. One proclaims, “Joseph Beuys conclusive proof not everyone is an artist.” 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Johnson)MoMA PS1: ‘Samara Golden: The Flat Side of the Knife’ (through Sept. 7) Standing at a railing where you look into the museum’s two-story-tall Duplex Gallery, you behold a confoundingly complicated interior architecture with furniture, stairways, musical instruments, wheelchairs and many other domestic items rendered in silvery, foil-clad foam board. The gallery’s floor is covered by a grid of large mirrors so that everything is doubled. What you think is up may really be down and what you take to be real might be a virtual reflection of the real. 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Johnson)★ Museum of Biblical Art: ‘Sculpture in the Age of Donatello: Renaissance Masterpieces From Florence Cathedral’ (through June 14) This terrific 23-piece show features three major works by the early Renaissance sculptor Donatello (1386-1466), including the life-size statue of a bald prophet known as “lo Zuccone” or “Pumpkin Head,” which is widely considered the sculptor’s greatest work. Along with a half-dozen other works by or attributed to Donatello are sculptures by Nanni di Banco (circa 1386-1421), Donatello’s main competitor, including his monumental representation in marble of St. Luke. With the addition of a series of octagonal marble reliefs by Luca della Robbia and wooden models of the Florence Cathedral’s enormous dome attributed to its designer, Filippo Brunelleschi, the exhibition amounts to a tightly cropped snapshot of the birth of the Renaissance. 1865 Broadway, at 61st Street, 212-408-1500, mobia.org. (Johnson)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘The Forever Now: Contemporary Painting in an Atemporal World’ (through April 5) Despite being predictable and market-oriented in its choice of 17 artists, this museum’s first painting survey in decades is well worth seeing. About half the artists are exceptional and the rest are represented by their best work. Based on the premise that all historical painting styles are equally available today, the exhibition has been smartly installed to juxtapose different approaches: figurative and abstract, digital and handmade, spare and opulent. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Jean Dubuffet: Soul of the Underground’ (through April 5) “Look at what lies at your feet!” Jean Dubuffet wrote in a 1957 essay. “A crack in the ground, sparkling gravel, a tuft of grass, some crushed debris, offer equally worthy subjects for your applause and admiration.” In MoMA’s stimulating show, drawn entirely from its collection, we can see how Dubuffet’s earthbound gaze nourished his reinvention of the painted surface. On view are several canvases smeared with a mixture of oil, putty, sand and gravel, some of them with incised drawings that seem to equate painting with plowing. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Rosenberg)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Modern Photographs from the Thomas Walther Collection, 1909-1949’ (through April 19) Overflowing with prints by Berenice Abbott, Andre Kertesz, Edward Weston and other luminaries from the first half of the 20th century, this exhibition would seem to be a straightforward look at photography’s past. But the show, packaged with a book, a symposium and an engrossing interactive website, is really a bold attempt to visualize the future of photography inside the museum as it reckons with the unwieldy, image-saturated culture outside the galleries. With works by Aleksandr Rodchenko, Ms. Abbott, Alvin Langdon Coburn and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy that explore cities from unusual angles or abstract their infrastructure, the show’s largest section, “Dynamics of the City,” best encapsulates the Walther Collection’s distinctly urban, peripatetic take on Modernism. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Rosenberg)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Museum of Modern Art: ‘The Paris of Toulouse-Lautrec: Prints and Posters’ (through March 22) In his printed works, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec chronicled and publicized the music halls, theaters, circuses, operas and cafes of Paris with terrific verve, sly wit and surprising subtlety. This enthralling show presents approximately 100 examples drawn from the museum’s permanent collection. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Johnson)★ Neue Galerie: ‘Egon Schiele: Portraits’ (through April 20) Of the approximately 125 items in this terrific show, there are only 11 oil paintings, which is a good thing. Except for a large picture of his wife, Edith, in a colorful striped dress, Schiele’s works on canvas are dark and turgid. But his drawings are nimble and nuanced. Working on paper with pencil, charcoal, ink, gouache, watercolor and crayons, he portrayed himself and others with infectious avidity. There’s hardly a single sheet here that doesn’t warrant close looking for its virtuoso draftsmanship and psychological acuity. 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street, 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org. (Johnson)Advertisement★ New Museum: ‘Surround Audience: 2015 Triennial’ (through May 24) If you’re fed up with big joke-shop sculpture, diva spectacle and brain-dead abstraction, this museum’s 2015 Triennial will come as a break in the clouds — not a full flood of new light, but a pull in a different direction. It’s a glimpse of terrain composed almost entirely of border crossings in media, art disciplines, ethnicities, genders and species. The in-between as an aesthetic is no surprise given the curators: Lauren Cornell of the New Museum, who has been paying astute attention to digital art and the Internet for years, and the artist Trecartin, whose laptop-generated, YouTube-distributed, hourslong pop-epic videos add up to some of the most thoroughly genre-collapsing art of the past decade. If nothing by the 51 artists from 25 countries is as genius as his work, there is still a lot to ponder in a show that represents a welcome shift to microgravity flux within a gross-objects industry. 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ New-York Historical Society: ‘Freedom Journey 1965: Photographs of the Selma to Montgomery March by Stephen Somerstein’ (through April 19) Almost 50 years ago, the picture editor of a campus newspaper at City College of New York assigned himself a breaking story: covering what promised to be a massive march in Alabama, led by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., to demand free-and-clear voting rights for African-Americans. On short notice the editor, Stephen Somerstein, grabbed his cameras, climbed on a bus and headed south. The 55 pictures of black leaders and everyday people in this show, installed in a hallway and small gallery, are some that he shot that day. The image of Dr. King’s head seen in monumental silhouette that has become a virtual logo of the film “Selma” is based on a Somerstein original. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org. (Cotter)★ Rubin Museum of Art: ‘The All-Knowing Buddha: A Secret Guide’ (through April 13) This show presents 54 paintings that illustrate step-by-step instructions for followers of Tibetan Buddhism. Delicately painted on 10-by-10-inch paper sheets, most of the pages depict a monk having fabulous visions in a verdant landscape. Thought to have been commissioned by a Mongolian patron and executed by unidentified artists in a Chinese workshop sometime in the 18th century, it is a fascinating and remarkably thorough manual for seekers of higher consciousness. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org. (Johnson)Sculpture Center: ‘Araya Rasdjarmrearnsook’  (through March 30) A pre-eminent artist in Southeast Asia, this Thai video maker addresses topics like death, the insane, East-West cultural differences, the disenfranchisement of women and the rights of animals, often in provocatively discomfiting ways. In a set of three videos, she gives professorial lectures about death to sets of real human corpses. Many of her most recent works have to do with dogs. In them, she protests the abuse of dogs and hints at a holistic vision of people in tune with nature and the cosmos. 44-19 Purves Street, Long Island City, Queens, 718-361-1750, sculpture-center.org. (Johnson)Galleries: Chelsea‘The New York School, 1969: Henry Geldzahler at the Metropolitan Museum of Art’ (through March 14) This show revisits a large groundbreaking exhibition in 1969 organized by the Met’s first curator of 20th-century art. Its radiant works evoke the big-name movers and shakers of Abstract Expressionism, Pop Art and Minimalism, while also representing art history as unquestioningly orderly, monolithic and male. Paul Kasmin, 293 10th Avenue, 212-563-4474, paulkasmingallery.com. (Smith)Galleries: Other‘The Gee’s Bend Tradition’ (through April 24) A show of 14 quilts by seven artists, all made since 1990, and an accompanying exhibition of photographs, demonstrates what makes the Gee’s Bend tradition so compelling. Unlike most quilts in the European-American tradition, which favored uniformity, harmony and precision, Gee’s Bend quilts, made by generations of African-American women, include wild, improvisatory elements: broken patterns, high color contrasts, asymmetry and syncopation. They came into being alongside gospel, blues and jazz. The photographs document how the quilts are historically linked to slavery, Depression-era politics and the Civil Rights Movement, and the rich landscape in which they germinated and thrived. Lehman College Art Gallery, Lehman College, 250 Bedford Park Boulevard West, the Bronx, 718-960-8731, lehman.edu/gallery. (Martha Schwendener)Public Art‘Archeo’ (through March) Shortening the word archaeology, this exhibition focuses on technology and obsolescence. Marianne Vitale’s sculptures made from steel components of railroad switches known as frogs are one highlight; Jessica Jackson Hutchins’s neo-hippie assemblages with found ceramics and a hand-woven hammock another. Across the bar from the Standard Hotel, Josh Kline takes the most activist stance, with smoothies made from prescription drugs and consumer products, while a mural by the veteran artist Ed Ruscha — a new commission separate from “Archeo” — announces “Honey, I Twisted Through More Damn Traffic Today,” perhaps capturing the ethos of the tourist-clogged High Line. At the High Line, enter at Washington and Gansevoort Streets, art.thehighline.org. (Schwendener)Out of Town★ National Museum of African Art: ‘Conversations: African and African American Artists in Dialogue’  (through early 2016) For its 50th anniversary, this museum has brilliantly thread together work from two sources: its own holdings in African material and the Camille O. and William H. Cosby Jr. collection of African-American art. The Cosby collection, weighted toward canonical figures like Romare Bearden and Charles White, will bring in the crowds, but it is the curators and museum itself, which is in a period of renaissance, that have made the show rise well above predictability. Smithsonian Institution, 950 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, 202-633-4600, africa.si.edu. (Cotter)AdvertisementPennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts: ‘Peter Blume: Nature and Metamorphosis’ (through April 5) Though not well-known today, Blume (1906-92) was a famous American artist during the 1930s and ’40s. For many years his painting “The Eternal City” (1934-37) was one of the most memorable artworks displayed in the permanent collection galleries of the Museum of Modern Art. A weird, technically dazzling mix of Magic and Social Realism that envisioned Rome under the Fascist reign of Mussolini, it’s among the highlights of this exhibition of more than 150 works dating from 1924 to 1990. 128 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, 215-972-7600, pafa.org. (Johnson)Last ChanceAmerican Folk Art Museum: ‘A Shared Legacy: Folk Art in America’  (closes on Sunday) Drawn from a private collection, this beguiling show presents more than 60 choice objects including paintings, drawings, sculptures, furniture, painted chests and knickknacks made from 1800 to 1920. Altogether they embody a paradox for modern viewers: They evoke a world and a way of life that modernity has eclipsed, and yet they feel as vivid as anything you might desire in the art of today. 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 66th Street, 212-595-9533, folkartmuseum.org. (Johnson)James Benning and Peter Hutton (through Thursday) Three slow, beautiful installations of moving images include Mr. Benning’s “Tulare Road” (2010), which was shot digitally but has repeating segments. Mr. Hutton’s three-channel installations were shot on 16-millimeter film and transferred to video. Deep-hued and expertly composed, the films are also subtle commentaries on labor and globalization. There is footage of a ship being constructed in Korea, images taken from a ship at sea and film of workers demolishing freighters in Bangladesh — and at Orchard Street, three different forms of industry: salt miners in arid Ethiopia, farmers in the verdant Hudson Valley and repairmen in a familiarly bleak Detroit. All three exhibit a mastery of the moving picture that is arresting, instructive and impressive. Miguel Abreu Gallery, 36 Orchard Street, near Hester Street, and 88 Eldridge Street, near Grand Street, Lower East Side, miguelabreugallery.com. (Schwendener)★ Dia:Beacon: ‘Carl Andre: Sculpture as Place, 1958-2010’ (closes on Monday) Minimalism was the late-20th century’s great hope for a heroic American art on the Abstract Expressionism model. Mr. Andre was one of Minimalism’s founders. This career survey of his low-to-the-ground modular sculptures looks terrific in Dia’s sonorous, sunlight-washed spaces. It also poses the question of how such monument-minded art can feel so modest, intimate — even delicate. The real treat here is the chance to see dozens of manuscript pages of Mr. Andre’s 1960s poems, which he referred to as “typewriter drawings.” Carefully shaped on the page in lines and blocks, they are evidence of a sculptor-to-be at work. 3 Beekman Street, Beacon, N.Y., 845-440-0100, diaart.org. (Cotter)★ Agustin Fernandez: ‘Paintings and Works on Paper’ (closes on Sunday) After a short hiatus, Mitchell Algus has reopened a gallery under his own name, this time on the Lower East Side. (He’s also the co-owner of the Chelsea gallery Algus Greenspon, which continues.) And as always, he’s highlighting substantial but under-recognized artists of an earlier day. The painter Agustin Fernandez was born in Cuba in 1928, studied art and philosophy there (he was a classmate of Fidel Castro), and had a cosmopolitan career at home and abroad. His expertly painted mix of abstraction and surrealism ended up being out of step with new art in New York, where he died in 2006, but looks remarkably fresh in the context of current styles of morphing digital realism. Mitchell Algus Gallery, 132 Delancey Street, at Norfolk Street, Lower East Side, 212-844-0074, mitchellalgusgallery.com. (Cotter)★ ‘Foot Notes: On the Sensations of Tone’ (closes on Saturday) This marvelous small show of sound art, organized by Alastair Noble, requires some time to take in, and is worth every minute spent. You’ll travel two aural voyages: across the North Sea in a myth-tinged narrative recorded on video and LP by Chris Watson and Robert Macfarlane, and down the Housatonic River, its length traced entirely in field recordings of water, weather and bird sounds. And you spend an hour of pure, natural magic with the clarinetist David Rothenberg as he stands in a field creating a collaborative song cycle with cicadas. Other magicians on hand are Ed Osborn, the team of Una Lee and Chris H. Lynn, and the deep listeners and pulse-whisperers George Quasha and Chuck Stein. Apexart, 291 Church Street, between Walker and White Streets, TriBeCa, 212-431-5270, apexart.org. (Cotter)Saya Woolfalk: ‘ChimaTEK: Hybridity Visualization System’ (closes on Saturday) This show’s installation evokes the lobby of a futuristic, New Age boutique or spa. It includes paintings of psychedelically patterned kimonos, digital animations representing archetypal iconography, and exotic avatars and colorful mannequin heads decorated with bones and jewelry. Based on an imaginary cult, “The Empathics,” Ms. Woolfalk’s show adeptly extends the genre of Afro-futurism, which includes the music of Sun Ra and George Clinton and the sci-fi novels of Samuel Delany and Octavia Butler. Leslie Tonkonow Artworks + Projects, 535 West 22nd Street, Chelsea, 212-255-8450, tonkonow.com. (Johnson)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page C16 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Art.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.