AdvertisementSupported by Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Ballet Flamenco Sara Baras (Friday and Saturday) The celebrated Spanish dancer Sara Baras presents “Voces, Suite Flamenca,” which should be a rousing close to City Center’s three-week festival “A Bailar.” Riding the line between innovation and tradition, between theatrical glamour and flamenco’s Gypsy roots, Ms. Baras will be joined by her large ensemble of dancers and musicians, including the guest artist José Serrano. At 8 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org. (Siobhan Burke)★ Compagnie CNDC-Angers (Tuesday through March 15) More than five years after his death, Merce Cunningham lives on in fresh and exciting ways. This French company, making its United States debut, has a direct link to the source: Its artistic director, Robert Swinston, was a 30-year veteran of the Cunningham company, as a dancer and Merce’s right-hand man. The company will perform “Event,” a quilt of excerpts that Mr. Swinston has stitched together from Cunningham classics made from 1965 to 1990. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday and March 13 at 8 p.m., March 14 at 2 and 8 p.m., March 15 at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Brian Schaefer)★ ‘Dancers, Buildings and People in the Streets’ (through March 28) Ballet and contemporary dance sometimes seem like estranged relatives, but with its latest platform, inspired by the dance critic Edwin Denby, Danspace Project collapses the space between them. The curator Claudia La Rocco, a critic and poet who contributes to The New York Times, paired artists from different choreographic traditions — those of Merce Cunningham, George Balanchine and Judson Dance Theater — and left them to their own devices. The results so far have been fascinating. The next set of collaborations (Friday at 8 p.m.) features two New York City Ballet principals: Sara Mearns, who teamed up with the former Cunningham dancer Rashaun Mitchell, and Sterling Hyltin, who’s been working with the contemporary choreographer Jodi Melnick. Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)Ori Flomin  (Wednesday through March 14) While doing research for his first evening-length piece, Ori Flomin, a veteran of the Stephen Petronio Dance Company, asked 40 dancers around the world what drew them to dance and what they remembered about their first performance experiences. The resulting quartet, “First Move,” takes those personal tales and turns them into an abstract meditation on a dancing body’s unique physical journey, and the obstacles it encounters along the way. The performance is part of Gibney Dance’s new Making Space series. At 7:30 p.m., Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Schaefer)Hong Kong Dance Company (Friday through Sunday) Known for its large-scale productions, this troupe returns to the David H. Koch Theater with the United States premiere of “The Legend of Mulan.” Directed by Yang Yuntao with an extensive creative team, the show is billed as “an inspiring retelling” of the ancient folk tale about a humble and heroic peasant girl. Departures from the Disney version may be in store. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 1 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com. (Burke)Sam Kim (Friday and Saturday) In “Sister to a Fiend,” Ms. Kim conjures a ritualistic space that she shares with two enigmatic dancers, Amanda Kmett’Pendry and Joanna Kotze. The three could be siblings or strangers, friends or foes; in an earlier version at New York Live Arts, Ms. Kim kept us guessing. She performs as part of Gibney Dance’s inaugural spring season, titled Making Space, in its new downtown space. At 7:30 p.m., Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Burke)Malpaso Dance Company (Friday through Sunday) Founded three years ago by former members of Danza Contemporánea de Cuba, this appealing troupe, based in Havana, returns to the Joyce Theater with two premieres. “Despedida,” by the artistic director Osnel Delgado, takes cues from the Jorge Luis Borges poem. It blends contemporary ballet and capoeira and is performed to an original score by Arturo O’Farrill, who will play live with the Afro Cuban Jazz Ensemble. Adding to the company’s growing repertory, the inventive Trey McIntyre offers “Under Fire,” an exploration of resilience to music by the singer-songwriter Grandma Kelsey. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)New York Theater Ballet  (Saturday and Sunday) Bedtime stories and nursery rhymes will be brought to life by this troupe in Keith Michael’s “GOOSE!,” a collection of colorful, cheerful vignettes aimed at the little ones. It features cameos by the clumsy Jack and Jill, the forgetful Little Bo Peep, the lazy Little Boy Blue and the frightened Little Miss Muffet; original music is by Vladimir Shinov. At 11 a.m., 1 and 3:30 p.m., Florence Gould Hall, French Institute Alliance Française, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 212-355-6160, nytb.org. (Schaefer)Peridance Contemporary Dance Company (Saturday, Sunday, next Friday and March 14) For more than 30 years, Igal Perry has been carving dances out of ballet technique, polishing them with a contemporary sensibility and giving them a sensual varnish. His company’s annual spring season includes premieres by the Italian choreographer Macia del Prete, the French choreographer Manuel Vignoulle, the United States’s Dwight Rhoden (of Complexions Contemporary Ballet, with whom Peridance shares an aesthetic kinship), and Mr. Perry’s own work. Saturday at 6:30 p.m., Sunday and March 15 at 4 p.m., March 14 at 8 p.m., Peridance Capezio Center, 126 East 13th Street, East Village, 212-505-0886, peridance.com. (Schaefer)School of American Ballet  (Saturday and Monday) The pupils of this training academy, which is affiliated with the New York City Ballet, are pure focus at the core and determined grace on the surface. In “The Beauty of Ballet,” students and faculty members share their experiences in this free lecture (Saturday at 2 p.m.). On Monday the annual Winter Ball (a black-tie dinner, dance and fund-raiser) will give viewers a chance to support and see the promising advanced students in action. The lecture is at Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, Brooklyn, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org. The ball is at 7 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, sab.org. (Schaefer)★ Vicky Shick (Friday through Sunday) This veteran choreographer is up next at the 92Y Harkness Dance Festival, where she presents “Pathétique, Miniatures in Detail.” In his review for The New York Times last year, Brian Seibert found that the work had many moments of magic. This is a reflection of Ms. Shick’s effective, long-term collaboration with the costume designer Barbara Kilpatrick and the sound designer Elise Kermani, as well as Ms. Shick’s precise and elastic choreography. For the festival’s Stripped/Dressed format, where choreographers generally unravel their work, Ms. Shick heads in the other direction, toward embellishment. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Schaefer)★ Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance (Wednesday through March 29) It’s never too late to reinvent yourself: After 60 years as the Paul Taylor Dance Company, the group returns this year as Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance, a more inclusive moniker reflecting the addition of outside choreographers. This season that includes Shen Wei, with his artful “Rite of Spring,” and the pioneering Doris Humphrey, represented by her 1938 “Passacaglia.” Adding to his tireless output, Mr. Taylor will also premiere a new work, “Death and the Damsel.” Tuesday, Wednesdays and Thursdays at 7 p.m. (except Thursday’s gala performance, at 6:30 p.m.), Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m., Sundays at 2 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com. (Schaefer)White Road Dance Media (Saturday) What does dancing look like from the dancer’s perspective? In “Neon Brave,” the women of White Road Dance Media attempt to share that viewpoint with their audience by wearing cameras as they move. Live and recorded projections augment solos and group vignettes that address themes of courage, vulnerability and self-actualization. Performing once a week over three weeks, the troupe intends to see what happens when choreography has room to breathe between showings. At 8 p.m., Muriel Schulman Theater, 106 Calyer Street, near Franklin Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, wrdm2015.brownpapertickets.com. (Burke)Advertisement