MARCH 5, 2015
 Prices may not reflect ticketing service charges. For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Alabama Shakes  (Wednesday and Thursday) Retro-soul warbling rattles the Southern rock firmament of this Athens, Ala., quartet, which has opened for Jack White and has had its share of festival dates. “I Ain’t the Same,” the lead single from its 2012 debut studio album, “Boys & Girls,” crackles live. The band’s second album, “Sound & Color,” may not arrive until next month, but it’s safe to assume the group will probably play a few of the new tracks during this two-night engagement at the Beacon Theater. At 8 p.m., 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatrenyc.com. (Stacey Anderson)★ Björk  (Saturday and March 14) It is startling to hear Björk — an artist who specializes in mercurial, brilliant electro-symphonics and opaquely cerebral lyrics — expose her heart so thoroughly on her morose new album, “Vulnicura.” Yet when this Icelandic star poses the devastating question, “Did I love you too much?/Devotion bent me broken,” on the song “Black Lake” — over heavy, elegiac strings, warped voices and fractured synth production from the upstart talent Arca — she creates her finest art in a decade. Her sorrow is terrible and gorgeous. At 12 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Anderson)Will Butler  (Saturday) This multi-instrumentalist and member of Arcade Fire (his brother is the frontman, Win Butler) opens his debut solo album, “Policy,” with a stretch of cheery, clanging throwback country-rock akin to Jake Bugg (“Take My Side”); he then segues into detached New Wave synthpop (“Anna”) and somber pop piano (“Finish What I Started”). Mr. Butler’s mind clearly works swiftly, and he exhibits a healthy dose of irreverence, but the hectic, diffuse approach makes his true solo strengths unclear. At 8 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, babysallright.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementBrandi Carlile  (Wednesday) This singer-songwriter’s delicate falsetto lends itself to country-pop melodicism and spare acoustic backing. Her new album, “The Firewatcher’s Daughter,” veers into more rock-’n’-roll terrain but still has gentle, cathartic moments of balladry, most notably on the Laurel Canyon-folk-influenced single “The Eye.” At 9:30 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementCherrytree Records 10th Anniversary Celebration with Sting and Feist  (Monday) The pop-dance label Cherrytree has long proved adept at grooming intriguing, slightly eccentric artists for stardom: its roster includes Robyn, Lady Gaga, Disclosure and Die Antwoord. At this 10th anniversary celebration, two of its current artists, Sting and Feist, headline. Far East Movement, Ivy Levan and Matthew Koma are also on the bill. At 7:30 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 800-745-3000, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)Cursive  (Tuesday and Wednesday) Chamber rock and post-hardcore clashes and coheres equally in this feisty group from Omaha. Mainstays of that city’s emo-leaning scene since the mid-1990s, this quartet released its seventh studio album, “I Am Gemini,” in 2012, which featured its most churning, heavy squall in a decade. With Beach Slang and John Congleton and the Nighty Nite. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)★ D’Angelo and the Vanguard  (Wednesday) In December, when the reclusive neo-soul star D’Angelo released his third album, “Black Messiah,” after a 14-year recording hiatus, it was hailed as a Christmas miracle by many a music fan. “Black Messiah” is a stunningly intricate reverie that calls for greater social conscience, exhibits vintage funk and teems with joyous orchestration. At 8 p.m., Best Buy Theater, 1515 Broadway, at 44th Street, 212-930-1950, bestbuytheater.com. (Anderson)★ Heems  (Tuesday) The silly, rowdy meta-commentary on hip-hop culture by the defunct rap trio Das Racist has been missed, but one of its former members, Heems, had a promising solo outing with the 2012 mixtape “Wild Water Kingdom,” an intelligent work of coiled, occasionally sitar-tinged beats and stubbornly nontraditional rhyming schemes. His debut solo album, “Eat Pray Thug,” arrives the day of this show. With Sandunes and Rizzla. At 8 p.m., Santos Party House, 96 Lafayette Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-584-5492, santospartyhouse.com. (Anderson)Hozier  (Friday) Something’s in the air in Ireland; two of its musical representatives are begging for higher power. The brooding singer Hozier, whose real name is Andrew Hozier-Byrne, broke into American radio and graced the stage of “Saturday Night Live” with his first single, “Take Me to Church,” a sultry, bracing appraisal of love and the hypocrisy of religion. The song shouldn’t be confused with his countrywoman Sinead O’Connor’s identically titled track, a yearning for redemptive love. With George Ezra. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Billy Joel  (Monday) The piano man has achieved what the Knicks can only fantasize about: a yearlong winning streak at Madison Square Garden. His open-ended monthly residency, which began in January 2014, has been billed by the arena as its fourth franchise. So far, it has included hearty appearances by Sting, John Mellencamp and Brian Johnson of AC/DC, as well as many euphoric singalongs to “New York State of Mind.” At 8 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)Maroon 5  (Friday) Loyal listeners of FM radio generally exist in a perpetual twilight loop of the current Maroon 5 hits “Animals” and “Sugar,” which blend amiable, poppish guitar riffs with the singer Adam Levine’s falsetto. The band joins another flashy, genetically blessed group, the reggae-rockers Magic! (whose “Rude” was a hit single last year), for two nights at the Garden. With Rozzi Crane. At 7:30 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret (through April 4) The most anticipated event of cabaret’s high season is Debbie Harry’s already sold-out engagement at Café Carlyle, from March 24 to April 4. On the heels of Buster Poindexter’s run there, it is proof positive that downtown has crashed the gates of uptown and that the punk-rock revolution, absorbed by the mainstream, now qualifies as rock nostalgia. Before that, from Tuesday through March 21, Herb Alpert and Lani Hall return to the Café with a mixture of light pop-jazz built around Mr. Alpert’s burbling trumpet and Ms. Hall’s sultry voice. (Tuesdays through Fridays at 8:45 p.m., Saturdays at 8:45 and 10:45 p.m., 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com.) At 54 Below, Maureen McGovern performs her new show, “Sing, My Sisters, Sing!” The program, celebrating women singer-songwriters like Joni Mitchell, Laura Nyro, Annie Lennox and Amanda McBroom, includes a jazz sidebar. (On Tuesday and Thursday through next Saturday at 7 p.m., 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 646-476-3551, 54below.com.) Also at 54 Below, Melissa Manchester, one of the women to whom Ms. McGovern pays tribute, opens a three-evening engagement on March 26 at 7 p.m., and the unstoppable Ben Vereen revives his high-spirited show “Steppin’ Out,” from March 17 through 21 at 7 p.m. At Birdland, the versatile pop-jazz singer Kevin Mahogany, whose range encompasses R&B and bebop, is appearing from Tuesday through next Saturday at 8:30 and 11 p.m. His forthcoming recording is a tribute to Johnny Hartman. (Stephen Holden)AdvertisementOf Montreal  (Wednesday) Led by Kevin Barnes, these unflinching glam-pop oddballs trod deeply personal ground on their 2013 record, “Lousy With Sylvianbriar,” which nodded to Southern California folk and country. But don’t expect to hear too much from that album at this show. The band’s latest, “Aureate Gloom” (its 13th release), arrived this week and will most likely set the tone for the evening. With Yonatan Gat. At 8 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)One Step Beyond, with Mayer Hawthorne (Friday) This dance party in the American Museum of Natural History’s Rose Center for Earth and Space is a selectively educational endeavor: Guests are free to read every factoid on the Kuiper belt and Oort cloud, or simply spill beer on them. Regardless, it’s a truly exceptional occasion best enjoyed in the company of stellar dance acts; Mr. Hawthorne, a spit-shined soul-popper, fits the bill. With the Range and Astro Nautico. At 9 p.m., Central Park West, at 81st Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org/rose. (Anderson)Sage Francis  (Thursday) This multifaceted rapper draws from his past as a slam poet to spit his heavily politicized lyrics. His passion has no threshold; it’s why the hard-core punk institution Epitaph Records signed him as its sole hip-hop artist. He has since left the label, and last June he released “Copper Gone” on his own label, Strange Famous. With Ceschi and Metermaids. At 9 p.m., Knitting Factory, 361 Metropolitan Avenue, at Havemeyer Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 347-529-6696, bk.knittingfactory.com. (Anderson)★ Suicide  (Saturday) This trailblazing, underrated synth-punk duo were linchpins of the late-1970s downtown experimental dance scene. Their art-rock whispers of melodies found are exhibited by other artists in the New Wave explosion, though Suicide’s own terrifying 10-minute saga “Frankie Teardrop” scared off some noise neophytes. With the Vacant Lots and Pharmakon. At 8:30 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 800-745-3000, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)★ TheeSatisfaction  (Friday) This intoxicating hip-hop and neo-soul duo’s dynamism was on full display at the Afropunk Fest in Brooklyn last summer, where they D.J.’ed a lively mix of their spacey spiritualist influences and churned an initially restrained crowd into a raucous dance party. This Seattle pair, consisting of the rapper Stasia “Stas” Irons and the singer Catherine “Cat” Harris-White, released their second album, “EarthEE,” last month on Sub Pop, and it featured feisty cameos from Shabazz Palaces and Meshell Ndegeocello. At 7 p.m., Santos Party House, 96 Lafayette Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-584-5492, santospartyhouse.com. (Anderson)Charlie Wilson  (Saturday) This funk veteran and former Gap Band frontman remains a prominent force in R&B: In recent years he has collaborated with Kanye West on the Grammy-nominated hit “Bound 2” and received a BET Lifetime Achievement Award, presented by Justin Timberlake. This smooth showman makes two stops in the area as part of his “Forever Charlie” national tour, with Kem and Joe. At 8 p.m., Prudential Center, 165 Mulberry Street, Newark, 800-745-3000, prucenter.com. (Anderson)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page C14 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Pop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.