AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenThe New York Cabaret Convention’s return to the Town Hall, its place of origin, on Tuesday evening was a warm, festive homecoming for an annual event that has slowly, sometimes painfully evolved to reflect 21st century realities. In recent years, it had been held at Rose Hall at Jazz at Lincoln Center, a more luxurious but less welcoming environment.Since its inception, the convention, a national talent showcase now in its 26th year, has been the musical equivalent of an exclusive country-club retreat for an older audience repelled by the abrasive tone of contemporary pop. Even now, it is a bastion of tradition against the barbarian invasion that began with ascendance of Elvis Presley.Under its new artistic director, KT Sullivan, it is cautiously broadening its scope to embrace a younger, more diverse audience. There was even talk this year of including a hip-hop suite from the hit Broadway show “Hamilton” on the opening-night program. But that didn’t happen. Some badly needed discipline was exerted to keep the running time down to two and a half hours.Under the auspices of Ms. Sullivan and the Mabel Mercer Foundation, which produces the convention, what might be called “the Noel-and-Cole” (as in Coward and Porter) school of cabaret, though still prominent, no longer defines it, despite the grumblings of die-hard traditionalists. Soft rock and sophisticated pop-soul have found their way in the door, and the concert made space for international voices including Stefan Bednarczyk (from England) and Frans Bloem, a Dutch-born New Yorker who sang Charles Aznavour’s “La Bohème.” Christine Andreas sang Edith Piaf classics.The opening night show — the first of four consecutive evenings — was a carefully chosen pop-jazz showcase featuring serious talent. After a zany medley of show business anthems sung by Ms. Sullivan, the jazz baritone Allan Harris evoked the caressing purr of Nat King Cole with his renditions of the Bart Howard ballad “I’ll Be Easy to Find” and a bossa-nova flavored version of Billy Strayhorn’s “Something to Live For.”Mr. Harris was one of several major underrecognized talents on the bill. Even lesser known was Vivian Reed, whose ferocious, accusatory rendition of “God Bless the Child” evoked the mature Lena Horne in her one-woman Broadway show more than three decades ago. In the age of inequality, that Billie Holiday classic has taken on a furious urgency, and lightning struck as she bitterly cried out, “Money, you’ve got lots of friends crowding ’round the door.”In a soft-rock mode, Lauren Fox delivered the Rolling Stones’ “Wild Horses,” and Stevie Nicks’s “Storms” with a haunted intensity. Karen Oberlin sang acutely perceptive renditions of Paul Simon’s “Train in the Distance” and the Elvis Costello-Paul McCartney song “Veronica.” For some, the evening’s high point was a deadpan rendition of a comic obscurity by Sidney Myer, a beloved latter-day vaudevillian and New York nightclub manager.The evening crested with the appearance of Amanda McBroom and her husband, George Ball, who met more than 40 years ago in a New York production of “Jacques Brel Is Alive and Well and Living in Paris.” Both are powerful theatrical singers, based in California. Ms. McBroom, who wrote “The Rose,” an inspirational pop-country ballad that reveals new facets every time I hear it, is a major songwriter whose deeply felt folk-tinged pop songs are models of modern grown-up composition. Mr. Ball dug deeply into “Old Habits Die Hard,” a song about marriage she wrote with her longtime accompanist Michele Brourman for an obscure musical, “Heartbeats.” It made for moving culmination of an unusually satisfying opening-night concert.The New York Cabaret Convention runs through Friday at the Town Hall; thetownhall.­org.Advertisement