AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertIn “Voces, Suite Flamenca,” the Spanish flamenco star Sara Baras pays tribute to six luminaries of her art who have influenced her. Their likenesses appear on mobile flats that suggest monumental headstones. Their voices can be heard in recordings, expounding in Spanish on the meaning of flamenco. Live singers and guitarists add resonant voices of their own. That most of the show rings hollow is the fault of Ms. Baras.Don’t tell that to her fans, especially those who enthusiastically greeted the United States premiere of “Voces” at City Center on Wednesday. The professions of love exchanged between Ms. Baras and her vocal public were the most over-the-top aspect of the show.I can see grounds for admiration. Ms. Baras is a highly controlled, finely etched dancer. Her curling wrists, serpentine arms and scorpion shapes are fatally precise. In taut turns, she whips around with a startling swiftness, an angry snap. She can swirl a skirt vividly and cut a handsome figure in slacks. Her thunderous, turbo footwork (highly amplified) is indisputably impressive. At the climax of every number, her jackhammering heels propel her like a locomotive.But all this flash covers a preening emptiness. The most revealing moment in “Voces” comes when the images of the honorees are turned to face the rear so that Ms. Baras can be surrounded by mirrors.The slick 90-minute show is a diva production, though the musicians do get a few moments to shine. Ms. Baras is also periodically spelled by a tight and skilled chorus of six dancers, who share some of their boss’s glibness but also betray some winningly unpolished enthusiasm. The guest star is her husband, José Serrano, a manly dancer who can delineate simple patterns clearly and whose slow-build solo was low on suspense. The childlike way he responded to audience encouragement had a certain charm.You could say that the show starts off on the wrong foot with an unintentionally silly first ensemble routine. But the problem goes deeper. The awful synthesizer music that backs the dance is representative of the bad example sometimes set by the guitarist being honored, the pathbreaking Paco de Lucía.Ms. Baras’s tribute to the influential choreographer Antonio Gades, a “Carmen” number, also highlights the faults of what it intends to celebrate. “Voces” is almost about Ms. Baras learning the wrong lessons.It is certainly about displaying Ms. Baras. Her successive solos are carefully arranged to escalate. For her last one, “Soleá por Bulería,” she wears a three-layered dress of green fringe, like a flamenco flapper; when she spins, she looks like a Christmas tree. Then Mr. Serrano brings her a short jacket like those once worn by the great Carmen Amaya, a volcanic dancer known, as Ms. Baras is, for adopting footwork more commonly associated with men.Here, in her Amaya tribute, Ms. Baras applied her prodigious technique to expressive phrases. There were even hints of melody in the rapid barrages. From Carmen Amaya’s example, it seems, Ms. Baras learned something right.“Voces, Suite Flamenca” continues through Saturday at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan; 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org. Advertisement