AdvertisementSupported byArt in ReviewBy Martha SchwendenerSocial practice, a recent term developed to describe art projects often staged in distinct communities and concerned with social justice issues, is hard to translate into a gallery in Chelsea. You might not even know this was a social practice-type show, except that Pablo Helguera, who also works in the education department at the Museum of Modern Art (museum education departments are hotbeds of social practice activity), is well known in the field.If you look more closely at the display cases, photographs and collections of framed documents on the wall, however, you will see a variety of concerns emerging. In “The Parable Conference” (2014), Mr. Helguera exchanged letters with people who would be in the audience of his performance at the Brooklyn Academy of Music last October. Some of the letters are displayed here. They ponder questions like “Should we treat art making as a profession?” and “Who is an author?” Meanwhile, the game Vita Vel Regula (Rules of Life), which began in 2013 and is to end in 2097, includes photographs documenting a project in which some of the participants will, presumably, outlive the innovator, Mr. Helguera.Because participation is one of the hallmarks of social practice, Mr. Helguera has included two live projects that are available only on Saturdays. One is a sort of mock ritual experienced in a darkened room and the other is a card game, best played in a group. In the first one, you are invited by a young woman to choose a “dead idea” to bury from a grid of canisters on the wall. In the second one, a partial re-creation of Mr. Helguera’s project at Site Santa Fe in 2013, you sit at a table and play card games based on some of those played in the American Southwest, when it was Mexican territory. In all of these works, there is a sense of playfulness, poeticism and gentle open-ended inquiry. Reminiscent of Fluxus and other art movements, these pieces also show you possibilities for socially engaged art in the present.Kent Fine Art210 11th Avenue, Chelsea Through March 14 Advertisement