AdvertisementSupported byArt in ReviewBy Roberta SmithSince opening in 2008, the Gladstone Gallery’s space on West 21st Street has emphasized large sculptures or environmental installations. In December, for example, the painter R. H. Quaytman put abstract painting and architecture on a collision course with challenging, if decidedly confused, awkward results. Now the Swiss-born, Berlin-based artist Claudia Comte makes her American debut with roughly the opposite: a sculptural-architectural ensemble resembling a designer boutique, home furnishings store or art fair stand. This totality makes a delightful first impression, but its sources and references are startlingly obvious.With its palindromic title, “No Melon No Lemon” operates in a populous artistic zone where Modernist quotation chases its tail often with diminishing returns. The main elements here — displayed on and against striped pedestals and walls — are sculptures carved in lustrous woods like cherry, walnut, acacia, yew and pear. These objects suggest derivatives of works by Brancusi, Arp and Calder; more ersatz thrift-shop finds; and in one case a squat version of McDonald’s golden arches. The stripes on some walls are yellow and white, fading in and out, with matching paintings that conjure a mixture of Daniel Buren, Op Art, shaped canvases and serial art. Other gallery walls and four free-standing partitions are covered with wood painted black and hand-routed to create vertical off-white pinstripes redolent of early Frank Stella. In the best structural detail, long sections cut from the black walls, and hinged, form the pedestals. Their placement ranges from very high to very low (get it?) and adds a note of economy consistent with the artist’s easy command of decorative space, scale and proportion.It seems likely that Ms. Comte, who is in her early 30s, has more up her sleeve than this. But in the meantime, go, see, enjoy the impertinent mood, take selfies.Gladstone Gallery 530 West 21st Street, Chelsea Through March 21 Advertisement