By VIVIEN SCHWEITZERMARCH 5, 2015
Musica Sacra, the notable professional chorus and mainstay of the New York choral scene, has a strong reputation both for its interpretations of the classics, such as the annual performances of Handel’s “Messiah,” and for its commissioning of new works.On Wednesday evening at the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine, the choir presented four pieces by living composers, three of them premieres. Michael Sheetz, the group’s assistant music director, led the oldest work on the program, Judith Lang Zaimont’s “Parable: A Tale of Abram and Isaac” (1986), performed here in its version for organ and voices.The colorful work overlaps texts from the Mourner’s Kaddish, a medieval mystery play and a poem by Wilfred Owen, with emphatic choral sections and lyrical solos for Abram, sung by the baritone Malcolm J. Merriweather, and Isaac, portrayed by the tenor John Tiranno. The soprano Lianne Coble sang the Angel. While the work at times meandered, text and texture were often interwoven with alluring detail.Kent Tritle, the choir’s music director, conducted the other three works in their premieres. Michael Gilbertson’s “Returning” explores themes of love, regret and time, voiced as a conversation between David and Jonathan of the Hebrew bible and set to lyrics by Kai Hoffman-Krull.AdvertisementThe opening section, which the choir repeated as an encore at the end of the concert, proved particularly beautiful. Its texts, initially sung by the sopranos, unfolded over a gentle humming that increased in intensity, with the line “What makes us choose” sung with declamatory passion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The program concluded with Juraj Filas’s “The Wisdom of the Wise Old Man,” a cantata honoring the victims of the concentration camp Terezin and inspired by the Czech composer Rudolf Karel, who perished there. While interned, Karel wrote an opera called “The Three Golden Hairs of Grandfather Wisdom,” which was smuggled out of the camp on scraps of paper.Set to texts from Dante’s “Inferno,” the phrase “Lasciate ogni speranza, voi ch’entrate” (Abandon all hope, you who enter here”) is a leitmotif throughout the dramatically scored work, set to instrumental accompaniment of cello (Arthur Fiacco) and organ (Raymond Nagem).AdvertisementThe program opened with Robert Paterson’s gorgeous “Lux Aeterna,” a setting of excerpts from the Requiem Mass and featured on a new disc of the composer’s choral works. Tautly scored with vivid contrasts and soaring lines, the work proved a highlight of the program.A version of this review appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Highlighting the Living.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.