AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken JohnsonIf the name Ennion is familiar to you, you probably are a scholar or collector of ancient glassware, and you’ll appreciate the significance of “Ennion: Master of Roman Glass,” a small exhibition of ancient glassware at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. But you don’t have to be a specialist to profit from this lovely and informative show. Active sometime between A.D. 1 and A.D. 50, Ennion is the first known artisan to have produced mold-blown glass: objects made by blowing bubbles of molten glass into patterned molds. His elegant cups, bowls, beakers, jugs and flasks decorated with geometric and botanical motifs were sought after by wealthy Romans and traded throughout the Mediterranean. Examples have been unearthed at archaeological sites from Spain to Israel. Sadly, though, glass is fragile. Today only about 50 to 55 Ennion pieces are known to have survived, many of them broken. This exhibition presents 22 works, and fragments of two more. Three belong to the Met and the others are borrowed from museums and private collections in Europe, Israel and the United States. The show includes examples of mold-blown glass by other makers as well. Organized by Christopher S. Lightfoot, a curator in the department of Greek and Roman art at the Met, it’s the most comprehensive show of Ennion glass ever. It also happens to be the Met’s first exhibition of ancient glass. Ennion’s objects represent two revolutionary developments in glass making. For thousands of years people had been making glass objects by melting powdered or broken glass in molds, which produced relatively crude glassware. Then in the first century B.C., someone invented the process of inflating blobs of molten glass at the ends of blow tubes. (An informative video in the exhibition shows craftsmen reproducing an Ennion glass piece using ancient methods.) In the next century came the idea of blowing glass into molds to create vessels impressed with patterns. Ennion was his era’s best maker of mold-blown glass. His pieces are all small. Cups with one or two handles have mouths ranging from about 3 ½ inches to less than 5 ½ inches in diameter. Jugs with ovoid bodies, narrow necks and flaring mouths stand under 10 inches. Globular bowls are slightly bigger than baseballs. All have patterns in horizontal bands: vines, berries and leaves; circles and dots; vertical ribs and networks of crisscrossing lines. What’s most compelling are their beautiful, translucent colors: deep cobalt blue, pale sea green, olive oil green and dark amber. Simplicity of overall form, ordered complexity in the decoration, exquisite delicacy of the glass itself and its seductively sensuous hues: It’s easy to see why Ennion’s glass was sought after by discriminating Romans. Apart from the works he made, little is known about Ennion. It’s thought that he started out in Sidon, Lebanon. Some scholars think he later moved to Aquileia in northern Italy to be closer to the central Roman marketplace as demand for his products grew. But no one knows for sure. Most scholars believe he was a Phoenician, but the only evidence that a glassmaker named Ennion existed at all is that his name appears prominently impressed on the sides of most of his known works. In these pieces, the phrase “made by Ennion,” otherwise translated as “Ennion made me,” is spelled in raised Greek letters within a rectangular frame or within the outline of a tabula ansata, a plaque with dovetail shaped handles. Some vessels have another inscription in addition or by itself: a tag line in Greek that translates as “may the buyer be remembered” — implicitly, that is, “by the gods.” In the indispensable exhibition catalog, Mr. Lightfoot devotes considerable attention to these inscriptions. The tabula ansata is particularly noteworthy, as it was a common Roman device for framing inscriptions on things like votive plaques, military standards and monumental buildings. It was, Mr. Lightfoot observes, “a potent symbol of Ennion’s time, a period when Rome had imposed its control over much of the ancient world and, equally important, restored peace, order and prosperity.” Ennion was not alone in conspicuously featuring his signature and slogan on his products. In the exhibition, similarly framed signatures appear on two cups that resemble Ennion pieces but were made by his main competitor, Aristeas. This is what we now call branding. When objects are mechanically reproduced in large quantities, competing products may be hard to distinguish. Marks of distinction and authenticity amplify brand recognition and loyalty and arouse the consumer’s desire. It’s amusing to learn that 2,000 years ago, Roman glass makers dealt with the pressures of commercial competition just like sneaker and jeans manufacturers do today. “Ennion: Master of Roman Glass” continues through April 13 at the Metropolitan Museum of Art; 212-535-7710; metmuseum.org.Advertisement