AdvertisementSupported byAntiquesBy Eve M. KahnART OF INTERNMENT CAMPS WILL HEAD TO AUCTIONNext month, Rago auction house in Lambertville, N.J., will offer about 450 artifacts made by Japanese-Americans during World War II while they were living at internment camps.The objects illustrate the resourcefulness of internees as they tried to preserve traditional artisanship and familiar habits. Cigarette boxes are made of string recycled from onion sacks. Woodcarvings depict birds in flight. Plaques with family names were made to hang outside tar-paper homes.The highest prices, up to $1,200 a piece, are expected for oil paintings by Estelle Peck Ishigo, the white wife of a Japanese-American aspiring actor, Arthur Ishigo. When Mr. Ishigo was sent to Heart Mountain Relocation Center in Wyoming, she joined him and documented how internees suffered and tried to adjust. The Rago lots include her scenes of children playing at riverbanks and hauling luggage between barracks.The collection for sale was assembled by Allen Hendershott Eaton, a crafts expert who analyzed it in his 1952 book, “Beauty Behind Barbed Wire: The Arts of the Japanese in Our War Relocation Camps.” When he tried to buy pieces from internees, he wrote, “They offered to give me things to the point of embarrassment.” The book describes how the artisans made tools and art supplies out of salvaged wallpaper, drainage pipes, lumber scraps, “discarded saw blades, worn-down files, automobile springs and other waste metal.”The Rago consignors’ family acquired the items from an Eaton descendant, who had once hoped to devote a museum to them.Eric L. Muller, a board member at the foundation that now runs Heart Mountain as a museum, has helped catalog the Rago lots. The name plaques, he said, “are so deeply touching, and so deeply revealing of the desire of an incarcerated community to assert some individuality.”Such material rarely surfaces on the market; many former internees never even spoke about the experience, let alone revealed that they had taken home handcrafted pieces. “There was a lot of shame attached to the episode,” Mr. Muller said.In 2012, he published rediscovered snapshots by a former internee, Bill Manbo, in “Colors of Confinement: Rare Kodachrome Photographs of Japanese American Incarceration in World War II” (UNC Press). Mr. Manbo’s photos will be shown through April at Whitman College at Princeton University, and beginning in December at the Center for the Study of Ethnicity and Race at Columbia University.A show of internment camp handicrafts has been traveling for years under the auspices of the Smithsonian; through September, it is on view at the Holocaust Museum Houston. The Japanese American National Museum in Los Angeles owns another substantial collection, and Clement Hanami, a vice president at the museum, said that owners sometimes drop off material anonymously. The museum is left guessing whether the gifts came from someone who found them in storage, he said, or from descendants of internees who wanted their secrets kept.REMEMBERING RAGTIME The widow of the ragtime composer Scott Joplin, Lottie Stokes, stored stacks of his early 1900s paperwork in her Harlem basement. In 1949, scholars including the music historian Rudi Blesh salvaged piles left in disarray after Joplin’s death at a psychiatric asylum in 1917, at 49. On March 26, Swann Auction Galleries in Manhattan will offer a batch of Joplin memorabilia (estimated at $7,500 to $10,000) from Carl Hultberg, Mr. Blesh’s grandson, in a sale devoted to African Americana.Mr. Blesh, who died in 1985, at 86, preserved tattered snapshots of Joplin and his friends and colleagues, stationery from Joplin’s Manhattan offices and handwritten scores and sheet music for rags, romps, marches, two-steps and Joplin’s opera about a freed slave, “Treemonisha.” Instructions on the scores warn against sloppy improvisation: “Play slowly until you catch the swing, and never play ragtime fast at any time.”Mr. Hultberg long shared his grandfather’s apartment in Lower Manhattan and took care of the archives there, and he now lives in a converted foundry in a New Hampshire hamlet. He consigned the material to Swann, he said, because in his remote home, “the real important historical stuff got to be a burden.”Mr. Hultberg runs a website, ragtimesociety.com, and hosts a radio show, “Radio Free Ragtime.” The music, he said, “is very idealistic, it’s stately and full of dignity.” One advertisement on the Swann pages for sale recommends ragtime as an anxiety suppressant, which can “scatter the brooding fears of troubles that are to be but never come.”GO RAISE A GLASSThe antiques dealer Robert Lloyd runs a basement booth at the Manhattan Art & Antiques Center full of remarkable contrasts. Along with 14th-century Japanese woodcarvings and 18th-century European silver, he has mid-20th-century British paintings that advertise Guinness brewery products. In the paintings, zoo animals clutch brown beer bottles, toucans with frothy glassfuls balanced on their beaks fly over big cities, and servings of Guinness creep into caricatures of familiar paintings by Vermeer, van Gogh, Whistler and El Lissitzky. Five years ago, a few hundred of the Guinness ads turned up after decades in storage in England. Mr. Lloyd acquired the batch, largely painted by the illustrator John Gilroy. The canvases, which were prototypes for posters and other promotions, had been abandoned around 1970 by an agency that worked on the Guinness account. Mr. Lloyd has been steadily selling them (prices start at $9,500 each) and working with a British historian, David Hughes, on books about the artwork.“Gilroy Was Good for Guinness” (Liberties Press) came out last year. Another Hughes volume, “The Lost Art of Guinness,” is due in a few months. The forgotten ad agency trove had been so damaged in storage, Mr. Hughes said, “as many as a third or towards a half didn’t recover and were destroyed.”Mr. Lloyd has framed them to reveal marks where artists wiped off brushes and executives penciled in corrections, like “make rhino more threatening.” The buyers have included specialists in beer and advertising history; Mr. Hughes acquired a canvas depicting a toucan, seal, ostrich and kangaroo celebrating Queen Elizabeth’s 1953 coronation. But Mr. Lloyd said he could never predict what would most amuse a customer.“I sold a gnu to an 80-year-old couple in Boston,” he said.Mr. Lloyd will be exhibiting Guinness artworks at coming fairs, including the New Jersey Home Show, Friday through Sunday in Edison, N.J., and AD 20/21, from March 26 to 29 in Boston.Advertisement