AdvertisementSupported byBy Alessandra StanleyThere was a time when just being from the Midwest was funny. That was the joke of “Wonderful Town,” the 1953 musical about two sisters from Columbus, Ohio, who move into a basement apartment in Greenwich Village with eccentric neighbors and a kooky landlord. (“Why, oh why, oh why, oh — why did I ever leave Ohio?”)“Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt,” a new Netflix comedy by the executive producers of “30 Rock,” puts a freakish contemporary spin on that premise: Rescued after 15 years of captivity in a doomsday cult in Indiana, Kimmy (Ellie Kemper) moves into a basement apartment in New York City with an eccentric roommate and a kooky landlady.The series leavens wacky absurdity with acid wit and is very funny. Tina Fey, who created “30 Rock,” and Robert Carlock, its showrunner, apply that show’s alchemy to this one, and it works. Almost every scene has both whimsy and something darker, at once daftly effervescent and snidely cynical. And as on “30 Rock,” many of its jokes are New York-specific. At one point, Ellie, who has problems with sleepwalking, tries to strangle her roommate, Titus (Tituss Burgess). Titus indignantly tells her, “This isn’t the Chinatown bus — you can’t just choke someone who’s sleeping.”“Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt” was originally made for NBC, the home of “30 Rock,” but as that award-winning show proved, it’s becoming harder for networks to nurture and sustain even the best sitcoms. Once it became clear that NBC would not have any similar shows to pair with “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt” (“Parks and Recreation” might have been a good fit if it hadn’t just finished its seven-season run), the project was taken to Netflix. Sitcoms aren’t dead, but they’re increasingly spreading beyond the traditional networks. Amy Poehler is an executive producer of Comedy Central’s “Broad City.” John Goodman is the star of Amazon Prime’s “Alpha House.” And one of Netflix’s first notable shows was a new season of the cult comedy “Arrested Development” in 2013.The streaming service will release all 13 episodes of “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt” on Friday, and that’s useful, because the series finds its full comic verve after the first two, which have to establish a lot of back story.Kimmy was in the eighth grade when she was kidnapped by a cult leader, Richard Wayne Gary Wayne and locked in an underground bunker with three fellow sister wives. The women dressed in 19th-century frocks and spent their time knitting scarves out of their hair and making up Bible characters, like one named Terry, who borrowed his brother’s moped.After a SWAT team rescues the captives, they become known as the “Indiana mole women” and appear on the “Today” show to explain why they stayed underground for so long. The leader told them that the apocalypse had destroyed the planet.After the show, the other women go back to Indiana, but Kimmy decides to keep her past as a victim a secret and start a new life in New York City.All of her expressions and cultural references date back to the mid-’90s (“Billy Madison”), and she doesn’t know how to use a smartphone or what a selfie is. She tries to make a hashtag reference but calls it “hashbrown.” When told to get a photo ID, Kimmy asks where she can find the nearest Sears store.But she is irrepressible as well as unbreakable. Titus is a highly theatrical would-be Broadway performer who counts on Kimmy to pay the rent. So does their landlady, Lilian (Carol Kane). So Kimmy does, snagging a job as a nanny for a rich socialite, Jacqueline, played by Jane Krakowski, who is just as charmingly insane in this role as she was playing Jenna on “30 Rock.”Jacqueline has an absent husband, a sullen, spoiled son, Buckley (Tanner Flood), a sullen, spoiled teenage stepdaughter, Xanthippe (Dylan Gelula), as well as many servants, trainers and therapists and a fluffy lap dog named Abattoir. Kimmy tells her boss that she is alarmed that the dog doesn’t poop on his walks. “They bred that out,” Jacqueline explains. She says the dog’s anus is “purely decorative.”Kimmy relies on Titus for sophistication and guidance, and Titus relies on Kimmy for her Midwestern optimism — she refuses to fail or let him falter. And Jacqueline grows to rely on Kimmy as well, even taking her along to an appointment with her famous plastic surgeon, Dr. Grant, played by Martin Short, who is hilarious and barely recognizable behind a mask of tightly stretched skin. Dr. Grant is entranced by Kimmy’s pale complexion. He can’t find any sign of sun damage, but he does detect traces of stress. “Are you a coal miner? A submarine captain?” he asks. “Because you have very distinct scream lines.”There are flashbacks to Kimmy’s life in the bunker, and they are harshly funny, but that kind of conceit may be necessary to a fish-out-of-water comedy these days. It’s not easy to come up with modern characters who are plausibly this naïve — even primitive tribes in the Amazon have access to modern technology.But to some New Yorkers, the Midwest might as well be the jungle.Titus is at first suspicious of Kimmy — she arrived with only a backpack and seems ignorant of even the most obvious things. He demands to know her secret. When she tries to explain about her 15 years in captivity, Titus cuts her off the second she says she comes from Indiana. “Oh, O.K.,” he says. “That explains why you’re so basic.”The series, of course, is anything but.Unbreakable Kimmy SchmidtAvailable for streaming on Netflix.Produced by Universal Television, Little Stranger Inc., 3 Arts Entertainment and Bevel Gears for Netflix. Created by Tina Fey and Robert Carlock; Ms. Fey, Mr. Carlock, Jeff Richmond, Jack Burditt and David Miner, executive producers.WITH: Ellie Kemper (Kimmy Schmidt), Jane Krakowski (Jacqueline Vorhees), Tituss Burgess (Titus), Lauren Adams (Gretchen), Sara Chase (Cyndee), Sol Miranda (Donna Maria), Carol Kane (Lilian) and Dylan Gelula (Xanthippe).Advertisement