AdvertisementSupported byInside ArtBy Hilarie M. SheetsNow that the Barnes Foundation has weathered its move from Albert Barnes’s home in suburban Merion, Pa., to downtown Philadelphia in 2012, it seems newly game to look at itself with a bit of irreverence.For “The Order of Things,” opening on May 16, the installation artists Mark Dion, Judy Pfaff and Fred Wilson have been invited to respond to Barnes’s own brand of installation art, his idiosyncratic mix of Impressionist and old master paintings, furniture, metalwork and ceramics placed in “ensembles” according to color, shape and size rather than chronology or art history.“People react to the way Barnes installed his collection in such different ways, some finding it liberating and others saying it subsumes the individual works into these bigger structures,” said the exhibition curator, Martha Lucy. Barnes, who died in 1951, decreed that the works had to remain exactly in the place he left them, and the foundation reinstalled them to the inch in its new home.“Even though we can’t take them apart because of Barnes’s mandate,” Ms. Lucy continued, “we can still have artists engage with what’s great and what’s problematic about them.”Known for using classifying methods of science in his installations, Mr. Dion is arranging a naturalist’s tools on the wall as Barnes might have done. The obsessive symmetry in the grouping of butterfly nets, botanical pruners, microscopes and guns will read as Barnesian, but with a pointed critique about collecting.“In natural history, collecting is a destructive act because it literally kills things,” Mr. Dion said. “Once Barnes collected his works and froze them in a very particular context, the art is not allowed any other kinds of discussions.”Mr. Wilson often illuminates a museum’s culture with installations made from objects uncovered in its storage rooms. Here, noticing adjacencies of commonplace furniture and paraphernalia in the foundation’s offices in Merion, he will reinstall these clusters faithfully on plinths as “ready-made ensembles.” “There’s an absurdity in it, obviously,” Mr. Wilson said, perhaps raising an eyebrow at Barnes’s adherence to the notion of permanence.While the unruly exuberance of Ms. Pfaff’s typical installations might run counter to Barnes’s way of looking at art, “his eclectic mixing and independence makes a lot of sense to me,” she said. She plans to splice together various architectural plans on the gallery floor and build to the ceiling, integrating crafts, furniture and natural materials. “I’m wondering what Pandora’s box Martha has opened up,” Ms. Pfaff said.FROM ‘CITY’ TO THE CITYMichael Heizer rarely leaves his “City,” the colossal work of land art he has been constructing with heavy machinery from earth, rock and concrete since 1972 in the Nevada desert, where he lives. But Mr. Heizer, now 70, is to return to the urban fray for his first substantial gallery exhibition of monumental sculpture in more than two decades, opening on May 9 at Gagosian Gallery on West 24th Street in Chelsea and commanding more than 9,000 square feet of floor space.“There’s a generation of artists and collectors that should know more about Michael Heizer’s work and they just haven’t had the exposure because he’s been working in semi-isolation on ‘City,’ ” the dealer Larry Gagosian said. That National Mall-size complex of plazas, passageways and geometric forms rising from and descending into the ground is nearing completion and will eventually open to the public.As for the new sculpture, which Mr. Heizer is keeping under wraps, “there’s a topographical quality to the show that grows out of some of the issues he’s explored in ‘City,’ ” Mr. Gagosian said. “But it’s a completely different body of work and will be quite an eye-opener.”A CUBE ON THE HIGH LINE“I’m thinking of it like squatting in a Sol LeWitt sculpture, like the students are having a sit-in at the dean’s office,” said Rashid Johnson, describing his first public artwork, made for the High Line elevated park, and going on view May 4 for four seasons. Mr. Johnson’s eight-foot-high open steel cube will resemble LeWitt’s white Minimalist structures, albeit painted black. Inside, on shelves, will be busts sculpted from African shea butter, then cast in resin and painted yellow to evoke the skin and hair moisturizer Mr. Johnson grew up with. Fluorescent lights will illuminate lines on the grid of the cube.“There’s definitely a reference to the buildings along the High Line and being able to see into people’s homes,” he said.The site, between two pathways, is planted with vegetation that will grow through the cube. “It’s going to have a really interesting evolution from summer to winter to spring,” Mr. Johnson said, “watching how the piece gets molested by the plants and covered to becoming more stark and minimal again.”2,300 IMAGES OF OBAMASince President Obama’s inauguration in 2009, Rob Pruitt has begun each day by making a painting based on an image of Mr. Obama plucked from the morning news — the artist calls it doing his “art calisthenics.” Known for performance-based artworks, including his Art Awards at the Guggenheim modeled on the Oscars, Mr. Pruitt said he “wanted to commit myself to making a picture a day in a parallel way to how Obama would be committing himself to the job of the presidency.”Mr. Pruitt clearly has the easier side of the equation. Projecting photographs onto four-foot-square canvases with backgrounds that fade from blue to red, he uses expressionistic white brush strokes to capture Mr. Obama in moments historic and mundane. At the Museum of Contemporary Art Detroit on May 15, all 2,293 Obama paintings to date will wallpaper 10,000 square feet of galleries. A new canvas will be mailed in each day.“Everyone is always in a rush to write his legacy, but it’s not over yet,” Mr. Pruitt said. “It’s been like an endurance project for me.”Surely for Mr. Obama, too.Advertisement