AdvertisementSupported byBy Roberta SmithThe prodigious Icelandic musical phenomenon Björk is the most avant-garde popular artist of her time, the creative force behind extraordinary music videos and also one of the most instinctive of talents. So she probably should have trusted her first response — No thanks — when the Museum of Modern Art came calling. Evidently, the museum first floated the idea of an exhibition of her work in 2000 and she finally said yes in 2012. Three years later, a scant, cramped overview, which opens on Sunday, has been jammed into a tacky little two-story pavilion specially built in the Modern’s atrium. Björk should have said no — not because her work isn’t museum-worthy but because, as proved here, the Modern is not up to the task. The show is billed as a “midcareer survey,” but its disappointing catalog indicates little of the research, documentation or context setting that such projects usually entail, and the exhibition hasn’t been allotted much more gallery space than one of the museum’s “projects series” showing work by emerging artists. Given the number of Björk fans it will probably attract, the show’s future as a logistical nightmare seems clear. It was already indicated at the preview on Tuesday night. The show was organized by the multi-titled Klaus Biesenbach, director of MoMA PS1 and the curator at large at MoMA itself, and a great advocate for all things intramedia, cross-disciplinary, collaborative, interactive and esthetically relational. But the show reeks of ambivalence, as if MoMA, despite its frantic drive to cover the entire waterfront of cutting-edge art and visual culture, couldn’t quite commit. The museum has certainly given more space to less. Marina Abramovic, whose cheesy retrospective, “The Artist Is Present,” took over half of the Modern’s sixth-floor galleries in 2010 (another Biesenbach project), is not as genuine, innovative or visually inclined an artist as Björk. The South African artist William Kentridge was given the big second-floor galleries next to the atrium for a display with multiple screening rooms that would have showcased the survey of Björk’s music videos better than the single gallery devoted to them. As a result, the Björk exhibition stands as a glaring symbol of the museum’s urge to be all things to all people, its disdain for its core audience, its frequent curatorial slackness and its indifference to the handling of crowds and the needs of its visitors. To force this show, even in its current underdone state, into the atrium’s juggernaut of art, people and poor design is little short of hostile. It superficially promotes the Modern’s hipness while making the place even more unpleasant than usual. Given that the pavilion seems designed to comfortably hold around 300 to 350 people, those Björk fans are going to spend a great deal of time waiting in line or, worse, near the pavilion. The show consists of four custom-made musical instruments displayed in the lobby; two darkened screening rooms for music videos on the lower (atrium) level of the makeshift pavilion; and, above them, extending from the third floor and reached only by leaving the exhibition, an intestinal twist of narrow galleries dotted with mostly trifling bits of Björkiana — a very few costumes and accessories from videos and tours, often poorly displayed. They are accompanied by an audio guide whose excessive length indicates that the artist — and not the curator — was in control. Björk is an unusually complete artist — a visionary musician, singer, composer, actress, dancer, poet and perhaps, most impressively, an omnivorous creator of fantastically rich musical arrangements. As the music critic Alex Ross points out in his catalog essay, Björk, in addition to drawing from most every form of popular, classical and world music, is indebted to avant-garde musicians like Karlheinz Stockhausen and Meredith Monk. (I’d add Philip Glass.) Listening to her music can be like looking at a great painting — you experience its historical continuity and diversity, but also its personal expression, the helpless outpouring of one life. Björk has a special talent for enlivening the long, flowing lines of her songs with layers of insistent percussive beats. Driving all this is the one-of-a-kind voice, as instantly recognizable and aching with emotion as those of Maria Callas, Johnny Cash or Nina Simone. The almost mystical bigness of her subject matter, however, seems all Björk, and deeply Icelandic: It dwells on the power and suffering of love, as translated into a flood of metaphors that flit among earth, mind, body, science, plants, outer space and beyond. In addition, there’s a strong visual side to Björk’s vision — forget that the cameras seem to love her almost as much as they did Marilyn Monroe. With singer and songs enhanced by sets, staging, dance, action, plotlines, costumes and makeup, as well as inspired uses of color, black and white, and digital effects, her videos put many art world efforts in this medium to shame, especially those that use great pop music to prop up weak visual ideas. These music videos are the heart of the MoMA show, compared to which everything else seems slightly feeble or undeveloped. Of Björk’s nearly 40 videos, 32 play continuously in the larger room on the pavilion’s lower level, where visitors can perch on enormous red cushions.The videos are greatly enhanced by big-scale projection and surround sound, but it is limiting to show them in a sequence of about two hours on a single screen, rather than divided among several spaces, so you can easily compare sights and sounds, moods and palettes, personae and landscapes, both visual and sonic. The videos’ diversity testifies to Björk’s sensibility and collaborative skills, her ability to get the best from very different directors.Multiple screening rooms would also have allowed more to be made of Björk’s electrifying tour films, presently bunched into a corridor designed for waiting, their sound muted. The videos begin in 1993, with “Big Time Sensuality,” showing Björk singing while cavorting on a flatbed truck driving through Manhattan. “It takes courage to enjoy it/the hard core and the gentle/big time sensuality ... .” Other outstanding videos include “It’s Oh So Quiet” (1995), a rare cover and an exhilarating song-and-dance number carefully choreographed in the tradition of “Singin’ in the Rain” and superbly directed by Spike Jonze. In contrast, Paul White’s 1998 “Hunter” is a minimalist treatment of a great song: just Björk from the shoulders up, but still “dancing,” while morphing digitally between bald human and Art Deco polar bear. Chris Cunningham’s “All Is Full of Love” (1999) is all sci-fi dazzle: a pair of exquisite Björk robots discovering each other’s bodies. In a mostly animated video for the 2008 “Wanderlust,” directed by Encyclopedia Pictura, Björk resembles a Mongolian shepherdess, riding a herd of Sendakian yaks down a river toward a kind of Tibetan godhead. (Both the costume and a yak head are in the MoMA show.) Especially stunning is Andrew Thomas Huang’s “Mutual Core” (2012), that gives us Björk buried to her waist in the sand of a Japanese rock garden, surrounded by and ultimately merging with extravagant animated rocks that erupt, dance in the air and kiss. In the second, slightly smaller screening room box are “Black Lake,” from “Vulnicura,” Björk’s new album, a meditation on the end of her relationship with Matthew Barney. Also directed by Mr. Huang, it is an 11-minute music video/sound piece — and a MoMA commission — on facing screens that seems as yet unfinished. Although the song is memorable and the sound remarkable, spatially distributed by a system created for the show, it lacks the artifice of her best work. On the upper level of the pavilion, the display of Björkiana is meant to be viewed while listening on headsets to “Songlines,” an audio piece created by the artist with the Icelandic novelist and poet Sjon. Loosely biographical, following Björk’s first seven albums, this singsong children’s-book tale is ludicrously infantilizing and tedious. Its 40 minutes are more than twice the time needed to take in the material at hand. “Songlines” casts Björk as a naïf in the narrative, while in real space it reflects her inexperience with exhibition design and Mr. Biesenbach’s inability to guide her. The main object of note here is the “Bell Dress,” a sculpture in its own right made from thousands of jingle bells and designed by Alexander McQueen (1969-2010). It was worn by Björk as she performed on an Icelandic lava field in the 2004 music video “Who Is It” — another good one — directed by Dawn Shadforth. One suspects that there could, and certainly should, have been many more engrossing objects in this exhibition. This undertaking does not treat Björk as the “era-defining artist” that Mr. Biesenbach claims she is. Lacking the ambition to do her ambition justice, it might better have been staged in a more relaxed curatorial manner at MoMA PS1.“Björk” opens on Sunday and runs through June 7 at the Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53rd Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9400, moma.org. Advertisement