One of the best known art fairs in New York became the site on Saturday of an unsanctioned performance demonstrating against the death of Eric Garner.As fairgoers milled around the Armory Show, held each year on two West Side piers, shouts of “I can’t breathe” could be heard. Soon, about a dozen participants, all members of a group called Artists for Justice NYC, were shouting the words. These were some of the last words spoken by Mr. Garner, who died of compression of the neck and chest after an encounter with police officers on Staten Island seeking to arrest him for selling loose cigarettes in July. “I was overwhelmed with emotion and a sense of obligation to get involved and take a stand,” Shamirrah Hardin, a theater director and performer and one of the group’s founders, wrote in an email. The group, which includes visual artists, came together after a grand jury on Staten Island declined to return an indictment against a police officer, Daniel Pantaleo, who used a chokehold –– forbidden by police department regulations –– on Mr. Garner.One member, Patrick Waldo, said that participants chose the art fair for a performance with an eye toward reaching an audience that might be sympathetic but that probably was not typically involved in protests. “We’re trying to get our message out to a crowd that is historically out of touch with the struggle of black America,” he said.The crowd watching swelled to more than 100, and one performer, Christian Felix, began shouting other phrases attributed to Mr. Garner before his death, including “I’m minding my business” and “I didn’t do nothing.”As the performance continued, there were moments when the line between art and reality appeared to blur. For instance,
an emergency medical technician holding a heavy bag elbowed his way through the crowd, apparently in response to the cries from performers saying they were unable to breathe.Some spectators voiced opinions about what they were witnessing. “I have no problem,” said Rabinder Singh, 52, an accountant from the Upper West Side. “This is performance art.”Within 10 minutes the unauthorized performance was over.  Most protesters left singing, herded out by guards. One guard roughly grabbed and shoved a man who had sunk to the floor as part of a “die-in.”As the protesters left, the art fair returned to normal, with people gazing at installations. Some discussed what they had just seen, including Felipe Garcia, 24, a graduate student at the School of Visual Art, who called the performance “meaningful” and added: “I got the message.”In an email, Noah Horowitz, the executive director of the Armory Show, wrote that the show welcomes visitors from far and wide but added: “As a matter of policy and due to a combination of both curatorial and safety concerns, any performance or action that has not been preapproved has to be asked to leave. This is precisely what happened at the fair this afternoon.”