By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMARCH 7, 2015
9 P.M. (Showtime) INSIDE LLEWYN DAVIS (2013) Oscar Isaac portrays Llewyn, an aspiring folk singer mourning the death of his musical partner (the voice of Marcus Mumford) and leaving mayhem — a crying hostess, a pregnant woman, an escaped cat — in his wake as he bounces from couch to couch in Greenwich Village during a single week in 1961. Carey Mulligan, Justin Timberlake, Stark Sands and Adam Driver round out the cast as Llewyn’s fellow folk singers; John Goodman is a drug-addicted jazzman; and Garrett Hedlund is a Beat poet. And while Llewyn’s background and antics were inspired by the life of Dave Van Ronk, “this is not a biopic, it’s a Coen brothers movie, which is to say a brilliant magpie’s nest of surrealism, period detail and pop-culture scholarship,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “Mr. Isaac, a versatile character actor here ascending to the highest levels of his craft, refuses the easy road of charm.” One of the film’s lessons, as Mr. Scott sees it, is: “We are, as a species, ridiculous: vain, ugly, selfish and self-deluding. But somehow, some of our attempts to take stock of this condition — our songs and stories and moving pictures, old and new — manage to be beautiful, even sublime.”12:30 P.M. (El Rey) SATURDAY SCREAM-A-THON HORROR MOVIE MARATHON This lineup of classic Italian and noir thrillers begins with Lucio Fulci’s “Don’t Torture a Duckling” (1972), in which a reporter and a sexually liberated Milanese woman try to solve a series of child killings in a remote village in southern Italy. It continues with Michele Soavi’s “The Church” (1989), at 2:45; Dario Argento’s “Inferno” (1980), at 5; Mario Bava’s “Shock” (1977), at 7:30; Mr. Fulci’s “Zombie” (1979), at 9:45; Luigi Bazzoni’s “The Fifth Cord” (1971), at 11:45; and Bob Clark’s “Deathdream” (1974), at 3 a.m.4 P.M. (CUNY) ABNY: MAYOR BILL DE BLASIO In an event for the Association for a Better New York, Mr. De Blasio discusses his first year in office and his plans for the coming year, including investing in Hunts Point in the Bronx, raising the minimum wage and preserving affordable housing.5:30 P.M. (NY1) CITY HEALTH BEAT In this new weekly program, Erin Billups reports on major developments in the medical field and interviews experts about the latest research. A segment titled “On Call” allows viewers to submit their health questions online at cityhealthbeat@ny1.com and receive answers from medical professionals. In this premiere episode, Ms. Billups interviews the NY1 anchor Roma Torre about her experiences with colon cancer.Advertisement8 P.M. (HBO) NEIGHBORS (2014) Mac (Seth Rogen) and Kelly (Rose Byrne), a couple with a baby, a mortgage and other trappings of adulthood, find their marital bliss upended when a fraternity whose leader (Zac Efron) is intent on making party histor, moves into the house next door. “Soon enough, the Greeks and their neighbors are at war, and ‘Neighbors’ ascends to an impressively high level of farcical anarchy,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. And while it’s not a great film, it doesn’t really aspire to be, he added. “It is more a status report on mainstream American movie comedy, operating in a sweet spot between the friendly and the nasty, and not straining to be daring, obnoxious or even especially original. It knows how to have fun. How very grown-up.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.8 P.M. (Discovery) DOLPHINS: SPY IN THE POD Spy cameras disguised as sea creatures — including a dolphin, tuna, nautilus and squid — infiltrate pods of bottlenose and spinner dolphins to capture the animals leaping and communicating in their natural habitats in the Pacific and off the coasts of Mozambique, Costa Rica, the Florida Keys and western Australia.9 P.M. (CUNY) WHAT A WONDERFUL WORLD (2006) Faouzi Bensaidi directed and stars in this comic thriller from Morocco about Souad (Fatima Attif), a prostitute; her friend Kenza (Nezha Rahil), a tough-minded traffic cop; and Kamel (Mr. Bensaidi), a contract killer and Souad’s favorite customer, with whom Kenza falls in love.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowDIVORCE LAWYERS A couple of legal colleagues with opposing views on love and marriage — Luo Li (Yao Chen) is a hopeless romantic, Chi Hai Dong (Wu Xiu Bo) is a cynic — discover that they’re new neighbors after Hai Dong gets a divorce himself in this Chinese series. It doesn’t help matters that Li represented his ex-wife. (hulu.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 7, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.