By DEBORAH JOWITTMARCH 6, 2015
If you mate a stellar ballet dancer with an adventurous postmodern choreographer-dancer, what do you get? A mix-and-match duet? When Claudia La Rocco, a freelance critic for The New York Times, organized six such pairings as part of “Platform 2015: Dancers, Buildings and People in the Streets,” she wisely imposed no format on her recruits.The four artists involved in the series’ second performance, at Danspace Project in St. Mark’s Church, might not have heeded such strictures anyway. Although Rashaun Mitchell was paired with Sara Mearns, a principal dancer with the New York City Ballet, and Jodi Melnick was brought together with Sterling Hyltin, another City Ballet principal, all four collaborated on what they aptly titled “Starts and Fits, No Middles No Ends: Eight Unfinished Dances.”Watching these brilliant, thoughtful artists in their generous give and take brings to mind very smart, imaginative children concocting something on a rainy day. And given that chance elements figure in their creation, the final performance on Saturday may differ from the first one on Thursday night.Drama in dance is the evening’s contentious issue. In a high point, Ms. Hyltin reads from directives given during a coaching session for George Balanchine’s “La Sonnambula,” while Ms. Melnick, bearing the Sleepwalker’s (imaginary) candle, attempts also to portray the death of the poet protagonist in her own emphatically non-balletic way. Ms. Hyltin’s “It hurts more than you think,” elicits a tiny moan and increasingly convulsive staggers. Ms. Melnick, responding with diligence to every suggestion, is hilarious. “4.chance dances/21 images” involves the four tossing a pink plush die the size of an ottoman and performing what its number ordains. Meanwhile, the dancers take turns reading statements by the proto-postmodernist choreographer James Waring (1922-1975) about dancing being itself and not a symbol of anything.All this happens without musical accompaniment, until close to the end, when the performers appear in somewhat shinier costumes by the designer Reid Bartelme. Now Ms. Mearns dances in all her glory, whether she’s hurling a gorgeous leg around to pull herself off balance, or spinning toward a pillar and stopping her momentum in a deep arabesque penché. In easygoing counterpoint, Ms. Melnick and Mr. Mitchell entwine imaginatively on the floor.These great dancers all get a chance to show what they can do, but within the agreed-on context. The informal setting and the collaboration lure the ballet dancers to greater freedom of motion. Mr. Mitchell performs several charged solos, seemingly responsive to shifts in the atmosphere; once — evoking Merce Cunningham, in whose company he danced — he moves with four chairs strung on him. Ms. Melnick and Ms. Hyltin pair up, unalike yet attuned to each other. If the program occasionally shows its seams or a ragged edge, that’s a price I would willingly pay for an hour or so crammed with wit, playfulness and brainy beauty.“Starts and Fits, No Middles No Ends: Eight Unfinished Dances” repeats on Saturday at 8 p.m. at Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village; 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. A version of this review appears in print on March 7, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: Ragged Edges With Brainy Beauty.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.