AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerWhen it began in 2013, the A&E series “Bates Motel” was an intriguing idea with uncertain staying power. As it starts Season 3 on Monday night, it has evolved into a deftly acted story of small-town dysfunction, creepy when it needs to be yet far more wide ranging than the movie that inspired it.That movie, of course, is “Psycho,” Alfred Hitchcock’s landmark 1960 film. “Bates Motel” is a prequel to its story, giving us Anthony Perkins’s character, Norman Bates, as a teenager, with his mummified mother, Norma, still very much alive. Vera Farmiga as Norma has been an anchor right from the first episode — alluring and vulnerable, deliciously walking the line between functional and unhinged. The harder job, though, fell to Freddie Highmore, the young British actor who took on the role of Norman. He had to find the precursor to a character already well defined in the public mind, making Norman his own while also keeping him on track to grow up to be Perkins’s version. Mr. Highmore has made it work, adding depth to Norman with each passing episode, but in subtle ways that keep him a cipher — just as Perkins’s grown-up version was. Not bad for an actor who has only just turned 23. “He wasn’t even legal drinking age” when the show started filming, recalled Kerry Ehrin, who created the series with Carlton Cuse and Anthony Cipriano. “He always just is so intelligent about how he dissects scenes,” she said in a telephone interview, “how he prepares for them, how aware he is that the character needs to evolve, and slowly evolve.”Over two seasons, that evolution has led to a gradual shift in the dynamics of television’s oddest odd couple. At the start, Norma manipulated Norman with ease. She is still pretty good at it, but now Norman, who is 18 in Season 3, has figured out how to manipulate her as well, withholding information and affection when it suits his needs.But don’t worry; the mother-son head games haven’t led to estrangement. The first thing we see in Season 3 is Norma and Norman waking up in the morning. In the same bed. Yeah, the Bates family does things differently.If these two eccentrics were all that “Bates Motel” had to offer, it would have been interesting for a few episodes, maybe a season. But the reason it’s still compelling is the swirl of activity around Norma and Norman: a storm of intrigues made up of drugs, sex and small-town politics. The show departs from the film in that it is set in the present, and in Oregon, in a town where two rival marijuana-growing barons call the shots. A highway bypass is being built that threatens to ruin business at the Bates Motel by isolating it, which has drawn Norma into local politics; in Season 2 she ended up on the City Council. Oh, and Norma and Norman aren’t all there is to the Bates family. One of the show’s best characters has turned out to be Dylan (Max Thieriot), Norman’s older brother, or perhaps half brother (his parentage being a subplot all its own). When Dylan first showed up early in Season 1, it might have seemed, even to the show’s creators, that he wouldn’t be around long — there is no brother in “Psycho,” and young Norman didn’t seem like the kind of lad who would want competition for his mother’s attention. But Mr. Thieriot has a smoldering appeal and a wistful gaze, and now his character is a major part of the show with as deep a back story as the two principals. Dylan found himself reluctantly working for one of the pot barons, and when Season 2 ended in a bloody drug war, he was practically the only one left standing. Now, as Season 3 begins, he just wants to retreat into the hills and become a legal marijuana grower.That gives the writers a chance to bring back one particularly memorable character — no spoilers here, though — and to introduce new ones. As in Seasons 1 and 2, some will survive, some won’t, but all of them will add to the demented tapestry this series has become.Advertisement