AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary Woolfe“You think I’m putting on an act?” the distraught protagonist of Poulenc’s “La Voix Humaine” asks incredulously, trying to keep on the phone the lover who’s leaving her.When Anna Caterina Antonacci sang this tense 40-minute monodrama at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday, the answer was both yes and no. Ms. Antonacci’s remarkable talent is a suspension between artifice and naturalness, theatricality and subtlety. She may be putting on an act, but she’s also telling the truth.Joined by her frequent collaborator, the lucid, sensitive pianist Donald Sulzen, this sometime soprano, sometime mezzo, who has charted an idiosyncratic, inimitable career, offered an immersion in the French repertory that has lately been her passion. This meant a leapfrogging journey through a century of mélodie, or art song, that culminated, after intermission, in the tour de force of “La Voix Humaine.”Presented here as emerging from the mélodie tradition rather than, as usual, opera, Poulenc’s work, with a text by Jean Cocteau, felt more poetic and even surreal than a naturalistic narrative. Its obliquity and experimental structure — we hear just the woman’s side of the fateful phone conversation — were natural outgrowths of Debussy’s “Chansons de Bilitis” and Poulenc’s “La Fraîcheur et le Feu,” both on the recital’s first half.Her voice resinous, penetrating and peerlessly articulate, Ms. Antonacci did not create an easy program, either to perform or to listen to. The dark intensity was relentless, the mélodies she chose not the repertory’s most melodic. But her alertness to the texts and the unassuming grandeur of her presence made the night riveting.The passages of wordless vocalise in Berlioz’s “La Mort d’Ophélie” were songs in themselves, and Ms. Antonacci sang with death-drive lushness as she described Ophelia drowning. The “Chansons de Bilitis” were particularly fine, with the eroticism of “La Chevelure” tinged with fear and with a visionary pure tone for “Le Tombeau des Naïades.” Her voice seemed to grow several sizes for the climaxes of Duparc’s “La Vie Antérieure” and the sinuous keening of Ravel’s setting of the Hebrew “Kaddish.” For “La Voix Humaine,” Ms. Antonacci was alternately cajoling, charming, frantic and exhausted. Her take on the work is without undue histrionics — her desperation is as much existential as plainly emotional — but is fascinating in its changeable facets. “We’re not trying to be interesting,” her character tells a woman who cuts in on the party line. But Ms. Antonacci always is.Advertisement