By MELISSA EDDYMARCH 6, 2015
BERLIN — Gustav Klimt’s gold leaf and mother-of-pearl masterpiece, the “Beethoven Frieze,” should remain in Austria, a government panel said in rejecting a claim that its Jewish former owner had been forced to sell it. Austria’s Art Restitution Advisory Board “recommended unanimously” that the 112-foot-long work remain in possession of the government, which bought it from Erich Lederer in 1972.The multi-panel frieze is one of the best known examples of the Viennese Jugendstil and attracts thousands of visitors to the Vienna Secession building, where it is displayed in a specially designed hall. Klimt painted it onto the walls in 1902 for the Secession’s 14th exhibition, depicting floating genies, a knight in shining armor, a giant Typhoeus monster of Greek myth and a choir of angels.Josef Ostermayer, Austria’s minister for culture, said Friday he would follow the nonbinding recommendation. The minister said the opposite outcome “would have been a loss for Austria as an art and cultural center.”Marc Weber, a lawyer representing Mr. Lederer’s heirs, who had pressed the case, said that the ruling was “very disappointing” and that his clients would seek to challenge it at the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, France, or through a civil suit in the United States.AdvertisementIntended only to last during the festival, the frieze was saved, divided into eight pieces and purchased in 1915 by Erich Lederer’s father, August, whose collection was lost to the Nazis in 1938. His son inherited what survived the war in 1946 but relinquished ownership of some pieces to gain rights to export others.AdvertisementThe board rejected a claim by Mr. Lederer’s heirs that he agreed to sell the frieze for 15 million schillings, or about $750,000 at the time, only because he could not take it out of the country.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a document cited by the board in its decision, Mr. Lederer referred to frustration over negotiations about the Klimt and his longing to recover another work, writing that he would be “very happy if they would finally buy this frieze that I am not allowed to export and give me back the Gentile Bellini, and finally end this macabre bet over my death!”Clemens Jabloner, the head of the restitution board, told Austrian reporters that the panel had found “no indication that an export had not been possible.” Documents submitted by the Union of Austrian Artists cited correspondence from the chancellor at the time, Bruno Kreisky, to argue that Mr. Lederer “was not subjected to pressure of any kind, but sold the Frieze to the Republic of Austria for a price voluntarily negotiated by him and considered by him to be reasonable.”Over the past 15 years, Austria has taken steps to compensate families victimized by the Nazis, returning six Egon Schiele works to Mr. Lederer’s heirs, and the Gentile Bellini he had sought. This case rested in a different category: how recovered art was handled years after the war.Mr. Weber questioned how carefully this case had been considered. “How can you say there was no connection between ban and sale,” he said. “It seems to me that it was always clear that the answer must be ‘no,’ and they just tried to find an easy way to get to that ‘no.’ ”A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Klimt Work Should Remain in Austria, Panel Says.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.