By RAPHAEL MINDERMARCH 6, 2015
MADRID —  Guards make sure visitors to the Museo del Prado stay at arm’s length from its masterpieces. But here on a recent morning was José Pedro González running his fingers over one of El Greco’s most famous paintings, “The Nobleman With His Hand on His Chest.” He went back and forth over the nobleman’s eyes, rubbed his beard and eventually reached his hand, tracing the edges of each digit.The work, of course, was a copy. But more surprisingly, the copy was in three dimensions so that Mr. González, who is 56 and has been blind since the age of 14, could experience the painting firsthand.“It’s an unbelievable sensation,” Mr. González said. “I’m feeling this painting down to the detail of each fingernail.”Mr. González was visiting a small, highly unusual exhibition, “Touching the Prado,” designed to give the blind or those with limited sight an opportunity to create a mental image of a painting by feeling it. The show, which runs through June 28, occupies a side passage of the museum, near a room that contains an original of another work copied for the blind: a version of the Mona Lisa by a pupil of Leonardo da Vinci. Altogether, six 3-D copies are on display, all of them rendering famous works in the Prado. They include Goya’s “The Parasol”; a still life by van der Hamen; “Apollo in the Forge of Vulcan” by Velázquez; and “Noli Me Tangere,” Correggio’s painting of Christ meeting Mary Magdalene.The exhibition is one of the most sophisticated yet in efforts to unlock the beauty of the visual arts for those unable to see them. The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York and the National Gallery in London are among several museums that organize activities for blind visitors, including special guided tours, drawing classes, and “touch” workshops, in which blind people can feel sculptures. The Louvre in Paris also has a Tactile Gallery that contains copies of some of its sculptures.AdvertisementOther examples include the Museo Nacional de San Carlos, in Mexico City, which was among the pioneers in using collage to reproduce paintings that could be felt by the blind, and the Denver Art Museum, which has been collaborating with Ann Cunningham, an art teacher at the Colorado Center for the Blind, to create tactile art.AdvertisementMs. Cunningham said she had seen “real momentum” recently in making art accessible to the blind. She attributed part of the growing interest in tactile art to the fact that “blind educators figured out that they definitely need to make information more accessible to students” because “as textbooks got more and more heavy on the graphics, all that information that students used to get through text was beginning to pass them by.”The idea that blind people should touch 3-D print copies of paintings, however, goes significantly further than other efforts to make art accessible, and it represents a costly investment as well as a technological challenge.In 2011, the Uffizi Gallery in Florence, Italy, exhibited a more modest version of the Prado’s 3-D method, a downsized copy of one of its masterworks, “The Birth of Venus” by Botticelli.Other Italian museums have followed suit using that method, but without venturing beyond black-and-white copies, according to Fernando Pérez Suescun, the curator of the Prado exhibition, who works in the museum’s education department.“It seemed important to us to add color, because the visually impaired often can still perceive some color,” he said.The Prado used a relief printing technique developed by Estudios Durero, a printing company near Bilbao, Spain. Works it has produced also have been displayed in the fine arts museum of Bilbao. Starting with a high-resolution photo of the painting, employees at Durero select textures and features that make sense to enhance for the blind. Next, they create a print, with a special ink, and then use a chemical process to add volume to what would otherwise be a flat reproduction. As part of the chemical process, ultraviolet light is applied to the special ink, so that the print gains a few millimeters of volume while maintaining the colors of the ink, “like if you would add baking powder to a cake,” Mr. Pérez Suescun said.AdvertisementEach work displayed at the Prado cost about $6,680.The museum’s initiative is also testimony to the special status of the blind in Spanish society, thanks to Spain’s national organization for the blind, known by the acronym ONCE (pronounced OHN-say). Founded in 1938 during the Spanish Civil War, the organization was allowed by Gen. Francisco Franco to run a nationwide lottery. In a lottery-obsessed country, ONCE became an economic powerhouse, while guaranteeing employment, mostly as lottery vendors, to almost all of Spain’s blind citizens to this day. The organization collaborated with the Prado for its project, offering advice on how to improve visits for the blind, notably by leaning the 3-D canvases so that they would be easier to touch. Some of the copies were also downsized slightly from the original artwork.“A painting should really be no more than 120 centimeters wide, because that’s how far a person can comfortably reach without having to move,” Mr. Pérez Suescun said. (That’s roughly 47 inches.)An audio guide accompanies blind visitors through the special show, but regular visitors are also provided with an audio guide, as well as a mask so they can relate better to what a blind person perceives. “I think it’s great to integrate the blind even as far as making it possible for them to appreciate paintings,” said Carlos Hernández, a 19-year-old student who chose to touch the copies without covering his eyes. Still, Mr. Pérez Suescun said that watching blind visitors discover masterworks was in itself an experience, allowing him to rediscover paintings that he had considered very familiar. “The first question that I got from one of our blind visitors about El Greco’s nobleman was what color were his eyes — and I had to check,” Mr. Pérez Suescun said. “There are really plenty of details to which I had never paid any attention.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. González had never seen the El Greco portrait of the nobleman, one of the many masterworks in the Prado. But he had visited museums as a child and has continued to do so since going blind, helped by his wife, who describes the paintings to him. “It’s great to look at paintings with my wife and spend time with her, but it’s clearly a big difference when I can discover a painting for myself or have to listen to what she tells me,” he said.Another blind visitor, Andrés Oteo, said touching a 3-D copy “created a clear link between what I feel in my fingers and what is in my mind,” even if there was still room for improvement in terms of defining some textures. On the copy of the Goya painting, he said, “the clothing and the hair felt so similar that I couldn’t distinguish them well.”Mr. Oteo, 56, who went blind from glaucoma 35 years ago, said he had seen the portrait of the nobleman in his youth, but “it’s one thing to more or less remember what it was like and another to be able to touch it in all its details.” He added, “It’s like getting back my eyesight.”A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Unlocking Sight, With Touch, at the Prado.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.