Season 5, Episode 13, “Forget”Spoilers and emotionally traumatized little boys lurk below.So far our heroes have faced cannibals, murderous convicts, tyrants, tornadoes, wild dogs and, of course, voracious zombies. But Sunday brought rumors of their greatest menace yet: Mrs. Niedermeyer, who won’t shut up about pasta makers.Such is the cushiness of life at Alexandria, we were led to believe, as the survivors settled deeper into the easy living of post-apocalyptic suburbia. Sunday’s episode, which centered on an awkward cocktail party at Deanna’s place, didn’t move the needle much on the broader narrative but I mostly enjoyed it, as Alexandria was presented as a sort of “Needful Things” fantasyland that delivered to Rick and friends that which their hearts desired most. For Abraham it was a bunch of beers. For Daryl, a motorcycle in pieces. For Rick, something like a “normal” home for his kids and the attentions of a winsome new neighbor. But as in the Stephen King story, these things will eventually come at a price, whether it’s internal divisions, the onset of weakness, as Carol fears, vaporization, as in Father Gabriel’s case — seriously, what happened to that guy? — or some other repercussion to come. Civilization isn’t free, is the point. The compromises people make for its comforts cut into some fundamental aspect of their nature. To hear Daryl tell it, the longer creatures are out in the wild, the more they “become what they really are.” Of course soon after making this declaration he saw what that can get you, as Buttons the untamable horse went down in a swarm of walkers. Later he saw, conversely, what a community can bring: a hot plate of spaghetti and that disassembled motorbike in Aaron’s garage. And just like that, the untamable bow slinger was ready to give Alexandria a go. Can a symbolic shower be far behind?The episode opened on an increasingly troubled Sasha, who is having the most severe — and severely unsubtle — struggle to adapt to the friendly confines. Unable to sleep, she takes target practice at happy family photos — actual pictures of domestic bliss. She seemed to be spoiling for a zombie showdown and for a second I thought it was a suicide-by-walker situation, but I ultimately chalked it up to generalized self-destructiveness. (Anyone else have theories about this?)Later Sasha lashed out at the party in a fun breakdown sequence that managed to both signal her emotional troubles and jab at the inanity of all cocktail chatter. “That’s what you worry about??!!” she shouted, incredulous, at a friendly foodie. We’ve all been there, Sasha. That said, I don’t feel great  about your future.Elsewhere, the picture is cloudier, as the specks of the life the survivors had come to know fell away, just like the song that closed the episode said. We’ve discussed Daryl, whose rabbit hunt with Aaron turned into a transformative event. By episode’s end he’d signed on to be a recruiter for Alexandria and turned down a gun from Carol. Michonne literally hung up her sword but didn’t seem terribly happy about it, despite her stated desire to settle down. Glenn did Glenn, telling Noah to come to the party because “we’re in this together, man.” Abraham got glibly drunk. Rick, meanwhile, moved things along with Jessie, getting a little buzzed himself and giving her a meaningful — and not unappreciated — peck on the cheek. Sure, Jessie’s husband seemed slightly more civil this week but this affair is totally on — the lovebirds are sporting matching scarlet “A”s and everything!Unlike Daryl, Rick did stick with the plan to arm himself, sort of, reluctantly accepting the pilfered gun from Carol. More revealing was the symbolic geometry of their departure, captured in an overhead shot, as the three compatriots walked off in diverging directions.Which brings us to Carol, who on Sunday raised her dowdy-chic sweater game as she doubled down on the Junior League act. She swapped recipes. She gabbed with the gals. “You need anything else, you hit me, girl!” one yelled brightly at her, and I fully expect Carol to hit her for real at some point.Because unlike the others, Carol is not conflicted. She rejects Alexandria’s comforts but does so as an icy, Machiavellian counterpoint to Sasha’s flailing disintegration, glad-handing the locals while she plots against them, or at least in defiance of their rules. She was a one-woman sleeper cell on Sunday, reconnoitering the supply shack, preparing it for infiltration and then, finally, stealing the guns that later went unappreciated by her cohorts.Carol has had arguably the most dramatic arc of the primary survivors. She began the show as a victim, at the hands of her husband, then endured both the most wrenching loss of the series — her daughter, Sophia, in Season 2 — and exile from the group before returning and later saving everyone at Terminus.Along the way she continued to deepen and toughen as a character, taking out poor insane Lizzie, among others, and confessing her murder of Karen to Tyreese. Melissa McBride has done incredible work to evince Carol’s emotional complexity even while making her evolution into a stony warrior feel credible.I thought her transformation culminated in that attack on the cannibal commune, Carol wearing zombie-gut camouflage as easily as she now does those sweaters. But I was wrong. The real moment of revelation came in that supply shack on Sunday when, upon being discovered by Jessie’s son, she used a graphic story that paralleled her own daughter’s demise as a weapon to terrify another child into silence.If you tell anyone what you saw, she calmly explained to the boy, one morning you’ll wake up far from the safety of home. “The monsters will come, the ones out there, and you won’t be able to run away when they come for you,” she said. “And they will tear you apart and eat you up all while you’re still alive, all while you can still feel it. And then afterward no one will know what happened to you.” (Take the cookies, kid.)It remains to be seen whether little Sam will follow my advice but one thing is clear: Carol, the former shattered mother turned coldblooded ninja, is not to be underestimated or messed with in any way. If that overhead shot of her, Rick and Daryl did symbolize a rift to come, I know whose team I’d join.A FEW THOUGHTS WHILE WE WONDER IF WE’VE BEEN LEFT BEHIND• So did Father Gabriel get raptured? Or what? He’s been totally M.I.A. for two entire episodes now. I accept that perhaps he’ll be making some sort of dramatic return to the story (as suggested by the scenes from next week) but it’s odd, to a distracting degree, that no other character has so much as mentioned him.• Could he be the one who grabbed the blender gun? (Probably not, I guess.)• While we’re on the subject, this show is getting lousy with cryptic initials. There was the mystery “J” on the missing gun. There are the deeply symbolic “A”s on Rick’s and Jessie’s hands. Then on Sunday we saw a walker with a “W” carved into its forehead. It’s like the Wheel of Misfortune in this piece.• Did you totally buy Daryl’s 180? I believe he believes it but didn’t the turn seem a little drastic? Last week he was gutting possums on the porch and sneering at any nods toward respectability. Now he’s pals with Aaron and Eric and ready to advocate for the colony? What was in that spaghetti?• What say you? Will Sasha go Charles Whitman in that clock tower? Which nonessential appliance will you miss most after the apocalypse? Please weigh in on whatever seems appropriate in the comments. 