Season 6, Episode 14: “Mind’s Eye”
 “The Good Wife” went Joycean on us on Sunday night, sending Alicia Florrick (Julianna Margulies) on her own miniaturized version of the “Ulysses” journey in an episode called “Mind’s Eye.”In a fictional span of three hours, Alicia didn’t move far physically — she spent most of the time at her kitchen table, took a break for a walk outside that unexpectedly included a visit to a hospital, and then returned to her apartment like a weary traveler. But the elaborately structured, cleverly written episode thoroughly explored the geography of her mind. While one crisis popped up after another, her thought process was acted out onscreen using the show’s other characters. She imagined them in various scenarios, playing out scenes in her head to test out her hypotheses, to decide what to do, to come to an understanding of how she felt, to figure out how to win. She used her colleagues, family members, friends and enemies like mental puppets, watching them, stage-directing them, talking to them, being yelled at by them. It was a gimmick, but an interesting and well-executed one — to render in dramatic terms Alicia’s quicksilver intelligence, her free-ranging, intuitive reasoning and her extreme propensity to get distracted.The episode, limited in incident, also didn’t advance the plot significantly. The framework was her preparation for a crucial newspaper editorial-board interview, which we didn’t see. She also dealt with a wrongful-eviction lawsuit from her nemesis Louis Canning (Michael J. Fox) and responded to the latest public-relations crisis involving the drug dealer Lemond Bishop. The only really foreboding development was that Canning was left at death’s door, unconscious in the hospital. What the episode did accomplish was to move Alicia — who hadn’t been the central focus of her own show for much of this season — toward a series of insights and realizations, about herself and others. By the end of the episode, she, and we, knew just how angry she still was with Kalinda (Archie Panjabi) for sleeping with Peter (Chris Noth), but that she at least partly acknowledged Peter’s right, post-Will, to feel a double standard was being applied. On the other hand, she realized she had been unfairly harsh to her son, Zach (Graham Phillips), who was comically pictured as homeless on a park bench, plaintively asking why she was still angry with him. And she came to a pair of major realizations. She decided she was O.K. with publicly skirting the truth about Bishop’s funding of her political action committee if it contributed to the greater good of her being elected state’s attorney. In an imaginary conversation with her opponent, Frank Prady (David Hyde Pierce), she told him that if he wasn’t willing to lie to do the job, then he shouldn’t be elected.More important for the show’s fans, she also realized, or admitted to herself and to us, that she wanted to have sex with her curly-haired siren of a campaign manager, Johnny (Steven Pasquale). Accepting this meant saying a symbolic goodbye to a shadowy figure with the voice of the late Will Gardner.Detailing the eddies and ripples of the multifarious story would take far too much time and space. Some highlights:Howard Lyman (Jerry Adler), a key player in Alicia’s many imaginary run-throughs of Canning’s wrongful-eviction lawsuit, enters the Florrick Agos conference room and says, “Ooh, bagels!”Alicia imagines a scene of Lemond (Mike Colter) talking about her PAC three times, each time adding a new thought that’s just occurred to her, until daydream supplies her with a way to dodge a question about him and the PAC.An exasperated Eli Gold (Alan Cumming) continually pops up, full frame, to chastise her for her inadequacies. “Why do you always freeze up at that?” “You’re acknowledging the premise of the question!”As Kalinda and Lemond discuss how to deal with the rumors about his funding of the PAC, they stop midsentence and turn to look at the camera, because Alicia’s mind has wandered; inserting Kalinda into her daydream has made her flash back to Kalinda and Peter in bed together. She starts to imagine their pillow talk, but Peter turns to the camera with a sneer and says, “We don’t talk this way and you know it.”A memory of sex with Will segues into a fantasy of making out with Johnny (while he coaches her on how to answer the Lemond question) and then shifts once again into either a memory or a fantasy of sex with Finn Polmar (Matthew Goode).My favorite: Worried about the state of mind of her daughter, Grace, Alicia imagines Pastor Isaiah Easton (Gbenga Akinnagbe) asking her if she wants her to turn out like Zach. Cut to the park-bench Zach exclaiming: “Why am I the example of what not to do? I’m at Georgetown!”A couple of melodramatic real-world developments did take place later in the episode. After pondering ways to defeat Canning in the lawsuit, and seeing herself questioning the reality of his health problems, she learned that he had just collapsed, leading to her unplanned hospital visit. And another of the show’s patented cellphone glitches led to her learning that Grace was having a crisis of faith. (This entailed some amusing scenes of imagined conversation’s with a heavily made-up, world-weary, eventually pregnant and glue-sniffing Grace.)For some viewers, though, the episode may be remembered for just one thing. As Alicia fretted about Grace, she imagined she was talking to Richard Dawkins,  the atheist and best-selling author of “The God Delusion.” Making the case for the normalcy of atheism, he calmly said to her: “Look at all those priests who raped small boys. I’m not saying Christianity makes them do that, but it certainly doesn’t seem to stop them.” Someone in standards and practices at CBS may be fielding a few questions this week.Please let us know what you thought of “Mind’s Eyes” in the comments.