Season 4, Episode 8: “Tad & Loreen & Avi & Shanaz”
Luxuriating in a breakup — some call it sulking — can be a worthwhile indulgence, but life just never stops happening. After three superb episodes inside the noxious bubble of Hannah and Adam’s split, “Girls” had some plot bombs to drop as we enter this season’s final stretch. Hannah (Lena Dunham), out and braving the world again away from her ex, is going to be seeking shelter after this one. Joining me, Joe Coscarelli, in discussion is Lydia Polgreen. Joe: As this episode did, we should start with the big one: Hannah’s father, Tad Horvath, played with perfect passivity by Peter Scolari, is gay. He came out not in couples therapy but after a session, when he tells his wife, Loreen (Becky Ann Baker), that he’s “been thinking lately” that he is gay. She pushes back: “You’re not gay,” she says, “I think it would have come up.” He clarifies, “I don’t think — I am.” The HBO comedy by Lena Dunham.What follows felt a little heavy-handed: Loreen launches into a selfish screed about how she’s been wronged, blaming her husband’s revelation on his latent misogyny over her newly awarded tenure (both elder Horvaths are college professors). The reaction, I assume, was meant to tell the viewer: See, this is where Hannah gets it from. But the scene felt a bit like Becky Ann Baker was just doing her best Lena Dunham impression. (Ms. Dunham wrote the episode with Jenni Konner.) Maybe “Girls” deserves credit for making the notes of Hannah’s narcissism so familiar over the years, but the uncanniness took me out of the moment. “It’s not not about me, Tad,” Loreen tells her longtime partner at his most vulnerable. “It’s not not.” I’m pretty sure that’s Hannah’s mantra. The occasional monstrousness of the Horvath women reared its head again at the episode’s end, when Loreen interrupts Hannah’s inane phone monologue — “Do you think I’m a dramatic person?” — by blurting out, “Hannah, your father is gay!” This right after she tells Tad that their close friend in academia, Avi, happens to be in love with her, assuring that her husband’s coming out really was all about her. Poor, poor, pathetic Tad. What did you think of this twist? Lydia: First of all, as any good lesbian will tell you, watching gay male porn does not make you a gay man. However, Tad’s coming out does not come as a complete surprise. Elijah (Andrew Rannells) clocked him way back in Season 1, with his memorable parting line after coming out to Hannah: “Nice to see you, your dad is gay.” That episode first introduced us to Elijah, who had been Hannah’s boyfriend in college but later came out, much to Hannah’s chagrin, which leads me to wonder how Hannah will handle her dad’s news. This episode has other clever echoes with that memorable Season 1 episode, “All Adventurous Women Do.” Hannah had sought out Elijah because she had tested positive for HPV and she suspected him of infecting her. In the current episode, Hannah has what seems to me a highly inappropriate outing with Cleo, a teenage student in one of her classes, in which HPV is a nontrivial item of conversation. Your heart really goes out to Tad here, and Peter Scolari plays him with such innocence and sweetness. I wondered back in Iowa, when he bizarrely suggested that he and Hannah run off together, if something like this was in the offing. I thought: Either he has terminal cancer or he’s gay. I’m relieved it is the latter. Joe: It does seem worth noting that the episode, which I thought continued the show’s recent strong streak overall, was directed by Jamie Babbit. Her film “But I’m a Cheerleader” is a cult classic coming out story (starring “Girls” guest and one of my personal heroes, Natasha Lyonne). Ms. Babbit also happens to be behind some of my favorite episodes of “Gilmore Girls,” a master class in family drama, so pairing her with the material here was an inspired choice. Lydia: Speaking of drama, all is not well with our singer-songwriter duo. The childishness of Desi (Ebon Moss-Bachrach), Marnie’s boyfriend and bandmate, seems to know no bounds. He shows up at their apartment with a box that he claims will change their lives forever. “These pedals are so sick,” he says, burying the lead, which is that he blew their entire $2,000 recording advance on German guitar pedals. Marnie (Allison Williams) is furious, and rightfully so. Desi storms out, after calling her a name, shouting, “Thanks for ruining my day, Raincloud.” Marnie seems to show glimmers of smarts about this loser, which makes it all the more galling when, at the end of the episode, when Desi apologizes and proposes marriage (wait, where did he get the cash for the ring?) and Marnie says yes on the spot. This struck me as a little bit off — as annoying as Marnie can be, she has a steeliness to her that I would think makes her at least pause before accepting a marriage proposal from Desi. But then, she broke up with sweet, dedicated Charlie because he bored her in the bedroom. Maybe hot sex is just what makes her tick. Which makes me wonder about Ray’s (Alex Karpovsky) confession on the hustings to Shoshanna (Zosia Mamet) that he still has deep feelings for Marnie. “It’s one of those things where you are waiting for your heart to catch up to your brain,” he tells Shosh, who, of course, thinks he is talking about her. Could Marnie and Ray be the sleeper true love story in this show? Joe: Speaking of callbacks to the first season, let’s remember how that one ended: with a sudden wedding for Jessa (Jemima Kirke) — who, by the way, has descended so far into a vicious caricature of a spoiled white girl that she may stand alone in the (very competitive!) Most Sociopathic category, especially in this Mimi-Rose-less episode. When Jessa tells Shosh, “I have four suicide attempts under my belt — men who just couldn’t live without me,” my stomach dropped a little.Lydia: Indeed. Though her hankering for unavailable Ace seems very much out of character. Wasn’t she supposed to be “unsmotable,” to use her memorable phrase from Season 1? Joe: Back to the ill-advised wedding. I will not be surprised if we get another, and soon, but maybe this time Ray will pull a “Speak Now” and save us any more sanctimoniousness from Desi, who is not only obnoxious but deranged (and a terrible musician, My Bloody Valentine pedals or not). And while I would have watched a movie-length version of the professors’ dinner party that gave this episode its title, the same goes for Hannah’s after-school excursion with a teen, Maude Apatow’s Cleo, whose actual age matches Hannah’s emotional age. In what could have been the centerpiece of a less cringe-stuffed episode, Hannah celebrates the end of her substitute teaching stint by taking Cleo to get “best frenulum” piercings — under the tongue — before ducking out after witnessing the kid go first. Hannah says it was “heinous” to watch, and it was, not to mention graphic and tear-filled. Hannah then continues her streak of clueless false wisdom, as if she’s really lived: “As an older woman and as your friend, a great lesson that I can teach you is that it’s O.K. to change your mind.” Whatever helps you sleep at night, Ms. Horvath. Firmly, laudably uninterested in her shenanigans is Fran (Jake Lacy), who accepts Hannah’s apology for last week’s date from hell but politely insists he’s trying “to lead a calmer life, as Mary J. Blige tells us to.” Hannah counters that she’s a wild horse in need of taming — “the new frontier in misogyny,” she says, echoing her mother in Michigan — and all Fran can do is take a deep breath and walk away. Great call, buddy. 