AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (Comedy Central) NIGHT OF TOO MANY STARS: AMERICA COMES TOGETHER FOR AUTISM PROGRAMS Jon Stewart hosts; Larry David, Martin Short, Larry Wilmore, Fred Armisen, Andy Cohen, Ilana Glazer, Abbi Jacobson and Susan Sarandon oversee the phone banks; and Bill Burr, Louis C. K., John Oliver, Paul Rudd, Amy Schumer, Steve Buscemi, Steve Carell, Gilbert Gottfried, Maya Rudolph and Sarah Silverman, above, perform in sketches taped at the Beacon Theater in this telethon on behalf of autism awareness and education.10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Representative John Lewis, Democrat of Georgia, commemorates the 50th anniversary of the civil rights march from Selma to Montgomery, Ala., here and on “Meet the Press,” at 10:30 on NBC.10:30 A.M. (CBS) FACE THE NATION The guests include Senators Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, and Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York. Also, an excerpt from Bill Plante’s interview with President Obama on the 50th anniversary of Selma.7 P.M. (CBS) 60 MINUTES Bob Simon, in a profile completed a week before his death on Feb. 11, interviews James Levine, the music director of the Metropolitan Opera, about his career, including the fall in 2013 that left him partially paralyzed. He also captures him in conversation with Plácido Domingo and in a practice session with the mezzo-soprano Stephanie Blythe.8 P.M. (Velocity) SEMA BATTLE OF THE BUILDERS The Top 10 vehicle builders and car customizers, culled from more than 125 entrants by editors from Super Street, Hot Rod and Petersen’s 4-Wheel & Off-Road magazines, put their creativity and craftsmanship to the test for the title of Ultimate Builder in this competition sponsored by the Specialty Equipment Market Association.8 P.M. (CBS) MADAM SECRETARY Elizabeth (Téa Leoni) tries to repair political relations with Turkey after that country’s government releases a video that could harm the Central Intelligence Agency. In “The Good Wife,” at 9, Alicia (Julianna Margulies) prepares for an important interview in her campaign for state’s attorney. Louis Canning (Michael J. Fox) tries to force Florrick, Agos and Lockhart to settle in his wrongful eviction case against the firm. And in “Battle Creek,” at 10, Milt (Josh Duhamel) and Russ (Dean Winters) pretend to be distillers to infiltrate maple syrup cartels after a victim is found drowned in goo.8 P.M. (FX Movie Channel) THE CURIOUS CASE OF BENJAMIN BUTTON (2008) Brad Pitt, left, received an Oscar nomination for his portrayal of Benjamin Button, a man born in his 80s in 1918 New Orleans, who ages in reverse into the 21st century, in this adaptation of a short story by F. Scott Fitzgerald. Cate Blanchett is Daisy, the dancer who loves Benjamin at whatever stage he is in. And Taraji P. Henson, who was also nominated, is the nursing home caretaker who raises him when his father abandons him. From Fitzgerald’s “odd, somewhat unpromising kernel, the director David Fincher and the screenwriter Eric Roth have cultivated a lush, romantic hothouse bloom, a film that shares only a title and a basic premise with its literary source,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times.9 P.M. (ABC) SECRETS AND LIES Ben (Ryan Phillippe) tries to unite his family in the midst of revelations that make him seem even more guilty of murder. Then he discovers something shocking about evidence.9 P.M. (HBO) GIRLS Hannah (Lena Dunham, left) spends an afternoon with a friend; Marnie (Allison Williams) and Desi (Ebon Moss-Bachrach) quarrel over money; Jessa (Jemima Kirke) tutors Shoshanna (Zosia Mamet) in the art of seduction; and Hannah’s parents (Becky Ann Baker and Peter Scolari) give a disastrous dinner party.What’s Streaming NowHOW I GOT OVER (2015) In this documentary from Nicole Boxer, 15 formerly homeless women stage a play at the Kennedy Center in Washington about their own lives and the transformative power of arts education. (amazon.com, iTunes) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement