An audience that Hollywood often ignores — older moviegoers — turned “The Second Best Exotic Marigold Hotel” into an immediate success over the weekend, while the director Neill Blomkamp and the actor Vince Vaughn fell flat in their pursuit of younger crowds. “The Second Best Exotic Marigold Hotel,” which cost Fox Searchlight about $15 million to make, took in an estimated $8.6 million from a relatively limited 1,573 screens in North America, according to Rentrak, which compiles box office data. Mr. Blomkamp’s “Chappie,” playing on more than twice as many screens (including Imax locations) and costing roughly $50 million to make, took in an estimated $13.3 million. Mr. Blomkamp became a studio darling in 2009 after directing the inventive science-fiction hit “District 9” but stumbled with his second movie, “Elysium,” before turning to “Chappie,” an R-rated robot thriller. Analysts noted that “Chappie,” co-financed by Sony Pictures and Media Rights Capital, arrived amid a glut of R-rated movies — including “Unfinished Business,” a comedy co-starring Mr. Vaughn and Dave Franco that arrived to disastrous results. New Regency spent $35 million to make “Unfinished Business,” which took in an estimated $4.8 million and was distributed by 20th Century Fox. “Unfinished Business” marks the fifth comedic flop in five years for Mr. Vaughn, whose big-screen career appears to have peaked a decade ago with “Wedding Crashers.” Rentrak projected on Sunday that ticket sales for the weekend would total $88.5 million, a 39 percent decline from the same period a year ago. One bright spot: “American Sniper,” with a new domestic total of $337.2 million, overtook “The Hunger Games: Mockingjay Part 1” to become the top-selling release of 2014.An earlier version of this post carried an incorrect headline. “Chappie” was the top box office draw this weekend, not “The Second Best Exotic Marigold Hotel.”A version of this article appears in print on 03/09/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Older Moviegoers Flock to Second ‘Marigold’ Movie.