When the Museum of Modern Art opened an exhibition of contemporary works in December, eight unstretched canvases by the celebrated young Colombian artist Oscar Murillo were not hung on walls, but were instead placed on the floor, where visitors were invited to handle them.  The somewhat-unusual arrangement offered a tactile experience, but also might have produced a temptation too overwhelming to resist.  Museum officials said that somebody at the show last week left with one of the eight canvases from the floor.That work, titled “1/2s (Lessons in Aesthetics and Productivity),” is a painting on stitched-together pieces of canvas with Mr. Murillo’s signature chaotic scrawls on the lower right part of the painting and the fraction ½ marked on the upper left side. Officials at the museum swiftly became aware of the painting’s absence and contacted the police.“Security identified the visitor,” said Margaret Doyle, a spokeswoman for the museum,  adding that the work “was quickly returned without incident.”Ms. Doyle said that the painting was unharmed, adding that “no action such as an arrest was taken.” The painting was returned to the floor of the gallery, where, she said, “the museum will assure that there is the appropriate level of security in the exhibition.”  She did not say how the museum was able to identify the person who took the work, describing that as a “security matter.” Ms. Doyle cited the same reason in declining to say how long the painting was missing and whether it was returned by the same person who took it.The removal and return of the work, which was reported by artnet.com, left lingering mysteries.  Who removed the canvas?  And what became of that person?A search through emails describing serious crimes that the Police Department sends each day to news organizations did not include an indication of any theft of an artwork since the beginning of the month.  A police spokesman said Saturday night that he had no immediate information about a stolen painting.Museum officials would not identify the person who took the painting.  Neither would a representative of Mr. Murillo’s dealer, David Zwirner.Mr. Murillo, who is not yet 30 and has been referred to as “the 21st-century Basquiat,” had a rapid rise in the art world.  Just a few years ago, he was waking up near dawn to clean office buildings and earn money to pay his tuition at the Royal College of Art in London. More recently, collectors have paid six figure for his paintings.Ms. Doyle said that the painting would remain in its spot on the floor until the exhibition, “The Forever Now: Contemporary Painting in an Atemporal World,” closes on April 5.A version of this article appears in print on 03/09/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Oscar Murillo Canvas Is Taken and Returned.