
American Horror Story By                     
E. A. HANKS

OCT. 15, 2015
Season 5, Episode 2: “Chutes and Ladders”“I envy you,” says James March, in his clipped mid-Atlantic cadence, “My curse was making my fortune too early. My point being, that the appetites of the filthy rich are specific, altered from that of the common man.”This might be the complaint of the original resident homicidal maniac of the Hotel Cortez, but could this not also be the plight of “American Horror Story: Hotel”?Whose appetites are being satisfied by such shallow gestures?Last week I wrote about the question of camp and its relation to horror. Both are equally able of going beyond what most common men — gay, straight and everyone in between — would consider to be in good taste, but I also believe that horror and camp can still service story. In fact, horror helps us have conversations through analogy that would be too didactic otherwise; race, in “Night of the Living Dead,” for instance, or the dangers of sexual promiscuity in the recent indie hit, “It Follows.”But how scary is “American Horror Story: Hotel”? Not very, as the Times critic Neil Genzlinger predicted earlier this fall.AdvertisementPerhaps you’ll recall the Academy Award nominated film “Se7en,” about a chilling serial killer who punished victims for indulging in the seven deadly sins. The last scene, in which a young detective receives his pregnant wife’s severed head in a box, is now considered classic. It’s horrifying and memorable because we never see what’s in the box.AdvertisementIn this week’s episode of “American Horror Story,” we learn we are tracking a killer whose victims are chosen for breaking the Ten Commandments. For instance, an Oscar blogger is sodomized to death with an Academy Award, for worshiping false idols. We see crime scene photos; we see a bloodied golden statuette. If what truly scares us is often what we don’t, or can’t, see, it’s no wonder that this episode offered little in terms of fright.(I will make an exception for Sarah Paulson’s bloody gums.)Two episodes in, “Hotel” has so many disparate plotlines, each taxed with its own clunky exposition, that the story of the show’s characters and larger themes are floundering, while the plot races from event to event, with little interest in who these people are or what is happening.When you can’t get too bothered by a fashion show that seems to appear out of nowhere, and introduces yet another glamorous guest star (this time, infamous supermodel Naomi Campbell), and then vanishes completely from the screen and story, there is a problem.What has always been impressive about “American Horror Story,” is its success at bringing horror, a genre that is most effectively experienced in the cinema, into the home in part by focusing on the intimate havoc we can wreak on those closest to us, be it a new family in an old house, a coterie of inmates, a coven, a traveling band of freaks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.These are horrors that the common viewer can appreciate: The pain divorce can inflict on children, the crushed hopes of a fading matriarch, and yes, being raped by an anonymous ghost in a rubber suit and spawning the Antichrist.The “Rubber Man” plotline of Season 1, while ridiculous, worked. First, it was not sharing story space with a handful of other equally insane plotlines — it was, for lack of a better term, the headliner.When ghost Tate raped Vivien Harmon, it was the traumatic event the entire season revolved around. It was an outrageous plot point that was saved from being nihilistically gratuitous by showing actual emotional consequences for nearly all the characters of “Murder House”; it wasn’t titillating, it was upsetting.Compare that with the gratuitously extended shot of a character who had just been introduced, being raped in this season’s premiere.AdvertisementThus far, “Hotel” has earned none of the violence and depravity that it has flaunted while expressing zero interest in subtlety or mystery, but the season is young and I have hope.(I am also crossing my fingers that all these nearly identical white men look alike for a reason, namely bearing a resemblance to the Countess’ lost maker.)As far I can tell, the only mystery going thus far is how sewing dead bodies into old mattresses brings back the dead.So perhaps here is where horror and camp begin to work against each other: Can anything that preens so glibly in the spotlight’s glare truly be scary?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »