AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe CoscarelliHimanshu Suri, the musician and artist known as Heems, is an operator across worlds that may seem, at first, incompatible. An Indian-American rapper with a degree from Wesleyan and a day job doing data entry at an advertising agency, Heems is releasing his first solo album, “Eat Pray Thug,” on Tuesday via the metal label Megaforce, once home to Metallica. Recorded largely in Mumbai, the work is focused on racial identity and 9/11 — Heems was blocks away, at Stuyvesant High School, when the towers fell — and is made up mostly of discordant and gravel-voiced protest songs (“Suicide by Cop,” “Flag Shopping,” “Patriot Act”) until it’s not, and he’s singing sweetly about a breakup.“Sometimes I’m ’bout chicks, sometimes it’s politics,” Heems raps, ever self-aware, on the lead single, “Sometimes,” which he described as being about “dualities,” a mission statement that applies to the entire album, pop songs and sociopolitical bombs alike. “When I was younger, it was cut and dried: I go to school and I’m American; I come home and I’m Indian,” Heems, 29, who grew up in Queens with Punjabi parents, said of his chameleon nature. “But when I became an artist and stopped putting up those divisions, I had to deal with myself as myself, and that was quite a difficult process for me. I found a certain protection living in two worlds.”That in-between — he described it as “the space between black and white, with Latino and Indian as ‘brown,’ and unity across diversity” — was the safe zone Heems’s former group, Das Racist, which rose from cutting Internet novelty to professional rap act without losing its smirk-and-wink silliness. But it wasn’t until Das Racist broke up in 2012, and Heems decamped for his ancestral homeland, that he truly could explore his own individuality without defenses. “Das Racist hinted at a lot of things,” he said. “But this is the most personal work I’ve ever done.” Heems discussed his creative process in an interview at Aicon Gallery in Manhattan, where he organized and contributed to an exhibition tied to his album that runs until Tuesday. These are excerpts from the conversation.Q. Why the nod to “Eat, Pray, Love” in the album title? Were your travels a spiritual experience?I was in Asia for five months. The name speaks to my identity confusion, because in a certain way I fell victim to the spiritual tourism bug just like any white American. I’m just as guilty of exoticizing as Elizabeth Gilbert. I would be reading about Mughal history while listening to Ravi Shankar with incense lit in my room. And I would be like, “I’m Indian — I don’t need to be doing all this!” But I’m not Indian — I’m American. Specifically a New Yorker — so much so that you rap, “I still don’t bump Tupac.”The album is all about New York. It was one of those artist-in-exile things, like the Beastie Boys in L. A. or E. B. White leaving New York to write about the city. When you leave New York, it’s all that you think about. In India, I wasn’t the Indian rapper — I was just the rapper. Ironically, it was there that I was able to look past being Indian, and that allowed me to make this record.Did being overseas leave you disconnected from what was happening in rap music here?My favorite rappers right now are Meek Mill and French Montana. They’re not inherently political guys, but so much of their music is about the justice system. In light of what happened in Ferguson, it’s important for people to talk about that stuff. But I was listening to a lot of Indian music — Bollywood songs on Spice FM. I like that the album wasn’t influenced by contemporary stuff, especially because rap is regionally moving so much to Atlanta. But you’re still subtly weaving in your hip-hop influences, as well, borrowing flows or lyrics.Rap has always been quote-unquote hyper-referential. It’s collaging. [On the song “AL Q8A”] I referenced French Montana saying, “Hi haters, our guns from Al Qaeda.” I think it’s funny because a lot of Al Qaeda’s guns were from us, so it was kind of a misguided quotation. There was also this whole thing with Dipset, where they referred to themselves as the Taliban — it was just for shock value. And Chicago, in rap, becomes Chi-raq. From a certain standpoint, it was about reclaiming that from hip-hop as a brown person. You’ve worked on Wall Street and now in advertising, but have you made a living off rap?I dropped 20 stacks [$20,000] on art here, so I’m doing all right. But I had a certain amount of guilt about being an artist. I thought working-class people shouldn’t be artists because it’s a luxury. My father drove a cab, and my mom worked at Pathmark bagging groceries for $4 an hour. But I try not to validate myself through the labor of my parents. They worked their butts off and I did, too, in a different way. In India, I realized that I need to own this. I finally accepted that I am inspired by sound and language, and I’m fortunate that this is my career. For people who are used to you in Das Racist, there’s now a lack of —— Jokes. Why? It’s not realistic to be happy like that all the time. You put yourself out there, and it’s extremely vulnerable. That’s why I think we were much more comfortable hiding behind humor. Something like race is an extremely personal, depressing topic. I would always reference Langston Hughes’s “Laughing to Keep From Crying” because that’s what we were doing. Now I’m just crying. [Laughs.]Advertisement