AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasSo, how often does Paul Taylor attend dance performances? “Never,” he said bluntly at his Lower East Side apartment overlooking the East River on a recent morning. “I don’t go out anywhere anymore. I don’t go to movies. I don’t go to concerts. I’m a real stay-at-home.” And, he added, “I’ve found that if I go out to see somebody’s work, I have to stay through the whole thing even though I hate it.”Mr. Taylor’s attitude is understandable — he is 84, after all. But it’s also perplexing given that he is presiding over a new version of his company that requires him to sift through the weeds to find the flowers. (He’ll manage with videos.)Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance, an umbrella name for his organization — when the troupe tours it will remain the Paul Taylor Dance Company — opens on Tuesday at the David H. Koch Theater. Its mission is ambitious: to become a home for American modern dance, presenting masterworks along with pieces by a new generation of choreographers. “I wanted to show other people’s dances besides mine, because a lot of young people especially don’t know anything about the history of modern dance,” Mr. Taylor said. “I wanted to get some of the old-timers on there, the founders. I thought it would be a way to show people important dances that they wouldn’t otherwise see.” This inaugural season, American Modern Dance is slated to present 19 of Mr. Taylor’s works as well as two by outside choreographers: Doris Humphrey and Shen Wei. But unlike other repertory companies, whose members perform all the dances, Mr. Taylor has engaged the Limón Dance Company to perform Humphrey’s “Passacaglia and Fugue in C Minor” and Shen Wei Dance Arts to present Mr. Shen’s “Rite of Spring.” “That way it’s like from the horse’s mouth,” Mr. Taylor said of the decision. “But there will be times, I’m sure, when my company will learn someone else’s dance. I think it’ll be good for them.” Carla Maxwell, the artistic director of Limón Dance Company, regards American Modern Dance as an affirmation that the field is about more than just what is happening today. “I was out lecturing earlier this fall, and a young woman asked, ‘With so many new, modern companies, is there really a place for this work?’ ” Ms. Maxwell recalled. “I had to hold myself back. The answer is: Would you be here today without us? Did you give birth to yourself?”Thursday’s gala will include an announcement about additions to the repertory, including one piece, Mr. Taylor hinted, that his company will perform. While he makes all final decisions, he is advised by a committee comprising the writer and historian Suzanne Carbonneau, who is working on a book about Mr. Taylor; the former Taylor dancer and educator Carolyn Adams; and the director of the American Dance Festival, Jodee Nimerichter. Mr. Taylor acknowledged that there had been earlier versions of his idea, including the short-lived American Dance Theater, a repertory group directed by José Limón in 1964 and ’65. In 1972, the American Dance Festival, then led by Charles L. Reinhart, presented the ADF Repertory Company. “It’s been started,” Mr. Taylor said.His hope, of course, is that it will continue. His project was financed, in part, by the 2014 sale of a group of Robert Rauschenberg works that Mr. Taylor owned. “It’s expensive,” he continued, “even if the place is packed.”Still, this first season of American Modern Dance seems somewhat random. Ms. Maxwell said the organization initially requested Humphrey’s “Air for the G String,” because, as she understood it, the piece had been an early inspiration for Mr. Taylor. “I don’t think their administration understood it’s only a five-minute dance for five women,” she said.“Passacaglia,” for 16 dancers and set to Bach, created in 1938, takes on the theme of survival over despair. In it, the dancers are arranged on platforms. “It’s almost the architecture coming to life in dancing,” Ms. Maxwell said. Mr. Taylor recalled performing “Passacaglia” one summer at Connecticut College, where he first met Humphrey, a modern dance pioneer. Ultimately, Mr. Taylor gravitated toward Martha Graham. “It was full-blooded,” he said of her work. “You really got to move.”His attempts to obtain a Graham work this season were unsuccessful. “They just will not commit themselves,” he said. “I think we’ll get one eventually.”Mr. Shen’s inclusion is more surprising. Robert Kleinendorst, a member of Mr. Taylor’s company, said: “We were all assuming it was going to be older works — Humphrey, Graham, Ted Shawn. Those people who are no longer around.”Mr. Taylor has never seen Mr. Shen’s company perform live. Perhaps Mr. Reinhart — both a supporter of Mr. Shen and Mr. Taylor’s former company manager — had something to do with his involvement? “I know that he likes Shen Wei very much,” Mr. Taylor said of Mr. Reinhart. “But he has not been in on all of this stuff.” For Mr. Taylor, the draw is Mr. Shen’s voice. “I don’t see that he’s been terribly influenced by other people’s choreography,” Mr. Taylor says. “He’s like started from scratch for himself.” In the future, Mr. Taylor said he would consider works by a number of choreographers, especially Twyla Tharp, a former company member. So far, she has turned him down. “Maybe it’s a matter of time before she’d be free enough to let us do something,” he said. “She’s certainly sold many of her dances to different places.” Playing the choreographer game with the devilish Mr. Taylor is entertaining: He speaks in tweets. On Mark Morris: “Certainly that’s a possibility. He auditioned for my company. I didn’t take him. I didn’t like all that long hair.” And Merce Cunningham? “I think that would be O.K.,” Mr. Taylor said. “I don’t know if we’d ever get that music played right. Pretty awful. But there might be a way, and so that could be considered.” Despite his new role as a presenter, Mr. Taylor regards himself, foremost, as a choreographer. This season, which includes live music, features two premieres, “Sea Lark” and “Death of the Damsel,” which he happily calls “a horror show.”The run also features many of his hits. “It was John’s idea,” he said with a grimace, referring to his organization’s executive director, John Tomlinson. “There are pieces that have not been popular that I’d like to show again, because I like them.”American Modern Dance is a way for Mr. Taylor to have a say about his company after he’s gone. He is contemplating a successor — or successors — and said that there are several possibilities, though he hasn’t gotten in touch with anyone yet. “It’s too early,” he said, adding they were “people I’ve worked with directly.” He’s sure of one thing: “I’m not going to disband. I’ll have to die before I leave.”Advertisement