AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel E. SlotnikDaniel Von Bargen, a character actor who played both bumbling and menacing authority figures and was probably best known as George Costanza’s thickheaded boss on “Seinfeld,” died on Sunday in Cincinnati. He was 64.His death was confirmed by Harry Gilligan, the owner of Gilligan Funeral Homes, without specifying the cause. Mr. Von Bargen had been treated for diabetes for years and had undergone a leg amputation.Mr. Von Bargen tended to portray police officers, soldiers and other stern sorts, parts well served by his close-cropped hair and piercing blue eyes. He was a relentless sheriff in the Coen brothers comedy “O Brother, Where Art Thou?” (2000), a SWAT communicator in “The Silence of the Lambs” (1991), a warden in Steven Spielberg’s “Amistad” (1997) and a corrupt police chief in the raucous comedy “Super Troopers” (2001).Some of his most memorable performances made light of his authoritative mien. He rivaled Jason Alexander’s Costanza in laziness as Mr. Kruger on “Seinfeld” from 1997 to 1998 and terrorized disobedient military school students as the sadistic but inept Commandant Edwin Spangler on “Malcolm in the Middle” from 2000 to 2003. He appeared regularly in prime-time dramas like “The West Wing” and “Law & Order” and acted in soap operas like “All My Children.”Daniel Von Bargen (pronounced like “bargain”) was born in Cincinnati on June 5, 1950. He majored in drama at Purdue University before joining the Trinity Repertory Theater in Providence, R.I., and appeared on Broadway in the short-lived Larry Gelbart satire “Mastergate” in 1989.In film, he appeared in Woody Allen’s “Shadows and Fog” (1991), Jonathan Demme’s “Philadelphia” (1993) and Paul Verhoeven’s “Basic Instinct” (1992). Mr. Von Bargen took fewer and fewer roles as his diabetes worsened; his last credited film role was in the comedy “London Betty” in 2009. In 2012, having lost one leg through amputation, he attempted suicide, telling the police in a widely publicized emergency call that he had shot himself in the temple because he could not face another amputation the next morning.Mr. Von Bargen lived in Cincinnati. His survivors include several siblings. Advertisement