Season 1, Episode 6: Five-OThe previous episode of “Better Call Saul” promised some potential back story about Mike Ehrmantraut, and this week the show delivered. The writers had to explain the psychic core of Mike, a guy so taciturn and flinty that he seems emotionally cauterized. How did he get that way? By the time Mike is done talking (he narrates many of the events), we know. “Five-O,” as this episode is titled, reaches a level of pathos unrivaled by anything seen in this series or the one it precedes chronologically. It is a great, devastating 40-something minute drama.
And that’s because of Jonathan Banks, an actor who has spent all of his on-camera minutes in both “Breaking Bad” and “Better Call Saul” making the most of a minimalist performance. He played everything so simply that in last week’s episode he was emoting with just an eyebrow. Not eyebrows, plural. His only reaction, in a couple of dialogue-free shots, was the quiver of a single eyebrow.Anyone who assumed that Banks favored stillness because he didn’t know how to dance has been disabused of that idea. The final scene of “Five-O” was the payoff to years of less-is-more acting. We see facial expressions that we didn’t know Mike could make, undergirded by notes of desperation and remorse we didn’t know he had in him.The plot collides only briefly with our main character, Jimmy McGill, but “Five-O” does not feel like a digression or a piece of midseason filler.  We learn that Mike’s son, Matty, was also a Philadelphia cop, two years into his career. But unlike the rest of the force — Mike included — Matty refused to skim cash from drug busts. He balked when his partner, Hoffman, offered a cut of some ill-gotten gains, and Matty’s inclination was to file a bribery report to the authorities. Matty asked his father for advice, and Mike did more than just talk his son out of turning anyone in. He admitted that he was “dirty” too. That admission convinced his son that he should take the loot.But Hoffman and his superior, Sergeant Fensky, still thought Matty couldn’t be trusted. They killed Matty, making it look like the work of a druggie in a crack den.Mike realized what had really happened and pulled his own Jimmy McGill-style scam, one with lethal consequences. In a showdown that seemed like a cross between “Serpico” and a classic western, Mike snookered the cops while they were getting ready to kill him, shooting them dead in a vacant lot.Mike, it emerges, left for Albuquerque right after he killed those cops. The Philadelphia detectives who showed up at his door at the end of Episode 5 suspect Mike may have had a hand in the death of those officers. When Mike is questioned, he asks for a lawyer, specifically Jimmy McGill, whose card he has on him.Why Jimmy? Because Mike thinks he’s just clownish enough to do the one job for which he needs a confederate: pretend to spill coffee on a detective, a maneuver Jimmy calls “the Juan Valdez bump and dump.” Jimmy initially says that such buffoonery is beneath him, but he spills right on cue and Mike ends up swiping the detective’s pad of paper. The scenes with both Mike and Jimmy are the only fun we get in an episode that is very low on amusement. The two have a singular chemistry, one that defies archetypes and does not seem fated to evolve much beyond low-level antagonism. Jimmy’s performance as a lawyer in “Five-O” is the most Saul Goodman-like in this series thus far. The flippancy and bravado are there, along with the ability to X-ray his opponents and their motives.“In case you missed it,” he tells Mike, when the two are idling in Jimmy’s car, “your friends from Philly back there — they think you killed two cops.”Mike will never warm to the guy, we can safely predict, because it’s unlikely that Mike is ever going to warm to anybody, other than his granddaughter. (And her mother, Stacey, if Stacey ever allows it.) Now we know why. Mike was damaged even before the death of his son, as suggested by repeated references to his  alcoholism. Now he has to live with the knowledge that he revealed his own shortcomings to Matty and that this revelation led Matty to make a terrible moral compromise. “I was the only one who could get him to debase himself like that,” Mike tells Stacey in the closing scene. “And it was for nothing. I made him lesser. I made him like me. And the bastards killed him anyway.”Twice Mike whimpers, “I broke my boy.”You can take a burden like that in one of two directions:  years of therapy or years of stoicism. Mike opts for the stoicism.The episode is framed as a confession. Mike denies any knowledge of the cops’ deaths in the first half of show — both to the detectives and to Stacey — and admits everything to Stacey in the second half. The result is television executed at a level that is altogether too rare. There isn’t a spare frame or a moment that fails to move the story forward or a line of dialogue that seems false or out of place. Even the scene at the veterinarian’s office, where Mike goes to get stitches (he’s wounded in the Philadelphia shootout) is necessary, I would argue. It establishes the New Mexico underworld that Mike will soon enter.Fans of “Breaking Bad” will be accustomed to the tautness, tension and emotional force of “Five-O.” But those elements are here in the service of a story of filial guilt that would have seemed out of place in that show. It’s more and more clear that “Better Call Saul” isn’t “Breaking Bad” in a garish suit, as one might have expected when this season began. This series is great in its own unique way.Favorite LinePhilly detective to Jimmy: “You look like Matlock.”
Jimmy: “No. I look like a young Paul Newman dressed as Matlock.”And finally: Anyone else miffed to have 38 Special’s “Hold On Loosely” stuck in their noggins? It was playing in the bar when Mike needled those two cops. And now the song is needling me.