AdvertisementSupported byBy Craig JenkinsSeason 2, Episode 4: “Poor Yorick”Andre is unraveling. The murder of Lucious Lyon’s right hand man Vernon has haunted everyone this season, but up until now the only ones aware of the fate of the prosecutor Roxanne Ford’s star witness were his killers, Andre and Rhonda. In Episode 4, eerily titled “Poor Yorick”  from “Hamlet,” Andre’s desperation to get back into Lucious’s good graces finally drives him to the unthinkable: returning to the forest where Vernon is buried to deliver proof to daddy that his court case is sunk.They’re caught in the act by Lucious and Thirsty Rawlings when the elder Lyon begins tracking his son’s movements, tipped off by Andre’s ominous promise to make his father’s legal troubles go away. Spookier still is Andre’s belief that he’s been called by God to do all of this. This conviction couldn’t possibly lead anywhere nice, and the prospect that he could be driven to behavior more cravenly self-destructive than propping Vernon’s rotting corpse up in the passenger seat of Roxanne Ford’s car is chilling. (Leaving Vernon at Roxanne’s doorstep is leagues kookier than just owning up to what happened. Before, the death could’ve been presented as a crime of passion, but the Lyons have fixed it to look like revenge. Why is everyone here so resourceful but so irrational?)The other major power plays in Episode 4 are all Ford’s: she gets the Empire and Lyon Dynasty offices raided by the feds, and she successfully freezes Lucious’s Apex deal. Until tonight, Lucious and Roxanne’s cat-and-mouse game leaned unfairly toward his favor. But armed with the wrath of a vengeful Cookie who is now disinterested in the well-being of the company she helped create and possesses a crippling fear of doing more time, Ford now has power to match her dangerous drive.It’s disorienting how quickly and completely Cookie has flipped on Empire; protecting the family has long been her core concern but the Lyon Dynasty schism opened, she has been working against two sons. Her ease in providing Roxanne with sensitive information about Lucious’s business and criminal motives — to skirt jail time for a subway turnstile violation she didn’t even commit — suggests that Cookie’s primary concern is saving her own hide. Props to Cookie, though, for invoking Sandra Bland, the African-American woman whose mysterious death in police custody was ruled a suicide this summer, during her arrest. (“If I die in police custody, it was not a suicide!”)Jamal and Hakeem’s cold war finally exploded this week on the set of an ill-advised video shoot for a song off Hakeem’s leaked album. Lucious funds the shoot as a means of showing family solidarity in the face of mounting legal troubles, but his timing couldn’t be worse. The brothers’ bond seems irreparably broken. A dispute during a performance of Hakeem and Jamal’s delightfully passive aggressive duet leads to a scuffle and a much needed haymaker from Jamal, but Haeem also jams a knife into the neck of a portrait given to his brother by a photographer commissioned to shoot Jamal for Rolling Stone. (The mercurial artist seems destined to draw a rift between Jamal and his boyfriend Michael: he’s an open flirt, and his appreciation for Jamal’s creative process makes Michael visibly uncomfortable.)Three eventful musical moments from Episode 4:• The song Jamal performs at the request of his Rolling Stone photographer is peak Timbaland. The producer’s odd musical tics were frustratingly restrained last season, and it’s great to hear him stretch out. Too bad about Jamal’s album title, though. Between “The Artist,” Lyon Dynasty, and Mirage à Trois, it doesn’t seem like anyone at Empire is very good at naming things.• Jamal and Hakeem’s duet “Ain’t About the Money” is loads of fun because it feels as though they’re talking about each other in their verses. Who else could be the target of Jamal’s barbs about the difference between money and power? The video’s a bit much, though. Mimi swears it’s a protest gesture, but it looks like someone plopped the “Rhythm Nation” dancers down on the set of Tupac and Dr. Dre’s “California Love.”• Hakeem’s new new love interest delivers a striking rendition of “Lago Azul,” singer Linda Ronstadt’s Spanish language version of her popular cover of the Roy Orbison classic “Blue Bayou,” at a nightclub the young Lyon is lurking for drinks. She’s got a great voice, and likely destined to replace Valentina as the lead singer of Mirage à Trois. Here’s hoping she gets to be more than fresh meat for Hakeem’s appetite.Advertisement