LONDON — In an open letter published by The Financial Times, 33 of the world’s leading opera directors and managers voiced support for the beleaguered English National Opera, which has been beset by infighting among its top administrators as well as budget cuts and probationary measures imposed by England’s leading arts funding body, the Arts Council England.The letter — which was published Sunday and whose signers include Peter Gelb, the general manager of The Metropolitan Opera; Valery Gergiev, the Mariinsky Theater’s director; and Pierre Audi, who runs the Dutch National Opera — praises the artistic director John Berry for a number of his successes, including the current hit production of Wagner’s “Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg” directed by Richard Jones, and calls the company “one of the U.K.’s greatest cultural ambassadors.” It says that “at a time when it has helped to further embellish London’s reputation as a leading center of cultural creativity, it doesn’t seem fair for the E.N.O.  to now be under fire.” The letter mentions neither the Arts Council nor the company’s personnel issues, instead voicing generalized support for the opera and its director in the face of criticism.In January the company’s chairman, Martyn Rose, and its executive director, Henriette Götz, stepped down. That month, a letter from Mr. Rose to the company’s president, Vernon Ellis, was leaked to The Sunday Times. Mr. Rose wrote that he believed that Mr. Berry should leave his position, having caused the company to lose 10 million pounds, or about $15 million. Weeks after the scandal broke, the Arts Council, which slashed the company’s financing by nearly one-third last year, announced that it had removed the opera from its National portfolio — a list of stable, regularly and robustly funded arts groups — and placed it on a two-year probationary period, during which the council will closely oversee its business model.The announcement was largely viewed as an embarrassing slap on the wrist for a company aiming to be recognized as one of London’s major cultural players.On Monday morning, in one of the first steps taken under the Arts Council’s close supervision, the opera company announced that Cressida Pollock, a management consultant at McKinsey & Company, would step in as interim chief executive.Performing only in English, the English National Opera is the smaller of London’s two major opera companies. Despite a string of innovative shows from directors like Katie Mitchell, Fiona Shaw and Peter Sellars that would seem to position it as an exciting alternative to the more staid and established Royal Opera in Covent Garden, the company has had trouble attracting audiences.