By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMARCH 9, 2015
9:10 A.M. (HBO Signature) ATONEMENT (2007) Saoirse Ronan (above with James McAvoy) received an Oscar nomination for her portrayal of Briony, a 13-year-old aspiring playwright who accuses the son (Mr. McAvoy) of a family servant — and the lover of her older sister (Keira Knightley) — of a crime in this drama directed by Joe Wright and based on the Ian McEwan novel. Romola Garai and Vanessa Redgrave play Briony at different times in her life. “The main casualty of the film’s long, murky middle and end sections is the big moral theme — and also the ingenious formal gimmick — that provides the book with some of its intensity and much of its cachet,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “As the title suggests, ‘Atonement’ is fundamentally about guilt and the attempt to overcome it, and about the tricky, tragically imperfect power of art to compensate for real-life crimes and misdemeanors.” The film received six more Oscar nominations, including one for best picture, and won for Dario Marianelli’s score, featuring the pianist Jean-Yves Thibaudet and a clacking typewriter.8 P.M. (CBS) 2 BROKE GIRLS The wedding shower of Sophie (Jennifer Coolidge) becomes mired in a hostage situation. Max (Kat Dennings) and Caroline (Beth Behrs) find their cupcake business attracting the wrong kind of attention when someone is arrested while wearing their company T-shirt. And in “Mike & Molly,” at 8:30, Molly (Melissa McCarthy) worries that no one will buy her book.8:30 P.M. (BBC America) TOP GEAR James May steps into a 600-horsepower hatchback to try out World Rallycross racing with Jeremy Clarkson and Richard Hammond as his support crew. Elsewhere, Mr. Clarkson takes the latest Jaguar F-type R and a modernized E-type christened the Eagle Low Drag GT for a turn on the test track, while Mr. Hammond drives a new version of the Mazda MX-5 around Spain.9 P.M. (CW) JANE THE VIRGIN Jane (Gina Rodriguez) and Rafael (Justin Baldoni, above with Ms. Rodriguez) once again consider moving in together after receiving news about their baby’s health. Alba (Ivonne Coll) offers Jane and Xo (Andrea Navedo) relationship advice that only leads to trouble. And Petra (Yael Grobglas) discovers that someone is on her side after all.10:30 P.M. (TCM) THE THOMAS CROWN AFFAIR (1968) Steve McQueen portrays a cunning Boston millionaire who pulls off the perfect heist in this crime caper from Norman Jewison. Faye Dunaway is the insurance investigator who applies the heat. But despite a kind of oral chess scene — “For all the finger in mouths and stroking of chess pieces, it is just impossible to castle insinuatingly,” Renata Adler wrote in The Times — and some misdirected kissing, there are a lot of good things. For instance, “McQueen is always special, and although this role is too indoors and formal, for him, he does get a chance to race across the desert, or fly a glider or lounge on the beach, in the casual-intense work he is best at,” she said. “Miss Dunaway has some nice scenes in which she struggles tearfully with her monomania.” And “the robberies themselves are graceful and funny.” In “Le Mans” (1971), at 12:30 a.m., Mr. McQueen plays a driver in that 24-hour French race who is haunted by a fatal accident in this action-adventure directed by Lee H. Katzin. “The color photography of this film, encompassing every conceivable technical aspect of this world-famous competition, is dazzling,” Howard Thompson wrote in The Times. “And let’s say this for Steve McQueen, a noted speed wheeler off the screen: The actor, who is the only familiar name in the cast, looks perfectly at home behind his wheel here.” The films are part of an evening-long tribute to Mr. McQueen starting with “Nevada Smith” (1966), at 8, and wrapping up with “The Reivers” (1969), at 2:30 a.m., and “Baby, the Rain Must Fall” (1965), at 4:30.What’s Streaming NowBY THE NUMB3RS (2015) In this latest entry in the “Signals” series of short films, the director Jamie Schutz profiles Justin Zormelo, a mathematics expert and former student manager of the Georgetown basketball team who used advanced analytics and film studies to help Kevin Durant of the Oklahoma City Thunder become an M.V.P. in the N.B.A. (fivethirtyeight.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on March 9, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.