By BRIAN SEIBERTMARCH 8, 2015
It has been many years since lofts in SoHo were the province of musicians, dancers and artists. There are holdouts, though, and on Friday one of them invited the public in. Passing the high-end stores on Prince Street, audience members climbed a rickety staircase to sit on folding chairs in Peggy Spina’s loft. Ushers took care to keep slush-wet shoes off the wooden floor. That was reserved for footwear with metal on the soles. Ms. Spina is a tap dancer.She founded the Peggy Spina Tap Company in 1981. Six years later, she started giving performances in the loft where she has lived since the 1970s. The music is always by the versatile jazz pianist Joel Forrester, joined by two or three other adept musicians, playing mostly his compositions. Ms. Spina’s dancers are all women and loyal. Of the six who performed on Friday, four have been with her for 10 years or more. Ms. Spina’s dances, full of nice ideas nicely shaped, have a warm glow and an affable wit. The pithy tap phrases and agreeable stage patterns, closely coupled with the live music, make for a rare and intimate pleasure.Friday’s 90-minute concert featured 11 short numbers, mostly recent and including a premiere, “Pulse.” In profusion, they added up to an impression of sameness, despite changes in the not-too-flattering costumes and the stylistic variety of Mr. Forrester’s songs (which all tend to sound familiar). The counterpoint and high-speed unison of some numbers called for a bit more precision than the dancers could muster, and when incorporating vocabulary from ballet or modern dance, they looked more amateurish than they sounded.But the glaring problem is one of affect, the bright smiles they continually flash at one another and the audience. Too strong for such close range, their manner lacks the cool that this kind of jazz tap seems to demand. The absence can be felt most uncomfortably in slow blues, though Alison Manning compensates with a forceful attack. Her taps thump, snap and pop.And Ms. Spina, an unprepossessing performer, is a true tap artist, a living heir to such teachers of hers as Honi Coles, Chuck Green and Buster Brown. On Friday, every solo of hers, light and intricate, was at least tasty and at best breathtakingly beautiful. In her program biography, she writes that she is “delighted with her two new hips.” The sound of her feet is an enduring delight.A version of this review appears in print on March 9, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Tapping to the Sound of Live Jazz in a SoHo Loft.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.