AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasMulan, the girl who disguises herself as a man to join the army in place of her frail father, is beloved by Disney fans. But does it work as a dance? The Hong Kong Dance Company, in residence at the David H. Koch Theater, presented its version of that Chinese folk tale on Thursday with a four-act production of “The Legend of Mulan.” Choreographed by Yang Yuntao, the company’s artistic director, this work turns a story of heroism and honor into a plodding affair. We first spot Mulan, performed by the delicate Pan Lingjuan with more fragility than heart, wearing a white dress and stumbling through a crowd while pausing every so often to hold her head in anguish as she, presumably, contemplates her father’s fate.In a flashback, a younger Mulan (Lam Tsz Yu) appears with her father (Huang Lei) as he guides her through martial-art drills. She extends a leg toward her head and tries to grasp it, but collapses; the second time, she succeeds. While little Mulan spins in joy on one side of the stage, the older Mulan does the same on the other as she recalls the bond she has with her father and realizes that she must sacrifice herself for him. Despite the action-filled plot, “Mulan” — in many ways more pantomime than dance — is often listless. The ensemble moves in repetitive swirling patterns that send bodies spiraling to the floor and back up again; add in a few lunges and springy sideways leaps, and you have a battlefield. Lengthy silent passages meant to reveal the characters’ internal dialogue rarely register and provide an awkward contrast to Matthew Ma’s gratingly cinematic score, in which strings crash into cymbals. The pacing barely picks up after Mulan arrives on the battlefield. Where is the warrior in the girl? Ms. Pan soars through the air, but only intermittently; soon enough, the choreography places her in a series of poses that highlight her extension and are more pretty than fierce. After she experiences the devastation of battle — in a clever theatrical touch, the soldiers climb from the orchestra pit onto the stage — Mulan reconsiders her life as a soldier and pines to be a woman again. In the final scene, her armor is replaced by a dress. She smiles in elation while winding her arms luxuriously through the space, but after this journey, it’s not much of homecoming.Advertisement