AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon ParelesHozier, the Irish songwriter who performed at the Beacon Theater on Friday night, is a somber phenomenon. His songs ponder passion, mortality, compulsion and sin. His voice is a richly melancholy moan, with echoes of Van Morrison and Jeff Buckley; his music is grounded in blues, soul and Celtic ballads, and it’s full of minor chords, starkly syncopated guitar picking, blunt tom-tom beats and moody drama. Yet Hozier, whose debut album was released last fall, is also a hitmaker who was greeted, between his doleful songs, with the squeals and whistles of pop adoration and female voices calling out, “I love you!”“Take Me to Church,” a song Hozier released in 2013, has sold millions of copies and was nominated for song of the year at this year’s Grammy Awards. Its lyrics find spirituality in lust, contrasting a church that preaches “fresh poison each week” with a girlfriend he’ll “worship in the bedroom”; its music is mournful and sturdy, with a gospel-tinged chorus. Its video, with more than 130 million views online, portrays homophobic violence and arson, with no happy ending. Hozier has arrived in an era of pensive ballad singers like Lorde and Sam Smith, but with a perspective even gloomier than theirs. “Arsonist’s Lullabye” was a sociopath’s autobiography, while “Sedated” declared, “We are deaf, we are numb/Free and young and we can feel none of it.”When he offers romance, it’s usually with a morbid streak. “Work Song” vows that his love is so strong he’d get out of his grave to be with his sweetheart. The lyrics of “In a Week,” a folky waltz that he performed as a duet with his band’s cellist, Alana Henderson, imagine two lovers’ corpses lying side by side, to be discovered “when the buzzards get loud/after the insects have made their claim.” Hozier introduced “Someone New,” a song about thoughts of infidelity, saying: “This song is a fun one. It’s about love at its most futile and momentary and empty, and it’s appropriately and tragically co-written by an ex-girlfriend.”The set was drawn almost entirely from Hozier’s debut album, along with two cover versions that neatly pinpointed his musical coordinates. One was “Illinois Blues” from the Delta bluesman Skip James; Hozier scrupulously credited his own version to a modern remake by Alvin Youngblood Hart. The song made clear all that Hozier has learned from the blues. The other song was far more recent: “Problem,” a 2014 hit for Ariana Grande. Her version is a well-turned pop song with a snappy beat and a guest rap from Iggy Azalea, but Hozier backdated the arrangement toward 1960s soul and brought out the verses. It was still pop, but instead of a giggly kiss-off, “Problem” revealed itself as a battle between desire and better judgment — a lot like Hozier’s own unlikely pop successes. Hozier will perform on March 22 at the Hammerstein Ballroom, 311 West 34th Street, Manhattan; 800-745-3000, ticketmaster.com. Advertisement