AdvertisementSupported byAuctionsBy Scott ReyburnLONDON — Auctioning art is one of capitalism’s older professions, and recent sales have shown that it’s a robust one, with the ultra-rich prepared to pay ever-higher prices for trophies that enhance their status. But are auctions a profitable way to make a living?New figures released last week confirm that the top end of the art market is booming, and yet, as has been widely noted, it is individual sellers, rather than the auction houses, who are benefiting most from these dazzling sales.The Christie’s auction house is privately owned by the French billionaire François Pinault and does not include information on profits or losses in its financial data. Sotheby’s, however, is publicly listed — the only international auction house that is — and thus declares profits in its Securities and Exchange Commission filings in the United States.Short of an insider spilling the beans, there is little opportunity to break down the profits from individual auctions, such as the Christie’s evening sale of contemporary works in London on Feb. 11, which grossed 117.1 million pounds, or about $178.7 million. But Sotheby’s documents provide a detailed insight into how an international auction house is run.The two historic auction houses are in many ways unrecognizable from what they were at their founding in the 18th century. Sotheby’s, created in 1744 in London and an American company since 1983, and Christie’s, founded in 1766 in London and still based there, continue to conduct public sales at which an auctioneer takes bids from a rostrum. But nowadays it is postwar and contemporary art, not Rembrandt or Italian Renaissance painting, that fetches the biggest money, and most of the bids are taken from international clients on telephones.Catalogs are generally read on electronic devices rather than in print. Internet bidding has become a norm at auctions of lower-value “commodifiable” items, such as wine and books, and Christie’s (although not Sotheby’s) conducts its own online-only sales.Yet for all this transformation, new figures released last week indicate that the domination of the art auction market by the two houses remains unchanged.Sotheby’s said Tuesday that it sold $6.7 billion of art and collectibles in 2014. Christie’s said on Jan. 20 that it had £5.1 billion, or about $7.7 billion, of sales last year. These figures, which combine auctions and private transactions, were the highest ever for both companies.Equivalent figures were not available for Phillips and Bonhams, two smaller houses also founded in London in the 18th century. These houses, too, had high points in 2014: Phillips sold a Mark Rothko painting for $56.2 million in New York in May and Bonhams achieved a record $38.1 million for a 1962 Ferrari 250 GTO racer in California in August. But neither company generates the barrage of seven- and eight-figure prices that characterize Sotheby’s and Christie’s evening auctions in New York, London and, more recently, Hong Kong.The two leading houses generate about 94 percent of fine art auction sales of over $1 million, according to the art market industry analysts Skate’s in New York.But profits are another matter. Sotheby’s had net income of $117.8 million on its $6.7 billion of sales in 2014, down 9 percent from the previous year. Profits were hurt by the $21.4-million cost of a long-running dispute with the activist shareholder Daniel S. Loeb, founder of the hedge fund firm Third Point, who is now on the board, and by a $7.6 million severance package for the company’s chairman and chief executive, William F. Ruprecht, according to the latest S.E.C. filing.Mr. Ruprecht announced his departure on Nov. 20. A replacement has yet to be appointed.“I don’t think it’s a good return for that level of turnover,” said Alan Hobart of the Pyms Gallery in London, who has been a prominent bidder on high-value Impressionist and Modern paintings at Sotheby’s and Christie’s. “But there is a lot of money out there, and these are the only two players. Christie’s is just the smarter operation at the moment.”In recent years, Christie’s has gained a clear edge over Sotheby’s at New York’s all-important biannual auctions of contemporary art. Christie’s evening sale on Nov. 12 grossed $852.9 million — the highest total for any auction in history. A total of 23 works sold for more than $10 million, led by the $81.9 million paid for Andy Warhol’s 1963 silkscreen “Triple Elvis (Ferus Type).” The night before, Sotheby’s took a “mere” $343.6 million at a sale in which the main highlight was a 1983 Jasper Johns “Flag” painting at $36 million. That less-than-stellar performance may well have hastened Mr. Ruprecht’s decision “by mutual agreement” to depart.On Dec. 2, Steven P. Murphy, Christie’s chief executive, also stepped down, suggesting to art world insiders that the most expensive auction in history might have been an expensive exercise in buying market share.Sotheby’s has said it will defer capital allocation decisions until a successor to Mr. Ruprecht has been chosen. On Feb. 20, Mick McGuire of Marcato Capital Management, which owns 9.5 percent of the company, wrote to the board complaining of a “poor return” on invested capital and calling for the company to buy back $500 million of its shares.On Tuesday, Sotheby’s chief financial officer, Patrick McClymont, explained in an earnings telephone conference that commission margins had declined on the company’s auction sales of $6.1 billion in 2014, owing to “competitive conditions for winning high-value consignments” and “a shift in the proportion of properties sold, at higher price bands of our buyer’s premium rate structure.”In other words, more expensive works were being auctioned, and because of competition with Christie’s to lure sellers, Sotheby’s was taking less money. Owners of works valued at more than $10 million are now almost invariably not charged commission and can play one house against the other to be given a bigger cut of the house’s buyer fees. Sellers can also negotiate guaranteed minimum prices. Works that had essentially been “bought” by the auction house generated more than 60 percent of the total at Christie’s record-breaking sale in November, according to the analysts ArtTactic in London.“Sotheby’s and Christie’s are dealing with sharp operators,” said the London dealer Richard Nagy. “It’s about writing checks. If they lose money on certain items, it doesn’t matter if they keep making headlines and they keep making 35 percent out of the stuff in their day sales.”With margins on high-value lots squeezed by canny sellers, Sotheby’s has resorted to raising the fees it charges buyers. From Feb. 1, buyers paid 25 percent fees on the first $200,000 of the hammer price, up from the previous $100,000. This will enhance returns in what Mr. McClymont referred to in the conference call as “new middle market auction sales,” although he did not identify which collecting categories will be developed.Sotheby’s has, however, acquired a 25 percent stake in the classic car specialist RM Auctions, and the company is reintroducing dedicated sales of 20th-century design in London. Both are sectors in which wealthy individuals will happily buy in the $20,000 to $200,000 “sweet spot” of profitability, where the auction house charges optimum fees from both the seller and the buyer.But while financial analysts pore over Sotheby’s earnings statements and eagerly await the company’s forthcoming collaboration with eBay, market insiders have identified cost-efficient private sales as the area where Sotheby’s most needs to raise its game. Sotheby’s made $624.5 million in discreet transactions in 2014, down 47 percent from the previous year, according to its S.E.C. filing. Christie’s, by comparison, made private sales worth $1.4 billion in 2014.“Private sales are at a high price level,” said the New York art adviser Todd Levin, who worked in Sotheby’s purchaser accounts department the 1990s. “The transaction is streamlined. Fewer people handle things and there’s no catalog or essay. If Sotheby’s can make a more strategized position for private sales, that really will bring home the bacon.”Advertisement