Season 6, Episode 8, “Dark as a Dungeon” More than any episode this season, this one left me mystified. I mean that in a good way. Raylan’s hatching a plot to do in all the bad guys, but I’m not sure I get where it’s all going.The best part is that the episode was almost all about Raylan as he, in his spare time, exorcises some of the demons created by his no-account father, Arlo. It opens with Raylan cleaning his family home of all traces of his father: clothes in black garbage bags, pills down the drain and a footlocker full of Vietnam War memorabilia. I assumed he was finally serious about selling, following the advice of every good real estate agent and decluttering the place. He sets the footlocker on fire, though for a moment there, I thought he would save the photo of what I presumed was his mother. Nope. That was in the box, too. The one thing he salvages is a key that was on the old guy’s dog tags. Raylan seemed to know what it unlocks: a storehouse, the “fraidy-hole” where Arlo supposedly kept all manner of evil. There Raylan later confronts his ghosts. (As in literally Arlo’s ghost.)Raylan contracts with an undertaker to exhume the family bodies buried there in the yard. (Good move, getting rid of headstones, to raise the curb appeal.) The exchange with the undertaker spells out one of the episode’s themes. “What you are moving is not your mother’s remains, but the idea of your mother’s remains,” the undertaker explains to Raylan. That’s what Raylan wants, for his father, and all of Harlan County for that matter. On the business side of things, Raylan refuses to join the manhunt for Ty Walker, who is running around the countryside with a festering bullet wound in his shoulder. Instead, Raylan is hatching a grand scheme to get Boyd Crowder. Raylan pays a visit to Zachariah, Ava Crowder’s uncle who a few episodes back tossed one of Boyd’s men down a mine shaft and is probably aiming to do the same to Boyd. (Best line of the night comes from Raylan’s “sidekick,” Tim Gutterson:  “How come no one down here is named Steve or Justin?” )Zachariah is hiding a crate of dynamite in a shed, and Raylan punches the guy in the gut, hard, to get him to step aside. Now’s a good a time as any to mention something about Raylan’s character. He’s mean. In other episodes this season, he whacks a drug dealer across the face with a coal shovel, slams Dewey Crowe’s head against a steering wheel, breaking his jaw, and grabs Earl’s crotch so hard he crumbles. None of it is necessary, so let’s call it what it is: police brutality. The various plots start to come together in Ava’s kitchen, where Walker is holding her hostage while he spins out his scheme to enlist Boyd in a direct attack on the bank vault full of cash (we later learn it’s $10 million) in the pizza parlor basement. Raylan spends the rest of the episode setting up his scheme to get Boyd, and this is where I’m just not smart enough, or criminal-minded enough, to figure out where this is headed. “That’s about as clear as mud, boy,” Avery Markham, the criminal marijuana mogul, tells the lawman, so I’m not the only one. Raylan persuades Markham to put up $100,000 for anyone who turns in Walker as part of a longer-ranging plan to get Boyd. Boyd does turn in Walker, and Raylan obliges by shooting Walker, a fleeing suspect, in the back, dead. “If you want to get hit in the front, you shoulda run toward me,” Raylan explains to the dying man. But before all that we do get one of the rare scenes between Raylan and Boyd, with all the delightful wordplay that we’ve come to expect. Raylan says this will end with the hero riding off in the sunset. Boyd suggests the ending for Raylan will be akin to Captain Ahab’s in “Moby-Dick.” This is what we watch this show for. Well, that and the shootings.Raylan takes Boyd to Markham to get the reward personally. That gives Boyd his first look at what is in the vault. Why would Markham allow that except to lure Boyd — at Raylan’s behest? — into an assault on the vault? Questions within questions. “You sure you want me to take that bait?” Boyd asks Raylan there in front of the vault. “Cause this fox goes for that rabbit, it’s all over, Raylan.”  Raylan detects the sound of dynamite far below the pizza parlor and knows whatever plan he had cooked up may not work out the way he wanted. Ava later confirms to Raylan that they are coming up through the mine, and though she can’t tell Raylan that Boyd now knows she’s a snitch, he knows. It’s what he doesn’t know that could kill him. The show drink: Raylan takes the edge off while destroying Arlo’s footlocker with swigs from a bottle of Ancient Age. It’s what a guy would be drinking as he empties his house of every trace of his father. At 80-proof, however, I don’t think it would ignite a pile of letters and photos as if it were kerosene.The real drink in this episode must be the one Catherine Hale pours herself in her hotel room when Art Mullen, Raylan’s former boss, comes to visit. It’s Eagle Rare, yet another Buffalo Trace Distillery brand, a top-shelf single-barrel 10-year bourbon in a fancy bottle. She fails to offer Art any, but does give him a lead that kicks off her scheme to bring down Markham.