AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8:50 A.M. (HBO2) RUSH (2013) The director Ron Howard climbs into the cockpits of Formula One racecars to recount the rivalry between James Hunt, a British playboy turned racing royalty, and Niki Lauda, a wealthy Austrian nicknamed the Rat for his overbite, who drove the sport into the mainstream in 1976. “Mr. Howard doesn’t just want you to crawl inside a Formula One racecar, he also wants you to crawl inside its driver’s head,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times about this adrenaline jolt starring Chris Hemsworth and Daniel Brühl. “ ‘Rush,’ which is serious without being self-serious, fun without being trivial, feels like the movie that he has been waiting to make his whole life.” (Image: Mr. Hemsworth as James Hunt)3 P.M. (CBS) DR. PHIL Oprah Winfrey and Dr. Phil take a walk down memory lane and chat about “Belief,” her new series about spiritual journeys starting Sunday.6:20 P.M. (Encore) MALEFICENT (2014) Those lips! Those cheekbones! Those horns! A woodland fairy plunged into a perpetual foul mood after her wings are clipped exacts revenge on her former love by turning his child into Sleeping Beauty. Angelina Jolie “makes a fabulous monster,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times, as “she breezes through the movie, part superstar, part superfreak.” (Image: Elle Fanning as Sleeping Beauty)8 P.M. (Fox) BONES Brennan and Booth end up back where they started: at the Jeffersonian and the F.B.I.8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY Owen gives the interns a lesson in breaking bad news. In “Scandal,” at 9, Fitz learns that mercy comes at a price. And in “How to Get Away With Murder,” at 10, Annalise and her team represent the person suspected of killing a teenager in the woods.8 P.M. (Starz Comedy) TALLADEGA NIGHTS: THE BALLAD OF RICKY BOBBY (2006) Will Ferrell is Ricky Bobby, a Nascar superstar, and John C. Reilly is Cal Naughton Jr., his best buddy, who is content to come in second. But there’s a new baddie on the track: Sacha Baron Cohen as Jean Girard, a gay French Formula One driver.8:30 P.M. (13) METROFOCUS Angela Lansbury, who turns 90 on Friday, reminisces about her long career, from her Oscar-nominated film debut at 17 as a Cockney maid in “Gaslight” to her recent American tour of “Blithe Spirit,” which she has said will be her last.9 P.M. (Comedy Central) NATHAN FOR YOU Nathan Fielder is back helping small businesses turn profits in unusual ways, starting with an electronics store that’s losing out to Best Buy. His solution? Something about an alligator, a tiny door, a fake dating show and a salsa lesson. Writing in The Times, Neil Genzlinger recommended that Mr. Fielder be shortlisted for the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science “for illuminating the relationship between the economy and absurdity.”9 P.M. (Fox News) THE KELLY FILE Megyn Kelly interviews Charles G. Koch, the chairman and chief executive of Koch Industries, about the presidential election; the economy; and his new book, “Good Profit: How Creating Value for Others Built One of the World’s Most Successful Companies.”What’s Streaming NowTHE GREAT BRITISH BAKING SHOW What it lacks in vitriolic chefs and former strippers dolled up in ballerina skirts and towering Louboutins, this cult hit makes up for in earnestness and charm. Contestants in street clothes with homey back stories sweat over their mixers in a tent plopped down at Welford Park in Berkshire, where bleating lambs frolic among the snowdrops. But the confections themselves — a cardamom-scented Swiss roll crowned by chocolate-lace flowers; a Hansel-and-Gretel scene of brandy snaps and gingerbread; miniature tiered Victoria sponges ruffled with lemon curd and raspberry cream — are the real stars of this Bafta-winning series, lorded over by Mary Berry, the author of more than 70 cookbooks, and the baker Paul Hollywood. (netflix.com)Advertisement