Updated, 4:21 p.m. | Matthew Barney has often been called the most important American artist of his generation, but last week, he became newly famous as a former boyfriend. The pop singer Björk (loudly) bemoans the collapse of her long relationship with him in the survey of her work that opened at the Museum of Modern Art on Sunday. “Black Lake,” a music video projected onto two large screens in a specially constructed theater, is a breakup ballad in surround sound.“Family was always our sacred mutual mission,” Björk sings of her 13-year relationship with Mr. Barney, “which you abandoned.”The accusatory lyrics left many art-world observers wondering whether Mr. Barney planned to say anything in his defense — and what he is up to these days. The answer has just been revealed, at least partly.Mr. Barney, who turns 48 this month, is about to receive his own museum coronation. “Matthew Barney: River of Fundament,” whose title also refers to his latest film, will open at the Geffen Contemporary at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles on Sept. 14. The exhibition is his first museum show in Los Angeles and will be accompanied by a festive slate of Barney-themed events around town, including a gallery show at Regen Projects (Hollywood) opening on Sept. 10. Mr. Barney, a native of San Francisco who lives in Brooklyn, specializes in sculpture, performance and film, preferably fused into a single Wagnerian entity.  His latest film is surely his most ambitious since “The Cremaster Cycle,” a seven-hour art-house classic completed in 2002 that made Mr. Barney a household name (and expanded the vocabulary of English-speaking people everywhere to include the word cremaster, a muscle related to male anatomy). The film culminated in a much-ballyhooed exhibition at the Guggenheim Museum that included many photographs of Mr. Barney wearing costumes and making tartan plaids look sinister. People still think of him as a satyr with flaming red hair and droopy goat ears.The Los Angeles show, too, will consist of sculptures, photographs and other material plucked from the film of the same title. It originated at the Haus der Kunst in Munich, and it is now on view at the Museum of Old and New Art in Tasmania. Philippe Vergne, who became the director of the Museum of Contemporary Art a year ago, is responsible for bringing the show to Los Angeles. “I thought it should be seen in America,” he said, adding that it would not be seen anywhere else in this country.In conjunction with the show, but well before it, “The Cremaster Cycle” will be screened in its entirety from April 21 to 23, at the Billy Wilder Theater at the Hammer Museum. Two days later, on April 25, “River of Fundament,” will have its West Coast premiere at Royce Hall at U.C.L.A. The film is loosely based on Norman Mailer’s “Ancient Evenings,”  a novel that pondered the soul states of the dead in ancient Egyptian mythology. Mr. Barney shifts the location to Detroit from Cairo and replaces people with the bodies of cars.If you are thinking of watching it at home, you are out of luck, because Mr. Barney and his longtime collaborator, Jonathan Bepler, have no intention of releasing it for home viewing. As Mr. Barney noted in an email, “At five and a half hours with two intermissions, we’ve found that this piece functions best in a theater.”A version of this article appears in print on 03/11/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Matthew Barney Show Planned in Los Angeles.