By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMARCH 10, 2015
8 P.M. (DirecTV) BILLY & BILLIE Adam Brody plays the reticent Billy and Lisa Joyce is the profanity-spewing Billie, stepsiblings turned lovers in this romance from the playwright Neil LaBute. This second episode finds the couple putting their relationship on standby after a too-close-for-comfort encounter with family members. “The premise might seem tabooish — it’s the basis of a whole subgenre of heavy-breathing romance novels — but Mr. LaBute is going for something more subtle,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The New York Times. Yes, Billy and Billie “are trying to figure out how guilty they should feel, but at the same time they’re interacting like feuding brother and sister and like ordinary young people navigating the casual hookup scene.”6:20 P.M. (Starz Cinema) TRANSSIBERIAN (2008) Woody Harrelson and Emily Mortimer play Americans on a Moscow-bound train whose journey through Russia takes a deadly turn after they share a compartment with some sketchy nomads (Eduardo Noriega and Kate Mara). Ben Kingsley is a duplicitous detective who toys with the couples like a cat before the kill. This thriller directed by Brad Anderson “skillfully manipulates familiar tropes: innocents abroad; ominous, glowering foreigners; conspiracy and duplicity; erotic intrigue,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “Until it fizzles in an anticlimactic train crash, it is extremely entertaining.”8 P.M. (CBS) NCIS Anthony DiNozzo Sr. (Robert Wagner) offers up his black-market art-world contacts to the team after evidence in a murder case reveals that a rare painting may have been replaced by a forgery.8 P.M. (ABC) FRESH OFF THE BOAT Eddie (Hudson Yang) tries to befriend the only other Chinese student (Albert Tsai) in school but discovers they have nothing in common.Advertisement9 P.M. (Esquire) FRIDAY NIGHT TYKES The head coach of the Ducks faces disciplinary action, and a player for the Colts grapples with a grandfather’s death as the teams fight to advance in the Texas Youth Football Association playoffs. In “The Short Game,” at 11, the 7- and 8-year-old golfers prepare to tee off against players from 30 countries at the U.S. Kids Golf World Championship.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9:30 P.M. (Fox) THE MINDY PROJECT Danny (Chris Messina) works furiously to atone for his sins when his priest dies after hearing his confession.Advertisement10 P.M. (BBC America) WILD ALASKA Dougray Scott narrates this three-part series, which explores spring, summer and winter in the 49th state and the species that thrive in its often inhospitable conditions.1:15 A.M. (HBO2) ENOUGH SAID (2013) Julia Louis-Dreyfus, in a Golden Globe-nominated role, plays Eva, a divorced massage therapist in Los Angeles who finds her life emptying out as her daughter (Tracey Fairaway) head to college. Then she meets Albert (James Gandolfini), another divorced parent of a college-bound girl, and although he isn’t her type, Eva finds herself falling for this funny, tender, sexy slob. Enter Marianne (Catherine Keener), a glamorous bohemian poet and Eva’s new client — who, Eva finds out a little too late, happens to be Albert’s former wife. And so Eva listens to Marianne’s complaints about her ex — he’s a bore, a loser, clumsy in bed and helpless — and surreptitiously tries to correct the faults in Albert that caused his marriage to disintegrate. “The real genius of ‘Enough Said’ is that it takes this entirely plausible anecdotal circumstance and unlocks both its farcical potential and its latent profundity,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times about this “small miracle of a movie,” written and directed by Nicole Holofcener.What’s Streaming NowA MASTER BUILDER (2014) Wallace Shawn portrays the title role of Halvard Solness, an architectural eminence intent on crushing the dreams of those around him in his final days, and Lisa Joyce is Hilde, a 22-year-old beauty who appears with memories of their encounter 10 years earlier. André Gregory staged, Mr. Shawn translated and Jonathan Demme directed this adaptation of Henrik Ibsen’s play, “The Master Builder.” “Playing a woman who is part angel and part witch who stands up to Halvard, Ms. Joyce is a seductive, forceful screen presence,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. (iTunes)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.