By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIM and JAMES R. OESTREICHMARCH 9, 2015
NEW YORK YOUTH SYMPHONYCarnegie HallFor the talented young members of the New York Youth Symphony, Sunday’s Carnegie Hall concert under the baton of Joshua Gersen was a test of concentration. The first source of distraction was the capacity audience filled with cellphone-toting relatives. The musicians kept their composure even when two dozen latecomers crept in during the opening bars of the lyrical Larghetto of Beethoven’s Violin Concerto, with one wave of audience members tut-tutting and a second shushing the tut-tutters.Another distraction was the furor over the last-minute decision to cut a contemporary piece by the composer Jonas Tarm from its program because, according to the orchestra’s management, he did not give a satisfactory explanation for his work’s citation of the “Horst Wessel” song, a Nazi anthem.The remaining program, which featured Rimsky-Korsakov’s “Scheherazade” as well as the Beethoven, offered plenty of evidence of the youth symphony’s rich sound and melodic astuteness. But it was a shame that the players were not given the chance to show off their chops in contemporary fare.The Beethoven was not without imperfections, but Mr. Gersen drew vivid dynamic contrasts from the orchestra. The soloist, Elena Urioste, played with an enchanting, sweet tone and shapely phrasing. There was an unaffected purity and naturalness to the trills that are sprinkled all over the solo part. In “Scheherazade,” the quality of individual orchestra members stood out: the gorgeous tone of the concertmaster Joseph Morag; the warmth of the principal bassoon, played by Harrison Miller; the limpid clarity of Olivia Staton’s flute. The face-off between trombone (Zach Crowley) and muted trumpet (Anthony Limoncelli) in the second movement was vivid and exciting, part of a performance that was taut with dramatic tension. CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMAdvertisementHANDEL’S ‘ESTHER’Church of St. Luke in the FieldsHandel oratorios have been big in New York in recent months.In early December, just before the usual wave of “Messiah” outings, came “La Resurrezione,” performed by forces of the Juilliard School; and in early January, just after the “Messiah” outpouring, came “Saul,” in a staged version presented by Trinity Wall Street. On Thursday evening, the Choir of St. Luke in the Fields and a period-instrument band, conducted by David Shuler, offered “Esther,” appropriately aligned with the Jewish celebration of Purim.Advertisement“Esther,” Handel’s first oratorio in English, not only draws heavily on his earlier music — notably the “Brockes-Passion” — but looks back even farther, to Purcell, in a touching duet for Esther and her husband, King Ahasuerus (or Xerxes) of Persia. Short by Handel’s later standards (under two hours), it presents the story of Haman and Esther at Ahasuerus’s court in quick bites: the minister Haman’s pledge to exterminate the Jews in Persia; the adviser Mordecai’s intervention with Esther, and Esther’s with Ahasuerus; Ahasuerus’s condemnation of Haman to death.The St. Luke choristers, 11 strong, were excellent en masse, and most of the members doubled as soloists, though the results there were mixed. The singers in the major roles — Melissa Fogarty as Esther, David Root as Ahasuerus and Peter Walker as Haman — were fine, Ms. Fogarty, in particular, making excellent use of ornamentation to heighten expression.But most impressive over all was Brian Giebler, a tenor, singing Mordecai with bright, clear tone and lively personality. JAMES R. OESTREICHA version of this review appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Music in Review.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.