By JON PARELES, BEN RATLIFF and NATE CHINENMARCH 9, 2015
PURITY RING“Another Eternity” (4AD)Teasing its way closer to mainstream pop, Purity Ring plays complex games of approach and evasion on its second album, “Another Eternity.” Then again, pop has been approaching Purity Ring, too, as pop, hip-hop and electronic dance music have raided one another’s ideas.Purity Ring is a duo from Canada — Megan James on vocals and Corin Roddick on instruments — whose 2012 debut album, “Shrines,” was electronic pop filled with strategic holes of sound and sense. Ms. James’s high, ingenuous voice hopscotched through blithe melodies and cryptic, sometimes nightmarish lyrics; Mr. Roddick’s tracks played hide-and-seek around her, with silences where beats or bass lines might have been and notes that puffed up and disappeared like ragged breathing. Purity Ring went on to collaborate with rappers and dancehall reggae acts; meanwhile, directly or indirectly, some of Purity Ring’s blips and hollows were echoed in radio hits.“Another Eternity” is at once more expansive and more transparent than “Shrines.” Ms. James’s voice has moved consistently into the foreground, with newly succinct melody lines and pretty, overdubbed choruses alongside trickier, computer-manipulated vocals. Mr. Roddick now deploys the arena-scale sounds of European trance — grandiose piano arpeggios, nebulous chords, buzzy bass lines, ratcheting snare drums — alongside the brittle, sputtering percussion samples of trap and the monumental bass and drum impacts of hip-hop producers like Mike Will Made-It. A song like “Bodyache” — with the stuttering, poppy chorus “I-I-I lied, now I’m lying awake/I-I-I cried until my body ached” — is only a few steps removed from radio hits by singers like Ariana Grande and Ellie Goulding.Still, Purity Ring is stubbornly arty. Even as Mr. Roddick invokes electronic dance music, the songs resist dancing. Instead, they are crystalline dirges, with buildups that suddenly vanish and bass lines that sustain or slow down, deliberately impeding the rhythm instead of propelling it. And while Ms. James’s voice sounds guileless, her lyrics have stayed enigmatic. They hint at intimacies and separations, love and death, swirling together images of bodies and landscapes with brief moments of straightforward longing: “Where have I been/Why can’t you see me?” she suddenly wonders in “Sea Castle.” Why not? Because Purity Ring is better that way, verging on pop but maintaining a sense of mystery. JON PARELESAdvertisementSARAH BETHE NELSON“Fast-Moving Clouds” (Burger)Sarah Bethe Nelson is a San Francisco singer-songwriter who played for the better part of a decade in a shaggy, mildly alternative roots-rock band called Prairie Dog, a group a little too comfy for its own good. In her late 30s now, she’s reinvented herself on “Fast-Moving Clouds,” her first solo record. It’s an album of decoys: It refers to musical and narrative simplicity, directly and often, but doesn’t quite believe in or surrender to it.AdvertisementShe’s put more trust in her voice. Where it was shy and cracking in Prairie Dog, now it’s breathy and clear and well managed, somewhere between Suzanne Vega’s and Hope Sandoval’s. (It would have been an MTV voice 20-something years ago.) All these songs are guided by melodies or chord structures that sound familiar or easy or even primitive. There’s a sense of the amateur at the center of them: “Start Somewhere” rests on two chords, and garage-pop reverb; “Snake Shake” rests on two notes. But the point of the record is in the ways Ms. Nelson makes the songs gradually move from one definition to another, drawing your attention to its repetition or simplicity, then expanding the context or otherwise defying your expectations.“Start Somewhere” begins crudely, but in its last 30 seconds the arrangements blossom with layered guitars. Suddenly it’s fizzy and beautiful, like a Fleetwood Mac song. That’s a strange way to play her hand: Why wait so long for the surprise? In “Snake Shake,” she deals out her lyrics intermittently. “I’d rather be a snake in a pool in the desert in the sun,” she begins. After a while, she sings, “I’d rather be one lone leaf on a shadow-strewn street stepped on by everyone” — another pause — “than to keep living like this.” But as the lyrics go through further cycles, the words become a multitrack round, and you start to hear other sounds: keyboards, piano, marimba. Suddenly simplicity isn’t the point anymore.The album’s epic is “Every Other Sunday,” a monochord drone through its verses that shifts into double time and becomes a hypnotic jam. But its emotional center is a ballad called “Paying,” which moves from the blurry to the specific, like a rack-focus shot in a film. “Don’t ask me to say I understand when you know that I do,” she sings. “But this is the last time I’ll be saying those words to you.” She makes you wait until the chorus for you to get it: She’s the bartender. He’s a customer. “This is the last time that I’ll be making your drinks on the house,” she sings. “You’ll be paying, starting right now.” BEN RATLIFFJACKY TERRASSON“Take This” (Impulse!)The postbop pianist Jacky Terrasson has always cultivated a touch of whiz-bang in his music, but that doesn’t mean he panders. Since the release of his self-titled major-label debut just over 20 years ago, his art has communicated a deft intelligence sharpened by dynamic contrast. He tends to do his best work when he can ground his natural effervescence within the advanced mechanics of a working band.“Take This,” Mr. Terrasson’s new album, isn’t so much about a band. Recorded in France, it’s a brisk showcase for an international rhythm coalition: the bassist Burniss Earl Travis, from Texas; the drummer Lukmil Perez, from Cuba; the percussionist Adama Diarra, from Mali; and Sly Johnson, a French singer and beatboxer of African descent, formerly known as Sly the Mic Buddah.The album title derives from Paul Desmond’s “Take Five,” which appears in a pair of loosely funky interpretations. Among the other covers, reframed with a similar spirit of play, are Bud Powell’s bebop touchstone “Un Poco Loco” and, less rewardingly, Gotye’s 2011 indie-pop hit “Somebody That I Used to Know.” A version of the Beatles’ “Come Together” finds Mr. Johnson in Bobby McFerrin mode, humming and thumping his chest as Mr. Terrasson kneads a groove in 9/8 meter.Mr. Terrasson has made a habit, for better or worse, of cheeky pop flirtation. But the covers on “Take This,” innocuous and succinct, feel subordinate to a larger message of percussive buoyancy. The originals “Dance” and “November” offer two variations on Afro-Caribbean pulse, while “Kiff” is the latest evidence of Mr. Terrasson’s affinity for the groovy, mid-1970s Keith Jarrett.The album’s focus on concision means that Mr. Terrasson’s more digressive urges go unfulfilled. That’s a fine reason to hear him at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola this Friday through Sunday with his current group, featuring Mr. Travis, the drummer Justin Faulkner and the Cuban percussionist Mauricio Herrera. Still, concision can be the best possible outcome, as it is on the album’s two ballads, Miles Davis and Bill Evans’s “Blue in Green” and a companionable, no less gorgeous original, “Letting Go.” NATE CHINENA version of this review appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: New Music.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.