By ANTHONY TOMMASINIMARCH 9, 2015
ST. PAUL —  “The Manchurian Candidate,” the much-anticipated new opera by the composer Kevin Puts and the librettist Mark Campbell that had its premiere on Saturday night by the Minnesota Opera, is based on the 1959 novel by Richard Condon. This tale, a political thriller about a sergeant during the Korean War who is brainwashed and turned into an oblivious assassin for a Communist conspiracy, is best known from the 1962 film version directed by John Frankenheimer.That convoluted, creepy and entertaining movie, starring Laurence Harvey as the sergeant and Frank Sinatra as his infantry captain and best friend, remains a cult classic, which can’t be said for the director Jonathan Demme’s 2004 version. Unfortunately, the 1962 film also overshadows this new American opera, presented at the Ordway Center. For all the intelligence of Mr. Puts’s score and the inventiveness of the staging, by the director Kevin Newbury, the opera seemed tentative and musically tame.As the opera begins, the mood-setting orchestral music is compellingly ominous, especially in the nuanced, colorful playing that the conductor Michael Christie draws from the orchestra. The sergeant, Raymond Shaw (the vocally muscular and appealing baritone Matthew Worth) stands stiffly onstage, looking weirdly blank, while subdued, sustained tones in the orchestra form hazy, shifting harmonies, until the notes begin to splinter, as if disintegrating.But in the music that immediately follows, Mr. Puts makes what seems a miscalculation. Five soldiers, including Shaw and his buddy Capt. Ben Marco, sit in a row at what appears to be the Ladies’ Garden Club of Northern New Jersey. A bubbly Mamie Eisenhower type, Mrs. Lowe, explains to similarly dressed onlookers that the soldiers believe themselves to be attending a meeting of the club. Actually, they are captives, held somewhere in Manchuria toward the end of the Korean War, and have been brainwashed. Mrs. Lowe and the ladies are actually a cadre of Soviet and Chinese Communists who are demonstrating the effectiveness of their brainwashing techniques. Mrs. Lowe orders Shaw to play a game of solitaire until he draws a queen of diamonds, the trigger card that makes him numbingly receptive to instructions. She orders him to strangle one of his comrades and then shoot another. He does.AdvertisementThis scene is terrifying in Mr. Frankenheimer’s film. In a flash, the garden club ladies become fearsome, grinning Communist men, and the disorienting back-and-forth continues. Onstage, it would be hard to replicate this effect, even for a director as resourceful as Mr. Newbury, who largely provides a grim, fluid production that imaginatively employs television cameras and three video screens. So these ladies always look like ladies.AdvertisementMr. Puts’s music here is mostly a pastiche-like ensemble of chattering jollity without much creepiness. Many people in the audience laughed, until Shaw killed his two comrades. Even those moments seemed more awkward than horrific.Further into the act, a dream sequence revisits the “garden party.” Marco, returned home, has a recurring nightmare in which he sees Shaw killing their fellow soldiers. This time the Communists are in drab uniforms, and the music is raw with clashing chords and jagged bursts. But the intensity is not enough and comes too late.This is the second work that Minnesota Opera has commissioned from Mr. Puts and Mr. Campbell. The company is rightly proud of the first, given its premiere in 2011: “Silent Night,” about a spontaneous, fleeting Christmas truce between enemy soldiers during World War I. Whole stretches of that score are written in a neo-Romantic style, usually not my taste in contemporary music. But Mr. Puts writes in this vein with craft, intelligence and a keen ear for detail. His style suits the poignant, tragic story beautifully. The work won Mr. Puts the Pulitzer Prize for music and continued to have success, including a run in 2013 at Opera Philadelphia, the company that co-produced it.The score to “The Manchurian Candidate” also demonstrates Mr. Puts’s skills, especially during some intricate ensemble numbers. Still, it does not get to the paranoia and psychological depths below the convoluted surface of this story. Not surprisingly, Mr. Puts excels in the more romantic scenes.One example is a flashback to a summer when the young Raymond Shaw (the winning baritone Andrew Lovato) is bitten by a snake near a country house on Long Island and tended to by the lovely Jocelyn Jordan (the sunny soprano Angela Mortellaro), whose father is an outspoken liberal senator, Thomas Jordan. Mr. Puts’s tender music for this scene of love at first sight is tinged with astringent sonorities that suggest Raymond’s inner complexities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He is forbidden to continue to see Jocelyn, however, by his indomitable mother, Eleanor Iselin, who is married to a McCarthyite Republican senator, Johnny Iselin (Raymond’s stepfather), who, guided by his wife, is red-baiting his way to a vice-presidential nomination. Eleanor (played memorably in the 1962 film by Angela Lansbury) is a malevolent, if implausible, character. She is actually part of the Communist conspiracy to take over the American government.She also seems to have incestuous feelings for her son. If a muddle of a character, Eleanor is certainly fascinating. In the opera, the soprano Brenda Harris brings a big, wobbly voice and sneering bluster to the role and makes the most of her suitably melodramatic scenes.The opera is strongly cast, and the singers give their all. The Italianate warmth of the tenor Leonardo Capalbo’s voice suits the role of the effusive, troubled Ben Marco. Daniel Sumegi, a husky-voiced bass, conveys the loudmouthed blather of Senator Iselin; the bass-baritone Christopher Job makes a dignified, principled Senator Jordan. The mezzo-soprano Adriana Zabala is effective as Rosie Chayney, a sophisticated young woman who meets Marco on a train. Sensing his neediness and confusion, she flirts with him shamelessly. It works. They become a couple.Mr. Puts’s music evokes the rattling motion of the train and the stirrings of romance quite vividly. But in the 1962 film, this scene is so mysterious you almost suspect Rosie of being another Communist agent.AdvertisementThe opera does not really explore such ambiguities. Despite its admirable elements, there is not much thrill in this operatic thriller.“The Manchurian Candidate” continues through Sunday at the Ordway Music Theater, St. Paul; 612 333-6669, mnopera.org. A version of this review appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Made Evil in China and Then by Mom.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.