By NEIL GENZLINGERMARCH 9, 2015
“You try to think about a lot of things before you make a commitment,” Eric Sacks says during a documentary about his wife, “but you don’t think about something like this.”“Make a commitment” is a reference to marriage. “Something like this” is a reference to watching his wife, Laury, gradually vanish.The film, “Looks Like Laury, Sounds Like Laury,” which is being shown Tuesday night on the World Channel’s “America ReFramed” series, is an unflinching case study of the neurological condition frontotemporal dementia. It is a degenerative disease that impairs judgment, language, memory and more, subtly at first but with increasingly devastating consequences.The film is about Laury Sacks, a Manhattan actress and mother of two who began showing symptoms at age 46. Two of her friends, Connie Shulman (Yoga Jones in “Orange Is the New Black”) and Pamela Hogan, produced it, with Ms. Hogan directing. The project began as something they thought might help Ms. Sacks with the odd memory and speech problems she was beginning to exhibit.“She wasn’t chatting with me,” another friend, Nelsie Spencer, explains about the unsettling early manifestations of the disease, “and one of Laury’s favorite things to do on the planet is chat. That’s what we did for 14 years: We chatted. Give Laury a subject, and she can give you 45 minutes on it. The subject could be lipsticks.”The film doesn’t feature a lot of researchers and doctors talking about the disease (the diagnosis comes relatively late in it), just Ms. Sacks’s friends and family members watching with alarm as she loses cognitive abilities. Most wrenching, though, are the images of Ms. Sacks herself — she clearly knows that something is happening to her that she can’t figure out or articulate. Medical dictionaries are full of unusual and frightening illnesses, but this one seems especially cruel.America ReFramedLooks Like Laury, Sounds Like LauryOn the World Channel on Tuesday night (check local listings).Produced by the World Channel and American Documentary Inc. Directed by Pamela Hogan; Jeffrey Kimball, executive producer; Ms. Hogan and Connie Shulman, producers; Andrew Fredericks and Adrienne Haspel, editors; Kat Patterson, cinematographer; Natasha Del Toro, host.A version of this review appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Devastating Vanishing Act in Dementia’s Grip.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.