AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia Kourlas“We begin again.” Three simple words, but the revolutionary choreographer Merce Cunningham, who died in 2009, used them often. After the Merce Cunningham Dance Company disbanded in 2011, Robert Swinston, who was with the troupe for more than 30 years, did just that. He began again. “I took the opportunity to try to do something new,” Mr. Swinston said in a telephone interview. “I wanted to create out of his work, and I wanted to create something of my own.” And so Mr. Swinston moved to France, where he now directs the National Contemporary Dance Center in Angers and is also the artistic director of Compagnie CNDC-Angers, an eight-member group making its United States debut at the Joyce Theater in Chelsea starting on Tuesday and running through Sunday. In his Cunningham Event, in which excerpts from past works are assembled to create a new production, Mr. Swinston, 64, is focusing on dances made between 1965 and 1990. John King and Gelsey Bell will perform an original score; the visual design is by the French artist Jackie Matisse. “I wanted to flood the space with color,” Mr. Swinston said. Fans around the stage make Ms. Matisse’s fabric strips move. The dances in Event, which include sections from “Variations V,” “Rebus” and “Fractions,” were created before Cunningham started to choreograph with DanceForms, a computer program that resulted in dense, difficult arrangements of steps. In training dancers less versed in the technique, Mr. Swinston, who served as Cunningham’s assistant beginning in 1992, needed to use vocabulary from Cunningham’s earlier periods. In both his staging and selections, Mr. Swinston said, he hoped to show “that Cunningham was a humanist at heart.” He added: “Merce would express that — ‘You can’t separate the human from the dancer.’ ”The Event cast is composed of French dancers, ages 21 to 36. They “just let it go,” Mr. Swinston said. “They show their whole spirit all the time. It’s necessary for me to calm them down, to cool them out so that they can survive. I know when I was young and went into Cunningham’s company, I was very much like that too. But to survive the work, you have to find ways to deal with it in a way that it won’t kill you.” The dancers are both eager and anxious about performing Cunningham repertory in New York. Comparisons are bound to happen. “Of course, we will not be the same” as Cunningham’s troupe, said Anna Chirescu, one of the dancers. “We are trying to bring our own selves to the movement. This is something Robert insists on. The movement is so abstract that you have to have a very profound inner self to feed the movement with your soul.”Would Cunningham, who took steps to ensure that his company would disband upon his death, have approved of keeping his work alive? “Merce never said he didn’t want his work done,” Mr. Swinston said. “The simple fact is, without the new work of Merce Cunningham, how would the Cunningham Dance Foundation be able to support the company in the same way that it had? It was a practical consideration.”But Mr. Swinston admitted that Cunningham’s instruction was vague. “It could mean a lot of things,” he said. “But basically, finding a way to go on means to continue.”When Mr. Swinston was being considered for the position in Angers, some in the contemporary dance world reacted with petitions and protests; at the time, the director was Emmanuelle Huynh, a much-admired choreographer and educator whose focus was on contemporary dance and new creations. Mr. Swinston’s vision — seemingly wedded to the Cunningham tradition — was seen as a step backward. Mr. Swinston was not then a choreographer, which was another concern; he has now created dances himself.“I found out this is quite normal in France,” he said of the controversy. “It happens all the time when there is a change. It took time, but it worked out O.K.”Mr. Swinston has led the center for two years — his position is renewable twice for three years — and he’s starting to feel more comfortable. “I might be wrong,” he said, “but I felt I’m finally in the club. I’m maybe accepted as part of French dance.”Mr. Swinston has also settled happily into life in Angers, even without his wife and daughter, who still live in New York. (They visit.) “I have to say, it’s so beautiful here that I find myself smiling all the time,” Mr. Swinston said in surprise. “I’m smiling as I ride my bike to work. I look at the castle, the skyline — I find myself smiling a lot for no reason at all.”In New York, he said, he didn’t see much dance. “I had blinders on pretty much just for Merce,” Mr. Swinston said. “It was important that I did. I was very aware in those last years that he was going to die. I felt in a great hurry all the time — hurry to make revivals, hurry to do things under his auspices. Now I’ve opened up a great deal. Also, the quality of life in France is different and I’m learning — ” He paused and in the next instant Mr. Swinston sounded like a crusty New Yorker once more. “I’m trying to learn how to relax, O.K.?” he said. “In New York, I don’t think anybody relaxes, but here you don’t really have a choice. I’m learning how to deal with that.”Compagnie CNDC-Angers continues performances through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-242-0800, joyce.org.Advertisement