By MIKE HALEMARCH 9, 2015
For a show that exists as an offshoot of a video-game console, “Powers” plays less like a video game than you might expect, or fear. The new 10-episode series — available beginning Tuesday through Sony’s online PlayStation Network, console not required — is action-oriented, with doses of violence and crude language, but it’s a television show, not a first-person shooter. And it’s a reasonably entertaining one in its CW-style, low-rent, formulaic way.The formula here is dystopian superhero-manqué, with echoes of “X-Men” and “Heroes” and a large conceptual debt to Alan Moore’s “Watchmen” graphic novel. The twist is that the superhero world is crossed with, or contained within, a classic buddy-cop police procedural story. The style is pure comic book, appropriate given the show’s origins in a comics series by Michael Avon Oeming and the well-known Avengers writer Brian Michael Bendis.And the premise makes it something of a TV natural. As in “Watchmen,” the specially abled, called Powers, are often less than noble — this is not a universe where great power correlates with great moral fiber — and they have been absorbed into celebrity culture, fodder for the paparazzi and tabloids. When a teenage girl meets the detective Christian Walker — a former Power, now stripped of his abilities — she perks up saying, “There’s a whole ‘Powers That Be’ episode about you!”One amusing detail illustrates the general cesspool atmosphere: Exchanging bodily fluids with Powers can temporarily give you their abilities, adding a new dimension to the role of groupie.AdvertisementAs an on-screen project, “Powers,” which posts its first three episodes on Tuesday and then one a week after that, has a long and checkered history. The comics began to appear in 2000 and a film adaptation was talked about as early as 2001. Then a pilot for an FX series was shot in 2011 with a cast that included Jason Patric and Charles S. Dutton. The show that has emerged is clearly a smaller production on a lower budget, with visuals that are the opposite of lavish. Mr. Bendis and Mr. Oeming are credited as creators and executive producers, but the showrunner is Charlie Huston, a comics and fiction writer whose TV credits consist of adapting one of his own novels for the still-unseen 2010 HBO pilot “All Signs of Death.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But in casting, at least, it’s made do quite well with an array of lesser-known names. The mismatched cops who are our guides to this world — Walker, the dogged onetime hero, and Deena Pilgrim, the hotshot young recruit whose father was, surprise, a famous cop — are a likable pair as played by the South African actor Sharlto Copley (“District 9”), making his television-series debut, and Susan Heyward (“The Following”).In roles we’ve seen a thousand times before, they make the wise choice of underplaying, and Mr. Copley gives Walker a casual, lived-in quality. (His accent occasionally slips out in what sounds like its pure form, intentionally or not.) Providing color around the edges are Eddie Izzard as an imprisoned Power who was Walker’s mentor, Noah Taylor as the bad guy and Michelle Forbes as Walker’s former girlfriend.AdvertisementThey all do their best to provide what every comic-book adaptation needs and so few achieve, which is a little soul, some human substance at the core. “Powers” shows occasional, fitful signs of that kind of life, though in the long run it may be just too threadbare to get there. As a diversion between sessions of “Call of Duty” or “Grand Theft Auto,” however, it more than does the job.PowersThe first three episodes are available at PlayStation Network, with subsequent episodes appearing weekly.Produced by Jinxworld and Circle of Confusion in association with Sony Pictures Television. Brian Michael Bendis, Charlie Huston, Remi Aubuchon, Michael Avon Oeming, Michael Dinner and David Engel, executive producers.WITH: Sharlto Copley (Christian Walker), Susan Heyward (Deena Pilgrim), Noah Taylor (Johnny Royalle), Eddie Izzard (Wolfe), Michelle Forbes (Retro Girl), Olesya Rulin (Calista) and Logan Browning (Zora).A version of this review appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Bad Guys Wielding Their Clout.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.