AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy David AllenCan it really be that there are no more new works to hear from the prolific Elliott Carter? Carter’s petite, almost bashful setting of five poems by Wallace Stevens, “The American Sublime,” was not the last work Carter wrote before his death in 2012 at age 103. That was “Epigrams,” a piano trio first heard at the Aldeburgh Festival in June 2013. But “The American Sublime” was the only Carter piece yet to have its world premiere. On Sunday, his champion James Levine rectified that with the Met Chamber Ensemble and the excellent, precise baritone Evan Hughes at Zankel Hall. An English major at Harvard in the 1920s, Carter always had an ear for poetry. He set Robert Lowell, E. E. Cummings, Elizabeth Bishop and others during his career, including Stevens in “In the Distances of Sleep” (2006). For Edmund Burke, writing in the 18th century, the sublime was a terror “productive of the strongest emotion which the mind is capable of feeling.” But Stevens, as Carter wrote in the new work’s score, was “concerned that what Americans consider ‘sublime’ lacks spirit.” Carter’s idea was to show that the sublime could be revealed in Stevens’s own poetry.Musically, the result is theatrical but modest and soft-edged, not recognizably sublime in any sense. In all of the songs, the voice is almost constant, smoothly cresting and subsiding but ever-present, almost submerged in sparse textures of wind, brass and percussion. In the tiny “Life Is Motion,” there’s just a dancing lyrical line and rattles of tambourine and temple blocks and a quiet cymbal stroke; in “The Woman in Sunshine,” the baritone duets lambently with the oboe, with only a piano and a vibraphone for company. And the alluringly radiant last song, “This Is the Thesis ... ,” softens to a tranquil pianissimo, instruments falling away as the voice alone finds the metaphysical “merely in living as and where we live.” It’s as if Carter is suggesting that music should not deal in such heady terms.A few balance issues aside, Mr. Levine and Mr. Hughes gave the Carter a graceful performance. Much in this concert was superb, from a languidly amusing Stravinsky “Octet for Wind Instruments” to a gleefully raucous, straight-faced Ives miniature, “Scherzo: Over the Pavements,” and an unusually curt, lovingly colored performance of John Cage’s celestial “Atlas Eclipticalis.” All that was accompanied by a couple of surprises. One was the wit and whimsy of Charles Wuorinen, a composer renowned for abstruse serialism, not the surrealist humor of his sitcom cantata “It Happens Like This” (2011). The other was that work’s conductor. Speaking from the stage, Mr. Levine explained that “with all the things on my plate at the moment,” he was not ready to perform the cantata. (It was written for Mr. Levine but first conducted by Mr. Wuorinen at Tanglewood in 2011, while Mr. Levine recuperated from health problems.) Mr. Levine’s withdrawal seemed unplanned — there was no note in the program. He promised to conduct it “whenever I have a chance to put it together.”Mr. Wuorinen, 76, took charge. With charming, acerbic singing and flamboyant acting from Sharon Harms, Laura Mercado-Wright, Steven Brennfleck and Douglas Williams, the performance made a delicious success of hilariously knowing texts by James Tate.Audiences no longer expect withdrawals from Mr. Levine. In March 2011, after a number of cancellations, he began a long convalescence, recovering from back ailments. Since his return to the podium in May 2013, he has steadily increased his workload and kept his commitments. In addition to working on the important Carter premiere, Mr. Levine is conducting Offenbach’s “Les Contes d’Hoffmann” at the Metropolitan Opera, and preparing Verdi’s “Ernani,” which opens next week. Next season his schedule includes five operas, concerts with the Met Orchestra and Met Chamber Ensemble, and a visit to the Philadelphia Orchestra next February. This July, he plans to appear at the Verbier Festival in Switzerland.Many of Mr. Levine’s recent performances have been exquisite; others, less so. The concern is whether he is becoming too ambitious. Perhaps this was just a blip. But it adds a note of uncertainty to what audiences can expect in the future.Advertisement