AdvertisementSupported byBy George LoomisROME — It’s well-established practice to go back to original source material for guidance in performing an opera “authentically,” but the effort usually involves only the music. For its new production of Puccini’s “Tosca,” the Teatro dell’Opera di Roma has unearthed set and costume designs and other original material in an attempt to create a reasonable approximation of the opera’s world premiere production in 1900. By doing so the theater also pays tribute to its own heritage, because it was here that the premiere took place.Opera goers are sometimes frustrated by heavy-handed approaches taken by many modern directors, who think nothing of ignoring composers’ stage directions in favor of their own interpretations or even their invented scenarios. The Rome Opera’s “Tosca,” then, will be for many a tonic: It essentially tells the story as the composer and librettist imagined it and realistically recreates the opera’s site-specific Roman locations at the turn of 19th century.First comes the Church of Sant’Andrea delle Valle, in which Tosca, a famous singer, meets her lover Cavaradossi, who surreptitiously shields a fellow revolutionary. Then we see the grand Palazzo Farnese, where Cavaradossi is tortured by the villainous police chief Scarpia and Tosca agrees to have sex with Scarpia in exchange for Cavaradossi’s release. The opera reaches its bloody finale at the Castel Sant’Angelo, with a view of St. Peter’s across the river.In a way, the approach taken for this “Tosca” is less remarkable than the fact that the Rome Opera has mounted a lavish new production at all. Just months ago the theater seemed to be in desperate straits. As has been widely reported, in September Riccardo Muti, frustrated by union tensions, gave up his role as “honorary conductor for life.”Two weeks later, in an apparently frantic move to get its finances in order, the theater’s board of directors voted to fire its orchestra and chorus. But in November the theater and unions entered into an agreement, which runs through 2016, calling for a €3.5 million annual reduction in personnel costs and increased productivity. The season opened on schedule later that month.Equally important, the national government finally began implementing terms of 2013 legislation designed to assist its major opera houses. Accordingly, the theater was able to eliminate its long-running deficit with the proceeds of a long-term €25 million low-interest loan from the government.One strength of the new “Tosca” is that in Alessandro Talevi, a 28-year-old from South Africa, it has a director who seems to understand that the Rome Opera’s approach to historical reconstruction must stand as an exception, even a curiosity.Bold, new takes on familiar operas — even though they may produce misguided or even perverse results — are essential to keeping the art form fresh. In a program essay Mr. Talevi wrote that Rome’s approach must be viewed as “experimental.” For him the action had to “be absolutely natural” and work for a modern audience.Possibly sensing that some would find a historical approach slightly musty, Mr. Talevi inserted an original idea at the outset. When the curtain rose on the church interior, two children of his own invention were seen playing a game on the church floor. Other details also showed his ingenuity, not least in his treatment of Scarpia. The viewer was drawn in when Scarpia sat down on the arm of a settee on which Tosca was sitting and casually began asking her about the revolutionary whom he suspects Cavaradossi of harboring.There were other reminders that much room for creativity remains even when a director follows a composer’s stage directions. Mr. Talevi wrote in his program note that Puccini’s theatrical ideas prefigure the cinematic age, and that “90 percent of his stage directions still function extremely well and are the basis of my staging.”In reconstructing the original sets by the painter, set designer and illustrator Adolf Hohenstein, the designer Carlo Savi showed that the art of producing painted-on-canvas scenery remains alive and well in Italy. Especially dazzling was the rendering of the scene in the Farnese Palace. One kept wondering how much of the set was truly three-dimensional and how much was painted to look that way.Hohenstein’s costumes, reconstructed by Anna Biagiotti, were more mixed. Tosca looked like a prima donna of yore, lacking in sex appeal, but Scarpia’s appearance, in powdered wig and other late 18th-century garb, seemed exactly right.At the performance on March 3, this character pulsated with sinister life in the baritone Roberto Frontali’s strongly sung portrayal, which encased Scarpia’s thuggery in an aristocratic veneer. Oksana Dyka sang Tosca with a beautifully resonant voice that more than once had passages sounding as they did when sung by Renata Tebaldi, a great Tosca of the 1950s and ’60s. But Ms. Dyka’s Tosca lacked an imperious dimension and her words needed to register more strongly.The tenor Stefano La Colla sang Cavaradossi with a firm, bright voice and ringing high notes, although his tone occasionally sounded constricted; Yonghoon Lee was originally scheduled for the performance on March 3, but instead replaced Jonas Kaufmann at the Met in “Carmen” the following night. Donato Renzetti conducted a warm, expansive performance. “Tosca” runs through Thursday at the Rome Opera and returns for three performances in June. Advertisement