Perhaps fittingly, Episode 2 of “Broadchurch” unfolds with a Noah’s ark-esque parade of pairs. The creator and writer Chris Chibnall obsesses over dualities, comparisons and parallels, and the way one person can affect and shape another. Here are some of these various duos and what we can learn from them, culminating in the two highest-stakes pairings of all.Lee Ashworth and Alec Hardy
Throughout the show, Detective Inspector Hardy represented human ingenuity and infallibility, often arriving at breakthroughs while on the precipice of a physical breakdown. Meanwhile, the newcomer suspect Lee Ashworth operates in nearly a superhuman manner, appearing like Beetlejuice whenever his name is mentioned and slyly revealing information he shouldn’t know, his steely facial features seemingly chiseled from stone. The two meet outside Hardy’s house, with Ashworth already issuing ultimatums and seizing the upper hand.Mark and Beth Latimer
The pitiful Latimers are still locked in marital strife. Beth reaches out to Mark once again, pleading for just one more date to reconjure a (perhaps nonexistent) Edenic time; despite all of her grief, she’s still an idealist at heart. But Mark, back turned and focused on his plumbing kit, already has Tom Miller and video games for that, and he’s far too caught up in his own mistakes to realize he’s making them again. Jocelyn Knight and Sharon Bishop
The opposing lawyers form a classic teacher-versus-pupil story but also represent the establishment versus the outsider, wisdom versus youthful tenacity. If Jocelyn is supposed to be the town’s representative, she doesn’t look too happy about it, shrugging off all small talk with clipped replies. The apt metaphor is the bricklayer, with Jocelyn building her case little by little as a solitary worker. Sharon, on the other hand, is operating a bulldozer. She and her junior partner attack the case with zeal and disdain. They mock the Trader Inn’s lack of WiFi and bemoan the plight of being stuck in a dead-end town like this one while leaving no suspect unturned.In the courtroom, Sharon comes out swinging against the Latimers’ frayed marriage; Beth reacts as if she’s actually received a body blow. Then Sharon delivers the first knockout punch by revealing that Ellie had beat up Joe in the police station holding room. The best television shows carefully plant innocuous details and later expose them as pivots — you don’t realize that they were important until they suddenly play into a catastrophe. That’s certainly true with this detail, which at the time seemed like a natural, visceral reaction by Ellie to a foregone conclusion. It’s come back to bite her, and the defense easily win the trial’s first round. While Jocelyn struggles to play the principled hero, Sharon delights in being the villain. Ellie Miller and Claire Ashworth
Mr. Chibnall seems to love this sort of thing — arranging heart-to-hearts between characters with obviously similar experiences — so we get Ellie and Claire, the two wives of accused murderers, munching on fish and chips by the gorgeous Broadchurch seaside. They swap “how did you meet your man stories”: Claire fell for Lee immediately, “like a chemical reaction,” whereas Ellie kept running into Joe in professional environments and it just, kind of, you know, happened. Origin stories are important, and this show is full of foreshadowing. So put these details away for later.Alec Hardy and Ellie Miller
The odd couple is under siege and reunited once again, thanks to that disaster in the holding room and their quest to expose Lee Ashworth as the Sandbrook killer. When Ellie persuades Claire to meet with her estranged husband, Hardy responds, ““Oh Miller, I could kiss you.” Is this inevitable, highly charged romance finally taking flight??Claire and Lee Ashworth
At the end of the episode, Hardy and Ellie finally arrange for a quick meeting between the Ashworths at Ellie’s old house (a frankly terrible idea that should have been accompanied by flashing bright red warning signs). After Claire hypes the chemistry between them, the Ashworths do not disappoint. The brief minute they share together is the most dangerous and sexiest in the entire show, as Lee slowly pops open Claire’s shirt to “check for wires.” Then they disappear into thin air, with the ever-sinister Lee outwitting Hardy right under his nose. Seriously, the idea that Lee can teleport isn’t off the table.  Ellie Miller and Beth Latimer
Hardy and Ellie were supposed to have the Ashworth situation under wraps, but Beth Latimer foiled that by attacking Ellie in the middle of the street in the episode’s nail-biting finish. This is another instance of Mr. Chibnall’s beating us over the head with how carefully he’s crafted this world: violence in the face of anguish (Joe killing Danny) begets violence in the face of anguish (Ellie beating up Joe) begets violence in the face of anguish (Beth attacking Ellie). No matter where these characters turn, they look into a black mirror.Beth’s onslaught is stopped when her water breaks, midfight. Is the town (and the show) ready to nurture another life? What pivotal pairings will our newest member become embroiled in? More next week, while hanging onto the cliff for dear life. 