Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.STRAVINSKY: Works for Piano and Orchestra; ‘Petrouchka’
Jean-Efflam Bavouzet, pianist; Yan Pascal Tortelier, conductor; São Paulo Symphony Orchestra
(Chandos CHSA 5147; one CD)
Stravinsky wrote three ingeniously original works for piano and orchestra. Perhaps it’s because these pieces are so unconventional that they are seldom performed, a big loss for audiences. The excellent, inquisitive French pianist Jean-Efflam Bavouzet plays all three in bold, incisive performances on this new recording, with Yan Pascal Tortelier, another fine French artist, conducting the impressive São Paulo Symphony Orchestra. There is the flinty, Neo-Classical Concerto for Piano and Wind Instruments; the inventive Capriccio for Piano and Orchestra, a beguilingly strange work drenched in Russian musical styles and colors; and the compact, amazing 12-tone Movements for Piano and Orchestra, heard today mostly at New York City Ballet as a score for a seminal George Balanchine ballet. This recording includes a vibrant account of “Petrouchka” (1957 version), with Mr. Bavouzet playing the formidable piano part. (Anthony Tommasini)SCHUMANN AND JANACEK: Schumann’s Kinderszenen, Waldszenen; Janacek’s ‘On the Overgrown Path’
Marc-André Hamelin, pianist
(Hyperion, CDA68030)
Preparing for Jeremy Denk’s latest recital gave me an excuse to return to this CD, a display of the kind of virtuosity we don’t usually associate with the pianist Marc-André Hamelin. No Alkan, no Godowsky here, no fistfuls of notes at warp speed, just shimmering colors, infinitely pliable phrases, apt character in the Schumann and shivering poignancy in the first book of Janacek’s miniatures. (David Allen)ALLEN SHAWN: Piano Works
Julia Bartha, pianist
(Coviello Contemporary Recording COV 91414; one CD)
The American composer Allen Shawn, a longtime faculty member at Bennington College, may be best known for his books, which include the insightful “Arnold Schoenberg’s Journey,” along with “Twin: A Memoir” and a new book on Leonard Bernstein. This recent recording offers an immersion into Mr. Shawn’s piano music, played brilliantly by Julia Bartha. The works range from “Aus/From: Four Jazz Preludes,” composed in 1980 for his father, William Shawn (a former editor of The New Yorker), to his Piano Sonata No. 4 (2009), dedicated to Ms. Bartha. You hear lots of styles in Mr. Shawn’s voice: moody atonality, hints of Janacek, thickly chromatic lyricism, Messiaen-like cluster chords, rhythmic bursts that out-pummel Prokofiev. Yet Mr. Shawn’s own voice comes through in the deliberate, skillful, personal way he composes these pieces. And they are dazzlingly conceived for the piano. But none of the challenges daunt the impressive Ms. Bartha. (Tommasini)‘L’ORGUE FRANÇAIS’
Marie-Claire Alain, organist
(Erato, WRNC 2564631064, 22 CDs)
With Marie-Claire Alain’s later two Bach surveys firmly in the catalog, it’s invaluable to have this massive collection of her recordings of French pieces. Neglected works of the French Baroque by composers like Lebègue, Nivers, Clérambault and Grigny have grandeur and bite, while the repertory pieces of Messiaen, Vierne, Widor, Franck and Jehan Alain reverberate from mighty organs by Cavaillé-Coll. This is not just a set for organists, but a vital window into a musical world central to a culture. (Allen)SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)