This week on the music charts, Kelly Clarkson scored her third No. 1 album and Mark Ronson’s “Uptown Funk” is the top single for the 10th week in a row.“Piece by Piece” (19/RCA), the latest by Ms. Clarkson — the first winner of “American Idol,” way back in 2002 — opens at No. 1 on Billboard’s album chart, with 83,000 sales and 4.3 million streams, according to Nielsen Music. It is her third album at the top of the chart, and her first time there since 2009, when she released “All I Ever Wanted” (featuring the hit “My Life Would Suck Without You”).“Uptown Funk,” featuring Bruno Mars on vocals, has been the top single every week this year, and this week it extends its run for a 10th time at the top. In its latest week, it had 210,000 sales.Also this week, the soundtrack to “Fifty Shades of Grey” (Republic), with songs by Beyoncé, the Weeknd and Annie Lennox, rose one spot to No. 2. In its fourth week out, the soundtrack is closing in on half a million sales. Taylor Swift’s “1989” (Big Machine) is No. 3, and has now sold 4.5 million copies in 19 weeks.Drake’s mixtape-slash-album “If You’re Reading This It’s Too Late” (Cash Money/Republic) holds at No. 4, and Ed Sheeran’s “x” (Atlantic) is No. 5. Last week’s No. 1, Big Sean’s “Dark Sky Paradise” (G.O.O.D./Def Jam), fell to No. 6, while this week’s only other high-charting new release, “The Firewatcher’s Daughter” (ATO) by Brandi Carlile, opened at No. 9.For Ms. Carlile, a singer-songwriter from Seattle with six albums under her belt, that showing is both good and bad. It is her highest on the chart, but is also an illustration of how Billboard’s chart has changed in ways that can help some artists while hurting others. By sales alone, “The Firewatcher’s Daughter,” which sold nearly 42,000 copies, would have opened at No. 4 this week. But it was penalized for low track sales and streaming activity, which are now part of the formula that yields Billboard chart rankings.A version of this article appears in print on 03/12/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Clarkson Tops Chart.