By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMOCT. 14, 2015
Ian Hobson is not a pianist who does things by half-measures. His discography includes complete sets of Beethoven’s and Schumann’s sonatas, and his survey of Chopin’s works for piano — all of them — is in full swing. Two seasons ago, he offered New York audiences a 14-recital perusal of the entire catalog of Brahms’s chamber music for and with piano.On Tuesday at SubCulture, Mr. Hobson presented the first of six concerts in a new series titled Preludes - Études - Variations, which will be split between this Greenwich Village basement club and Merkin Concert Hall uptown. Its subject seems a perfect match for a pianist of such encyclopedic leanings. Preludes and études are musical snapshots exploring a single mood, texture or technical constraint and were often published in collections. Performed in sequence, they reveal interconnections not unlike those linking a series of variations on a theme.Chopin, Rachmaninoff and Debussy will figure prominently in this series, but Mr. Hobson will also draft in Fauré, Schumann and Szymanowski, as well as contemporary composers. On Tuesday Mr. Hobson opened and closed with Chopin.The sweet clarity of “Trois Nouvelles Études,” written for publication in a piano instruction book, contrasts with the virtuosic swagger of Chopin’s Opus 25 Études, a 12-part collection well suited to the concert stage. With his powerful sound and cleareyed command of multiple voices, Mr. Hobson offered a reading of the Opus 25 set that was varied and exciting. He also vividly characterized each of Rachmaninoff’s 10 Opus 23 Preludes, from the boozy impatience of the fifth to the noble singing voice of the concluding Largo.Mr. Hobson offered as well a persuasive and evocative first performance of Stephen Taylor’s “Variations Ascending,” a kind of evolutionary history of the world in 10 chapters, built around a musical representation of a single gene. The first, jerkily syncopated variation, for instance, represents the Cambrian explosion 500 million years ago; the aquatic blur of the second stands for the Devonian Age of Fishes; the stormy fugato of the 10th variation announces the arrival of Homo sapiens.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.