AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10 P.M. (BBC America) BROADCHURCH After learning that her husband, Joe (Matthew Gravelle), murdered Danny Latimer, Detective Sgt. Ellie Miller (Olivia Colman, above) returns to Broadchurch to hear what she assumes will be his guilty plea. But then he declares his innocence, forcing a courtroom battle that will re-examine the case. Detective Alec Hardy (David Tennant), meanwhile, finds himself embroiled in an unsolved murder and disappearance from his past. “Season 2 is, from the start, an entirely messier, more contingent affair, enjoyable in a different and, to me, more appealing way,” Mike Hale wrote in The New York Times. Having Joe plead not guilty enables Chris Chibnall, the show’s creator and writer, “to keep all the central characters of Season 1 around without the usual implausibility of plunging the town into a new mystery. It’s also a device to get Ms. Colman’s Ellie Miller back into the center of the story” — where she once again steals the show. “She’s a wonderful comic actress, and now even more than before Mr. Tennant is her straight man — Miller has had it, and Hardy has to absorb all of her (amusing) petulance and disgust.”9:30 P.M. (ABC) BLACK-ISH  Anthony Anderson, above, Tracee Ellis Ross and Laurence Fishburne star in humorous outtakes in this blooper special, while Yara Shahidi, Marcus Scribner, Miles Brown and Marsai Martin give a behind-the-scenes tour of the show’s set.10 P.M. (HBO Signature) RUSH (2013) The director Ron Howard, working from a screenplay by Peter Morgan, climbs into the cockpits of Formula One racecars as he recounts the rivalry between James Hunt (Chris Hemsworth), a blond British playboy who rose from his middle-class beginnings to racing royalty, and Niki Lauda (Daniel Brühl), a wealthy Austrian nicknamed the Rat for his pronounced overbite, who drove the sport into mainstream consciousness in 1976. “Mr. Howard doesn’t just want you to crawl inside a Formula One racecar, he also wants you to crawl inside its driver’s head,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. “ ‘Rush,’ which is serious without being self-serious, fun without being trivial, feels like the movie that he has been waiting to make his whole life.” She added: “There are no washed-out tones or characters here. There are, instead, shifting feet, trembling hands, shredding tires and the hard whine of machines that whether flying or skidding over the track, can feel like nothing other than needlessly reckless manifestations of human arrogance, like Icarus’s wings — but, you know, with the Marlboro brand emblazoned on them.”10 P.M. (CBS) CSI: CYBER Agent Ryan (Patricia Arquette) and her crew investigate a roller-coaster accident caused by a computer breach.10 P.M. (Ovation) AMERICAN CANVAS What if you detoured around the tourist attractions when visiting a place for the first time and ventured off the beaten path? In this new series, Dave Holmes focuses on the culture and history, not always mentioned in guidebooks, that make three cities distinctive. His journey begins in San Francisco, where he watches the Spidey-esque members of Bandaloop dance on the faces of skyscrapers with the help of rock-climbing equipment, traces the footsteps of Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg, and tours “@Large,” an exhibition at Alcatraz centered on freedom and confinement, by the Chinese artist and activist Ai Weiwei. What’s Streaming NowGIMME SHELTER (1970) David and Albert Maysles and Charlotte Zwerin record the last leg of the Rolling Stones’ 1969 American tour and the “ugly, beautiful mass,” in the words of one concertgoer, that came together to hear the band at places like the Altamont Speedway in California, where the Hells Angels oversaw security and four people were killed, including one stabbed to death on camera. “There is quite a lot of music and performing in ‘Gimme Shelter,’ some of it beautifully recorded, but it is not a concert film, like Woodstock,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times. “It is more like an end-of-the-world film, and I found it very depressing.” Albert Maysles, who received the National Medal of Arts from President Obama in July, died on Thursday at 88. (iTunes) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement