AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeWhen she enters the vast, shadowy Church of St. Sulpice, the title character of Massenet’s “Manon” looks around and shivers. “These silent walls,” she sings. “This chilly air I breathe.”But there’s no chill to be detected at the Metropolitan Opera. There, the temperature rises nearly to boiling every time Diana Damrau and Vittorio Grigolo are on stage together in a sensational revival of “Manon,” which opened on Monday and runs for just five more performances through the end of the month.Ms. Damrau has quietly become perhaps the Met’s most daring diva. While other stars tend to bring roles to New York that they’ve tried out ample times elsewhere, she has unveiled her last two here — Violetta in “La Traviata” and Amina in “La Sonnambula” — and hadn’t touched Massenet’s daunting antiheroine since introducing it in a short run in Vienna five years ago.In certain ways, Manon is the least natural fit of the group. Though Ms. Damrau’s voice has settled and darkened in recent years while retaining its pristine poise, it’s still not as full in the middle or lower registers as Massenet demands.But just as with Verdi’s Violetta and Bellini’s Amina, she seems to live Manon, in all her shadings. Ms. Damrau could not possibly give more of herself as she charts the character’s precipitous journey from innocence to experience to tragic demise. Modest and tender early on, her voice fills out, the top growing ever more commanding as the performance goes on and the character matures. In a tense final act, she manages to sound desperate, even hysterical, while the tone remains radiantly focused.Mr. Grigolo, the most hyper-hyped of tenors, burst onto the international scene as the opera’s tortured lover, Des Grieux, in a 2010 London run of this much-traveled Belle Époque production of “Manon,” originally directed by Laurent Pelly. After a few frustratingly unfocused, showboating stints in past years here, he is now showing the Met audience what all the fuss has been about.He was energetic but artfully restrained in Offenbach’s “Les Contes d’Hoffmann” in January, and is even better in “Manon”: His voice is clear and generous and his passion is infectious, whether luminously soft in “En fermant les yeux” or pealing in “Ah! Fuyez, douce image.”It is, with two intermissions, a four-hour evening. But the conductor, Emmanuel Villaume, paces it with vigor and a sense of movement in even the most delicate, reflective passages. Without stinting Massenet’s sumptuous lyricism, Mr. Villaume makes the score feel lean and agile.Of the supporting cast, the bass-baritone Nicolas Testé, as Des Grieux’s father, sang with rich, smooth tone. The tenor Christophe Mortagne was superbly characterful as the lecherous, vindictive Guillot de Morfontaine and the baritone Russell Braun, if not imposing, was articulate and lively as Lescaut, Manon’s cousin.For an opera I had long been inclined to underrate, the performance came as something of a revelation. It is the most vivid, exciting take on “Manon” at the Met in many years, and sets the bar high, early on, for the company’s spring season.“Manon” runs through March 28 at the Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center; 212-362-6000, metopera.org. Advertisement