AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperThe American Symphony Orchestra, which is known for unusual, thematic programs that often include works that have fallen out of the repertory, will cut back on concerts next season as it grapples with money woes, orchestra officials said on Tuesday.The orchestra, which was founded in 1962 by Leopold Stokowski and has been led for more than two decades by Leon Botstein, the president of Bard College, will end its Classics Declassified series of concerts and lectures at Symphony Space and will reduce its main Carnegie Hall season to four concerts next season from six this season.“This is a time for belt-tightening and cost-cutting, if you want to survive for the long term,” Mr. Botstein said in a telephone interview, attributing the orchestra’s financial troubles to what he called a “crisis of philanthropy” in classical music. Mr. Botstein said he hoped the retrenchment would be temporary, and added that he was especially troubled that the cutbacks would mean less work for the freelance musicians the orchestra relies upon. “The real hit is that it comes in a context where the finest freelance musicians in music have reduced options, and that’s intolerable,” he said.Lynne Meloccaro, the orchestra’s executive director, said that the ensemble had tried a couple of emergency fund-raising appeals and planned to open next year’s Carnegie season with a benefit featuring works by Nico Muhly, Gunther Schuller, Henri Dutilleux and Richard Strauss. In addition to its New York City offerings, the orchestra has in recent years deepened its ties to Bard, in Annandale-on-Hudson, where it performs regularly at the Richard B. Fisher Center for the Performing Arts. The orchestra’s latest annual report showed that more than three-quarters of its total revenues were connected to Bard, largely in the form of fees for its performances there.Mr. Botstein said that the main difficulty for the orchestra was the drop in individual giving, which supported its concerts in New York City. “This is hardly an anomalous story,” he said.The orchestra’s unique brand of programming will be on display March 26 at its next Carnegie concert, which will be called “Opus Posthumous” and will feature works by Schubert, Bruckner and Dvorak that were not performed during their lifetimes. The trouble has been brewing for some time. Mr. Botstein referred to it in a program note he wrote in 2012 celebrating the orchestra’s 50th anniversary.“The challenge facing classical music today is not a depletion of audience or potential audience, or the aging of the audience,” he wrote. “The real problem is that the very wealthy no longer consider it their civic responsibility to contribute to the traditions of the symphony orchestra. Their attentions have turned elsewhere.”Advertisement