By ALASTAIR MACAULAYMARCH 10, 2015
COSTA MESA, Calif. — The wealth of detail that informs American Ballet Theater’s new production of “The Sleeping Beauty” brings to life a classic that has often gone stale. Much more, however, is also achieved: The old ballet has become transformed into something full of surprises. Though the production, staged by Alexei Ratmansky, Ballet Theater’s artist in residence, is based on deep research into the ballet’s original 1890 production and various records from 1890 to 1906, it doesn’t feel quaint or dated or archival. It feels loved: The characters and their often unfamiliar steps glow from within.If you think you know “Beauty,” this production, which had its first performances here last week, teaches you that you don’t. In May and June, the production will reach the Metropolitan Opera House in New York, where it will be the subject of keen scrutiny (and by which time it may have changed).I learned much about it just by listening to the happy response of the Costa Mesa audience to the ballet’s many charms at each performance in the 3,000-seat Segerstrom Hall. The sound of children gurgling with delight at Act III’s fairy-tale divertissements (Puss-in-Boots, the Bluebird, Cinderella, Red Riding Hood, Hop-o’-My-Thumb and others) stays in my ears.I had booked to see five casts and expected this to be a chore. But it only deepened the fascination. These were performances that made me feel I was only just starting to become acquainted with both “Sleeping Beauty” and the choreographer of its St. Petersburg 1890 premiere, Marius Petipa.AdvertisementAbove all, this staging is a triumph of vivifying style. It’s the finest reconstruction I’ve ever seen of a dance work. When the Mariinsky Ballet staged a comparable “Sleeping Beauty” in 1999, the dancers showed no interest in any 1890-1910 idiom. (The ballerinas’ absurdly high extensions, so ill-suited to their period attire, were simply the most obvious anachronism.) Here, however, Ballet Theater’s dancers seem to cherish the challenges of the unfamiliar.AdvertisementWe see both unknown steps and known steps given completely new accents. These performers don’t look cramped by lifting their legs lower than shoulder height or performing with extreme turnout of the legs. They look released, motivated and musical. Their classical style looks enriched, and their skills as dance actors seem rekindled. Tempos for Tchaikovsky’s superlative score are marvelously fast. You can feel the kinesthetic excitement of rapid, complex footwork; upper bodies are mobile, and the performers breathe in both dances and in mime.To talk technique: Chaîné turns (a traveling step customarily performed on point by women today) are delivered here on half-point and with each dancer’s face addressing the audience when “spotting” to focus each revolution; retirés and passés (steps and positions in which the working foot is usually raised to touch the other knee) are here at calf height; and arm positions are often softer, less grand, but more inflected than we are used to seeing. Amazingly, Ballet Theater’s performers do all this as if it were right and natural — as if they believe in it, love it and have never moved any other way.My enthusiasm was tempered. The ballet’s most enchantingly eloquent music, depicting the palace asleep before the Awakening, is cut. Nothing here is dull, but also nothing is overwhelming, at least in these first performances. The wicked fairy, Carabosse (played by a woman at some performances and by a man at others), is vividly mimed but not sensational. The heroine, Aurora — played by five ballerinas in California — is entirely absorbing in her dances but builds no huge excitement.You feel Mr. Ratmansky’s transforming touch, however, most of all if you saw the ballerina Diana Vishneva dance Aurora in the Mariinsky’s 1999 production, where she was all unfocused, bland gymnasticism. Here, by contrast, where Ms. Vishneva’s legs seldom sweep above hip height, she is more youthful, nuanced, poetic and engaging.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other casts (Paloma Herrera with Denis Nedak, Isabella Boylston with Joseph Gorak, Hee Seo with Cory Stearns, Gillian Murphy with Alexandre Hammoudi) were no less rewarding. At a few points, Mr. Ratmansky has even supplied his ballerinas with alternative options from the old notation. Brightest and most musical of all were Ms. Boylston, the company’s newest principal, and her partner, Mr. Gorak (still a soloist), in their debuts in the lead roles: No one more eagerly lapped up the challenges of these intricate dances. But even Ms. Herrera and Ms. Murphy, who often danced Aurora well in the company’s misbegotten 2007-13 production, looked happily stimulated, combining artistic experience with freshness.Ms. Vishneva’s partner, Marcelo Gomes, is a marvel of authority as the Prince. He is also (like Nancy Raffa and Craig Salstein) a biting, vehement Carabosse. Among a long list of other performers, I single out Victor Barbee and, especially, Roman Zhurbin as the King; April Giangeruso as the Prologue fairy godmother (the one who points fingers in her variation); Skylar Brandt, Cassandra Trenary, Christine Shevchenko and Ms. Boylston as the Diamond Fairy in Act III; and Gabe Stone Shayer as a blithe Bluebird sweetly hanging in the air amid shimmering jumps.The audience rightly applauds the detail, depth, color and period evocation of Richard Hudson’s sets and costumes, although these prompt more complicated reactions than any other element. They are inspired by those of Léon Bakst, who designed Serge Diaghilev’s 1921 London production of this classic. It takes time to adjust to “Beauty” in knee-length tutus and with no male dancer’s legs fully outlined in tights; but this soon becomes part of the production’s charm.Problems? The color spectrums of each act are seldom satisfying over all, despite individual delights. The 116 years between the Prologue and Act III are shown in an unchanging Baroque era. The Sleep’s falling lilac petals and the Vision’s golden leaves (adorning the white tutus) are greeting-card tacky. Aurora and the Prince perform their Wedding pas de deux in what looks like Baroque underwear.AdvertisementI have often said that “Beauty,” more than any other of the old ballets, reminds me of what Pasternak said he loved in Pushkin’s poetry: It is full of things. And the greatest pleasure of these performances was to feel that again, not least in things I’d never encountered in this ballet.Carabosse’s rats make an absurd parody of courtly dancing in the Prologue. Cinderella pumps her bellows teasingly in the face of the prince who has come to claim her. Hop-o’-My-Thumb tells two of his brothers to steal the seven-league boots of the sleeping ogre, and the boys beat an exit with the awakened ogre in hot pursuit with a meat cleaver.The way classical dancing emerges out of this tapestry, both courtly and mythic, is entrancing. It becomes an expression of a belief in manners, form, beauty and, beyond all that, the life force.A version of this review appears in print on March 11, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Troupe Cherishing the Challenge of the Unfamiliar.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.