AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Anthony TommasiniThe beloved conductor Julius Rudel, who died last June at 93, could not abide the idea of a memorial for himself. He made this clear to his son, Anthony Rudel, who shared his father’s thoughts with the audience that packed Jazz at Lincoln Center’s Rose Theater on Monday night for a concert to celebrate Julius Rudel’s life and work, particularly his pioneering 22-year tenure as general director and principal conductor of New York City Opera.During that talk with his son, Rudel relented somewhat and approved a tribute concert as long as it “benefited music and musicians,” Anthony Rudel explained. In this regard, Monday’s gala fulfilled Rudel’s wish. It brought together musicians of the City Opera Orchestra, the Musica Sacra Chorus, five conductors and 19 singers from fledging young artists to the tireless Plácido Domingo, 74, who made his City Opera debut under Rudel nearly 50 years ago. The program was organized as a benefit for NYCO Renaissance, a group trying to bring back City Opera, in association with the Rudel family. Renaissance has made a bid to acquire the name of the company, which folded, after 70 years, in 2013. There is, though, another bidder, Gene Kaufman, an architect. The bankrupt company’s board favors the Renaissance group, but this complicated process is now before the federal court.From Anthony Rudel’s remarks, and the content of a film tribute, it’s clear that the family strongly favors Renaissance. Roy G. Niederhoffer, the chairman of its board, and Michael Capasso, its general director (formerly head of the scrappy Dicapo Opera Theater, which disbanded under his watch last year, still owing back pay to musicians and singers), also made remarks to the audience and sounded optimistic and determined. Mr. Capasso even spoke of a City Opera season this fall, with productions presented in the Rose Theater.Those involved with this venture may be getting ahead of themselves. Still, the gala touched on important strands of Rudel’s work and offered some fitting performances. This was not an occasion for close critical scrutiny of the music-making. There were last-minute changes, including a withdrawal by Sting, who was to have sung but got sick and sent a letter in tribute to Rudel that was read. The countertenor David Daniels, who was later part of the Handel boom that Rudel inaugurated at City Opera, was also ill. In his place, an impressive young countertenor, John Holiday, brought a bright virile voice to an aria from Handel’s “Giulio Cesare,” conducted by Pacien Mazzagatti. In tribute to Rudel’s Vienna roots, the program began with Imre Pallo conducting the overture to Strauss’s “Die Fledermaus.” Mr. Domingo, who keeps prolonging his vocal career in baritone repertory, sang “Pietà, rispetto, amore” from Verdi’s “Macbeth.” He also conducted both the prelude to “Carmen,” the work of his 1965 City Opera debut, a milestone he recalled affectionately, and an aria from a zarzuela by Sorozábal featuring a gifted young tenor, Joshua Guerrero. Renowned artists in attendance included the baritone Sherrill Milnes, who spoke of being given early opportunities by Rudel at City Opera. Rudel, a champion of American opera, would have been pleased that the program included the baritone Mark Delavan in an aria from Carlisle Floyd’s “Susannah” (with Mr. Floyd in attendance) and works by Ricky Ian Gordon and Jake Heggie (Frederica von Stade in an aria from “Dead Man Walking”) as well as a new song by Tobias Picker, “The Waking,” for soprano (Kristin Sampson) and orchestra (with Steven Osgood conducting). The soprano Christine Goerke ventured deep down into mezzo-soprano territory for a gripping performance of “O don fatale” from Verdi’s “Don Carlo.” The two-hour program ended with soloists and the chorus in “Make Our Garden Grow” from Bernstein’s “Candide.”The gala raised about $800,000, it was announced. What happens to the City Opera name and the remnants of its endowment has yet to be determined.Advertisement