AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon CaramanicaOn last week’s episode of “Empire,” the Lyon family’s music-based company, Empire Enterprises, was under siege. A rival label, Creedmoor, was trying to poach its artists, threatening to undermine Empire’s coming initial public offering. In the company’s conference room, a screen displayed financial information as the tug of war unfolded. Projected revenue: $343,546,002 for Empire; $491,546,002 for Creedmoor.This is fiction, of course. Possibly science fiction. Few hip-hop-focused labels have ever been able to generate that much money. But part of the charming fantasy of “Empire” — the new Fox drama on Wednesdays that will have its season finale next week — is that it still posits that music can be the foundation of a large conglomerate. There is an Empire-owned nightclub, Empire champagne, Empire sneakers that look a lot like Christian Louboutins. For an industry decimated by declining sales and declining glamour, “Empire” is gilded nostalgia.Given that, music can feel surprisingly incidental on this show, which can’t decide if its songs are best used as creative statements or plot points. Examples of both are on the just-released “Empire” soundtrack (on Columbia), which gives songs that received short shrift on the show a full airing, and also tries to make the case for “Empire” as not just a runaway television smash, with the audience growing every week, but a potential springboard for crossover hits.Empire, the fictional hip-hop and R&B powerhouse label, is headed by Lucious Lyon (Terrence Howard), a former Philadelphia drug dealer turned rapper and singer. Two of his sons are signed to the label — Jamal (Jussie Smollett), a gay singer-songwriter, and Hakeem (Bryshere Y. Gray), an immature rapper. (There’s also, oddly enough, an addict-cum-rock-star played by Courtney Love.)“Empire” gives them something like real-world hits — Hakeem’s “Drip Drop” is easily the most current-sounding song on the show to date, in the vein of a toothless rapper like Kid Ink or Tyga. It’s cheeky and catchy, even if it says little about Hakeem.As a rapper, Hakeem has a different flow on almost every song — sometimes muscular (as on the clunky “Can’t Truss ’Em”), sometimes tenderfooted. Given that he’s the youngest brother, and also the least predictable, maybe that’s intentional. But more likely it’s the show’s hedge against the shifting sands of the hip-hop industry — if he sounds too current, he can easily sound dated when styles change. There’s a marked difference between Hakeem, who prefers slick boasts delivered with a grin, and Jamal, who tends toward the confessional, and whose live performances reveal latent boy-band tendencies. (The third brother, Andre, isn’t a performer, but an executive at the label.)Unlike Hakeem’s songs, which serve as a sort of hip-hop placeholder, Jamal’s music is largely used to advance the plot. There’s a one-to-one relationship between his emotional reckoning and his songwriting. Every fight with his homophobic father seems to lead to a new song, like “Good Enough” — “I try to show you that I’m strong, why do I even bother?/’Cause it’s the same ol’ damn song/And you call yourself a father?” “Keep Your Money,” with its viscous low end, is the closest Jamal comes to contemporary R&B.Mostly, though, Jamal’s music is just there to tell the show’s stories, freeing Hakeem’s music from the burden of narrative. (Cookie, the mother played by Taraji P. Henson, tells Hakeem, “You need to stop rapping like you from the streets ’cause you not about that life.”) “Empire” is set in the present day, but it’s curiously inconsistent on matters of aesthetics, even though — or perhaps because — its musical director is Timbaland. He was one of the great hip-hop producers of the early 2000s, a wicked experimenter with an ear for bizarre sounds and skittering rhythms; later, he remade himself as the architect of Justin Timberlake’s surprisingly bruising pop-soul.But the music of “Empire” rarely takes a stand. It sometimes approximates the broad feel of Broadway music, emphasizing relatability over innovation. The show’s songs — many of them produced by Timbaland with Jim Beanz — are ambiguously modern, but don’t feel of the specific present. Besides “Drip Drop,” the only song on the soundtrack that could plausibly have come from the actual contemporary music world is “Keep It Movin,’ ” a duet by Hakeem and another character, Tiana (Serayah McNeill), that recalls club-minded R&B singers like Tinashe and Keri Hilson.Occasionally, there’s an outrageous misstep, like the hilarious updating of Dire Straits’s “Money for Nothing,” the sort of splashy borrowing that was once a hallmark of hip-hop’s brash approach to appropriation but has lately become a sign of dull pop-aimed rappers like Flo Rida. Here, the song seems more like a “Key & Peele” sketch of hip-hop excess.When it comes to extramusical gestures, “Empire” is similarly hit or miss. Current slang — “bae,” “thot” and so on — is sprinkled throughout the show, but when Lucious’s rival informs an underling to “book LaChapelle for a fashion shoot” — the photographer David LaChapelle — it’s as if the late-1990s had kicked a boot through the screen.Fashionwise, Hakeem is nearly flawless, in slouchy leather pants and heavily ornamented sneakers. And Lucious, now more a figurehead than a musician, dresses regally. But in flashbacks, Lucious is all over the place — grimy work clothes in one scene, a floral baseball cap in another.When it comes to the story of the label itself, the company — depicted as robust, ubiquitous, feared — feels like fantasy, especially compared with the back story, which borrows tidbits from real-life hip-hop labels. Empire was founded with drug money, a not-unheard-of occurrence in hip-hop. Lucious makes a deal with a rapper who’s in jail, recalling Suge Knight’s signing of Tupac Shakur.On the show, as in real life, there is no shortage of unscrupulous relatives in management positions, though rare is the family that can build intergenerational success. Within hip-hop, there has yet to be a true parent-child success story; maybe the closest examples are Master P and his son, Romeo, or Run (of Run-DMC) and his son, Diggy Simmons. But on “Empire,” the success of Lucious and his family is largely a given, even if the show primarily provides them with lumpy raw material. A couple of weeks ago, an episode revolved around the desire of Lucious and Cookie to record a song with the entire family. (In a way, the whole show is an elaborate parent trap, in which the three brothers use talent, dissatisfaction, misbehavior and pride to force their parents into nurturing roles as individuals and, eventually, as a unit.)And when Jamal chooses to use a song to come out of the closet, he chooses “You’re So Beautiful,” which Lucious had previously sung, amending one line to proclaim, “This the kind of song that makes a man love a man” in one of the show’s most gripping scenes. (The version on the soundtrack is the one sung by Mr. Smollett, but that line has been excised, perplexingly.)“You’re So Beautiful”— a swinging piano-soul song that’s not attached to a particular era — creates a through line for the characters. At the end of last week’s episode, the whole family performed it with Lucious at the piano, Jamal singing, Hakeem rapping and Cookie dancing along. For a few minutes the all-smiles Lyons bore a distinct resemblance to another family that jumped out of the television to birth real-world stars: the Partridges.Advertisement