AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon Caramanica“The Jacksons: Next Generation,” the new docuseries that trails Tito Jackson’s three sons — Taj, Taryll and TJ — as they aspire to hold their musical and personal lives together, is for sure a Trojan horse, but what kind?Is it the brothers drawing attention to their new album — they record as 3T — by offering a glimpse behind the Jackson family veil? Or is the focus on the brothers a way to sneak in a little camera time for Michael Jackson’s children? (TJ shares guardianship of them with Katherine, his grandmother; Prince, Michael’s son, appears in the first episode.) Or is it that interest in  Michael Jackson, who died in 2009, is still so keen that it trickles down far enough to get his nephews their own TV show?Actually, it’s none of these. The real twist to this show, which has its premiere on Lifetime on Friday, is that its intentions are, at best, lurid and craven, and yet what emerges is an empathetic portrait of a family that swallows suffering almost as a matter of course.Dee Dee, the trio’s mother, was murdered in 1994 by her boyfriend. In the premiere, Taryll says the reason was because she wouldn’t ask Michael for money. “When I’m going through bad things, the two people I talk to are my mom and my uncle, and they’re both gone,” he says, before doubling over in tears.Typically when celebrities do reality programs, they arrive with their skin thick and their story lines set. But what’s most striking about the brothers is how vulnerable they seem. They don’t play to the cameras; they almost seem cowed by them. Proximity to fame hasn’t hardened them; it has undone them.Taryll and Taj struggle with their weight, and TJ is happy to remind them about it. TJ has a baby son with hearing loss and is uncomfortable talking about it. Taj wants to make a documentary about Michael, but seems to know he might not be up to the task.And lack of artifice is built into the show itself. At various moments, the fourth wall collapses: Taryll is shown having makeup applied; the brothers speak directly to the producers off camera, who can be heard speaking back; a fight scene between the brothers shows the camerapeople filming the whole thing.They’re squabbling over making music, or more specifically, their inability to make music. 3T released one tepid major label album, “Brotherhood,” in 1995 on Michael’s label MJJ. (Michael also produced the album.) The group saw moderate success in Europe, and as recently as last year participated in “The Big Reunion,” a British reality show that reunited old boy bands.In the United States, though, 3T left barely a mark, and “The Jacksons: Next Generation” is unlikely to change that. But there’s one final Trojan horse: This show arrives the same day that Aunt Janet releases her first album in seven years.Advertisement