By VIVIEN SCHWEITZEROCT. 14, 2015
As the violinist Malcolm Goldstein played on Tuesday evening at Artists Space Books & Talks, silhouettes of his gyrating, swaying body provided a dramatic visual complement to his performance, a tribute to Ornette Coleman, the avant-garde jazz musician who died in June at 85.According to the critic Howard Mandel, “Ornette didn’t play free jazz, what he did was he freed jazz.” Coleman, who played violin, trumpet and alto saxophone, looked beyond traditional harmonic rules, chord patterns and the American Songbook repertoire. He was skeptical of standard Western harmony and believed that even if musicians in an ensemble were playing in different keys, the overall result could be harmonious. He also stretched boundaries while writing for players of other genres, exploring his ideas about harmony and structure outside the jazz sphere. In the 1980s he collaborated with Mr. Goldstein, who is 79 and was presented here by Issue Project Room.In his similarly unorthodox career, Mr. Goldstein has developed unusual techniques and worked extensively on improvisation. The program opened with one of his “Soundings” improvisations: Flutterings, whispers, squeaks, scrapes, trills and long brush strokes made for an intriguing aural collage, with sounds ranging from delicate and ethereal to harsh and grating.In “Gentle Rain Proceeding Mushrooms,” a homage to John Cage, Mr. Goldstein vocalized as he repeated a pattern on his instrument that evoked a gentle patter of raindrops, pointing out to the audience afterward that the C major and A minor chords spelled C-A-G-E. A more lyrical line emerged in “My feet is tired, but my soul is rested,” inspired by a Rosa Parks quotation. The highlight of the concert was “Trinity,” a suite of pieces that Coleman composed for Mr. Goldstein in 1985.Mr. Goldstein played it as a duo, partnering with a recording of himself performing the work. The lyrical lines of the recording were colorfully juxtaposed with his unpredictable live interjections, improvisatory flights and pitch-bending modulations, proving Coleman’s theory that seemingly conflicting keys and patterns can prove unexpectedly compatible.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.