In the annals of Broadway history, the 1921 musical “Shuffle Along” holds a special, if little-known, place: it was the rare all-black show, and started the career of Josephine Baker, among others.The show was an unexpected hit and attracted racially diverse audiences, but was belittled by some critics; The New York Times reviewer called it “extremely crude — in writing, playing and direction.” By contemporary standards, it remains problematic: some actors performed in blackface and the score included a song about how lighter-skinned black women are more attractive than women with darker skin.Now three of the theater world’s biggest names — all of them African-American – have decided to revisit the show with a Broadway musical exploring the backstory of the original. The show will be called “Shuffle Along, or, The Making of the Musical Sensation of 1921 and All That Followed.”Audra McDonald, whose six Tony Awards make her the most honored actor in Tony history, will star as Lottie Gee, the actress who played the female lead in the original. George C. Wolfe, a storied director who has won two Tonys, will write the book and direct; and Savion Glover, the acclaimed tap dancer who has also won a Tony, will be the choreographer.Mr. Wolfe said that the musical will focus on how “Shuffle Along” was created by vaudeville veterans Flournoy Miller and Aubrey Lyles, with music and lyrics by Eubie Blake and Noble Sissle. The show arrived in New York deeply in debt after a rough pre-Broadway tour, and succeeded despite, or perhaps because of, differing substantially from the other shows then running; the cast briefly included not only Baker but also Paul Robeson, and the audience included Fanny Brice, George Gershwin, Langston Hughes and Al Jolson.“I’m in love with these characters, and I’m in love with their bravery – brilliant, astonishing, extraordinary artists created a show that redefined rhythm and entertainment and vitality on Broadway,” Mr. Wolfe said on Thursday. “The defiant creative spirit that is reaching for you – that’s what this show is about.”The musical is scheduled to open April 21, 2016 at the Music Box Theater, and is to be produced by Scott Rudin, one of the most successful contemporary producers of movies and stage works.“Shuffle Along” succeeded in part because of its jazz stylings and chorus of female hoofers, but two Broadway revivals, in 1933 and 1952, closed within days of opening. Mr. Glover said that he would seek to recapture some of the dance energy of the original.“It was a groundbreaking moment – they were creating these dances in the streets,” Mr. Glover said. “I’m hoping to reignite that sense of exuberance – that sense of joy through expression.”Mr. Wolfe, who has helped create several other historical productions, including the 1992 Broadway musical “Jelly’s Last Jam,” said he had been looking for a new project to do with Mr. Glover, with whom he worked on “Bring in da Noise, Bring in da Funk,” and thought of “Shuffle Along,” with which he had long been fascinated.“I was intrigued because in 1921 it was such a significant show, and then it got buried by history,” he said. “How does something that significant get lost?”