Season 3, Episode 7: ‘Walter Taffet’ Здравствуйте, товарищи. Я рада, что вы сегодня вечером с нами.
(Greetings, Comrades. I’m glad you are joining us tonight.)More and more each week, young people are in the line of fire. We are told that Mischa, Philip’s son, is a paratrooper, and there is a clear danger that Paige might be the next to jump, or be pushed, out of a plane, metaphorically speaking. Will she ever meet the young man who is her half-brother?Hans and his fellow students fighting apartheid are essentially another variety of child soldiers, although they may be less at risk than the African National Congress members and the young militants risking their lives to upset white minority rule in South Africa. Hans, not yet fully trained, is being tested early on thanks to his own ingenuity in ferreting out an apartheid supporter on the George Washington campus. It is chilling to hear Elizabeth and Philip discuss whether Hans can handle the operation to lure out Eugene Venter, a high-ranking South African intelligence officer. The “bait,” as Philip puts it, is Reuben Ncgobo, No. 3 on the Most Wanted List in South Africa, who is sent in by Moscow when he was en route home to see his wife and four sons after 18 months away from home. He hopes his boys will become fighters too.Hans sounds so sincere and willing in his condemnation of the young Afrikaners working to preserve the prison of apartheid, and I hope the foreshadowing from Philip — “As long as we keep him far enough back we should be fine” — doesn’t mean Hans’s time with us will be limited. Stan’s still surly son, Matthew, on the other hand, does not seem ready to enlist, although he does eat with his father and the two actually have a conversation.  Henry’s word of the week: discourse. (Next week: dialectic?)And then there’s Kimmy.The trouble with Martha.
How much has she figured out? She was responsible for the pen in Agent Gaad’s office, right?  And what was the device she was deconstructing in her purse in a ladies room stall? (And who came in wearing the black pumps?)Does Philip always ask where Martha’s purse is? And wouldn’t he know if the small camera or sensor she had dismantled was a device that came from him? Or is she spying for someone else, too? What was she thinking as she stroked her little handgun?Truth and dare.
The moment in bed in which Philip tells Elizabeth about his son is another beautiful tableau. The lighting in the usually dark bedroom outlines their faces against the pillows. Her apology about sneaking Paige off to Kenilworth allows Philip to open up about Mischa. They both look so sincere and open. (Or is Elizabeth thinking, now I have some leverage; now he will feel the tug of empathy). The pens have ears. 
And what are we to make of Mr. Taffet, “from O.P.R,” presumably the Justice Department’s Office of Professional Responsibility? Why did he and Agent Gaad take Martha into a computer center of the Counterintelligence division to ask her a question? Was that a trick to give the agent with headphones and the Swiffer-like detector a chance to go through her purse?Stan on Stan.
Noah Emmerich, who plays Stan, directed this episode, and Stan got lots of camera time, as did Campbell’s Chunky Soup and Chevrolet vehicles.Did anyone catch Stan’s paperback, the one Matthew flipped over on the kitchen island? Was it a Tom Clancy? What else would an almost newly single but deep in denial F.B.I. agent with heaps of spare time choose to read?Closing in.
I almost didn’t recognize Philip in that black wig and rock star eyeliner in the final scene. He wears it well, but it’s a good thing he didn’t introduce himself to Kimmy in that get-up or he would have a posse of groupies attached to him at all times.This entire episode was a triumph of costume and accessory that rivaled “Downton Abbey” for creativity and slavish fidelity to its period. The makeup, the costumes and above all the wigs were stunning. Martha’s hair, in the sort of sculpted arrangement you might see in on the heroine of some TCM morning movie, was perfect as she stood in the elevator beside the mysterious Walter Taffet.This episode may signify a return to the faster pace and sharpness of the earlier days of the show. This season we have been absorbed, but, with a few exceptions, were lulled into some kind of suburban complacency that focused more on the moral issues and less on conflict and action. This season Philip and Elizabeth definitely seem less hard-edged than they were before, when we were just getting to know them. But this time, with the driving Fleetwood Mac anthem “The Chain” playing as the rapid action unfolded, the show built up to a tense, satisfying finish. One question: who popped the delivery woman with the Afrikaner accent, leaving her feet dangling lifelessly over a in a pile of baguettes?In the final scene, though, why did Hans look so stunned by it all? Or was he facing down someone unseen out the car window?Memorable moments.When the tearful Martha opens the drawer where Philip keeps a few token sweater vests and digs out the Kama Sutra. The look she gives it, like a yearning farewell, was priceless. Stan saying: “Nina was a good person. Straightforward.” Well, Stan, that’s one way to look at it.Rabbits pulled out of hats.When Martha asks to see his apartment, Philip hesitates, but voilà, moments later they arrive at his tiny bachelor pad. It has wine, and what appears to be a wedding picture of him and Martha, even. Is this plausible? Is it further evidence of the K.G.B. real estate investment program? And how far away is it from the couple’s love nest at Martha’s?Didn’t Martha sound like Irina, mother of Mischa, when she asked why they could not live together like a normal couple?Beyond the neighborhood.Yes, you are correct, Comrades. The writers and actors and directors are manipulating us beautifully, and that’s part of the thrill of a show that operates at this level. The story line can take a sharp turn at any moment; we should expect it to. The current trajectory holds multiple possibilities. Until apartheid came into the picture, in the person of Hans (although it took a while to figure that out), this season has lacked emotional ties to any specific political issue involving the United States and Russia, unless you count the changing of the guard at the Kremlin or the Stealth bomber, neither of which has resonated much in popular opinion or brought out protesters in the Jenningses’ burb.Afghanistan turns out to be the geopolitical tangle with the most lasting impact, but in the show it feels distant until Gabriel’s mention of Philip’s son, and not just because the quality of the marijuana has dipped. Incorporating apartheid may give the show an urgency I didn’t even realize it has been lacking.Comments on the comments.AJ from the Midwest wins Comment of the Week. He  nailed it, simply by quoting the show:
“Gabriel: How’s Kim?
Philip: I think she nervous about a math test she has coming up.”And Amy from Denver, also quoting from the show, but with her own subtext translations, runs a close second:
“The K.G.B. knows nothing of American teenage girls of the 1980’s,” she wrote.And then:
“Philip is so ready to bolt from the K.G.B. Loved the discussion with Paige:
Philip: Be your own person! (don’t trust your mother)
Paige: Are you saying don’t go to church?
Philip: No! Church is great! Just don’t get pressured into other things (like the K.G.B.)
Paige: Dad, I don’t do drugs.
Philip:  This is hard. Just, think for yourself. (Your mother is evil and so is the K.G.B., and I love America.)Товарищи, держите ваши семьи близко, а врагов еще ближе.
(Comrades, keep your families close and your enemies closer.)