It was one of life’s small contradictions. On Wednesday night at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Annie Cohen-Solal, the author of “Mark Rothko: Toward the Light in the Chapel,” just published by Yale University Press as part of its “Jewish Lives” series, was presenting her view of the artist as a man of “constant displacements,” wedded to an artistic vision with the messianic goal of mending the world and deeply hostile to the commercial side of art.Two months from tomorrow, Christie’s will auction a 1958 Rothko, “No. 36 (Black Stripe),” one of his finest color-field works. The presale estimate is $30 million to $50 million.Ms. Cohen-Solal, who has written biographies of Jean-Paul Sartre and the art dealer Leo Castelli, offered an overview of Rothko and then sat down for questioning by Marla Prather, a curator of modern and contemporary art at the Met. “My approach is not that of an art historian, but a social historian,” Ms. Cohen-Solal said, laying out an interpretation of Rothko that was more attuned to ethics than aesthetics. “His evolution goes way beyond a simple matter of palette,” she said. “His was a profoundly intellectual project.”In writing her biography, Ms. Cohen-Solal made use of “The Artist’s Reality: Philosophies of Art,” a work of criticism written by Rothko in the early 1940s but not published until a decade ago. It does not touch on the artist’s own work, and Ms. Prather wanted to know the reason for Rothko’s lifelong aversion to analyzing his paintings. “I think it is something in the Jewish tradition,” Ms. Cohen-Solal said. “You don’t describe, you don’t say the word for God, you don’t elaborate.”Ms. Cohen-Solal concluded with a curious anecdote about Sartre, whom she met in Paris when she was 20. Expecting to hear a cascade of brilliant talk, she found herself butting in and finishing Sartre’s sentences for him, a bit of brass that earned her an invitation to tag along and meet Simone de Beauvoir. “With Sartre, I felt something I can only describe as empowerment,” she said. “I feel the same thing with Rothko.”