By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMARCH 12, 2015
10 P.M. (ABC) AMERICAN CRIME Thirty-six hours after the murder of Matt Skokie, his parents, Barb Hanlon (Felicity Huffman) and Russ Skokie (Timothy Hutton), encounter two of the suspects — the drug addicts Carter Nix (Elvis Nolasco) and Aubry Taylor (Caitlin Gerard) — at their arraignment. A third, the teenager Tony Gutiérrez (Johnny Ortiz), is placed is juvenile detention, while the fourth, Hector Tontz (Richard Cabral), is told that he will be extradited to Mexico. “This series is at heart a murder mystery — someone has been killed, and the show withholds who did it,” Alessandra Stanley wrote in The New York Times about this limited series, created by John Ridley, the Oscar-winning screenwriter of “12 Years a Slave.” “But solving the crime isn’t the point.” What matters “is not just what is said but also the prickly sting of what is left unstated,” she added. “Miscommunication, misunderstandings and, on occasion, a stab of ice-cold reality are all part of the bereavement and also the investigation. ‘American Crime’ is a depressing story told so skillfully that it’s almost impossible not to be happy to see it unfold.”3:10 P.M. (Encore) THE DA VINCI CODE (2006) Tom Hanks plays Robert Langdon, who after a murder at the Louvre sets out to unravel a mystery that could rock the foundations of Christianity, in this adaptation of the Dan Brown best seller. Audrey Tautou is Sophie Neveu, his police-agent sidekick whose connection to the crime is personal. And Ian McKellen is Sir Leigh Teabing, an absurd British researcher with a vested interest in the case. “A more acute sense of its own ridiculousness,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times, “would have given ‘The Da Vinci Code’ some of the lightness of an old-fashioned jet-setting Euro-thriller.”8 P.M. (NBC) DATELINE: THE REAL BLACKLIST Richard Engel investigates the 2006 death of Alexander V. Litvinenko, a former K.G.B. officer and critic of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, and Andrei K. Lugovoi, the Russian entrepreneur and former K.G.B. bodyguard accused of poisoning him with radioactive polonium 210.8 P.M. (CBS) THE BIG BANG THEORY Tension arises when a magazine neglects to mention that Leonard (Johnny Galecki) is a co-author of a paper credited to Sheldon (Jim Parsons). Mrs. Wolowitz’s life is celebrated with a final family dinner. In “The Odd Couple,” at 8:30, Oscar (Matthew Perry) and Felix (Thomas Lennon) each try to find Dani (Yvette Nicole Brown) a date to her high school reunion. And in “Mom,” at 9:30, Christy (Anna Faris) and Bonnie (Allison Janney) discover that the new boyfriend (David Krumholtz) of Violet (Sadie Calvano) is old enough to be her father.Advertisement10 P.M. (NBC) THE SLAP Connie (Makenzie Leigh) tries to counter the monotony of her life by deepening her relationship with Hector (Peter Sarsgaard). But she may have gone too far when she professes her love.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (IFC) PORTLANDIA When the taxidermy shop of Bryce (Fred Armisen) and Lisa (Carrie Brownstein) is torched, everyone blames the local weirdos, prompting the reformed oddball Chad (Seth Meyers) to offer his insight. Paul Reubens plays the lawyer defending the right to strange behavior.Advertisement10 P.M. (USA) DIG Peter Connelly (Jason Isaacs), an F.B.I. agent relocated to Jerusalem, continues his mission to find out who murdered a young American — while keeping ahead of his Israeli counterpart (Ori Pfeffer) — in what Mike Hale, writing in The Times, called “the latest post-‘Da Vinci Code’ thriller that combines a murder mystery with an ancient-history primer.”What’s Streaming NowAMERICAN SONGBOOK Jose Llana, who portrayed Ferdinand Marcos in the Public Theater rock musical “Here Lies Love,” performs at the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse at Lincoln Center in one of five concerts streamed live this month. At 8 p.m. (At lincolncenter.org/watch, americansongbook.org and broadwayworld.com.)FIRST PERSON Kristin Russo, a founder of the youth organization Everyone Is Gay, hosts this series, a collaboration of WNET and PBS Digital Studios exploring sexuality and gender identity. This episode, its second, features Vivek Shraya, the author of “She of the Mountains.” (youtube.com/firstpersonpbs)A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Thursday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.