By ALASTAIR MACAULAYOCT. 14, 2015
The subject of both works in the final program of New York City Ballet repertory this season is ebullient innocence. But George Balanchine’s two-act “Harlequinade” (1965) and Jerome Robbins’s “N.Y. Export: Opus Jazz” (1958) face in fascinatingly opposite directions. The older ballet, the Robbins, seems the more present-day because its jazz music, by Robert Prince, points to a New York we still recognize, whereas Balanchine’s, taking the score and scenario of a 1900 comedy ballet (“Les Millions d’Arlequin”) by the choreographer Marius Petipa and the composer Riccardo Drigo, looks back into the primary-color never-never land of the commedia dell’arte.These works show opposite views of human nature, too. The characters of the commedia realm of “Harlequinade” — led by the extrovert lover Harlequin and his pretty Columbine — are bright, fixed, unchanging, and they deliver their dances exuberantly straight to the audience. The people of “Opus Jazz” are still unformed, raw, discovering who they are, and they play less for observers than for one another. The dance language for “Harlequinade” is scintillatingly virtuoso ballet; “Opus Jazz” is danced in sneakers, with hips bumping and shoulders shaking, with hands sometimes stretched out low (like pianists’) and sometimes with palms open and fingers splayed out to the public.The music for each is engaging. Drigo’s piquant score abounds in the 3/4 and 4/4 meters of the late 19th century, with the melody of each number picked out in a different sonority. One serenade is celebrated. (in 1922, the star tenor Beniamino Gigli made a best-selling recording of it as “Notturno d’Amore.”) A pizzicato number has special charm, as does the woodwind-and-strings fragrance of Columbine’s wonderfully affectionate second-act solo variation. And, in one piece of incidental music in Act I (largely with Harlequin alone onstage), two groups of violins play as if on charmingly different wavelengths.The Prince score for “Opus Jazz” is diverse. Saxophone, percussion, muted brass all make individual impressions. Spirits range from low to high; some sections seem to have no pulse at all, just moods hanging in the air, while in others the pulse, intense, changes and changes again.AdvertisementJoaquin de Luz, who led Tuesday’s cast at the David H. Koch Theater, perhaps has no better role than Harlequin. His energy, virtuosity, timing, sunniness and charm are all wonderfully vivid. At the start of one solo, every big upbeat finds him cresting at the top of another new jump; at its end, when he spins flamboyantly with one leg extended, the greatest pleasure is the brio with which his instep always rises on the beat.As Columbine, Tiler Peck plays ideally with her own brilliance. Even when turning or jumping at top speed, she has time; she can linger during a slow tempo as if in love with each passing moment, and she strikes a position on point as if to let her whole body exhale into the air.Her glittering dark eyes, bright smile and sharp face, with its dimples and multiple planes, are all ideal for this role. As soon as we see her, we know who she is — and then she lets us know that we don’t. In her Act II solo, she switches continually between playing for the public and communing with herself; she seems to discover her own heart and then open it to us.AdvertisementSome of the best dances — and some of the most marvelous of Rouben Ter-Arutunian’s costumes — go to the children from the School of American Ballet. In one number, they keep arriving in position (bodies leaning forward), and then Balanchine end-stops the phrase with a big exchange of arm positions: a smart punch line that makes them startlingly adult.The dancers for “Opus Jazz” — as in a number of Robbins ballets — are taken from the company’s corps and soloist ranks; each registers individually. There’s a special fascination just now in watching Justin Peck (not related to Tiler) — a dancer in his 20s but already a choreographer of note far beyond the company — in this and all his roles. His height and expansiveness make a particular impression, and here his somewhat geeky appeal is combined with a surprising naïveté. Elsewhere, you watch Georgina Pazcoguin and Harrison Coll, with their uninhibited vitality, like people you know in your own neighborhood.Ashley Laracey and Craig Hall danced the somber “Passage for Two” duet on Tuesday with marvelous hunger. This may be their first encounter — their first relationship — and this relationship may never recur. Their quality of intimate need and first-time urgency is enthralling.“Harlequinade” and “N.Y. Export: Opus Jazz” continue in repertory through Saturday at the David H. Koch Theater; nycballet­.com.A version of this review appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Ballet Shoes and Sneakers  on Opposing Paths in Life      .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.