AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayAdmirers and detractors of Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger’s film “The Tales of Hoffmann,” from Offenbach’s opera, are equally vociferous. The newly restored edition, playing at Film Forum Friday through next Thursday, reminds us why. This 1951 film belongs to a bewildering number of categories. It’s lip-sync opera, multilayered meta-theater (indeed, a dizzyingly baroque exercise in overt artifice), kitsch extravaganza of luridly colored design (by Hein Heckroth) and keenly musical ballet.And what’s more, it’s an over-the-top example of 1950s neo-Romanticism tipping over into surrealism; it’s not merely Anglophone but terminally English (the ostentatious quaintness of several accents is its most dated feature); it’s steeped in ideas from Diaghilev’s Ballets Russes (the femme fatale entrancing the hero, the dolls whose poignancy and vivacity raise questions about reality); and it’s an audacious essay in film fantasy, sui generis in its inventions and its splicing of different arts.I love it except when I don’t. It’s crazy, twee, camp, exhilarating, trite, bold.“Tales of Hoffmann” followed the success of Powell and Pressburger’s “The Red Shoes,” and again its dance heroine is Moira Shearer. Though “Hoffmann” doesn’t have the obsessive fervor of “The Red Shoes,” it’s a much better demonstration of Shearer’s dancing. (She was often the first to say so.) She’s again teamed with the dance-mime stars Léonide Massine and Robert Helpmann; we also see again the ballerina Ludmilla Tcherina.Watching it again after many years, I’m startled to see just how pervaded by dance and choreography it is. Sometimes in small, scarcely dance moments, it captures the alchemy of movement meeting music better than anything in “Red Shoes.” No wonder: The choreographer is Frederick Ashton, one of the most tellingly musical choreographers of all time, and the conductor is Thomas Beecham, experienced in working with dance since the Diaghilev Ballets Russes, and with long experience with this opera. (His rhythmic élan is a source of life from the very opening bars.) Ashton also gives the film’s best performances, though only in supporting roles.Powell and Pressburger, Beecham and Ashton rearrange the story so that Stella, who inspires Hoffmann to envisage her as a succession of elusive or doomed heroines, is here a ballerina rather than an actress. Shearer plays Stella, as well as two of the four heroines in the Hoffmann tales dramatized here. The third heroine (for Hoffmann, the most destructive) is the Venetian courtesan Giulietta, performed by Tcherina, to whom Ashton gives one of the film’s most branding images. Dressed in a black body stocking, she descends a staircase with her open hands releasing twin streams of rose petals.The film overrides  the Prologue’s opening number — a chorus for spirits of wine and beer (“Glou, glou!”) — with an enchanted-dragonfly ballet. We see Stella as a mistress of theatrical illusion: This supple human dragonfly, in body tights, unfolds on one lily leaf and jumps across others. She’s also a femme fatale, destroying her mate by pushing him underwater. Hoffmann’s fate is there in a nutshell.When, still in the Prologue, Hoffmann tells his first story, the brief “Legend of Kleinzack,” to his co-drinkers, we see both teller and tale. The production’s dance spell tightens as the camera reveals the knocking knees and clicking heels of Hoffmann, Kleinzack and others as he calls the refrain “Click-clack! Click-clack!” Their legs turn in and out, as everyone joins in. Ashton himself is Kleinzack, the strange hunchback jester; Shearer (now in full-length medieval attire, her porcelain loveliness perfectly captured) is his remote, heartless beloved. And Ashton’s forlorn, strange, not-quite-human quality captures an oblique pathos at the heart of Hoffmann’s narratives.Shearer is also Olympia, the virtuoso doll in whom Hoffmann finds divine perfection. Ashton’s choreography, takes what he once called the brittle quality of Shearer’s dancing and encapsulates it in movement of coloratura intricacy and musical wit. Not only is this scene the film’s dance peak, but it’s also where Powell and Pressburger go to town on the meta-theater of Hoffmann’s multilayered story: Stage curtains lead to further curtains and more curtains.There are shots that capture Ashton, Helpmann and Massine in the same frame. (Helpmann, central throughout, is shown as a master of both timing and melodramatic ham.) No one plays a character of real flesh and blood — and that’s the point. Who are they and where are we? Ashton’s ultrafantastic Cochenille is both puppeteer and puppet, the strangest character of the film. When he looks straight into the camera, he has the sad button eyes of ballet’s most famous puppet, Petrouchka.Powell and Pressburger keep up their layers of artifice right to the end. In Hoffmann’s final story, Antonia is a singer on a Greek island; Hoffmann sails to her in a painted boat across a painted sea. Her studio opens up onto a Greek theater that expresses her thwarted theatrical ambitions.Dance keeps resurfacing. As the Venetian scene reaches its erotic climax, Tcherina-Giulietta slowly lifts her arms to frame her and Hoffmann’s heads; then suddenly, severely, she lowers them like a stroke of fate. Antonia, singing herself to death, spins and spins on the spot. When the tales are over, the opera’s haunting Barcarolle is played again while Hoffmann sees four Stellas, all of them Romantic sylphs danced by Shearer. She and her partner — who may or may not be another projection of Hoffmann — walk into the sunset. And yet another curtain falls.Advertisement