AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayWhat will happen next? Why is she falling back into his arms when he’s sitting there minding his own business? Who would have expected that man with his legs spread eagle on the floor to scurry across it? Why does that group of people stand motionless and then all switch position in a way that transforms them? Why did the mood just change and then change again because of movement alone?The dancing that occupies the stage of the Joyce Theater this week is just dancing. It prompts questions like those above; it supplies no answers. Nobody argues, nobody falls in love, nobody dies. Yet it’s pervaded by mystery, drama, wit and, above all, suspense. The choreographer is Merce Cunningham (1919-2009); and to watch this 75-minute “Event,” an anthology of his dances performed by the Centre National de Danse Contemporaine, from Angers, France, under the direction of Robert Swinston, is to see again the essential theatricality of Cunningham’s work. This program confirms he was one of the supreme choreographers of the 20th century; he remains the greatest choreographer of the 21st century.But it shows Cunningham was a master of theater, too. His work is difficult to watch in the way that the plays of Beckett, Ionesco and Pinter are — and rewarding in the same way. His choreography, too, might have been called the Theater of the Absurd because of its non sequiturs, its avoidance of psychological explanation or narrative completeness and its rhythmic concentration of language: in his case, dance language.His dances, though, are much more than studies in absurdism; at their heart is an ardent fascination in human energy, rigorously expressed. The mind behind it is always investigative, tough, wry, sensuous, making “What if?” experiments and conjuring unanticipated patterns and harmonies from them.There are eight dancers in this Angers group: four women, four men. They’re given a wide range of ensembles — the compositional fun of several trios and quartets often brings the mood into comedy — but it’s a particular pleasure to see the rich supply of male-female duets on display here. This is a form in which Cunningham’s invention flowered throughout his career (he trained in ballroom idioms in his youth); something in the juxtaposition of female and male inspired him, more or less invariably, to poetic drama.The duets here remind us that Cunningham often makes as much of a woman’s independence as her dependence. In an image during one pairing, the woman’s leg soars and her body plunges. The man kneels beside her like a safety net, framing her head and torso with his arms, but does not touch her.Several duets show us man and woman seemingly on different wavelengths: He partners her, or she takes a position while holding onto him, but they are facing in different directions, like a couple. They might at times be a couple who cohabit without always communicating.Sometimes, despite the cool performing manner, the movement is itself funny. In one of those duets in which man and woman seem at close quarters but in separate orbits, he’s holding her as if by accident; but suddenly he hops backward and pulls her into hopping after him. It’s so unexpected you want to laugh out loud, and yet the duet gives us no time for any single reaction.In other duets, man and woman are in sympathy, sharing the same impulse but expressing it in different parts of the body. He, kneeling, abruptly contracts his lower abdomen; she, balanced on one leg, bends it at the knee.The stage is decorated on three sides by strips of individually colored, patterned fabric that billow in a soft breeze; designs are by Jackie Matisse. The dancers are dressed attractively in shades of gray: mottled, sleeveless hip-length tunics and paler tights below. Music, played live by John King and Gelsey Bell, covers a spectrum of sound from tintinnabulations to surreal soprano warbling (Ms. Bell) and noises like an engine’s and propeller’s made strangely lyrical.Most of the eight performers deliver Cunningham with what may be called a French accent. All have good stage faces and feet, and carry themselves elegantly; no French dancer ever enters the stage as if by accident.In matters of rhythm, turnout of the legs, placement of the hips and use of the torso, at least four don’t have the rigor of the Cunningham dancers we used to watch when there was a Merce Cunningham Dance Company. (It closed at the end of 2011, following his behest as stated soon before his death in 2009.) But they’re all committed and personable, and one, Anna Chirescu, is first-rate; several would surely have caught Cunningham’s eye and respect. At all points, they give us the choreography; their manner is both selfless and self-revealing.I could identify excerpts from “Squaregame” (1976), “Fractions” (1978) and “Points in Space” (1986); a more complete list is supplied in the Joyce program. But an “Event” is not a quiz. Among the fascinations of this one was how it drew me back as aspects of Cunningham’s work in the 1980s. (Mr. Swinston joined the Cunningham company in 1980.) The Cunningham of that era often seemed to be conducting a private dialogue with the two choreographers who influenced him most, and from whose idioms he departed most strongly: Martha Graham and George Balanchine.Here again were Graham-related contractions of the torso, but without the Expressionist emphasis that in Graham so often becomes tedious; instead these contractions become pure dance. Here again were Balanchine choreographic devices — four men partnering one woman in an extreme version of supported adagio, for example — but tweaked, so that the men dance among themselves when not partnering her. How wonderful to be brought the great American dance past by dancers from France. Rich and enthralling fare.Compagnie CNDC-Angers continues through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-242-0800, joyce.org. Advertisement