AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen Holden“Goin’ to the chapel/and we’re gonna get married.” So goes the triumphant proclamation by the Dixie Cups in “Chapel of Love,” their blissfully naïve No. 1 hit in 1964. Sung by Maureen McGovern at 54 Below on Tuesday evening, it was the finale of a medley of six girl-group hits in her show “Sing, My Sisters, Sing!,” which celebrates female singers and songwriters.Much of the rest of the program was a chipper feminist assessment of mainstream pop told with songs mostly from the 1960s and ’70s by artists like Joni Mitchell, Carole King and Carly Simon. The show was largely about a generation of women waking up to reality after being fed happily-ever-after romantic bromides like “Chapel of Love.” Helen Reddy’s anthem, “I Am Woman,” sung slowly and assertively, was positioned in the program as pop’s declaration of female independence. Ms. McGovern, 65, is no longer a formidable vocal acrobat who can hit any note, float through several octaves and turn her voice into a jazz flute. But what has been lost — and it isn’t that much — has been replaced by a keener attention to lyrics and an increased dramatic forcefulness. One of the most recent and little-known selections, Dar Williams’s “The Babysitter’s Here,” was a child’s-eye view of a favorite babysitter whose heart is broken when her boyfriend insists she choose between him and going to college.As much as ever, Ms. McGovern suggests an American Julie Andrews, supplying a spoonful of sugar that can sweeten the bitterest medicine. Fortitude always trumps pain.Her minimal accompaniment, by Jeff Harris on piano and Jay Leonhart on bass, kept her voice front and center. The sugar turned to bombast near the end with renditions of “Battle Hymn of the Republic,” “Give Me Your Tired, Your Poor” and “America the Beautiful,” all of which have lyrics by women. But to hear Ms. McGovern deliver them without a trace of irony was a reminder in these cynical times that such musical war horses still stand for something. “Sing, My Sisters, Sing!” continues through Saturday at 54 Below, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 646-476-3551, 54below.com. Advertisement