By MATT WOLFMARCH 11, 2015
LONDON — It may seem strange at this late date to talk about a new Ralph Fiennes, given that this superb actor has been at the center of the British theater and screen industries for more than two decades.But watching Mr. Fiennes seize the stage and then hold it across more than three hours in the National Theater’s rousing new production of “Man and Superman,” I felt as if an actor I’d long-known had been reborn. It’s not just that a bearded Mr. Fiennes looks somewhat like George Bernard Shaw, whose mammoth, dizzyingly discursive play proves a supreme fit for an actor whose rhetorical skills are second to none.One senses in addition that the comic aplomb he brought to the concierge Gustave in “The Grand Budapest Hotel” has perhaps released from within Mr. Fiennes a giddiness that one wouldn’t have thought likely in view of the severity of his early work. Whatever the reason, the actor tears into the role of the loquacious bachelor Jack Tanner in Shaw’s rarely performed 1903 play with a gleeful abandon, turning a potentially long haul into a largely happy one.Presented in neatly filleted form by the director Simon Godwin — who proved a dab hand when he pared down Eugene O’Neill’s “Strange Interlude” at this same theater two summers ago — “Man and Superman” emerges afresh as an expansion upon “Much Ado About Nothing.”AdvertisementThe reluctantly coupled Benedick and Beatrice of Shakespeare’s comedy are here re-imagined as the proto-revolutionary Jack and the heiress Ann (Indira Varma), a coolly watchful younger woman who gets Jack as a guardian following her father’s death.A rather chilly Ms. Varma doesn’t always justify the play’s focus on Ann’s amorous well-being, while Nicholas le Prevost, playing Ann’s other and still-older guardian, displays a discomfort with Shaw’s language that only shows up Mr. Fiennes’s ease in bolder relief. Let loose on the play’s inversion of the “Don Juan” saga, Mr. Fiennes ensures that prolixity has rarely sounded so pungent. “I’m in the grip of the life force,” Jack tells Ann as his heart gives way, to which, on this evidence, the response can only be that it takes one to know one: Mr. Fiennes constitutes a theatrical force all his own.AdvertisementTwo other, more contemporary plays find their own ways of pushing the envelope.When “Closer” opened at the National Theater in 1997, Patrick Marber’s career-defining play became an immediate talking point because of a level of candor that suggested the sexual politics of Strindberg but with a much fouler mouth.The play transferred to Broadway in 1999 and was filmed by Mike Nichols in 2004. It has now returned to the London stage in a new production from David Leveaux that doesn’t quite locate the lethal abrasions to the heart that marked out Mr. Marber’s own original production. This staging runs at the Donmar Warehouse through April 4.A carnal roundelay between two couples who end up swapping allegiances, bedmates and — in one case — losing a life, the original “Closer” carried with it a real sense of anything-goes bravado.The impression was that Mr. Marber was leading us, well, closer than any dramatist had in years to the havoc men and women wreak upon one another, whether between the sheets or not.Have attitudes changed in the period since? Possibly, or maybe it’s just that the current cast on some fundamental level may be that little bit too polite. Whether or not one saw the formidable Ciaran Hinds originate the role of the dermatologist Larry in London and on Broadway, the part’s latest occupant, Rufus Sewell, doesn’t capture the thinly cloaked ferocity of a character struggling to conceal his inner caveman. Nor, on a technical level, was Mr. Sewell always audible at the performance caught — even to those of us seated in the second row.Playing the waiflike Alice, the stripper who inhabits the emotional center of the piece, Rachel Redford never entirely conveys the psychic wounds of someone whose whole being is in some sense a lie — however much all four of Mr. Marber’s personages say they value honesty above all.AdvertisementWithout the truth “we’re animals,” concludes the obituary writer Dan, a part to which a sad-eyed Oliver Chris brings an awareness of someone forced to embrace his own egotism.The abiding strength of Mr. Leveaux’s clinically chic staging — all shimmering surfaces and clean lines in Bunny Christie’s deliberately faceless set — is the impossibly beautiful Nancy Carroll as Anna, a photographer who knows a thing or two about life’s hard knocks. Heard early on using a particularly strong expletive as a verb, Ms. Carroll’s Anna gives as good as she gets as she attempts to hold her corner amid a landscape in which hate is easier to come by than love.Yet, for all this foursome’s soul-shredding and game-playing — the now-celebrated Internet chatroom encounter between Larry and Dan included — I felt as if I were on the outside looking in. “Kind is dull,” observes Dan dismissively, and while Mr. Leveaux’s version of “Closer” is never once that, it nonetheless ought to feel a lot more dangerous.The Canadian playwright Brad Fraser has built an entire career on dispensing with theatrical niceties, so it’s not surprising to encounter in his latest London opening, “Kill Me Now,” at least two human interactions (not to be revealed here) that, I suspect, have never been shown on a stage before. The play is showing at the Park Theater through March 29.The narrative is structured around a role-reversal whereby a father who is first seen caring for his disabled teenage son himself falls gravely ill — thereby placing the onus of parenthood on a “misshapen” (that’s the play’s word) adolescent who is confronting the growing pains that accompany adulthood.Neither Mr. Fraser’s writing nor Braham Murray’s production holds back on the parent-child interplay that finds Jake helping bathe his beloved boy, Joey, and agreeing to do rather more than that as Joey’s sexual curiosity begins to kick in. The adolescent has, for instance, discovered the world of online porn.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The writing asks a lot of a cast headed by Greg Wise — the film actor best known as Willoughby in Ang Lee’s 1995 screen adaptation of “Sense and Sensibility” — and Oliver Gomm as father and son. Mr. Wise, here returning to the stage after many years away, looks in far better shape than the character as written: Jake’s worries about love handles would appear to be unfounded. (He is also considerably older than the part would appear to call for, but should we all be aging so well.)I can’t say I was at any point moved by “Kill Me Now,” which seems far too calculated in both its details and its overriding remorselessness to allow for tears. (The family surname, believe it or not, is Sturdy.) But all involved give themselves over to the unyielding material with total commitment, and for many, that fact will be what counts.Man and Superman.  Directed by Simon Godwin. National Theater/Lyttelton. Through May 17.Closer.  Directed by David Leveaux. Donmar Warehouse. Through April 4.Kill Me Now.  Directed by Braham Murray. Park Theater. Through March 29.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.