AdvertisementSupported byBy Raphael MinderMADRID — Around 1930, Federico García Lorca, the Spanish poet and playwright, decided to write “El Público” (The Public), a work with controversial themes for the time, including homosexuality, that he himself called “impossible theater.” The play was “very difficult and frankly unperformable,” Lorca wrote in a letter. “But in 10 years’ time, it will be a huge success, you’ll see.”Lorca never got to see his play performed. He was executed by Gen. Francisco Franco’s troops in August 1936, a month after the Spanish Civil War started and shortly after handing over a manuscript of his play to a friend, with instructions that it should be destroyed after his death. Instead, an incomplete manuscript of the play was eventually unearthed and first performed in Europe in the 1980s, but without drawing the kind of success that Lorca predicted or that “The House of Bernarda Alba” and many of his other plays have had. “El Público” has not been performed in Spain since 1987, while in Britain, the work sparked a political debate over whether to subsidize plays promoting homosexuality.Now, “El Público” has been transformed into an opera, which recently had its premiere at Teatro Real in Madrid and runs through Friday. Gerard Mortier, who was artistic director of the theater, made it his mission to transform the play into an opera, selecting a Spanish composer, Mauricio Sotelo, for his project in 2010, shortly after taking the helm of the opera house. Mr. Mortier also never got to see his project on stage because he died of cancer a year ago, shortly after leaving Madrid amid a dispute over the appointment of his successor. (The production has received strong reviews from Spanish opera critics, who also noted, however, that some members of the audience walked out during the intermission.)Lorca’s work uses the concept of staging a play within a play to interlace the themes that are the “two pillars” of his work, said Mr. Sotelo, namely finding sexual freedom while also “shedding the mask of theater and life.”“El Público” tells the story of a married theater director, Enrique, who is preparing a production of Shakespeare’s “Romeo and Juliet,” but is tortured by visions of his former lover, Gonzalo, who pushes Enrique to reject theatrical and social conventions and embrace his real loves by directing the kind of “theater under the sand” he truly believes in.When Enrique finally stages his play with Juliet played by a 15-year old boy, the reaction of the public is so violent that it escalates into a revolution. “All true theater has the strong stench of rotting moon,” one of Lorca’s characters says in “El Público.”Even though Mr. Mortier left Madrid in controversial circumstances, the Teatro Real has continued with the production that he put together. At a presentation last month before a rehearsal, the Teatro Real’s director, Joan Matabosch, paid homage to the artistic vision of his predecessor, including his determination to turn “El Público” into an opera, even if the play itself should be considered “one of the most enigmatic works of Spanish surrealism.”The author of the opera’s libretto, Andrés Ibáñez, went on to argue during the same presentation that turning one of Lorca’s most “obscure” works into an opera was something of a breakthrough, given that “Surrealism never went well with music.” He recalled that André Breton, the French writer and founder of Surrealism, “hated music.”In fact, Mr. Sotelo said, Mr. Mortier believed music was the best vehicle to allow an audience to try to come to grips with a play that he himself had loved but struggled to understand. The composer suggested at the presentation that he was selected “perhaps because of my relation with flamenco and the poetry of Lorca.”He took more than four years to compose “El Público.” Even if it is his own interpretation of Lorca’s work, he said that Mr. Mortier had given some specific instructions, down to the scenography of how to incorporate a folding screen in the first act, which various characters then cross in fantastical theater costumes and women’s clothing, made by Wojciech Dziedzic, a Polish costume designer.Mr. Sotelo insisted that his composition “is not a work of flamenco but one intrinsically linked to the European opera tradition.” Still, one of the most striking features of “El Público” is the way that Mr. Sotelo blended opera arias and duets with elements of flamenco, particularly its soul-searching “cante jondo,” performed by two flamenco singers who, alongside a flamenco dancer, become the three white horses, Lorca’s representation of sexual desire.Mr. Sotelo also ventures beyond classical opera by adding a component of electronic music and using a sound system made up of 35 loudspeakers spread around the opera house. He said he wanted to recreate the kind of theater acoustics promoted by Vitruvius Pollio, an architect of ancient Rome, who urged theaters to use overturned amphora to improve sound.The Madrid premiere was performed by Klangforum Wien, an Austrian chamber orchestra that specializes in contemporary music, and was led by Pablo Heras-Casado, who was named guest conductor of the Teatro Real in September.Mr. Ibáñez kept in his libretto some of Lorca’s obscene or provocative language. At one point, one of the characters argues that “the anus is the punishment of man.”Such statements proved particularly controversial in Britain, when an English version of “El Público” was staged in 1988 at the Theater Royal Stratford East. As a result, some members of Parliament demanded the withdrawal of government subsidies to the theater, Mr. Ibáñez noted.Still, he said that Lorca’s goal was not to scandalize but to hold up a mirror in which the audience could confront its own fears, desires and prejudices.And if Lorca had left behind a completed manuscript, it would probably have been a much clearer text, and would have featured “less music and more literature,” said Mr. Ibañez, and therefore would perhaps not have been the “perfect candidate” for an opera that Mr. Mortier first saw in it.Advertisement