An occasional series on vintage comics.Sure, Steve Ditko was a creator of the Amazing Spider-Man, perhaps the most crucial pillar of the Marvel Universe, and Dr. Strange, one of its quirkiest heroes. But it can be argued that the short horror, fantasy and science fiction tales he drew in the 1950s and early ’60s are a more pure distillation of his cartooning talent. Two new books — “Dripping With Fear: The Steve Ditko Archives Volume 5” (Fantagraphics) and “Ditko’s Shorts” (Yoe Books/IDW Publishing) — reinforce the notion that Mr. Ditko, more than any other comic book artist, was a master of Cold War paranoia.Mr. Ditko’s idiosyncratic drawings (many of his characters look as if they’ve just fled some small 1940s Eastern European kingdom) ooze with dread, terror and mistrust in “Dripping With Fear.” The more than 40 stories in “Fear,” most of them printed by cut-rate Charlton in 1958, dabble in the usual comics hackwork of that decade: robot uprisings and the lust for forbidden and arcane knowledge, alternate dimensions and intergalactic travel.But for Mr. Ditko, who was born in 1927 in Johnstown, Pa., writers’ predictable plots were simply rickety scaffolds upon which to hang a wild and deep Expressionism that was unlike anything seen in comics before. And though Mr. Ditko specialized in the fantastic, his stories were often grounded in the gruff blue-collar snarl of penny-ante cheats, thieves and liars. His villains want to take over the docks, not the world. In these nearly forgotten stories, Mr. Ditko excels at thugs, pugs and mystics, old salts and mad scientists. Working the fog and shadows, his characters, in their trench coats and fedoras, are often hiding their true faces, depending on cloaks and masks to navigate Mr. Ditko’s treacherous ’50s.The best of Mr. Ditko’s drawings here point to a haunted inner life of cobwebs, cracked windows and stairways to nowhere — chiaroscuro not as a technique of art, but as a way of life.His singular magic is even apparent in “Ditko’s Shorts,” which reprints nearly 40 of his one-, two- and three-page stories, mostly from the ’50s. The bulk of these tales were probably meant as filler to pad out a comic book whose page count had come up short. But Mr. Ditko generally lavished the same attention on these orphans as he did on his longer, higher-profile work. “He never cheated his readers by taking an easy way out,” Fester Faceplant, a Charlton historian, writes in his introduction. And the book’s editor, Craig Yoe, insists that “Ditko’s less is as good as Alan Moore” at length.Even in these half-a-note riffs, the reader glimpses prime Ditko, what Mr. Faceplant calls “the psychotropic infinities of other dimensions” and “the barren and otherworldly wastelands of his planets and moons.”But “Ditko’s Shorts,” too, illustrates the artist’s decline. The handful of stories here from the mid-’60s forward present an artist whose once sharp line has gone to flab, whose intensity has waned. Mr. Ditko’s later work represents a sad coda to the career of an artist who in the early ’60s helped establish the visual vocabulary of the Marvel Universe, and whose horror and fantasy work at least equaled that of his peers who drew for EC comics in the 1950s.