By JON PARELESOCT. 14, 2015
Everything is awhirl in Panda Bear’s music. His concert on Tuesday evening at the Bowery Ballroom, starting a three-night stand there at the beginning of the 35th annual CMJ Music Marathon, was dizzying, with eyes open or eyes closed.Panda Bear — a member of Animal Collective whose real name is Noah Lennox — performed solo behind an electronic setup with prominently dangling patch cords to show off analog components. He actually started during intermission following the opening band, nonchalantly stepping onstage to activate a sustained, droning chord with perpetual-motion inner parts, reminiscent of Lou Reed’s “Metal Machine Music,” as the sold-out crowd continued its conversations.Once the lights went down, and Panda Bear reappeared, the video screen behind him began flashing brightly colored images in constant motion, augmented by strobe lights. The images metamorphosed from sweet to grotesque, from abstractions to human figures that were multiplied again into Busby Berkeley patterns.And the music offered loop after loop and loop within loop: often merry major-key tootles and tinkles and squeaks, like a carousel in overdrive or a wind chime in a gale. In a voice that merged the most ebullient moments of Brian Wilson with the nervy insistence of David Byrne, Panda Bear sustained and repeated melodies that could be bubble gum choruses or something like mantras — a show of stamina that was equally determined and joyful.AdvertisementWhat he was singing, in repeated lines amid the loops, were memos to himself, paradoxical thoughts and existential admonitions: “It don’t mean I’ll do it like you want me to/But it do mean I’ll do it like you need me to,” he sang in “Crosswords,” from his latest album, “Panda Bear Meets the Grim Reaper” (Domino).Though the songs were built on instrumental and vocal repetition, the set was diverse, pivoting from 1960s pop to hip-hop to a ballad accompanied by harp arpeggios. Pushing elements of pop to a conceptual extreme, Panda Bear makes the kind of music that once relied largely on college radio to find an audience, making him an apt booking for the start of the CMJ Music Marathon, a showcase of more than 1,000 artists at clubs across Manhattan and Brooklyn. CMJ, which started in 1978 as a newsletter called College Media Journal, has been outflanked — like college radio — by the Internet, and the marathon has long been overshadowed by the spring behemoth in Austin, Tex., South by Southwest.AdvertisementThe pleasures of Panda Bear’s music were only heightened in a club that he could fill with sound and overload with strobes. “Surfer’s Hymn,” in which every flashing light seemed to coordinate with some madly plinking virtual percussion, left the audience dazed, blinking and happy.A music review on Thursday about Panda Bear, at the Bowery Ballroom in Manhattan, misstated the title of a song he performed. It is “Crosswords,” not “Crossroads.”Panda Bear performs through Thursday at the Bowery Ballroom, Manhattan; cmj.com/marathon.A version of this review appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Chords  of Color, Drips of Sound.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.