Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny
Royal Opera House.
Through April 4.Bertolt Brecht and Kurt Weill’s 1930 parable charts the fortunes of several citizens of Mahagonny — a corrupt, capital-driven city in the imaginary “Amerika” where men are put to death for crimes like failing to pay their bar bills. Brecht and Weill intended the opera as a socialist screed and a Nazi-sparked riot broke out at its premiere in Leipzig. The Royal Opera’s associate director of opera, John Fulljames, directed this production in collaboration with the designer Es Devlin. (Read Michael White’s review of the opera.) A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Toho Studios: Innovative Filmmakers in Setagaya
Setagaya Art Museum.
Through April 19.Storyboards, photographs, sketches and period posters are on view in this wide-ranging exhibition about Toho Studios — the legendary Japanese film company that produced “Seven Samurai” and “Godzilla.” The show provides a thorough history of the still-extant studio using scaled-down models and materials for its creations. A copy of the “Godzilla” set is on view in the museum’s lobby. Lollapalooza South America
Various venues.
Through March 29.Every summer, the Chicago-based music festival Lollapalooza attracts massive crowds to Grant Park in the city’s downtown. Audiences in Latin America can get their own taste of the festival during its brief South American tour. (The festival held its first South American event in Chile in 2011.) The festivities kick off this weekend in Santiago before traveling to Buenos Aires (March 21 to 22) and São Paulo (28 to 29). Acts include chart-topping names like Pharrell Williams, the D.J. Calvin Harris and the indie pop group Foster the People. The Stedelijk Museum and the Second World War
Stedelijk Museum.
Through May 31.On the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II, the Stedelijk is holding an exhibition exploring its own complex relationship with the war. The show weaves together work from the museum’s collection — by artists like van Gogh and Matisse — with history from the era, laying bare the museum’s complicated legacy: In the 1930s, the Stedelijk staged defiant exhibitions of modernist works labeled as “degenerate art” by the Nazis, but during the German occupation of the Netherlands the museum staged propaganda exhibitions. Pierre Bonnard. Painting Arcadia
Musée d’Orsay.
March 17-July 19.The French painter Pierre Bonnard (1867-1947) dabbled in most of the 20th century’s major painting movements — including Cubism, Fauvism and Surrealism. His real passion, though, was the Impressionistic use of color. This exhibition brings together works from across his career, including paintings of his wife, Marthe, who had an obsession with cleanliness, tidying herself in the bathroom.David Lynch: Between Two Worlds
Gallery of Modern Art.
Through June 7.The filmmaker David Lynch has produced a steady output of fine art throughout his career, much of which remained unknown to the broader public until a string of recent shows. This exhibition offers prints, photographs, mixed media and some video artworks by the artist, many of which bear the deranged, Lynchian quality familiar to those who know his films.Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker: Work/Travail/Arbeid
WIELS Contemporary Art Center.
March 20-May 17.For this world premiere event, the curator Elena Filipovic invited the choreographer Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker to create a new dance work that would incorporate the strictures and structure of a museum exhibition. The resulting piece works much like a fine art display — visitors can come and go as they please and entry costs as much as a museum ticket. The content, though, is all dance: Up to seven dancers and six musicians will perform nonstop for nine weeks during the museum’s opening hours. The exhibition is set to travel to Paris and London after it closes here.Videonale.15
Kunstmuseum Bonn.
Through April 19.The Israeli artist Shelly Nadashi won this year’s Videonale for “A Hidden Quiet Pocket,” a film depicting a massage that evolves from a soothing activity into something violent and erotic as the person being massaged describes a luxury apartment that she owns. The Videonale, now in its 15th edition, focuses on the promotion of young, emerging artists. Alongside Ms. Nadashi’s film are the 37 other works nominated for the Videonale prize, most of which were made by relative unknowns. A series of parallel events, including screenings of student projects at citywide venues, takes place throughout March. Annemarie Heinrich: Intenciones Secretas
MALBA.
March 20-July 6.The photographer Annemarie Heinrich (1912-2005) was born in Germany but emigrated to Argentina as a young woman, where she spent much of her life chronicling the country’s celebrities in lush black-and-white photographs that earned her a strong reputation there. This exhibition brings together around 50 of her more personal works, including self-portraits and nudes, and examines her legacy as a precursor to mainstream feminist artists. It shows alongside two other exhibitions at the museum, “Experienca Infinita,” dedicated to experimental artists, including Pierre Huyghe, Tino Sehgal and Elmgreen & Dragset; and a solo show by the video, performance and installation artist Osías Yanov. 