AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael WhiteLONDON — The Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, has been promoting its current season with the line “Life Reimagined”: an idea that puzzles when applied to most of the repertory coming up. This includes the Kurt Weill/Bertolt Brecht collaboration “Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny,” which opened on Tuesday in a new staging by John Fulljames and new English translation by Jeremy Sams. This is a piece whose chronicling of modern life is so exact, it functions more like reportage than reimagining.   Written in the closing years of the Weimar Republic as a sermon against decadent times, “Mahagonny” spins the dark fantasy of a world where anything goes, all appetites are catered for (to excess) and the only punishable crime is running out of money. Fugitives from justice set up this supposed utopia in a desert specified as somewhere in “Amerika” (which might suggest Las Vegas, except this is a dream-Amerika that for a 1920s German merely meant “a place I’ve never been to and don’t like the sound of”). For a while it thrives, but then collapses when a Messianic figure challenges the system, fails to pay his bar bills and is executed.Had there been some Christian motivation to the narrative, this death could have provided “Mahagonny” with salvation. But salvation wasn’t on the Brecht-Weill agenda. As their text insists, there’s no help for these people. Should there be any doubt as to who they might be, this production points a video camera at the auditorium and relays the information to an onstage screen. Yes, it declares, it’s you: the bankers, C.E.O.s and city traders in the stalls.But there were problems with the Royal Opera production, which runs until April 4. If Brecht or Weill had been operating that camera, they’d have meant it, investing the gesture with such visceral sincerity that the stalls would have emptied and a lot of London bankers not shown up for work the next morning, too disturbed by the sight of their own faces onstage. But as operated by a Covent Garden stagehand under instructions from Mr. Fulljames, it meant little. The onscreen faces were blurred, to avoid offense. And like so much of the show, it came with a sense of punches being pulled. Of not daring to bite the hands that feed.When “Mahagonny” had its premiere in 1930, after a long process of development from a dramatized song-cycle of 1927, it was staged according to the Brechtian principles of “epic theater,” which sacrificed human interest for socio-political discourse and incorporated the display of lecture-like texts to remind the audience that they were there to be instructed as well as entertained.At Covent Garden, Mr. Fulljames follows that device in a more high-tech way than Brecht could have envisaged, with screeds of polemic video projected onto the set. But his lectures come tempered with awkward humor that encourages the audience not to take any of this too seriously. You may be watching something that damns you for perpetuating a consumerist, corruptly money-driven way of life, it says, but don’t feel so bad that you avoid the Champagne bar during intermission.This critic couldn’t help but think that Covent Garden’s marketing department had the final say on what we saw and heard. And the result was toothless, tame: The sharp bite of Brecht’s intentions softened so the bourgeoisie were only mildly shocked.To give him credit, Mr. Fulljames told the story clearly and succinctly — “Mahagonny” stagings can be messy in their efforts to depict depravity — with some impressive stage pictures and an adroit handling of chorus movement. One of Britain’s bright young hopes for opera, he also knows his way around Weill, having made his name with a production of the composer’s love-letter to America, “Street Scene” (in some ways the antithesis of “Mahagonny”) for his own small-scale touring company The Opera Group.But that success on a small scale is part of the problem with his latest show. It has ideas that would work well in a confined space where the action spilled into the audience’s collective lap. But at Covent Garden it feels lost, low-impact, lacking in energy and slow. The production fails to cope with the fragmented, stop-start way of Brechtian theater, where the parts are often more than the sum.Played in English — which seems to be a creeping trend with Covent Garden — it also loses much of the flavor of the 1920s German cabaret culture out of which the piece was formed: the smoky voices and the rasping purr of Lotte Lenya and her kind. The cast on Tuesday was comparatively bland, led by performances from Kurt Streit, Anne Sofie von Otter, Willard W. White and Christine Rice that were committed but not special.Musically, a piece like “Mahagonny” challenges the settled culture of a major opera company, not because it’s difficult but because it’s different. You don’t often see a banjo or bandoneon listed on a Covent Garden credit sheet; and the sound world of 1920s urban dance-forms — the foxtrots and tangos that Nazi Germany would later dismiss as “asphalt music” — demands a response that isn’t necessarily in the DNA of opera-house instrumentalists.Conducted by Mark Wigglesworth, the players here did well enough but without the panache it takes to bring the score to life. It mirrored what was happening onstage: no edge, no danger, too decorous. Brecht would have called it “culinary,” his word for opera with its gloves on. In a piece like this, either the gloves come off or it’s a wasted effort. Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny.  Directed by John Fulljames. Royal Opera House, London. Through April 4. Advertisement