AdvertisementSupported byBy Alec M. Priester10:30 A.M. (Encore) HOOSIERS (1987) Norman Dale (Gene Hackman) is the new basketball coach in a small Indiana town in this tale of competition and redemption set in the early 1950s. His unorthodox coaching style initially rankles the townspeople and alienates the players but ultimately proves successful. Dennis Hopper, in an Oscar-nominated role, plays Shooter Flatch, an alcoholic who helps coach the team. “Who could resist a tiny Middle Western town where the barber shop is called Rooster’s and the game of basketball is foremost on every mind?” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times about this sports classic, directed by David Anspaugh. “Probably no one, and the quaintly innocent ‘Hoosiers’ is irresistible in much the same way.”7 P.M. (TBS) SEINFELD Kramer (Michael Richards) has a plan to get a refund on a stereo whose warranty has expired. George (Jason Alexander) experiences a comedy of errors in the course of getting his photos developed. The ornery reputation of Elaine (Julia Louis-Dreyfus) makes it difficult for her to receive medical treatment. And Jerry (Jerry Seinfeld) is suspicious of a package without a return address.8 P.M. (TNT) THE DARK KNIGHT RISES (2012) In this final installment of Christopher Nolan’s Batman trilogy, Bruce Wayne (Christian Bale) has retreated to his mansion after taking the blame for the death of Harvey Dent, the beloved district attorney, in the preceding film. He returns to fighting crime as Batman after Police Commissioner Gordon (Gary Oldman) is kidnapped by Bane (Tom Hardy), who means to destroy Gotham City. Batman is aided by John Blake (Joseph Gordon-Levitt) and Selina Kyle (Anne Hathaway) in his efforts to thwart Bane and save Gotham. “It’s an old, familiar tale that Mr. Nolan, in between juggling the cool bat toys, demure kisses, hard punches and loud bangs, has layered with open and barely veiled references to terrorism, the surveillance state and vengeance as a moral imperative,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times.8:45 P.M. (IFC) DAZED AND CONFUSED (1993) Richard Linklater (“Boyhood,” “Before Sunrise”) directs this coming-of-age story set on the last day of high school in a Texas town in 1976. The energetic narrative features an ensemble cast including Matthew McConaughey, Parker Posey, Ben Affleck, Adam Goldberg and Milla Jovovich. “The actors bounce off one another with crazy riffs and cosmic observations, some of them unexpectedly funny,” Ms. Maslin wrote in The Times. “ ‘Dazed and Confused’ has an enjoyably playful spirit, one that amply compensates for its lack of structure.”9 P.M. (CUNY) TIMESTALKS The documentarian Alex Gibney and the journalist Lawrence Wright discuss “Going Clear: Scientology and the Prison of Belief,” their new HBO documentary, based on Mr. Wright’s book, which examines the Church of Scientology through profiles of former church members including Paul Haggis, the Oscar-winning filmmaker, and Mike Rinder, a former senior executive in the organization, who are also on hand. “Third Person” (2014), Mr. Haggis’s latest film, centered on three love stories set in Paris, Rome and New York, is shown at 9 p.m. on Starz.10 P.M. (FOX) FOX NEWS REPORTING: UNHOLY WAR — THE MARCH OF ISIS In this one-hour special, Bret Baier examines the Islamic State and its regional impact.11 P.M. (HBO) VICE Thomas Morton visits Ferguson, Mo., after the grand jury decision not to indict Darren Wilson, the police officer who killed Michael Brown. He then goes to Oakland, Calif., to examine the militarization of American police forces. Suroosh Alvi travels from El Salvador through Mexico to investigate the gang violence causing many Central Americans to emigrate to the United States through a train system called the Beast.WHAT’S STREAMING NOWAZIZ ANSARI: LIVE AT MADISON SQUARE GARDEN Mr. Ansari (“Parks and Recreation,” “Human Giant”) riffs on immigration, relationships and gender inequality in this sold-out stand-up routine, his second for Netflix after “Buried Alive.” (netflix.com)Advertisement