By LAUREL GRAEBERMARCH 12, 2015
Math Celebrations What’s special about March 14?It’s not the Ides of March, so fateful for Julius Caesar. It’s not the longed-for spring equinox, which arrives next Friday.Hint: Think of the date in numerals.You’ll see that 3.14 is pi, the ratio of a circle’s circumference to its diameter. That makes March 14 Pi Day, which this year the National Museum of Mathematics calls the Pi Day of the Century.“The first digits are actually 3.1415,” said Cindy Lawrence, the museum’s executive director and co-founder. (Pi’s decimal places extend indefinitely.) “So Saturday’s date is the first five digits of pi.”Thus on Saturday, the museum has planned a grand celebration, starting at 9 a.m. in Madison Square Park, where even small children can help form circles.Advertisement“We’ll get people to line up and count out the distance around the circles, and others to do the distance across them,” Ms. Lawrence said. This pacing will illustrate that the circumference is about three times greater. Staff members will also pass out a graphic and lead a brief countdown to 9:26:53 a.m. because, yes, those are the next digits in pi.AdvertisementThe museum will open early, at 9:30, with a daylong pi scavenger hunt. (It closes at 5 p.m.) “The idea is to find places where aspects of pi come up in the exhibits,” said Glen Whitney, co-founder of the museum and president of its board.Children can also do pi puzzles there and play a circular version of tick-tack-toe involving four concentric loops divided into wedges. Visitors can explore pi further by filling the spaces on a circular grid with candy, and feeding a chosen set of digits (a birthday, a phone number) into a computer and learning where that sequence appears in pi.A separate event, the Girls Prep Ultimate Pi Day 5K, a 3.14-mile run to raise funds for Girls Prep Schools, charter institutions in New York, is at 9:26:53 a.m. on Roosevelt Island, with a race for runners 9 and under at 10:30. (Registration is at publicprep.org/ultimatepiday.) And at 8:30 p.m., the museum will repeat the morning’s free demonstration of pi (location to be announced), with visitors standing in huge circles and holding glow sticks as measuring tools. After a countdown to 9:26:53, the event will conclude with hot chocolate and something even the math-averse can usually digest: pie.(At Madison Square Park, 26th Street between Madison and Fifth Avenues, and at the museum, 11 East 26th Street, Manhattan; 212-542-0566, momath.org. Registration for the evening is required; participants are to meet at the museum at 8.) LAUREL GRAEBERFor Children‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘The Bully’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company has revived this ever-topical musical, by John Gregor and David L. Williams, which refreshingly avoids the trap of bullying its own audiences with heavy moralizing. Instead, the many pitfalls of the typical middle school relationship of victimizer and victim are revealed through wit, humor and a killer of a sly twist. (Through April 26.) At 3:30 p.m., McGinn-Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor; 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.Children’s Museum of the Arts Persian Festival (Sunday) Where do paisley patterns come from? How about earth architecture? Children can investigate the ancient legacies and contemporary innovations associated with Persia, now Iran, in this celebration, part of an annual series honoring the traditions of different cultures. Programming this weekend includes “Beyond the Light!,” a production with puppetry, dance and Rumi poetry. Based on Persian folk tales, it concerns a soul, divided in two, that’s seeking its completion through love. Other highlights will be creating paisley-themed stamps and stop-motion films; remixing Iranian pop music; and designing houses based on the earth work of the Iranian architect Nader Khalili. (Further programming continues on March 22.) From 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.AdvertisementFamily Day: ‘Spring Into Nowruz!’ (Saturday) We’ve had the Western New Year, the Chinese New Year and the Tibetan New Year; now here comes Nowruz, the Persian New Year, which also heralds the arrival of spring. Asia Society will celebrate with this Family Day, which includes song and dance from the J-Hoon Musical Ensemble, a Kurdish youth company; Nowruz folk song performances and a singalong; and storytelling that illuminates the holiday’s origins. Children can also take part in Persian crafts, including mosaics and collages. From 1 to 4 p.m., 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org/new-york.Family Films: ‘What’s the Trouble?’ (Saturday) Oh, yes, trouble. It can come at any time, in any shape or species. This free program of four short films from the Museum of Modern Art, for children 4 and older, humorously examines some different forms of it. The subjects include a hungry cave man (Paul Yan’s “Egghunt”); a boy who doesn’t like to wear his glasses (Alessandro Riconda’s “Shame and Glasses”); vengeful gophers (Louise Johnson’s “When the Dust Settles”) and a little Ethiopian girl with a sick camel (Aida Ashenafi’s “What Makes Me Happy: Amran’s Film”). A discussion follows. At noon, Celeste Bartos Theater, Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 212-708-9805, moma.org. Tickets are required. They can be picked up in the building’s lobby or at the information desk in the lobby of MoMA on Saturday, first come first served.‘Fancy Nancy the Musical’  (Saturday and Sunday) One of the arts’ youngest divas has returned to the McGinn/Cazale Theater. This musical from Vital Theater Company focuses on a little girl who wants everything to be fancy — especially herself. Based on the book series written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, the production explores the predicament that ensues when Nancy finds out that she hasn’t been cast as the glamorous mermaid she’d hoped to be in the coming dance show. With a book by Susan DiLallo, a score by Danny Abosch, and lyrics by both, the musical humorously follows Nancy’s attempts to cope with a most unfancy role: that of a tree. (Through April 5.) At 1:30 p.m., 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m., 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.The Golden Dragon Acrobats (Saturday) Don’t expect ordinary handsprings and somersaults. This troupe from China specializes in the extreme, like balancing on one hand on a stack of chairs or doing ballet moves while perched on another person’s shoulders. The show also offers music, dance and traditional costumes. At 2 p.m., Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, Brooklyn, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org.‘The Gruffalo’s Child’ (Saturday) You’d think that a large, hairy beast like the Gruffalo wouldn’t be afraid of anything. But in this adaptation of Julia Donaldson’s picture book (illustrated by Axel Scheffler), presented by the troupe Tall Stories, the little Gruffalo has been told by her father to beware of the Big Bad Mouse. When she ventures out, she discovers only a delectable tiny mouse. Still, this show for children 4 and older demonstrates that sometimes small rodents can have expansive ideas. At 1:30 p.m., TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, Borough of Manhattan Community College, 199 Chambers Street, near Greenwich Street, 212-220-1460, tribecapac.org/family.‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Hot Feet’ (Sunday) Warm toes sound pretty good after the winter we’ve been having. And the Paper Bag Players will generate plenty of heat in this show for ages 3 to 8, a celebration of the troupe’s 56th anniversary. Known for their signature props and sets made out of brown paper and cardboard, the players will present highlights of their past productions, song-and-dance skits like “Move Over,” a narrative that makes rush hour on the subway something to laugh about and “Happy Day,” which involves a chicken on the loose. Children who would like to sample the troupe’s secrets in advance can also take part in a morning workshop in which they’ll devise props and costumes together and create a mini-performance. Workshop at 10:30 a.m.; performance at 2 p.m.; the Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one will sprout indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which is reviving Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays at 1 p.m. (Some shows are sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park; 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.Advertisement‘Kid M.D.’ (Saturday) It’s never too early to prepare for medical school, especially when you can have fun doing it. In this new program from Discovery Times Square, geared to children 8 and older, aspiring physicians will be given lab coats and stethoscopes before taking part in workshops within the “Body Worlds: Pulse” exhibition. Sloka Iyengar, a neuroscientist, will lead the activities, which will explore the sensory system, the brain, the heart, the lungs and the bones. The investigation ends with a mini-graduation. (Also on March 28.) At 10:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m., 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan; 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com/kidmd.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton; 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.‘The Magic Garden, or, the Princess Who Grew Antlers’ (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Antlers are the hook, you might say, for all three stories that make up this show, a new production from the Czechoslovak-American Marionette Theater. Working, as always, with century-old carved puppets (and, in this case, moose and deer antlers), the troupe explores some fragmentary Czech folk tales, partly improvising to fill in details that have been forgotten or overlooked. The central story concerns a soldier who pays back the king and princess who have cheated him: He gives them enchanted apples that make them grow antlers. (Through March 22.) Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 3 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.; Theater for the New City, 155 First Avenue, at 10th Street, East Village; 212-254-1109, theaterforthenewcity.net.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.‘My Superhero, Roberto Clemente’  (Saturday) Roberto Clemente (1934-72) may not have had superpowers, but he was certainly a hero, both on and off the baseball field. Battling discrimination throughout his sports career, he became the first Latino athlete inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame, and was killed in the crash of a plane he had chartered to deliver aid to earthquake victims in Nicaragua. This bilingual children’s musical from Teatro SEA, written by Manuel Antonio Morán and Alejandro Zuleta, focuses on a boy named Bobby, who, with his friends, discovers Clemente’s legacy. (Also on March 28 and April 4.) At 3 p.m., Los Kabayitos Puppet and Children’s Theater, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org.New York International Children’s Film Festival (Saturday and Sunday) This celebration of young people’s cinema has never shied away from challenging films. It often sells out, but tickets remain for several screenings this weekend. The features include Julien Neel’s “Lou!,” from France, featuring a 12-year-old who’s far more mature than her mother (Saturday, for ages 9 and older), and the Japanese Pop artist Takashi Murakami’s sci-fi fantasy, “Jellyfish Eyes,” about teenagers surrounded by Pokémon-like creatures that only they can see (Sunday, for ages 9 and older). Fans can also view programs of short films. (Through March 22. Tickets may be available at the door for screenings listed as sold out.) At various locations; full schedule is on the website; 212-349-0330, gkids.com/fest2015.‘Passover Palooza!’ (Sunday) Her stage name may sound as if it belonged on a jar of pasta sauce, but Mama Doni is an indisputably Jewish performer. Doni Zasloff Thomas in real life, she specializes in putting a Jewish spin on all kinds of musical styles. She and her band will herald the coming of Passover in this fourth annual free concert, which takes place in an appropriately historic spot: the original Streit’s matzo factory. In addition to the celebration — which will award prizes for correct answers given to Passover questions — the day will include a free factory tour. Because Streit’s is about to relocate, this will be the last opportunity to see matzo being made in its Lower East Side home. At 1 p.m. (tour at 2 p.m.), 150 Rivington Street, at Suffolk Street, 718-813-7170, mamadoni.com.‘Pinocchio’ (Friday through Sunday) In this stage version of Carlo Collodi’s classic tale, the title character doesn’t just want to be a boy; he also wants to be a star. Presented at the New Victory Theater by the acclaimed Windmill Theater of Australia, this two-hour rock musical, with a score by Jethro Woodward, portrays Pinocchio as a youth — his nose grows before the audience’s eyes — who’s easily seduced by contemporary glamour. Written by Rosemary Myers and Julianne O’Brien, the show includes puppetry and animated projections. (Through March 22.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.; 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan; 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.Advertisement‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through May 9.) At 1 p.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, 13thstreetrep.org.Sunday Story Time With Kirsten Hall (Sunday) Imagine a book in which the book itself is a central character. That’s the interesting premise of “The Jacket,” a picture book by Kirsten Hall, with illustrations by Dasha Tolstikova. As part of this free Sunday series at the powerHouse on 8th bookstore in Brooklyn, Ms. Hall will read the story, which concerns what happens when a little girl has two not-quite-compatible best friends: the book and her sometimes messy dog, Egg Cream. At 11:30 a.m., 1111 Eighth Avenue, near 11th Street, Park Slope; 718-666-3049, powerhouseon8th.com.A Taste of Magic (Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. (Also on March 28.) At 8 p.m., Gossip Bar and Restaurant, 733 Ninth Avenue, between 49th and 50th Streets, Clinton, atasteofmagicnyc.com.‘Through the Looking Glass’ (Saturday and Sunday) Lewis Carroll himself, portrayed by a member of the Gingerbread Players of St. Luke’s Church in Queens, narrates this musical theater adaptation of Alice’s continuing adventures. With a score by William Ryden and a book by Louise Guinther, the show, first performed in 1999, has been updated to suit its current cast. Expect the usual characters — Humpty Dumpty, the Jabberwock, the Red and White Queens — along with something Alice would have appreciated during her journey: gingerbread for sale. (Through March 22.) Saturday at 2:30 and 7:30 p.m.; Sunday at 2:30 p.m.; St. Luke’s Church, 85 Greenway South, between Ascan Avenue and Harrow Street, Forest Hills; 718-268-7772, gingerbreadplayers.org.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘Tunes With Tina’ (Sunday) That’s Tina deVaron, a jazz musician and singer, whose musical brunch for young people at the Measure Lounge at Langham Place, Fifth Avenue, a hotel in Midtown Manhattan, has returned. Ms. deVaron, who often sings show tunes for children, also improvises and gears her performances to the audience. On selected Sundays throughout the season, she will be accompanied by Broadway performers. Singing along is encouraged. (Through May 31.) At 11:30 a.m., 400 Fifth Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-695-4005, measurenyc.com‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Sundays through March 29, at 1, 1:45 and 2:30 p.m., the museum will also feature the Matzo Bakery, a program in which children can grind wheat into flour and roll and bake their own matzos in preparation for Passover. Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; to 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Danny Weinkauf and the Red Pants Band (Saturday) Danny Weinkauf plays bass and writes music for They Might Be Giants, but he’s something of a giant on his own, too. With his group the Red Pants Band, he recorded “No School Today,” an album that won a Parents’ Choice Award. This weekend he and the band will perform at Symphony Space as part of the Just Kidding series. Despite his album’s title, don’t be surprised to hear tunes about archaeology and spelling bees. At 11 a.m., 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org/genre/family.LAUREL GRABERA version of this schedule appears in print on March 13, 2015, on Page C28 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.