AdvertisementSupported by Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.ABT Studio Company  (Friday) As the junior branch of American Ballet Theater, this elite troupe is a kind of springboard from student to professional life. Directed by the former Ballet Theater dancer Kate Lydon, the company offers four works that highlight different facets of ballet technique, including excerpts from “Le Corsaire” — a seafaring tale full of high-flying tricks — and Merce Cunningham’s bright yet spartan “Duets.” Works by Stephen Mills and Antony Tudor complete the program. At 7:30 p.m., Michael Schimmel Center for the Arts, Pace University, 3 Spruce Street, between Park Row and Gold Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-346-1715, schimmel.pace.edu. (Siobhan Burke)Ailey II  (Tuesday through March 22) Venturing south from its home on 55th Street, this hardworking ensemble, the second company of Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, presents its first independent season at the Joyce Theater. Two triple bills showcase the dancers’ technical prowess and seemingly boundless stamina, with high-energy works by Dwight Rhoden, Manuel Vignoulle and Amy Hall Garner (Program A); and Katarzyna Skarpetowska, Jennifer Archibald and the artistic director Troy Powell (Program B). Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday and next Friday at 8 p.m., March 21 at 2 and 8 p.m., March 22 at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)★ Compagnie CNDC-Angers  (through Sunday) More than five years after his death, Merce Cunningham lives on in fresh and exciting ways. This French company, making its United States debut, has a direct link to the source: its artistic director, Robert Swinston, was a 30-year veteran of the Cunningham company, as a dancer and Merce’s right-hand man. The company will perform “Event,” a quilt of excerpts that Mr. Swinston has stitched together from Cunningham classics made from 1965-90. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Brian Schaefer)Rebecca Serrell Cyr  (Thursday through March 21) An arresting performer in the work of Donna Uchizono, RoseAnne Spradlin and many other choreographers, Ms. Cyr has lately been immersed in a project of her own. Her “Assemblage” pushes back against paring down, favoring accumulation over editing. Sundry objects and ideas jostle in a series of solos and duets, performed by Ms. Cyr, Aretha Aoki and surprise guests. At 8 p.m., Jack, 505 1/2 Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Burke)★ ‘Dancers, Buildings and People in the Streets’ (through March 28) Ballet and contemporary dance sometime seem like estranged relatives, but with its latest platform, inspired by the dance critic Edwin Denby, Danspace Project collapses the space between them. The curator Claudia La Rocco, a critic and poet who contributes to The New York Times, paired artists from different choreographic traditions — those of Merce Cunningham, George Balanchine and Judson Dance Theater — and left them to their own devices. The next set of collaborations (Thursday through March 21 at 8 p.m.) features the choreographers Jillian Peña, Troy Schumacher, Emily Coates and Yve Laris Cohen. Also this week (Friday and March 20 at 1:30 p.m.), Ms. Coates, who has danced with Yvonne Rainer and New York City Ballet, teaches Ms. Rainer’s seminal “Trio A.” Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)Ori Flomin  (Friday and Saturday) While doing research for his first evening-length piece, Ori Flomin, a veteran of the Stephen Petronio Dance Company, asked 40 dancers around the world what drew them to dance and what they remembered about their first performance experiences. The resulting quartet, “First Move,” takes those personal tales and turns them into an abstract meditation on a dancing body’s unique physical journey, and the obstacles it encounters along the way. The performance is part of Gibney Dance’s new Making Space series. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Schaefer)Martha Graham Dance Company  (Friday through Sunday) When Martha Graham was just getting started, the 92nd Street Y hosted her experiments in a newfangled form called modern dance. Nearly a century later, the company she founded carries on her legacy in the same space. As part of the Harkness Dance Festival, the troupe performs “Cave of the Heart,” Graham’s ultra-dramatic telling of the story of Medea. Following the festival’s “Stripped/Dressed” structure, the program begins with a breakdown of the Graham vocabulary and an up-close look at Isamu Noguchi’s set. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Burke)Peridance Contemporary Dance Company  (Saturday and Sunday) For more than 30 years, Igal Perry has been carving dances out of ballet technique, polishing them with a contemporary sensibility and giving them a sensual varnish. His company’s annual spring season includes premieres by the Italian choreographer Macia del Prete, the French choreographer Manuel Vignoulle, the United States’s Dwight Rhoden (of Complexions Contemporary Ballet, with whom Peridance shares an aesthetic kinship) and Mr. Perry’s own work. Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 4 p.m., Peridance Capezio Center, 126 East 13th Street, East Village, 212-505-0886, peridance.com. (Schaefer)Amanda Selwyn Dance Theater  (Friday through Sunday) For her company’s 15th anniversary, Ms. Selwyn explores renewal and reinvention in an evening-length premiere for 11 dancers. The work takes the form of several short reflections on the theme of fresh starts, all grounded in her emotionally expressive style. Friday and Saturday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, Borough of Manhattan Community College, 199 Chambers Street, near Greenwich Street, 212-220-1460, tribecapac.org. (Burke)★ Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance  (through March 29) It’s never too late to reinvent yourself: After 60 years as the Paul Taylor Dance Company, the group returns this year as Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance, a more inclusive moniker reflecting the addition of outside choreographers. This season includes Shen Wei, with his artful “Rite of Spring,” and the pioneering Doris Humphrey, represented by her 1938 “Passacaglia.” Adding to his tireless output, Mr. Taylor will also premiere a new work, “Death and the Damsel.” Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays at 7 p.m., Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m., Sundays at 2 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com. (Schaefer)★ Netta Yerushalmy/Hillel Kogan  (Tuesday) As part of the Joyce Theater’s offsite series, Joyce Unleashed, Ms. Yerushalmy resurrects “Helga and the Three Sailors,” which had its premiere at Danspace Project last year. With three highly focused dancers (there’s some tricky choreography for the eyes, not to mention the rest of the body) and the composer Judith Berkson, who plays live, Ms. Yerushalmy fashions a compelling collage of movement, sound and vintage home video. She shares the program with Mr. Kogan, whose more character-driven “We Love Arabs” brings some levity to thorny issues of religious and cultural conflict. At 7:30 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Burke)Advertisement