MARCH 12, 2015
 Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera★ ‘Les Contes d’Hoffmann’ (Saturday and Wednesday) James Levine is now conducting the rest of the run of this revival of Bartlett Sher’s phantasmagoric 2009 production. This Offenbach opera has long been a Levine specialty, and he leads an elegant and insightful performance. The tenor Matthew Polenzani makes a vocally and emotionally impassioned Hoffmann. Audrey Luna stands out for a dazzling turn as Olympia. Laurent Naouri brings a robust voice and consummate French style to the four villains. Saturday at 8 p.m., Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)★ ‘La Donna del Lago’ (Saturday) The mezzo-soprano Joyce DiDonato is magnificent as Elena, the winsome heroine of this Rossini melodrama, which is having its premiere production at the Metropolitan Opera House. The story is set against the 15th-century rebellion by some clans of Scottish highlanders against their king, James V. As the daughter of the king’s former tutor, who is now allied with the rebels, Ms. DiDonato brings affecting sensitivity and brilliant coloratura to her performance. The tenor Juan Diego Flórez is at his best as the king, who, disguised as Uberto, falls for Elena, though she loves — and eventually marries — Malcolm, a contralto role, sung here by the rich-voiced mezzo-soprano Daniela Barcellona. The director Paul Curran’s essentially traditional production, atop a shifting floor and against the backdrop of atmospheric videos, gets the job done. The conductor Michele Mariotti leads a stylish and supple performance. This matinee, the final performance in the run, will be an HD simulcast to international movie theaters. At 1 p.m., 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)‘Lucia di Lammermoor’  (Monday and Thursday) For its revival of Donizetti’s moody masterpiece, the Metropolitan Opera has summoned a strong cast, led by the potent Russian coloratura soprano Albina Shagimuratova, the ardent tenor Joseph Calleja and the talented baritone Luca Salsi. Maurizio Benini conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)Advertisement★ ‘Manon’ (Tuesday) This sensational revival of Massenet’s tragic love story features the fiery combination of Diana Damrau, singing the title role for the first time with peerless commitment, and Vittorio Grigolo, infectiously passionate. Emmanuel Villaume leads a performance that’s agile and fast-moving without sacrificing sumptuous lyricism, and the supporting cast is characterful and involving. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)AdvertisementClassical Music★ Piotr Anderszewski  (Thursday) This idiosyncratic, often inspired pianist plays works by two composers in whose music he specializes. Bach is represented by his French Overture and the English Suite No. 3; Schumann by a “Novelette” and his dreamy Fantasy in C. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (David Allen)★ The Art of the Early Keyboard  (Friday and Saturday) The dedicated early keyboard specialist Gwendolyn Toth leads a two-day celebration of German baroque harpsichords with concerts, lectures and workshops, culminating in a performance of Bach’s Concerto in A minor for four harpsichords. A full schedule is at artekearlymusic.org. Various times, Immanuel Lutheran Church, 122 East 88th Street, at Lexington Avenue, 212-967-9157. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Joyce DiDonato and the Philadelphia Orchestra  (Wednesday) This radiant mezzo-soprano continues her Perspectives series at Carnegie Hall with a celebration of bel canto arias and orchestral selections by Rossini, Bellini and lesser-known composers like Michele Carafa and Giovanni Pacini. Maurizio Benini conducts the Philadelphia Orchestra and soloists including the soprano Nicole Cabell and the tenor Lawrence Brownlee. At 8 p.m., 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)★ Escher Quartet  (Sunday) This excellent young string quartet teams up with the powerfully expressive soprano Jennifer Zetlan in Berg’s “Lyric Suite,” part of a program that also includes Schubert’s “Rosamunde” Quartet and Sibelius’s “Voces Intimae.” At 5 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Adam Golka (Monday) In partnership with the 92nd Street Y, SubCulture, the intimate basement recital hall in the East Village, invited the eminent pianist Andras Schiff to select three emerging young pianists to be presented in recital. The last program in the series presents Mr. Golka, who was born in Texas in 1987 to Polish parents and won the 2008 Gilmore Young Artist Award. He’ll be making his New York debut, playing formidable works by young Brahms (Sonata No. 1 in C) and late Beethoven (the mighty “Hammerklavier”). At 7:30 p.m., 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 212-533-5470, subculturenewyork.com. (Tommasini)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.International Contemporary Ensemble  (Friday) The Music of the Americas series turns its spotlight on the Argentine composer Mario Davidovsky with a program of works mixing acoustic instruments and electronics, including a world premiere. The impeccable International Contemporary Ensemble is conducted by David Fulmer. At 7 p.m., Americas Society, 680 Park Avenue, between 68th and 69th Streets, 212-277-8359, as-coa.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Johann Johannsson (Tuesday) The American Contemporary Music Ensemble and the outstanding vocal ensemble Roomful of Teeth give the world premieres of two pieces by this Icelandic composer. Most exciting is “Drone Mass,” an oratorio for string quartet, vocals and electronics that’s based on the Coptic Gospel of the Egyptians. Naturally, then, the work will be heard in the Temple of Dendur at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. At 7 p.m., 212-570-3949, metmuseum.org. (Allen)The Knights (Thursday) Backstabbing and betrayal are the unusual themes of this Brutus-inspired program of chamber music presented by members of the orchestral collective the Knights. The program includes music by Haydn, Schnittke, Timo Andres, Fred Lerdahl and Thomas Adès. At 8 p.m., SubCulture: Arts Underground, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 212-533-5470, subculturenewyork.com. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)AdvertisementLondon Symphony Orchestra (Wednesday) The conductor Michael Tilson Thomas returns to New York with another of the ensembles with which he has had career-long associations. He opens the program, part of Lincoln Center’s Great Performers series, with Four Interludes from Britten’s “Peter Grimes” and ends it with Sibelius’s Second Symphony. In between, of special interest, the virtuosic, thoughtful pianist Yuja Wang will be the soloist in Gershwin’s Concerto in F. At 8 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org. (Tommasini)New York Festival of Song  (Tuesday) This canny program, “Bel Canto/Can Belto,” pairs classic Italian composers (Verdi, Mascagni and the like) with contemporary Italian-Americans like John Corigliano and Dominick Argento. The singers are young artists from Caramoor’s Terrance W. Schwab Vocal Rising Stars and the engaging pianists, as ever, are Steven Blier and Michael Barrett. At 8 p.m., Merkin Concert Hall, Goodman House, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, nyfos.org. (Woolfe)New York Philharmonic  (Friday, Saturday and Thursday) On Friday and Saturday, Thomas Adès gives the United States premiere of his magically macabre cantata, “Totentanz,” and conducts performances of Berlioz and Beethoven. Starting on Thursday (and continuing next Friday), Alan Gilbert leads the orchestra in Esa-Pekka Salonen’s dark “Nyx,” Debussy’s “Jeux,” the suite from Strauss’s “Der Rosenkavalier” and Ravel’s Piano Concerto, featuring the Philharmonic’s artist-in-association, the wonderfully sophisticated Inon Barnatan. Friday at 7:30 p.m., Saturday at 8 p.m., Thursday at 7:30 p.m., next Friday at 11 a.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Allen)★ Nicholas Phan  (Wednesday) Inspired by Schubert’s “Die Schöne Müllerin,” this gifted young tenor curates an evening of early English song by composers including Dowland and Purcell and presented as a song cycle relaying the love and heartbreak of a young man. He will be accompanied by Ann Marie Morgan on viola da gamba and Michael Leopold on lute and theorbo. At 7:30 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)Takács Quartet  (Thursday) As part of Lincoln Center’s Great Performers series, this superb string quartet offers Debussy’s String Quartet in G minor and Haydn’s “Emperor” String Quartet. They will be joined by the excellent young pianist Joyce Yang for Dvorak’s popular Piano Quintet. At 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org. (Schweitzer)Vienna Piano Trio  (Sunday) This eminent ensemble offers a program featuring Beethoven’s “Kakadu” Variations and Brahms’s Piano Trio in B (Op. 8) as well as a less frequently heard work: Eduard Steuermann’s arrangement for piano trio of Schoenberg’s “Verklärte Nacht.” At 5 p.m., Frick Collection, 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, 212-288-0700, frick.org. (Schweitzer)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 13, 2015, on Page C16 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.