MARCH 12, 2015
Prices may not reflect ticketing service charges. For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Steve Aoki  (Friday) Mr. Aoki serves as one of the abiding tastemakers in the Los Angeles party microcosm, though he has stealthily shaped international tastes for over a decade as the founder of Dim Mak Records (whose roster once included Bloc Party and the Kills). Now midway through the release of his two-part album series, “Neon Future,” he performs alongside Headhunterz, Caked Up and others. At 9 p.m., Manhattan Center Hammerstein Ballroom, 311 West 34th Street, Manhattan, 800-745-3000, ticketmaster.com. (Stacey Anderson)James Bay  (Monday) The Tortured British Invasion continues apace with this 24-year-old singer-songwriter whose breakthrough EP, “Let It Go,” shares the same lilting vulnerability as works by Hozier and Sam Smith. Mr. Bay’s easy rasp swathes ’70s folk and blue-eyed soul, and his lyrics can often take a maudlin path; “Why don’t you be you/And I’ll be me,” he wails on the EP’s title track, though his belting conveys great conviction in the concept. His debut album, “Chaos and the Calm,” comes out later this month. At 8 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)★ Björk  (Saturday, Wednesday and March 22) It is startling to hear Björk — an artist who specializes in mercurial, brilliant electro-symphonics and opaquely cerebral lyrics — expose her heart so thoroughly on her morose new album, “Vulnicura.” Yet when this Icelandic star poses the devastating question, “Did I love you too much?/Devotion bent me broken,” on the song “Black Lake” — over heavy, elegiac strings, warped voices and fractured synth production from the upstart talent Arca — she creates her finest art in a decade. Her sorrow is terrible and gorgeous. Saturday at noon, Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. Wednesday at 8 p.m. and March 22 at 3 p.m., Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Brooklyn, ticketmaster.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementDig Deeper with John Ellison (Saturday) Each month this cult-hit soul party invites veteran musicians to share their songs with appreciative young audiences, leaving all involved with full hearts and sore feet. This installment features John Ellison, the former frontman of the Soul Brothers Six, who had a hit in the 1960s with the buoyant “Some Kind of Wonderful.” At 9 p.m., Littlefield, 622 Degraw Street, between Third and Fourth Avenues, Gowanus, Brooklyn, littlefieldnyc.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementAretha Franklin  (Saturday) Not content to rest on her laurels, the Queen of Soul returns to the area for a performance that will draw from her late-1960s winning streak on Atlantic Records — the golden age that begot “Respect,” “Chain of Fools” and “I Never Loved a Man (the Way I Love You)” — and feature songs from her most recent album, “Aretha Franklin Sings the Great Diva Classics,” which includes covers of songs by Adele, Alicia Keys and others. At 8 p.m., New Jersey Performing Arts Center, 1 Center Street, Newark, 888-466-5722, njpac.org. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret (through April 4) The most anticipated event of cabaret’s high season is Debbie Harry’s already sold-out engagement at Café Carlyle, from March 24 to April 4. On the heels of Buster Poindexter’s run there, it is proof positive that downtown has crashed the gates of uptown and that the punk-rock revolution, absorbed by the mainstream, now qualifies as rock nostalgia. Before that, Herb Alpert and Lani Hall will be at the Café through March 21 with a mixture of light pop-jazz built around Mr. Alpert’s burbling trumpet and Ms. Hall’s sultry voice. (Tuesdays through Fridays at 8:45 p.m., Saturdays at 8:45 and 10:45 p.m., 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com.) At 54 Below, Maureen McGovern performs her new show, “Sing, My Sisters, Sing!” The program, celebrating women singer-songwriters like Joni Mitchell, Laura Nyro, Annie Lennox and Amanda McBroom, includes a jazz sidebar. (Friday and Saturday at 7 p.m., 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 646-476-3551, 54below.com.) Also at 54 Below, Melissa Manchester, one of the women to whom Ms. McGovern pays tribute, opens a three-evening engagement on March 26 at 7 p.m., and the unstoppable Ben Vereen revives his high-spirited show “Steppin’ Out,” from Tuesday through March 21 at 7 p.m. At Birdland, the versatile pop-jazz singer Kevin Mahogany, whose range encompasses R&B and bebop, is appearing on Friday and Saturday at 8:30 and 11 p.m. His forthcoming recording is a tribute to Johnny Hartman. (Stephen Holden)Modest Mouse  (Wednesday and Thursday) After spending over a decade in the comfort of niche indie-rock stardom, and occasionally mocking sunsets and picnics in its droll lyrics, Modest Mouse broke into the mainstream with a vengeance via “Float On,” from its excellent 2004 album, “Good News for People Who Love Bad News.” The band is about to release its first record in eight years, “Strangers to Ourselves,” and is already at work on a companion album. With Mimicking Birds. Wednesday at 9 p.m., Thursday at 8 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 800-745-3000, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)Ms. Lauryn Hill  (Saturday and Sunday) Ms. Hill seems to be warming to local showmanship. In the past month, she has had a handful of concerts at small clubs. Now she’ll perform an acoustic set at the famed Cutting Room, which may be a more ideal setting for this talented singer and rapper: In his review of one of her outings last year, Jon Pareles lamented that she “was often buried in the mix of her band’s hyperactive funk.” At 8 p.m., 44 East 32nd Street, Manhattan, 212-691-1900, thecuttingroomnyc.com. (Anderson)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Palma Violets (Saturday and Monday) A British garage-rock band with a remarkable sheen of earnestness, Palma Violets managed to turn the line “I want to be your best friend” into a scrappy, lo-fi post-punk anthem (“Best of Friends”). The group’s debut album, “180,” released in 2013, surfed a similar guilelessness, nodding to the Velvet Underground and the Libertines; the band will release its follow-up, “Danger in the Club,” in May. Saturday at 8 p.m., Shea Stadium BK, 20 Meadow Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, brownpapertickets9.com. Monday at 8 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, ticketfly9.com. (Anderson)Pentatonix  (Wednesday) A YouTube sensation with more than seven million subscribers on its channel, this a cappella quintet covers Pharrell Williams’s “Happy,” Psy’s “Gangnam Style” and Gotye’s “Somebody That I Used to Know,” with equal harmonic joie de vivre. The band offers bluesy pop original songs on its studio albums and recently won a Grammy for best arrangement, instrumental or a cappella for its “Daft Punk” medley. At 8 p.m., Theater at Madison Square Garden, 800-745-3000, theateratmsg.com. (Anderson)★ Perfume Genius  (Thursday) The brutal poetry of this Seattle singer-songwriter’s second album, “Put Your Back N 2 It,” explored depression, violation and sexual identity with ferocious honesty. His recently released follow-up, “Too Bright,” is a beautiful, if more opaquely written, knot of confidence and passion. With Jenny Hval. At 8 p.m., Stage 48, 605 West 48th Street, Clinton, 212-957-1800, stage48.com. (Anderson)★ Sebadoh  (Tuesday) These lo-fi rockers, brilliant navel-gazers even among their 1990s peers, toasted the 20th anniversary last year of their classic album, “Bakesale.” Sebadoh’s songwriters, Lou Barlow and Jason Loewenstein, still have lessons to impart to the emo bands that followed their lead — and proved it with the release in 2013 of their first studio album in 14 years, “Defend Yourself.” With Qui. At 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, ticketmaster.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementMarques Toliver  (Thursday) Mr. Toliver, a classically trained violinist from Florida, has shifted his considerable gifts to the unusual hybrid of baroque R&B. In his hands, it is fascinating: He croons fitfully about spirituality over intricate string solos, joking between songs. This young talent released his lovely first full-length album, “Land of CanAan,” in 2013. His monthlong Rockwood Music Hall residency concludes on March 26. At 10 p.m., Rockwood Music Hall, 196 Allen Street, Lower East Side, 212-477-4155, rockwoodmusichall.com. (Anderson)Meghan Trainor  (Friday and Sunday) This hip-shaking pop singer behind the saucy, slyly soul-influenced hit “All About That Bass” recently claimed the No. 1 slot on the Billboard albums charts with her debut, “Title.” A songwriting and production prodigy at just 21 years old, Ms. Trainor is currently the celebrity adviser for Blake Shelton’s team on “The Voice.” At 7 p.m., Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan, 212-777-6800, irvingplaza.com. (Anderson)Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons  (Thursday and next Friday) A short trek up Broadway from West 52nd Street, where “Jersey Boys” continues to print money and delight tourists, Mr. Valli and his vocal group, the subjects of that peppy musical, perform in the flesh. Perhaps Mr. Valli, a powerful and charismatic falsetto crooner, will sing “Walk Like a Man” and “Big Girls Don’t Cry” exactly when his Great White Way counterpart does. Now that’s entertainment. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatrenyc.com. (Anderson)Jozef van Wissem  (Wednesday) As both an avant-garde composer and a baroque lutenist, this Dutch musician is no stranger to dichotomy. He paired with his frequent collaborator the filmmaker and guitarist Jim Jarmusch to score Mr. Jarmusch’s film “Only Lovers Left Alive” in 2013. Last year, Mr. van Wissem released the experimental record “It Is Time for You to Return.” At 9:30 p.m., Le Poisson Rouge, 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich Village, 212-505-3474, lepoissonrouge.com. (Anderson)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 13, 2015, on Page C15 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Pop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.