AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon ParelesStakes are high in Brandi Carlile’s songs: emotionally, romantically, meteorologically, spiritually. Vocally, too. Playing a rare club show on Wednesday night at the Music Hall of Williamsburg — she’s usually in theaters — Ms. Carlile sang about family, memories, mortality, guilt, hurricanes, starry skies, suicide and eternal love, scaling personal experience up to grand pronouncements. In “The Stranger at My Door,” with a verse about watching a house burn down, she sang, “An all-consuming flame, that refines and new begins/It’ll take your family heirlooms, but it can take your darkest sins.” Her voice encompasses the full spectrum: quiet and clear, tremulously tearful, decisively rasping or reaching to a scream. She can yodel, too. Ms. Carlile, who is based in Seattle, has just released her sixth album, “The Firewatcher’s Daughter” (ATO), and proudly announced that it has entered the Top 10. In the 1970s, Ms. Carlile’s music would have been mainstream pop-rock, alongside Linda Ronstadt and Fleetwood Mac — an influence she acknowledged by playing Fleetwood Mac’s “The Chain” as an encore, and with “The Eye,” a close-harmony ballad with her two longtime songwriting collaborators, the twins Phil and Tim Hanseroth (on bass and guitar). Now it’s Americana or alt-country; Ms. Carlile wore a cowboy hat and a fringed jacket. But it’s still a matter of hands-on craftsmanship, tucked within performances that can be gentle and folky or rowdy and cranked up. Ms. Carlile and her band applied her strongest firepower to “Mainstream Kid,” a blast at commercial pressures; she strummed her guitar with near punk-rock force and turned it up to the verge of feedback.One of her encores, “Pride and Joy,” also surged to a noisy peak, which she sustained there, and then eased back just enough to reprise its stalwart chord progression. She was equally vivid in far quieter acoustic arrangements, like the fingerpicking of “I Belong to You,” which she announced as “a little love song I wrote about my wife, Catherine.” Afterward, a voice in the audience called out that a marriage proposal had been accepted during the song. Ms. Carlile’s songs and patter stayed personal about her band, songwriting, the road, family and memories — until her finale, “Murder in the City,” a song from the Avett Brothers.She called for continued pressure for gay rights: “I never thought in my lifetime that it would be O.K. for me to have a wife and a daughter,” she said, and urged the audience to “go in love but not in apathy.” After the song, which celebrates “the love that lets us share our name,” she raised her fingers in a V sign overhead, took a slug of whiskey from a bottle and made her exit. Advertisement