AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichKirill Gerstein is evidently determined to prove his mettle as one of the great piano virtuosos of the day, and he made a strong case to be considered as such with his recital at Zankel Hall on Monday evening. In a fascinating program consisting of pedagogical forms run more or less amok, he ended with a dazzling performance of Liszt’s 12 “Transcendental Études,” some of the most difficult music ever written for piano.No encores were demanded, and none offered. The audience seemed stunned, deliriously so.Not that Mr. Gerstein comes out of nowhere. His impeccable credentials include first prize in the Arthur Rubinstein competition in Tel Aviv in 2001 and receipt of the Gilmore Artist Award in 2010. In addition, he has shown a wide-ranging musical curiosity and intelligence, his interests running to jazz as well as scholarly concerns.Bartok’s “Mikrokosmos” consists of 153 studies in six volumes, graduated from simple eight-bar tunes in each hand to complex works a few pages long and laced with polyphony, chromaticism and tricky rhythms. Mr. Gerstein began with the “Chromatic Invention” from Volume 6, essentially a slightly prickly sounding two-part invention in flowing style.Then he continued, virtually without pause, into Bach’s 15 Three-Part Inventions (BWV 787-801), making a seamless tapestry of the first half of the program. The readings throughout were lovely, with elegant lines and a warm touch.But there are studies, and there are studies. From the start of the “Transcendental Études,” and especially the epic fourth étude, “Mazeppa,” it was clear that Mr. Gerstein’s technique would stand up to Liszt’s most devilish challenges. The only real question was whether he had the physical and mental stamina to weather the full set of 12.He did. There were a few smudges in “Wilde Jagd” (“Wild Hunt”), but those and a missed note or two in the numbers that followed did nothing to detract from the overall impression of brilliance and command.At least one listener, already an admirer, now views Mr. Gerstein with a new level of respect. Advertisement