AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate ChinenMatt Mitchell“Vista Accumulation” (Pi Recordings)The final track on the pianist Matt Mitchell’s rigorous, exhausting-but-worth-it new album, “Vista Accumulation,” sprawls to an eventful 12½ minutes, and feels at times as if it might never run out of steam. Its title is “The Damaged Center,” which could be a jab at the idea of a recognizable jazz mainstream — or a nod to its own destabilized core.What it conveys about Mr. Mitchell is his fondness for pressurized tensions, especially the one between intricate form and extemporaneous license. Over the last five or six years, he has been a crucial partner for composer-bandleaders in this vein: He appears on four excellent jazz albums this year, by Tim Berne, Rudresh Mahanthappa, Dave Douglas and Darius Jones. (One of these, Mr. Mahanthappa’s “Bird Calls,” was named best album in the DownBeat Critic’s Poll.)But Mr. Mitchell’s advanced vocabulary as a pianist seems almost like an afterthought on “Vista Accumulation,” which plays out across two discs, and might best be experienced with a brief intermission. The album features a superacute quartet with Chris Speed on tenor saxophone and clarinet, Chris Tordini on bass and Dan Weiss on drums, and Mr. Mitchell’s writing puts them through their paces. Even in its quieter stretches, like most of “Hyper Pathos” and the album’s opener, “Select Your Existence,” the music simmers with deep intensity.With an average length of 12 minutes, these tracks resemble miniature epics, conforming to no clear standard of repetition. Instead, Mr. Mitchell’s playbook leans on long thematic arcs, slithery polytonality, rhythmic caginess and a chamber-like internal logic that carries over to the practice of group improvisation. Even when the action gets prickly, it doesn’t feel arbitrary.Mr. Speed is key to this equilibrium: His output is expressive and hale, with a breathy blur that nicely offsets the weblike precision of Mr. Mitchell’s lines. “Wearing the Wig of Atrophy” begins as a splintered-funk confrontation featuring Mr. Speed on tenor saxophone; by song’s end, he has switched to clarinet, joining the rest of the band in a balladic section that evokes the sensation of walking slowly into a darkened room, waiting for the eyes to adjust.Advertisement