By ALESSANDRA STANLEYMARCH 12, 2015
“The Royals,” a new E! scripted series that begins on Sunday, is trying to usurp the throne of reality television’s reigning monarchy, which debuts a 10th season of “Keeping Up With the Kardashians” on that network the same night.And as in any worthwhile dynastic feud, there is a true heir and a pretender.“The Royals” is a tongue-in-cheek nighttime soap about a make-believe decadent British royal family. It should be a hoot, but it actually gets old, and dull, very quickly. It turns out that campy faux queens and princes can’t keep up with the real-life Elizabeth II and her progeny — or with reality show royals.Even Elizabeth Hurley as the sexy, calculating, foul-mouthed Queen Helena can’t hold a candle to Kris and her brood of sexy, calculating, foul-mouthed Kardashian daughters.In the season premiere of “Keeping Up With the Kardashians,” Kim takes a break from posing for nude portraits to have sex in a bathroom with her husband, Kanye West. She is ovulating and wants a second child — she has an heir and wants a spare. Her sister Khloe is repulsed, but Kim is serene, coyly telling the camera something that is too suggestive for print, but basically comes down to “honi soit qui mal y pense.”Advertisement“The Royals” is a mischievous sendup, a “Dynasty” about a real dynasty, and Ms. Hurley is quite amusing as she sashays across the marble halls of Buckingham Palace, making catty remarks to servile courtiers. (Joan Collins, who was the original conniving diva of “Dynasty” has a cameo later in the season.) When told that Sir Elton John wants to pop in for a visit, Queen Helena replies scornfully, “Give someone a title and they treat the place like it’s a Starbucks.”Those moments are fun, but they wear thin quickly, because this isn’t really a parody of the existing British royal family or a rag on the British class system; it’s more like an over-the-top reality show — which makes sense because this is the network’s first scripted series. King Simon (Vincent Regan) is sweet, well meaning and softhearted (or what the British call “wet”), but he is a bewildered patriarch outmatched by his conniving, sardonic queen and unruly children. When the oldest son dies, handsome, playful Prince Liam (William Moseley) becomes the heir apparent, but he angers his mother by sleeping with Ophelia (Merritt Patterson), daughter of the queen’s head of security. Ophelia is half-American, and instead of tea, drinks dirty chai with soy.Helena’s daughter, Eleanor (Alexandra Park), isn’t exactly a model princess. She drinks, takes drugs and sleeps around, seducing servants and bodyguards. She has a penchant for partying to excess in Paris nightclubs without any underwear. Queen Helena is inured, but annoyed. “My daughter’s vagina was on the cover of no less than four tabloids,” she snaps.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The Royals” wears a broad smirk, and its problem is that it veers too far from the real thing. What’s missing is tension between the public mask and private predilections, the dissonance between noblesse oblige and unlimited privilege. That’s what made the real-life soap opera of Prince Charles, Princess Diana and Camilla Parker Bowles so entrancing and keeps people fascinated with Prince William, Kate Middleton and Prince Harry — the real royals pretend nothing is ever wrong or improper, even in those cycles when the tabloids suggest otherwise. The early episodes of “The Royals” focus so intently — and unimaginatively — on bad behavior behind palace doors that it leaves out the contrast with the carefully nurtured public image.The Kardashians are better at keeping up appearances. In the season premiere, the family members act as though nothing is going on with Bruce Jenner besides his divorce from Kris, even as his appearance — including cosmetic surgery and ponytail — markedly changes.Mr. Jenner has not confirmed that he is transitioning from male to female, but he has not contradicted numerous reports to that effect, and some news outlets have been chronicling his physical makeover for months. But this momentous life decision isn’t part of the season’s script — at least not the early part. (It has been reported that Mr. Jenner has filmed at least part of an E! docuseries about his transition.)AdvertisementLike members of a disciplined royal family, Kim and her relatives follow the mind-numbing rituals and etiquette of reality television without complaint or even an eye roll of disbelief.In the season premiere, after Bruce’s divorce his sons from a previous marriage give him a bachelor party with babes and booze at his Malibu beach house — the theme is “Bruce on the Loose.” Kim and her sisters hear that he has been on a date with a friend of their mother’s and are outraged at his insensitivity — Kris isn’t dating yet and is hurt by the betrayal. Mr. Jenner, more youthful-looking but as muddled as ever, seems surprised. “Do you really think I am dating anyone?”The monarchy has survived in Britain for so many centuries partly because it protects its mystique and doesn’t bend to reality. The Kardashians have held onto their perch on cable television for 10 seasons for much the same reason.The RoyalsE!, Sunday nights at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Produced by Lionsgate and Universal Cable Productions. Created by Mark Schwahn; Mr. Schwahn, Brian Robbins, Joe Davola and Shauna Phelan, executive producersWITH: Elizabeth Hurley (Queen Helena), Vincent Regan (King Simon), William Moseley (Prince Liam), Alexandra Park (Princess Eleanor), Jake Maskall (Cyrus), Hatty Preston (Maribel), Lydia Rose Bewley (Penelope), Oliver Milburn (Ted), Joan Collins (Grand Duchess of Oxford) and Merritt Patterson (Ophelia).A version of this review appears in print on March 13, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: The New Princess Diaries.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.