AdvertisementSupported byBy Siobhan BurkeFor all the fanfare surrounding the new structure of the Paul Taylor Dance Company, things weren’t too different on Tuesday at the inaugural performance of Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance. The biggest change was the live music, played by the terrific Orchestra of St. Luke’s under Donald York’s baton, a major upgrade from the troupe’s usual taped accompaniment. But whereas other programs this season will feature, for the first time in the company’s 61-year history, outside artists — the Limón Dance Company in Doris Humphrey’s “Passacaglia,” Shen Wei Dance Arts in Mr. Shen’s “Rite of Spring” — opening night at the David H. Koch Theater was devoted to Mr. Taylor.At 84, he has created 142 dances, four of which made up Tuesday’s program. Every seat in the house was $7.50, a season-opening special signaling that American Modern Dance is for everybody — even if, according to the possessive construction of the company’s title, it belongs to Mr. Taylor. (Perhaps it’s not surprising that he’s having trouble acquiring works from the likes of Twyla Tharp and the Martha Graham Dance Company. Who wants to be owned?)I often find myself resisting Mr. Taylor’s dances — so proper, so unfunny — and then relaxing into them, won over by their musicality and by dancers who appear to be completely in their element. This happened in “Arden Court” (1981), a sprightly suite for six men and three women, performed to William Boyce symphonies. Against Gene Moore’s backdrop of a feathery pink rose, courtships and friendships blossom. A suitor tries giddily to entice his aloof love interest; one pal challenges another to a fleet-footed race against the music. The men are the focus here, and Francisco Graciano, spinning around Parisa Khobdeh, cut a startlingly sharp image. You couldn’t miss him.It seemed both appropriate and not to put “Big Bertha” on the very first American Modern Dance bill. A twisted piece of Americana, this 1970 work follows a nuclear family — Mr. B (Sean Mahoney), Mrs. B (Michelle Fleet) and the happy-go-lucky Miss B (Eran Bugge) — as they arrive at a carnival and fall under the corrupting spell of Big Bertha (Christina Lynch Markham), a coin-operated master of ceremonies. (One critic has theorized that the imposing machine is Martha Graham, with whom Mr. Taylor got his start, or even Mr. Taylor himself.) Though apparently intended as a social critique, it depicts incest, rape and other violence against women in ways that seem misguided today.“Troilus and Cressida (reduced),” from 2006, is more unequivocally goofy: a cartoon of ancient Roman romance, complete with tittering Cupids and drunk Greek invaders. Undaunted by the forced humor, Robert Kleinendorst and Ms. Khobdeh, as the prince and the priest’s daughter, were charming, persuasive comedians. In “Syzygy” (1987), Mr. Taylor looked to the cosmos. This refreshingly loose-limbed dance, to Mr. York’s surging score, imagines human bodies as celestial ones, with the sturdy, vibrant Aileen Roehl as the slowly promenading sun. The energy here carried over into the curtain call, when Mr. Taylor arrived onstage, and the audience members leapt to their feet. Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance continues through March 29 at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com. Advertisement