By MARTHA SCHWENDENERMARCH 12, 2015
New York’s museums are filled with stellar exhibitions devoted to Asian art — and several more open on Friday. A much-anticipated exhibition of ukiyo-e prints featuring cats debuts at the Japan Society. The Queens Museum opens a survey of art in India from 1947 to 1997 and the Rubin Museum introduces a show of masks from Tibet, Nepal and other regions. An exhibition of works by the Iranian abstractionist Monir Shahroudy Farmanfarmaian joins the Guggenheim’s already lauded show about the conceptual painter On Kawara. Meanwhile, the Asia Society continues a season of programming dedicated to the art of Myanmar.But the yellow banners hanging from lampposts on Madison Avenue uptown, announcing Asia Week New York, point the way toward less obvious but often museum-worthy troves of Asian art, lodged in innocuous apartments and galleries on the Upper East Side and drawn from 42 dealers, private collections and numerous institutions. From Friday until March 21, for the price of a MetroCard, you can see a vast range of painting, calligraphy, sculpture, ceramics and photography, and the annual Japanese Art Dealers Association fair, which opens on Saturday at the Ukrainian Institute of America (2 East 79th Street, at Fifth Avenue, through Monday). Here is a guide to some of the highlights.Indian PaintingThis is a great moment for Indian painting. In April, an exhibition of art from the Deccan Plateau, in southern India, from 1500 to 1700, will open at the Metropolitan Museum, followed in June by another Met show devoted to royal hunting images. Some of Asia Week’s standouts include a gorgeous exhibition of classical Indian paintings at Carlton Rochell (121 East 71st Street) with 18th-century illustrations of the Gita Govinda set in the lush Punjab hills. Oliver Forge and Brendan Lynch (9 East 82nd Street), another local dealer, has an extraordinary signed painting from around 1720 of the famously handsome Moghul emperor Farrukhsiyar, decked out in pearls and Burmese rubies. The British dealer Francesca Galloway, exhibiting at W. M. Brady (22 East 80th Street), has an exhibition titled “Into the Indian Mind” that explores tropes like valor in battle, filial relationships and people celebrating Holi, the Hindu spring festival that has recently been updated as a kind of daytime rave for the music festival crowd.And Art Passages (showing at the Isselbacher Gallery, 41 East 78th Street) has an exhibition titled “The Feminine Mystique in Indian Art,” in which the women range from lovelorn beauties in romantic poetry to hunters and demon-battling goddesses.AdvertisementCeramicsCeramics have been a central discipline of Asian art from ancient tomb vessels to tea ceremonies. Zetterquist (3 East 66th Street) has a wonderful collection of Chinese ceramics from the Song dynasty (960-1279), including several delicate works glazed with a delicious minty blue-green celadon. Joan Mirviss (39 East 78th Street) is featuring Japanese tsubo vessels, which started out as storage jars and whose simplicity became a vehicle for creative interpretation and reinterpretation.AdvertisementMika (41 East 57th Street) has Japanese ceramics that range from the ancient period to the present, culminating in the work of Koji Toda, whose silver-inlaid vessels have a startling, futuristic look. Dai Ichi Arts, exhibiting at Hollis Taggart (985 Madison at 75th Street), also has a display of contemporary ceramics, including boxes that update the kintsugi tradition — repairing shattered pottery with gold to highlight the fissures — with purposeful breakage and reassembly.Ancient WorldsFor those craving gods and heroes, or creatures accompanying humans on their journeys into the afterlife, several galleries present such work. The Brussels dealer Gisèle Croës (showing at Gagosian, 976 Madison, at 76th Street) bills her gallery as “Asian extreme,” and she usually delivers. This year her featured works are a large, fearsome Chinese bronze Bodhisattva in military gear from the Ming dynasty (1368-1644) and a more serene wooden Bodhisattva figure from the Song dynasty to the early Yuan dynasty (1279-1368).Around the corner is Nayef Homsi (7 East 75th Street), who has the best-smelling gallery of the group (he was burning a fragrant candle when I arrived). This befits his ashram-like space and display of religious sculpture, including a lovely second-century Buddha head from the Gandhara region (straddling today’s Pakistan and Afghanistan), influenced by Greek and Hellenistic sculpture since Alexander the Great briefly occupied the region. A few blocks north, Michael C. Hughes (showing at Shepherd W & K, 58 East 79th Street) has tomb sculptures — from old collections, he stresses — including ceramic horses meant to attend the deceased in the afterlife.Modern and ContemporaryMuch of the contemporary art exhibited in Asia Week’s galleries involves recent translations of ancient traditions like calligraphy, scroll painting or ceramics. A dealer with a solid roundup of contemporary ink painting is M. Sutherland (55 East 80th Street), including work by Jia Youfu, one of the best-known interpreters of the Song painting tradition, and Liang Quan, who stains rice paper with tea, an update on devotional practice..At the Kang Collection (9 East 82nd Street), Minjung Kim colors rice paper then applies a flame to it to achieve a bold effect. Kaikodo (74 East 79th Street) has something even more unusual: a photograph by Michael Cherney (whose Chinese name is Qiu Mai) printed in ink and mounted as a hand scroll that invokes the 14th-century calligrapher Zhu Derun’s famous painting “Primordial Chaos” (1349).PhotographyPhotography is not a big component of Asia Week, but a few exhibitions this year deserve mention. Primary among these is a fantastic show of contemporary photographs by Hyung S. Kim at the Korean Cultural Service (460 Park Avenue, at 58th Street). The exhibition’s title, “Haenyeo,” refers to the female divers who harvest seafood from the ocean around Jeju Island using methods dating back almost a millennium, and without modern diving equipment.Nearby is an exhibition of Taiwanese landscape photographs at the Taipei Cultural Center (1 East 42nd Street); the prints aren’t the highest quality but the range of photography is substantial. And if you want to head farther afield, the Rubin Museum (150 West 17 Street) has a fascinating exhibition from the French photographer Marc Riboud’s journeys across Asia in the 1950s and ’60s, while the Noguchi Museum (9-01 33rd Road, at Vernon Boulevard, Long Island City, Queens) is showing Isamu Noguchi’s photographs of northern India in 1949, and 18th-century astronomical observatories in Delhi and Jaipur. It might be a fitting place to conclude a week devoted to the art of a continent: a conduit for contemplating the universe and the stars.A Critic’s Notebook article last Friday about Asia Week New York misstated the address of the Nayef Homsi gallery, which has a display of religious sculpture. It is at 7 East 75th Street, not 75 East 75th Street. The article also misidentified the gallery showing work by Liang Quan. It is M. Sutherland, not the Kang Collection. The article also misstated the process used by Minjung Kim, whose work is on display at the Kang Collection. She colors rice paper then applies a flame; she does not apply the flame first.Asia Week New York continues through March 21, and the Japanese Art Dealers Association fair runs from Saturday through Monday; asiaweekny.com and jada-ny.org. A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2015, on Page C26 of the New York edition with the headline: An Array of Artworks as Vast as a Continent.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.