AdvertisementSupported byAntiquesBy Eve M. KahnIrish woodcarvers, metalworkers, glassblowers, ceramists and weavers often did not sign their works. During the 19th-century famines and early-20th-century revolts against British rule, major collections in Ireland ended up scattered or destroyed. Partly because of these obstacles to attributing the works and identifying past owners, the country’s antiques are rarely the subject of exhibitions overseas.The Art Institute of Chicago has unearthed the names of hundreds of underappreciated makers and aristocratic patrons for an exhibition that opens on Tuesday, St. Patrick’s Day: “Ireland: Crossroads of Art and Design, 1690-1840.” The museum staff and advisers have learned to recognize typically Irish motifs on unmarked objects; artisans there leaned toward shamrocks, harps, scallop shells, squirrels and the bearded and mustachioed faces of the objects’ original owners.“Quirkiness has come to be seen as peculiarly Irish,” the show’s main curator, Christopher Monkhouse, writes in the catalog (from Yale University Press).Many pieces in the show, which runs through June 7, spent decades mislabeled as English or American. A walnut desk and bookcase made in 1732 by John Kirkhoffer, a German immigrant living in Dublin, arrived at the Art Institute in the 1950s described as “England c. 1710.” The Dublin painter William Cuming’s portrait from around 1800 of a Dublin mayor was long believed to be an image of a London politician by the American artist John Singleton Copley. A silver chandelier made in Galway around 1740 for a Dominican convent has come to Chicago from the Winterthur museum in Delaware, where it has hung in a Maryland period room from the 1730s.Mr. Monkhouse writes in the catalog that a yew-wood crucifix, carved in the 1770s for religious pilgrims visiting County Donegal, “came to be mistaken for the work of the Iroquois under the influence of French Jesuit missionaries.”Mr. Monkhouse often consulted with Desmond FitzGerald, an aristocratic historian who filled his ancestral manor in a County Limerick village with Irish antiques. Mr. FitzGerald, known as the Knight of Glin, died in 2011, at 74; during his terminal illness, Mr. Monkhouse said, “he’d call me up and say, ‘I’ve just thought of something else you must track down.’ ”Ancient artifacts on view that once belonged to Irish aristocrats include a headless Roman statue of Venus and a pair of prehistoric deer antlers about 10 feet wide. An 18th-century silver cistern and a silver fountain in the show were both made for a duke who, Mr. Monkhouse said, “had a gambling habit and also went through several wives.”The catalog and wall texts explain how the collections formed during grand tours and missionary expeditions. In a portrait of a baronet painted around 1680, samurai gear at his feet represents souvenirs from Jesuit trips to Japan to spread Catholicism.“These are the unexpected stories that we try to sprinkle throughout the exhibit,” Mr. Monkhouse said.A number of objects in the show have changed hands in the last few years. In 2009, at Christie’s in London, Mr. FitzGerald sold a few hundred pieces from his home; the Art Institute paid about $28,000 for one of them, a chalk portrait from 1770 of a Dublin surgeon’s daughter, by Robert Healy. In 2012, at Christie’s in London, an unnamed major lender to the Chicago exhibition paid about $25,000 for a set of four renderings from 1760 of classical statues for an earl’s palace near Dublin that is now a museum.Chantal O’Sullivan, the owner of O’Sullivan Antiques in Dublin and in Lower Manhattan, helped furnish the earl’s home during restorations over the years. “I put a Napoleonic bed into the top bedroom,” she said. She can sometimes trace the provenance of her inventory of Irish furniture (prices start around $10,000), even though key government records and sprawling homes were lost in 1920s battles.One telltale sign of Irish manufacture is lavish use of high-quality wood. Since Dublin was a first port of call for ships coming to Europe from the Caribbean, Ms. O’Sullivan said, “we got the best mahogany.”In Manhattan, the S. J. Shrubsole gallery offers Irish silver at prices starting at a few thousand dollars. Through March 22, the gallery will display Irish pieces in its booth at the Maastricht antiques fair in the Netherlands, including four ribbed candlesticks made in Dublin in the 1690s for an English duke.James R. McConnaughy, a vice president at Shrubsole, described the distinctive look of Irish silver as “its own fun otherness.”THAT ’70S RESEARCH The Vermont Historical Society has set out to document the 1970s, when the state’s counterculturists took over abandoned farmsteads, gardened in the buff and organized food co-ops, crafts studios and communes.From March 18 to April 29, the historical society will hold community forums around the state, seeking anecdotes and artifacts like protest posters, fringed outerwear and cars painted in psychedelic patterns. A related exhibition and symposium will be held next year. Jackie Calder, the society’s curator, said that counterculture veterans will probably need little prodding to reminisce while being recorded by scholarly teams.In general, she said, “It was a group of people that really liked to talk a lot.” She added, “Some have good memories — we’ll see if everyone does.” Interviewees so far have mentioned the shock of moving to Vermont from elsewhere and experiencing their first winters there. “Cold is a big theme,” Ms. Calder said.Last year, the society received a federal grant of $117,521 for the project; a few web postings have complained about the taxpayer outlay for “naked hippie commune research.” Ms. Calder said she welcomed diverse opinions about the importance of 1970s movements and memorabilia.“It’ll be better to have comments than no comments,” she said.Advertisement