By HANNAH OLIVENNESMARCH 12, 2015
This year The European Fine Art Fair, or Tefaf, is adding a new section, “Night Fishing,” to its Modern section. The exhibition gathers eight artists and focuses on sculpture. Sydney Picasso, an art historian and author who is a curator of “Night Fishing,” spoke recently with Hannah Olivennes about her collaboration with Tefaf, her selection process, and the story behind the name of the new section.Q. How did you come to curate a section of Tefaf? A. The Tefaf board has been trying to look at ways of keeping this fair contemporary and present, especially with all the temporal changes in the art world schedules but also with all the different collectors.This had been done in other fairs, notably in Frieze Masters [in London], and so I said it should be so distinctive that people will notice it.Advertisement[Tefaf’s] architect, Tom Postma, who has also worked for Art Basel, has really dedicated himself in making something that will stand out, without taking away from the galleries.Q. How long did it take to put “Night Fishing” together?A. We’ve been speaking about it since August. In September, we really came up with the concept. We wanted to have everyone signed up by December, so it was very unnerving at times.Q. Why did you choose to focus on sculpture? A. The idea behind it is that sculpture is something that speaks to the past and the future. But also technically speaking, sculpture has always been part of my training.I’m very interested in materials, composition, prints and how things are made, and that’s why the subtitle of the section is “Hands On.”I think that many people don’t understand what is a mold or an undermold. Contemporary sculpture usually bares it bones, and it’s very self-evident.AdvertisementQ. How did you come up with the name “Night Fishing”? Is it an homage to “Night Fishing at Antibes,” which your former father-in-law, Pablo Picasso, painted in 1939? (Ms. Picasso was married to the artist’s son Claude.) A. With the idea of sculpture, you somehow can’t really not talk about Picasso. His sculptural activity and work is one of the major contributions to art history in the 20th century. Brassaï said of Picasso: “Sculpture was lurking like a virtuality deep within his paintings themselves, betraying a nostalgia for art in the round.”It was really a working title in the beginning. Everyone liked it, but the first problem was the concept of night fishing. Originally, night fishing is done at night, with a lamp, and that is illegal today. That was a problem because I didn’t want anyone to think I was pushing anyone into illegal activities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the other idea of night fishing is that it is about scanning the horizon, filtering and focusing on things. People always ask me how do I collect, or how I choose what I’m writing about, and it really is filtering and focusing. You are putting a spotlight on things.Q. How did you choose the works for the section?A. It was really all Hidde van Seggelen, the Dutch co-curator of “Night Fishing,” who runs a gallery in London, and the Tefaf board. In the case of Tefaf, you’re dealing with many dealers who have been there for a long time, and they’re also a foundation which does certain charitable events, and I didn’t want to get into any quarrels.I identified the artists who I believe have been the most explicit verbally about their craft. I gave my wish list to Hidde and the Tefaf team, who wrote to at least one hundred galleries to invite them to participate, and the result is the final list.I think originally the Tefaf Modern committee didn’t really understand what we were doing, but Hidde brilliantly did the footwork in October and November. There are really no defining criteria, except for questions of material or style, but there seems to be an unspoken plastic consensus which makes the work speak to me.Since there are only eight galleries here, we’re not trying to do the “best of.” To me, it’s more like a compilation, a playlist — like when you’re passing your iPod to someone.I think that when “Night Fishing” is finally installed, the objects will truly speak to each other, creating a new story.AdvertisementThe list is very European: Georg Baselitz, Tony Cragg, Richard Deacon, Cristina Iglesias — I’m very happy to have a Spanish artist and I’m happy to have a female — Wolfgang Laib, Mark Manders, Nam June Paik, Markus Raetz. We put them in alphabetical order, not favorite!Most of them, especially Tony Cragg and Richard Deacon, have also written about sculpture. Tony Cragg gave a couple of lectures at the College de France in 2013-2014, and Richard Deacon just published a book of essays.Q. What is the place of Tefaf in the art world today?A. It’s not an art fair like what we’ve been accustomed to, like Frieze or Art Basel in Miami Beach. It’s more about the art.When you go to Tefaf, you’re reminded, especially in the painting section, that these pictures have been in these American collections since the late 19th century, beginning of the 20th, and that some of these collectors were really interesting. Not just Hearst and Getty but also Henry Huntington, who has medieval manuscripts, scriptures of the Bible. He has a huge collection of Romney and Gainsborough portraits, and you don’t see that everywhere.I actually heard Noah Horowitz, the director of the Armory show [in New York], call Tefaf the “poster boy for the art fair,” and I think it’s nice to hear that from a young person.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.