AdvertisementSupported byBy Nazanin LankaraniWillem van Roijen, a finance specialist in Wassenaar, a suburb of The Hague, is chairman of the executive committee of the European Fine Art Fair, or Tefaf, and has been a member of the fair’s Board of Trustees since 1997. Mr. van Roijen recently discussed with Nazanin Lankarani some of the challenges faced by Tefaf today as the inventory of top-quality old masters and antiques shrinks and new collectors increasingly drift toward modern and contemporary art.Q. What was your background before joining Tefaf?A. I have a legal background but went into banking in the 1980s. I first became involved in the art market when I set up an art-financing department to facilitate short-term financing of acquisitions, especially by museums.Q. What is your primary responsibility as chairman of the Executive Committee?A. My most important task is to ensure that members speak in one voice, and that we focus on one goal, to keep Tefaf the top art fair in the world.Q. What is the single biggest challenge that Tefaf faces today?A. Staying at the top is our biggest challenge. We must be careful to keep abreast of art market developments.We are facing today issues relating to globalization and increased transparency in the market. Art dealers used to make good margins buying art in auction and selling later to clients in trade fairs. That is all in the past. Today, buyers know exactly what prices were paid in auction and where the art comes from.We must ensure that what is shown at Tefaf is the best quality and that its provenance is clear.Q. How does Tefaf attract the best-quality art?A. The challenge for old masters dealers today is to offer top-quality art that is fresh to the market. They usually keep their best works for Tefaf, because we have a very good reputation in the trade.That reputation comes from our extremely strict vetting procedure, one that is stricter than that of other fairs. For that reason, collectors and museums have developed the habit of coming to Tefaf to find the best.Q. Given the shift in buyer taste toward modern or contemporary art, how can Tefaf – primarily a traditional art and antiques fair — appeal to younger buyers?A. This is something we think about. We do succeed in attracting a young audience each year. They come with great enthusiasm. Whether they will become art collectors later on, we cannot tell.Tefaf’s modern and contemporary section attracts a younger collector base that, by virtue of being there, is also exposed to the rest of the fair.In addition, we try to bring something new to the fair every year to appeal to new buyers and museums. This year, we are presenting a section called “Night Fishing,” a curated presentation that complements the fair’s Modern section. We are testing the idea this year. If it is successful, we will repeat it next year.Q. Given the scarcity factor in the old masters market, will Tefaf evolve in the next decade into a primarily modern and contemporary art fair?A. The modern and contemporary section was set in the 1990s. This year, we have 51 exhibitors in that section. That is about 25 percent of total exhibitors, excluding the eight galleries represented in the “Night Fishing” section. The modern section will very possibly grow in the coming years given the scarcity in the old masters market but also because fewer new dealers are venturing into old masters.I cannot say how tastes will shift in the next decade, but our aim will be to present art covering the whole spectrum of 7,000 years. We are confident that Tefaf will continue to exist in 10 years. As long there is an art market, we will be here.Q. Tefaf remains a very European art fair, with about 10 percent of participating galleries from the United States, and even fewer from Asia. Do you plan to increase global participation? A. The problem is that we are at full capacity. Very few dealers ever leave once they are admitted into the fair. We would love to be more international, especially bring in more dealers from Asia or South America, but to let new exhibitors in, existing ones must leave.Q. The Art Basel fair has expanded to other sites, into major cities and art hubs like Miami and Hong Kong. Is geographical expansion a strategy Tefaf might adopt? A. We have no plans to change either the 10-day length of the fair or its the geographical location. Two years ago, there was talk of setting up a satellite fair in Beijing in collaboration with Sotheby’s. But those plans have been stricken due to lack of exhibitor interest.Q. Are you an art collector?A. My wife and I buy art at Tefaf and other fairs once in a while, but I would not define it as “collecting.” We are eclectic buyers; we buy art that appeals to us.Advertisement