AUSTIN, Tex. — The first five minutes of the pilot for the TBS comedy “Angie Tribeca,” co-created by Steve Carell, contain more gags than a full episode of most sitcoms. It starts with the titular police officer (Rashida Jones) going through her morning training ritual, which becomes more and more outrageous as the scene progresses. In the tradition of spoof comedy series like “Police Squad” and “Sledge Hammer” this new show takes satirical aim at the procedural. The festival showed the first two episodes as part of their Episodic program, which presents television premieres. “It’s really, really stupid,” said Mr. Carell, at a panel following the screening. “We just wanted something that was irreverent and silly and made us laugh.” Mr. Carell created the show with his wife Nancy and directed the pilot episode.Ms. Jones also spoke at the panel with her co-star, Hayes MacArthur (who plays a character named J. Geils), about taking on this show (scheduled to air this fall). “I read it and was like, there’s no chance I’m not doing this.” The show requires its cast to engage in some ridiculous physical comedy while keeping a completely straight face. Reports from the South by Southwest conference and festival in Austin.“All the jokes are so supported by wardrobe, makeup, explosions, all this stuff happening around you that you can just play it straight and honest and let the absurdity erupt around you,” Mr. MacArthur said.“My mom came to visit me on set the other day and she almost turned around. She was like, ‘I thought I was on your set, then I saw horses and Native Americans and I thought I was wrong,'” Ms. Jones said. “No, no, no. That’s our set.” The star of the new TBS comedy series discusses the show at the South by Southwest festival.A couple of running gags involve a screaming cop and another includes a weak-stomached officer who is compelled to vomit at the sight of a different atrocity each episode. Another frequent gag in the first episode involves a joke for Ford vehicles that removes any shred of subtlety that kind of product placement may have had on another show.“They didn’t come to us. We just wrote it that way hoping they would sign off on it at the end of the day,” Mr. Carell said. “Once they got wind of it, they were all on board and they gave us all those cars to use.”The show also contains some fun cameos, including Adam Scott and James Franco (playing a character named Sgt. Pepper). Mr. Carell also revealed that Bill Murray will make an appearance on the show this season. Mr. MacArthur’s character was intended to be short-lived, as well. When they first wrote the pilot, the Carells had planned to kill off Angie Tribeca’s partner each episode. But working with Mr. MacArthur, they changed their plan. “We loved him so much, we couldn’t kill him,” Mr. Carell said.