AUSTIN, Tex. — On Friday the 13th, the South by Southwest film festival started off with a creepy and occasionally funny bang. Audiences had a variety of horror options, including demon possession dramas, haunted Skype chillers and ’80s slasher remixes.Some jumps and a few gasps dotted a screening of the small-budget “Unfriended,” which will be released nationwide by Universal on April 17. Directed by Leo Gabriadze, the film takes place on the desktop computer screen of a high school girl (Shelley Hennig) and largely involves a group Skype conversation that is infiltrated by an unwanted (and unfriended) guest. While exploring the effects of cyberbullying, the thriller uses Google searches, iMessage chats, Facebook messages, and even the Skype call ringtone to create a progressively unsettling narrative.Before the screening, its executive producer Jason Blum, said that the movie was still being tweaked and the version the audience was watching that evening may be different from what makes it to theaters. There has already been a name change, from “Cybernatural” when it played Montreal’s genre festival Fantasia last summer to some good notices from horror sites.It joins a wave of horror films taking place on screens, like “The Den” and “Open Windows,” but “Unfriended” was based on a concept one of its producers, Timur Bekmambetov, had been considering long before those films were made. “Timur had this idea for like 15 years, and people said he was crazy,” recalled the film’s screenwriter Nelson Greaves at a post-screening Q&A. But they ultimately developed the idea into something workable, Mr. Greaves wrote a script and Mr. Gabriadze shot much of the film in long, real-time takes, to give a more of a sense of the stakes ratcheting up. Appropriately enough, Ms. Hennig participated in the Q&A via Skype. Mr. Bekmambetov also joined the call, although there were technical issues with his  connection. (No supernatural intervention was blamed.) Rather than taking place on a screen, “The Final Girls”  mostly takes place in a screen. A girl (Taissa Farmiga) is trapped with her friends inside  a “Friday the 13th”-style ’80s slasher movie that her mother starred in.That film with a cast that included Malin Akerman, Adam DeVine, Thomas Middleditch and Alia Shawkat, has a sense of humor as it deconstructs the genre.Before the screening, the film’s director, Todd Strauss-Schulson, recalled seeing Sam Raimi’s “Drag Me to Hell” at SXSW six years before. “It was a bunch of cinephile maniacs loving that movie,” he said. “It was the best vibe for me.”He said that feeling inspired him while making “The Final Girls,”  and the audience did not disappoint him at Friday’s screening: there were big laughs and even some applause at the climax.As the closing credits featuring outtakes and bloopers indicate, the cast improvised some of the funnier sequences, or, as Mr. Middleditch put it in the post-screening Q&A, they were  “goofin’ and spoofin’.”