AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (HBO) TAMMY (2014) After losing her car, her job and her husband in a single day, a fast-food worker (Melissa McCarthy) embarks on an adventure of self-discovery in a blue Cadillac with her grandmother (Susan Sarandon), like an intergenerational Thelma and Louise. “Tammy’s journey, as they like to say in movieland, is into self-worth,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times about this road movie, written by Ms. McCarthy with her husband, Ben Falcone, who directed. “Yet the far more interesting trip here, at least until her self-actualization kicks in, is through an America of lousy jobs, tyrannical bosses, nickel-and-diming poverty and real-looking women.” The jokes about Tammy’s appetite “register as both tedious and borderline desperate,” Ms. Dargis added, and suggest that Ms. McCarthy may not yet be comfortable in her own skin on screen. “But the radicalness of Ms. McCarthy’s success,” she added, “is that she’s a beautiful, funny, wildly popular female comic with terrific timing, movie star presence and oodles of charm. That she also happens to be fat may be historically notable although it is, finally, the most ordinary thing about her.”8 P.M. (Lifetime) WUTHERING HIGH SCHOOL (2015) In this contemporary retelling of Emily Brontë’s “Wuthering Heights,” Cathy Earnshaw (Paloma Kwiatkowski), a teenage outcast in Malibu, Calif., seeks solace after her mother’s death in the arms of Heath (Andrew Jacobs), the son of a woman employed by her father (James Caan). But when her friends mock her unconventional boyfriend choice, she dumps Heath for a more popular student, stirring up a whirlwind of jealousy, pride and passion.9 P.M. (CUNY) ENOUGH! (2006) A doctor (Rachida Brakni) searches for her husband, a journalist whose writings have led to his disappearance during the Algerian civil war in the 1990s, with the help of her neighbor (Fettouma Bouamari), a former revolutionary, in this drama directed by Djamila Sahraoui.10 P.M. (Starz Cinema) THE ROYAL TENENBAUMS (2001) The ousted patriarch (Gene Hackman) of a family of child prodigies — in their adult versions, Chas, a financial whiz (Ben Stiller); Margot, an award-winning playwright (Gywneth Paltrow); and Richie, a tennis champion (Luke Wilson) — tries to weasel his way back into the fold in this comedy by Wes Anderson, set in a fantasy New York. Anjelica Huston plays his former wife, Etheline, who in middle age discovered the twin vocations of urban archaeology and contract bridge, and who is courted by the dapper Mr. Sherman (Danny Glover). Owen Wilson is Eli Cash, a stoner novelist who happens to be Richie’s childhood friend and the secret lover of Margot, who is married to Raleigh St. Clair (Bill Murray), a neurologist who runs strange experiments on a boy. And Alec Baldwin narrates. “At once endearing and unbearably show-offy, it seems to be the product of a sensibility formed by age-inappropriate reading: a childhood spent sneaking into the grown-up fiction section of the library (and encountering, among other things, the complete works of John Irving) and a post-adolescence shaped by a lingering fondness for books like ‘Eloise’ and “From the Mixed-Up Files of Mrs. Basil E. Frankweiler,’ ” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “Mr. Anderson has talents that don’t entirely serve his ambitions, and ‘The Royal Tenenbaums’ finally elicits an exasperated admiration. Yes, yes, you’re charming, you’re brilliant. Now say good night and go to bed.”10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS: COLD CASE In this installment in a series on long-unsolved murders, Erin Moriarty revisits the case of Amy Gellert, who in 1994 was killed when she interrupted an intruder holding her parents hostage. The show will also use social media to collect possible evidence from the public.What’s Streaming NowCHAMPS (2015) The director Bert Marcus chronicles how Mike Tyson (who is also an executive producer), Evander Holyfield and Bernard Hopkins used boxing to overcome hardship while examining its value as a solution to urban poverty and the lure of drugs and gangs. “That the sport helped a handful of men does nothing for countless thousands; it’s no more a viable escape route than rap or basketball is,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times. “Footage of these men, especially Tyson and Holyfield, in their prime is thrilling, but what ‘Champs’ envisions for the future is unclear.” (iTunes)Advertisement