By ALASTAIR MACAULAYMARCH 13, 2015
Paul Taylor’s “Sea Lark,” which had its New York premiere on Wednesday, is entirely disappointing. A trivial frolic set to Poulenc’s irresistibly energetic “Les Biches,” the dance, new in October, is a boating adventure, with painted waves, a large toy sailboat and boring young people being frightfully jolly. There are pleasures to be found in the bright color schemes of the costumes and sets by Alex Katz, a long-term Taylor collaborator, but they can’t save the day.Since Mr. Taylor is known as a musical choreographer, the central cause of dismay here is how little he discovers in Poulenc’s rhythms. Listen, and you hear witty stops and starts, intriguing changes of meter and terrific brio (all of which are brilliantly used in the original Bronislava Nijinska ballet to this score); watch, and you see only cheerily regular blandness. “Sea Lark” is just a crayon daub of the painting Mr. Taylor couldn’t be bothered to paint. That would hardly matter, though, if it were just a passing blip in Mr. Taylor’s illustrious career. As things are, however, he has been disappointing his public with most of the new pieces he has created over the last 25 years.At Thursday’s gala at the David H. Koch Theater, the performance of the delectable “Company B” (1991) reminded me how, when it was first presented in New York, the reaction of many was “Thank God!” — it showed Mr. Taylor had gotten out of a rut. (Not for long. Within a few months he presented “Oz,” perhaps the most dismal piece he has put before the public.) Mr. Taylor will be 85 this summer. If you want to know why many people think of him as a desperately old-fashioned, lazy and cliché-laden choreographer, you don’t need to ask. You have only to look at most of the dances he has made since 1986.AdvertisementRecently, Mr. Taylor has been going through prolonged doldrums. “Sea Lark” follows “Marathon Cadenzas” (2014), “American Dreamer” (2013), “Gossamer Gallants” (2013), “Perpetual Dawn” (2013), “To Make Crops Grow” (2012), “House of Joy” (2012), “Phantasmagoria” (2010) and “Three Dubious Memories” (2010) — each showing a different glimmer of the Taylor talent, but none remotely important, and all quickly dropped from the repertory.AdvertisementWhy does the company keep reviving his silly-on-purpose “Troilus and Cressida (reduced)” (2006)? This, set to the “Dance of the Hours” from Ponchielli’s opera “La Gioconda,” was the centerpiece of Thursday’s gala. It’s easy to condescend to Ponchielli’s lollipop music, but Disney’s “Fantasia” and the Allan Sherman-Lou Busch “Hello Muddah” song did so far more hilariously long ago. This is not the only time Mr. Taylor has tried being superior to his choice of musical accompaniment; in public, he said of the Donizetti score he used for “Also Playing” (2009), a much more memorable comedy than “Troilus,” “Nobody would want to listen to it twice.”Back in Mr. Taylor’s 20th-century prime, his company was regularly accompanied by live music (though never for “Company B,” which is set to songs by the Andrews Sisters). For financial reasons, taped music has become the Taylor norm in recent years. So it ought to be a cause for rejoicing that the present season at the Koch Theater has, for most pieces, live music played by the Orchestra of St. Luke’s, conducted by Donald York (who used to be Mr. Taylor’s chief conductor back in the day).This, however, has brought further problems. I’ve never heard Bach’s “Brandenburg” Concertos more soggily played than in the gala’s closing item. (Mr. Taylor’s “Brandenburgs” employs the first two movements of the sixth concerto and all the third.) The ill-tuned cellos were only the most obvious problem. Mr. York knows Mr. Taylor’s work intimately, but his conducting brought none of the lift “Brandenburgs” needs, and Wednesday’s account of the Boyce music for “Arden Court” was subdued.It’s an effort to remember that there’s good reason to call Mr. Taylor the greatest living choreographer. The span of work from “Aureole” (1962) to “Beloved Renegade” (2008) has greatly enriched the dance world. The choreographers Twyla Tharp and Pina Bausch are just the most famous of those who have emerged from his company; the overt Taylor quotations that stud a number of Mark Morris works are a tribute in themselves.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Taylor’s last choreographic high came in 2008-9 (“Changes,” “Beloved Renegade,” “Also Playing,” “Brief Encounters”), and we should not give up hope that he will have another. I write before the premiere of his latest creation, “Death and the Damsel”: Here’s hoping.Wednesday’s performance of “Esplanade,” the most marvelous of all his creations, helped to pick up the evening’s flagging spirits at its end. “Company B” was the high of Thursday’s gala, after which things went downhill. But few of the Taylor dancers have hit a peak this season. Michael Trusnovec, the company’s senior artist, is always a paragon of fine execution, but currently he looks reserved and isolated, no longer a model of style to the other men.Elsewhere, the musclebound-jock look, which in past seasons has blighted too many Taylor men, has resurfaced. (It’s especially hard to watch the tension and strain of Robert Kleinendorst’s shoulders.) And none of the company’s admirable women are projecting well through the depths of the Koch Theater.If this was just another season of the Paul Taylor Dance Company, it would be dispiriting. Instead, however, this is the first season of Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance. It’s embarrassing to observe that now Mr. Taylor is the chief drawback of his own new project.A version of this review appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Season Sails In on Bright Colors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.