By JON PARELESMARCH 13, 2015
A straightforward soul revival would be too banal for the Alabama Shakes, who finished a sold-out two-night stand at the Beacon Theater on Thursday night. It would be easy for the band to stay retro. Its lead singer, Brittany Howard, can be achingly subtle or an unstoppable force of nature; she also happens to be an authoritative lead guitarist. Ms. Howard and the rest of the band are steeped as well in the patient grooves and storytelling strategies of soul, particularly the sounds of Memphis and Muscle Shoals.But instead of offering tame new songs in familiar styles, Alabama Shakes is pursuing some molten essence of soul: raw confessions, tensile riffs, extreme tempos and volcanic buildups.“Gimme All Your Love,” a midconcert showstopper, swerved and whipsawed again and again, from the whole band pounding together, down to a spindly lone guitar, into a tender croon, working through a chugging Memphis beat and ratcheting up to Ms. Howard at full scream demanding, “Give me all you got, baby!”The second Alabama Shakes album, “Sound & Color,” is due April 21, and the band played all 12 of its songs during the concert. Most of the material was unknown to virtually the entire audience, and much of it moves away from the soul basics: choosing extra-slow tempos like the song that opened the set, “Dunes”; toying with unexpected syncopation in “Future People” and “Guess Who”; racing at punk speed and then switching to a girl-group beat in “The Greatest.” But the songs also speak plainly to basic human situations; the funk was tricky but the domestic strife was clear in “Don’t Wanna Fight.”Onstage, it hardly mattered whether the songs were new or familiar. The band, augmented by three backup singers, made each one a showcase of open passion backed by cagey dynamics.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One moment Ms. Howard’s voice would be high, exposed, quivering; the next, the band crashed in as she turned into a soul shouter. There were beats that could be traced back to Stax and Hi Records; there were broad-shouldered guitar chords out of Southern rock. Most of all, there was soul — always recognizable, even in new shapes.The concert started with the impressive United States debut of a band from Mali: Songhoy Blues, whose founders were driven out of northern Mali (the ancestral home of the West African people usually spelled Songhai) by civil war and by Islamists opposed to secular music. It has just released an album, “Music in Exile” (Atlantic), and is the subject of a coming documentary, “They Will Have to Kill Us First: Malian Music in Exile.”Songhoy Blues’s music has the gnarled, triplet-driven riffs of what listeners outside Africa know as desert blues, leaning slightly toward American music, with some rock and funk backbeats and some Jimi Hendrix touches in the arrangements. (Nick Zinner, the Yeah Yeah Yeahs guitarist, was one of the album’s producers and joined the band onstage.) Circling through their modal guitar lines and galloping along on their drumbeats, the songs were insistent and determined but also headed for the ecstatic; when he wasn’t singing, Oumar Touré had some snappy dance moves.A version of this review appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: Lifting a Soul Revival to an Entirely Different Plane.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.