By DAVID ALLENOCT. 14, 2015
The Philadelphia Orchestra, which made its first, electric Carnegie Hall appearance of the season on Tuesday under the dynamic leadership of Yannick Nézet-Séguin, currently presents a paradox.Financial issues continue to trouble the orchestra, as the lingering effects of bankruptcy, which it left in 2012, unravel themselves. The distant threat of a players’ strike was averted on Monday when they agreed to a one-year contract. The pact gives the instrumentalists a small pay increase and a slightly enlarged roster but offers scant security over the longer term.Yet it might be that no American orchestra sounds more alive. Mr. Nézet-Séguin, who recently signed a deal that lasts until 2022, has his players hanging on his every move — and his every balletic move counts.In Grieg’s Suite No. 1 from “Peer Gynt,” he had little to do but lacquer up an alluring sheen, with the brass craggy and ghoulish for “In the Hall of the Mountain King,” the strings shimmering, almost sensual in “The Death of Ase.” He worked harder and achieved his characteristic intensity of attack in Bartok’s Violin Concerto No. 2, in which Gil Shaham proved a controlled, eloquent soloist more than capable of balancing wistfulness and regret, anger and hope. Mr. Shaham’s encore, the “Gavotte en rondeau” from Bach’s E major Partita, rightly had an improvisatory, joyful feel.AdvertisementMr. Nézet-Séguin approached Sibelius’s Symphony No. 5 as a colorist, one unusually concerned with warm yellows and reds. Other conductors more assertively draw out the composer’s disjunctive phrases and his piling up of rhythmic and harmonic tension, whether with the immaculate drive of Osmo Vanska or the deconstructive glee of Esa-Pekka Salonen. But this was no modernist reading, rather a brashly powerful one. A fluent, triumphant sweep didn’t hide insistent detailing, particularly in the woodwinds and the lower strings, but it did put smoothness, and a pristine cultivation of hue, first.That’s the worry: that this team is being seduced by its own sound, hiding a distinct lack of ideas behind fabled Philadelphia traditions. Rather than treating its Carnegie appearances as a platform for invention that might be thought risky on home turf, the orchestra’s four programs this season are so nostalgic they would make Leopold Stokowski blush: Just 12 minutes of those concerts will be devoted to music written after that magician left Philadelphia in 1941.AdvertisementGood thing the performances are, for the moment at least, inspirational.­The Philadelphia Orchestra returns to Carnegie Hall on Jan. 14; 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org.A version of this review appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: An Invited Guest Gets Down to Work.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.