AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RatliffThe Village Vanguard is unlike most of the rest of New York life: a rarefied basement that’s been here since before most of us were born and will be here after we die. (Or perhaps not, but there seems no other way to think about it.) It is not a grasping or anxious place. It remains idiosyncratically competitive in the cultural marketplace, cultivates its own favorites, presents them regardless of whether the bands have something new to promote. Because it has looked the same for so long, at the same spot on Seventh Avenue, it is a constant against which you measure your own change. Going to hear music there assumes the pattern of a ritual. So it was good to alter the ritual this week by paying attention to jazz and something else. On Wednesday, that was Jason Moran’s trio, the Bandwagon, and the music of metaphor and oratory, as performed by the poets Elizabeth Alexander and Yusef Komunyakaa. On Thursday, it was the Bandwagon and routines about sex and race and attitudes, as performed by three comedians: David Alan Grier, Marina Franklin and Keith Robinson. They were part of a six-day week programmed by Mr. Moran for the 80th anniversary of the Vanguard; each night brings something unusual for the club’s present but suited to its history. (The Vanguard routinely booked poets and comedians before the 1960s, when it solidified its identity with jazz.) They were great nights. Both could have had a ready-made didactic frame around them — the commonality of jazz and poetry, the commonality of black humor and aesthetics — but they didn’t. They were coherent and complex and provocative, but also casual. They remained casual when the poets were inevitably memorializing the subject of jazz — Ms. Alexander read a poem about an epiphanic night of listening to Mr. Moran with her husband; Mr. Komunyakaa read one that seemed to be about the room he was standing in, including the line “down in the legends’ basement” — as well as when the comedians were inevitably mocking it. On Wednesday, Ms. Alexander and Mr. Komunyakaa read alternately and almost as foils. Her work and delivery was narrative and clear, open and talky, about men and women and black identity and life and death. His was imagistic and oracular, crafty and stylized, delivered almost as an ancient song, with shifts in his face and body acting as punctuation. During the late set, Mr. Moran’s band accompanied them not with songs but with vamps or minimalist repetitions. Somehow this focused the ear better toward the poetry; I don’t know how that worked, but it did. On Thursday, Mr. Grier, in a white homburg and denim jacket, delivered an abbreviated set with easy targets — the aging and centrism of President Obama, for example — but also with extravagantly intense delivery. (The way he pursed his lips and performed indignation was funnier than anything he said.) Ms. Franklin brought the pulse rate down, using insinuation and gesture and understatement, describing attitude and sensation more than events. She talked about the mind-set for dating younger men; she reproduced a version of what she called the “sassy energy” of black female comedians, all in interjections. For about 20 seconds, she imitated a female cat having sex. And Mr. Robinson, the most chaotic of the three, wheeled around and tore into the band for their clothes, for their gentleness and for not being able to provide music adequate to the subject he was taking about, which was at one point something to do with crime, and at another point something to do with testicles. He described himself as a “situational racist” and relished the act of riling up a house of sensitivity. Hardly anybody was safe: not the young man near the stage wearing something vaguely similar to Michael Jackson’s “Thriller” jacket (“I hope you get robbed in that,” Mr. Robinson told him); not the table of Taiwanese women up front.He saved his highest approval for his ideal of the middle-aged woman — one strong enough to scold him on the street when he catcalled her — and for the Bandwagon drummer Nasheet Waits, whom he singled out as the coolest musician in the band, until he suddenly revised his opinion.The 80th-anniversary week continues through Sunday at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street; villagevanguard.com.Advertisement