AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenJose Llana may be 38. But this Filipino-American singer, who made his Broadway debut in 1996 singing “We Kiss in a Shadow,” in a revival of “The King and I,” radiated the eagerness and enthusiasm of a young pup in his American Songbook concert at the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse on Thursday evening. Two years after that debut, Mr. Llana appeared at the Public Theater in Adam Guettel’s majestic theatrical song cycle, “Saturn Returns,” later renamed “Myths and Hymns.” Three songs from that production — “Saturn Returns,” “Icarus” and “Hero and Leander” — were the high points of a concert whose twin themes were aspiration and freedom, scrutinized from the perspective of a gay immigrant from Southeast Asia whose American dreams have come true. The mythical characters in Mr. Guettel’s suite push the limits of possibility to the breaking point, and Mr. Llana’s astringent yelp is an ideal instrument for evoking a boyish impulse to go too far. Nearly two decades after that production, he still finds more truths in those lyrics than any other singer I’ve heard. An excellent band, conducted from the piano by Kimberly Grigsby, emphasized the percussive charge in songs that have a strong Brazilian current. The themes were reiterated in Mr. Llana’s other selections and in patter in which he talked about his coming out, and the frustration of having to go back in the closet when he went to the Philippines to record an album mostly in Tagalog. “Kailangan Kita,” a selection from that album that translates as “I Need You,” was the evening’s weakest moment.Mr. Llana recently played Ferdinand Marcos in the Public Theater production of “Here Lies Love,” a David Byrne-Fatboy Slim musical from which he sang two sturdy numbers, “Child of the Philippines” and “A Perfect Hand.” Mr. Llana’s pop voice is similar to George Michael’s but without the embedded sob. The concert’s summing-up song, Mr. Michaels’s “Freedom 90,” a proclamation of his sense of entrapment in a teenage-idol image, directly reflected Mr. Llana’s determination to be himself. Advertisement