By DAVID ALLENMARCH 13, 2015
That elusive mix came to Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday: a real musical event that drew a packed house and a young audience — and even Björk. Listening was close, the excitement palpable and the applause spontaneous.Thomas Adès was in town.This British polymath has become a major musical figure, lauded for his operas “Powder Her Face” and “The Tempest,” which was performed at the Metropolitan Opera in 2012. For his debut on the New York Philharmonic’s podium, he led characterful, often madcap accounts of Beethoven’s First Symphony and Berlioz’s overture to “Les Francs-juges.”But the real draw was the American premiere of Mr. Adès’s own “Totentanz” (2013), a grisly symphony-cantata for two singers and a vast orchestra that is his longest, most ambitious and most astounding orchestral composition yet. Despite an imprecise performance here, it’s clear that with “Totentanz,” this composer takes a dizzying leap beyond his finest earlier scores — “Asyla” (1997) and “Tevot” (2007) — and adds to a lineage of musical death-dances, including those of Liszt and Saint-Saëns.Dedicated to the memory of the composer Witold Lutoslawski, “Totentanz” was inspired by a frieze painted by Bernt Notke. Dating from 1463 and later copied, it was destroyed in a British bombing raid on Lübeck, Germany, in 1942. It portrays a skeleton skipping through the population, from the pope and an emperor, down to a handworker, a peasant and, most horribly, a baby. There’s a hierarchy on earth, it suggests, but in the face of mortality, everyone is equal.AdvertisementOf course, Death always survives. Mr. Adès personifies him in a baritone (here, the malevolent Mark Stone, replacing Simon Keenlyside, who withdrew because of illness) and has him sing with a mezzo-soprano (Christianne Stotijn, in magnificent voice) who represents humanity in all its variety. With that basic framework, Mr. Adès takes some of the characters from the Lübeck frieze and weaves a tapestry of 15 portraits.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All the souls are linked by a common fate, but each is wonderfully distinct. A cardinal, for instance, is introduced by a disturbed hymn tune in the flutes; the King gets a rumbling fanfare on the low brass, as if from hell; and the Knight struts in armor evoked by anvils. Frenzied dance rhythms underpin everything, recalling the trippy, influential “Ecstasio” from “Asyla.”AdvertisementMr. Adès makes his sympathies clear. The bourgeois — a doctor, a merchant, a usurer — are his main target, their music rootless, full of inane little scales that crescendo to deafening, unconducted carnage that implodes into deserved nothingness. But when Death must woo the Maiden, the composer conjures an alluring dreamscape of harps, strings and vibraphones. More tender still is the Straussian duet Mr. Adès reserves for Death and the Child, who dance in a spectral lullaby.With “Totentanz,” Mr. Adès is pictorial but always primarily musical in his effects, deploying an enormous percussion section that whistles and rattles, ratchets and whips, even clatters with the sound of bones (wood blocks here, but the score allows for animal bones, too). Like many of his pieces, this one extends the mischievous logic of Berlioz and has a flashy sound world that bridges neo-Romanticism and modernism.And while Mr. Adès’s sound is now completely his own, for “Totentanz” he seems to summon a communion of composers past. The ascetic Monk, for instance, is sent away with the music of high society, a soured Johann Strauss waltz. The Peasant is called by a little horn motif, a classic trait of German Romanticism. Even the Child dies to strains that recall Mahler’s “Kindertotenlieder,” before the reaper clacks off into the distance, Death and humanity chanting “tanzen” (“to dance”), on the search for more victims.The New York Philharmonic repeats this program on Saturday evening; 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. A version of this review appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Death Dances to Its Own Tune, Sparing Not a Soul.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.