By ANTHONY TOMMASINIMARCH 13, 2015
What was Andras Schiff, the eminent Budapest-born pianist, up to when he sat down to begin a recital program, the first of two, at Carnegie Hall this week? A part-time London resident who was knighted last year by Queen Elizabeth II, Mr. Schiff commands international respect as a paragon of refinement and musical integrity. Yet, on this night, as he settled into recital mode, was that a glint of mischief I caught in his eyes?The piece he was about to perform was Haydn’s Sonata in C, No. 50 in the standard catalog, among the composer’s last sonatas. The sportive Allegro first movement begins with the right hand playing the theme: just the descending, detached tones of a plain old C major chord, sort of plunk, plunk, plunk. And so on. As he readied himself to play, Mr. Schiff curled his right hand so that only his index finger stuck out, as if he was about to point to a key, not play one. Then, using only that finger, he plunked out those first notes, just like Chico in a Marx Brothers film.Mr. Schiff’s way with this passage, though seemingly mischievous, was actually revealing of his artistic depth. These two programs, on Tuesday and Thursday, could not have been more substantive. For “Sir Andras Schiff, Piano,” Mr. Schiff had chosen eight sonatas, two each by Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert, among the last sonatas written by these masters of the Viennese Classical era. So the audience that packed the hall both nights expected a typical journey into the sublime with Sir Andras.This Haydn piece, though, begins with sly humor. The melody is a tease. Is this dumb succession of notes the theme? This is it? Yes. And Mr. Schiff laid it out in all its plainness. The detached notes really should sound like plunks. Hence, he played them all with his index finger, assuring the same kind of touch and weight.AdvertisementAfter just two measures, the theme takes a slight expressive turn and continues in pairs of slurred notes, played by Mr. Schiff with legato smoothness and tender lyricism. So in just moments he established the overall nature of this bold sonata as music that shifts between the prankish and the eloquent, the simple and the fancy. In the fleet, amusing finale, which evolves in phrase chunks and keeps stopping and starting, Mr. Schiff displayed perfect comic timing. I bet with a good joke writer, he could deliver a great stand-up routine.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In choosing these programs Mr. Schiff seemed to be suggesting that we should not make assumptions about the last piano sonatas of these Classical masters. Yes, Beethoven turned mystical in his late period. But that was Beethoven. It was a great idea for Mr. Schiff to include, on Tuesday, perhaps the best-known Sonata in C ever written, Mozart’s, K. 545, whose first movement just about every young piano student plays. Mr. Schiff brought out subtleties and lurking wistfulness in this seemingly modest, sort of cute piece, especially in the deceptively simple slow movement. On Thursday he played Haydn’s Sonata in D (No. 51), a work in two movements lasting just six minutes, which in this insightful performance came across as the music of a master indulging himself by writing a piece all joyful on the surface but full of unconventional, quirky bits.AdvertisementSurely, what most people came for, and will long remember, were Mr. Schiff’s accounts of two late Beethoven sonatas — No. 30 in E, Op. 109, played on Tuesday, and No. 31 in A-flat, Op. 110, played on Thursday — and two of Schubert’s three long, demanding posthumously published sonatas: in C minor, D. 958, and in A, D. 959.In both Beethoven performances, Mr. Schiff, who has given acclaimed lecture-recitals on Beethoven, was musically searching and pianistically magnificent. He conveyed the mercurial, even bizarre elements of Schubert’s stormy Sonata in C minor, while somehow allowing the piece to seem organic. The highlight for me was his towering account of Schubert’s Sonata in A, in which gossamer passagework alternated with chiseled declamations.There were three encores each night, including Schubert impromptus and Beethoven bagatelles. I was especially touched by the simplest one, a little Schubert Hungarian dance on Tuesday. Do you have to be born in Budapest to play that piece with such lilting naturalness?A version of this review appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Nobody Was Expecting the Chico Marx Act.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.