By PALKO KARASZMARCH 13, 2015
BUDAPEST — “Why do you have to stay so far from us?” the French painter and sculptor Aristide Maillol once wrote to his friend, the Hungarian artist Jozsef Rippl-Ronai. “I lament not being able to shake your hand from time to time and to see your fine mug, my old frog.”Unlikely encounters, an enduring bond and a lively dialogue in pictures are the themes of “Rippl-Ronai and Maillol, The Story of a Friendship,” at the Hungarian National Gallery in Budapest until April 6.More than 200 works, including some of Rippl-Ronai’s defining early works and little-known examples of Maillol as a painter, are on display. The works are on loan from museums and private collections in France and Hungary.Much like the friendship it depicts, the show was born of a chance encounter between Eszter Foldi, head of the department of prints and drawings at the Hungarian National Gallery, and Yvon Berta-Maillol, the artist’s great-grandnephew and treasurer of the Dina Vierny Foundation dedicated to Maillol’s legacy.AdvertisementEager to discover the art of his ancestor’s friend, Mr. Berta-Maillol traveled to Hungary in 2007, where he met Ms. Foldi. Their mutual interest in the subject became clear immediately.“I asked her, why not try and reunite the two friends, Maillol and Rippl-Ronai, in Budapest, since Maillol himself never managed to make the trip,” Mr. Berta-Maillol said by telephone from Banyuls-sur-Mer in the south of France, Maillol’s hometown, where his descendants still live.“This is a very special artists’ friendship that merits our attention, beyond the personal link, as we are talking about two artists who took on a pioneering role in modern art,” said Ms. Foldi, curator of the exhibition. She traveled to France several times over eight years to research the subject and find a way for the Maillol Museum in Paris and the state museums in Hungary that hold Rippl-Ronai’s works to unite their resources.Rippl-Ronai was born the son of a schoolmaster in Kaposvar in southern Hungary. He began his artistic career with a scholarship to study first in Munich, in 1884, then in Paris in 1887. There, he worked under the mentorship of a wealthy compatriot, Mihaly Munkacsy, known for his theatrical genre paintings. Maillol left his hometown in 1881, after phylloxera devastated his family’s vineyard. He studied at the Académie des Beaux-Arts with some of the most famous professors of his time.They met through another painter and found not only a friend, but also a like-minded artist aspiring to break away from the mainstream. “Rippl-Ronai wanted to show states of mind,” Ms. Foldi said. “His motto was simplicity, so he wanted to capture of the world something completely different from Munkacsy.”AdvertisementMaillol was driven by similar intentions. The two artists were drawn to Symbolism, an innovative current in literature and fine arts at the time. “They weren’t trying to make faithful depictions of what they saw but rather record their own feelings,” Ms. Foldi said.A role model for both was Paul Gauguin, who flouted rules, daring to paint what he saw and experiment with painting, wood-carving and Japanese woodcuts. “Their rebellion lay in following Gauguin’s ideas,” Ms. Foldi said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 1894, Rippl-Ronai exhibited “My Grandmother” at the Salon de la Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts in Paris. The picture that one critic described as “a poem about the profound sadness of old age” is a somber depiction of the artist’s grandmother, in shades of grey, black and brown, broken by the white of the face. The painting was a success and drew praise, including from Gauguin.More importantly, it attracted the attention of the Nabis, the group of post-Impressionist avant-garde artists in France, seen by many as forerunners to 20th-century abstract art. As Maurice Denis, theorist of the group said in 1890, “Let us remember that a picture — before being a war horse, a nude woman, or some anecdote — is essentially a flat surface covered by colors put together in a certain order.”Rippl-Ronai joined the young artists and later introduced Maillol to the group, a move that proved decisive in Maillol’s career as a sculptor. Small wooden sculptures on display in Budapest, like “Draped Figure” (1902), are among Maillol’s earliest experiments with the chisel. Prints and watercolors by the two friends, hung alongside works by fellow Nabis, show their interest in similar topics and new techniques.Rippl-Ronai’s “Woman in Bed” (1891) and Édouard Vuillard’s “The Dream” (1892) both explore a female figure in bed, surprising for their time. They use similar compositions but the painterly solutions are different: strong contours and pale colors for Rippl-Ronai and patches of vivid color for Vuillard.In room after room in the exhibition, Maillol and Rippl-Ronai’s deepening friendship appears in their works. At times the bond is straightforward, as in Rippl-Ronai’s portrait of Maillol, held in the Musée d’Orsay’s collection and back in Hungary for the first time since 1936, but mostly it is more subtle. “Woman Holding a Rose” (1892-1895) by Rippl-Ronai, a pale oil painting of a female figure in white and grey, almost melting into the monochrome background, is reminiscent of Maillol’s full-length portraits. “Woman in Red” (1898) by Rippl-Ronai, a multicolor tapestry that places a similar figure in a lush art-deco garden, appears to respond to Maillol’s “Enchanted Garden” (1895).“Seeing their works next to one another, I find that Maillol’s work helps make sense of Rippl-Ronai’s and vice-versa,” said Nathalie Houzé, in charge of the archive and loans at the Musée Maillol in Paris. “But taking a closer look, one can see that it’s not the same type of color, not the same type of embroidery,” she said, suggesting that rather than imitation, the works spoke of mutual inspiration.One highlight of their friendship was Rippl-Ronai’s visit in 1899 to Banyuls-sur-Mer, where they spent over three months together. It was his first trip to the Mediterranean, and he called it “the most picturesque place I’ve ever seen.” The visit inspired him deeply and he produced some 60 oil paintings and 30 watercolors.Advertisement“He was entirely amazed at the beauty of the motifs he saw, so he painted everything he found,” Ms. Foldi said. His habitually somber palette brightened up, which is clearly visible in the show. And this influence returned in his later work.“I met Aristide when I was still quite young,” said Mr. Berta-Maillol, who has always lived in Banyuls-sur-Mer and manages the family vineyard. “But I have heard a lot about this friendship and learned a lot about it through the letters my uncle exchanged with Rippl-Ronai.”The letters, some of which are displayed in the exhibition, continued long after Rippl-Ronai and his family left Paris and moved back to Kaposvar, his hometown, in 1902. Sometimes frustrated by the distance that separated them, but always playful, the two maintained their bond until Rippl-Ronai’s death in 1927. Maillol outlived his friend by 17 years.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.