AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichNow here’s something different to help kick off the fall season: a flurry of works by Georg Philipp Telemann, seemingly out of the blue. (Telemann’s 335th birthday, unlikely to excite even an anniversary-mad classical music world, comes next year; the 250th anniversary of his death, in 2017.)Not that Telemann — a longer-lived German contemporary of Bach and Handel’s who may have committed more music to paper than any other composer — is at all a stranger. His often undistinctive instrumental works, which will fill a program by Juilliard Baroque on Nov. 2, are a staple of classical radio.But Thomas Crawford and the American Classical Orchestra and Chorus struck first on Tuesday with a late, great masterpiece rarely heard, the oratorio “Der Tag des Gerichts” (“The Day of Judgment,” 1762), at the Church of St. Ignatius of Antioch on the Upper West Side. And Nicholas McGegan and Juilliard415 will follow on Nov. 16 with Telemann’s cantata “Die Tageszeiten” (“The Times of Day,” 1757).Mr. Crawford’s performance was quite simply splendid. “Der Tag” is populated by a variety of characters, two named (Jesus and John), the rest allegorical (Faith, the Archangel, the Blessed and the like). Mr. Crawford divided them among his 16 choristers, who were almost uniformly excellent, both individually and as a body.To single out a few is to slight many. But some demand mention: Jonathan Woody (Disbelief), Helen Karloski (Reason), Brian Giebler (Mocker), Enrico Lagasca (Devotion) and Steven Eddy (Jesus).The period-instrument orchestra was superb, but for a viola da gamba. Trumpets have a special role in any account of the last judgment, and John Thiessen and Carl Albach handled their intractable early instruments deftly. The French horns were also strong.In a preconcert lecture, Mr. Crawford showed how advanced (in time and technique, not necessarily quality) Telemann’s idiom, with scant polyphony, was in relation to Bach’s, showing similarities to Handel and Mozart, and even citing Schumann. He could have gone further, to the finale of Mahler’s Fourth Symphony, where the composer, uncannily echoed the melody of Reason’s aria, “Des Sturmes Donnerstimmen” (“The Thundering Voices of the Storm”).“Not that you’ll ever hear this piece again in your life,” Mr. Crawford said at one point. Well, he holds the power to remedy that. A revival of “Der Tag” in two or three years, ideally accompanied by a recording, would surely be in order.­Thomas Crawford and the American Classical Orchestra and Chorus will perform Bach’s “St. John Passion” on Nov. 3 at Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center; 212-362-2727, aconyc.com.Advertisement