By NINA SIEGALMARCH 13, 2015
AMSTERDAM — Piet Mondrian, the Dutch modern master, died 71 years ago. Are his works now copyright-free?The answer — a highly qualified “yes, but” — has ramifications for scholars, publishers, museums, heirs and anyone else who has an interest in seeing and studying works of art in a global context.The issue turns on a discrepancy between European and American copyright law that is coming to light this year because, as of Jan. 1, 2015, Mondrian’s works enter the public domain in Europe. Under European Union law, the term of copyright for works of art expires on the 1st of January following 70 years after the author or artist’s death.But the case is particularly complex with Mondrian because he produced part of his work while living in Europe and part of it in the United States, where copyright laws are different.AdvertisementAlthough the lack of uniformity in national copyright laws affects reproduction rights for works by any artist, it is becoming a more complicated issue with the growth of online sharing, especially as museums are increasingly interested in offering the public access to their collections on the web.Advertisement“It’s a logical step for these institutions to do this, to make their collections available in the physical world and also in the virtual world,” said Bernt Hugenholtz, a professor of copyright law at the Institute for Information Law at the University of Amsterdam. “But they discover that copyright stands in their way, and copyright term calculations are some of the many headaches they need to confront.”Those headaches became particularly evident to the Gemeentemuseum in The Hague, which owns the largest collection of Mondrian artworks in the world, in 2012. That year, it published a small scholarly volume about its prize possession: “Victory Boogie Woogie (Unfinished)” (1944), Mondrian’s last, incomplete masterpiece.The book documented the findings of six years of curatorial and scientific research that the museum’s staff had conducted on the painting under the leadership of its chief curator, Hans Janssen.The richly illustrated book turned out to be very expensive to produce because of European copyright protections that were still in place.“It was a book about just one painting, but we didn’t have to pay just once for the image,” said Benno Tempel, director of the Gemeentemuseum. “We had to pay for pictures of X-rays of the painting, as well, and we had to pay for images of paint samples from the painting, too.” He couldn’t remember the exact figures, he said, but it was at least a couple of hundred dollars for each reproduction.“Victory Boogie Woogie,” a diamond-shaped painting of colorful geometrical shapes, stood on the artist’s easel in his New York studio when he died and has long been regarded as one of his most enigmatic and fascinating works.The Dutch government bought the painting in 1998 for 82 million guilders, equivalent to about $40 million. Copyright protection, however, remained with Mondrian’s American heirs.AdvertisementMondrian was born in the Netherlands, moved to the United States in 1940 and died in New York in 1944. Having no children, he made Harry Holtzman, an American artist friend, his heir and executor of his estate. Mr. Holtzman died in 1987; the Mondrian/Holtzman Trust now manages the worldwide rights, including digital reproduction rights.Mr. Holtzman’s daughter and trustee Madalena Holtzman explained by email that “only reproductions of Mondrian works in publications which will be published in English and distributed in the U.S. or worldwide (including the Internet) after 2014 must be sent to Mondrian Trust to determine whether the images are protected under U.S. copyright law and require copyright permission.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.European copyright law, established under the Berne Convention and harmonized across all members of the European Union in 1993, says that works of art and literature are free of copyright 70 years after the death of their creator, with the term of copyright expiring on Jan. 1 the following year.United States copyright law, under the Uruguay Rounds Agreement Act of 1996, extends to 95 years copyrights for images “by foreign artists created and first reproduced and published in another country between 1923 and 1978.” The statute requires that “publication date” be determined for each work individually.Publication dates for Mondrian’s works are not always obvious, Mr. Tempel said. For example, should “Victory Boogie Woogie,” which was never completed, be considered “published” on the day Mondrian died, the day the work was discovered on his easel, or when it was first documented in a photograph?Ms. Holtzman answered that question by email: The trust has established the date of the painting as 1944. She added that because it was first reproduced in the United States, it is not covered by the Uruguay rules and so is not subject to United States copyright fees.Removal of the European copyright from Mondrian’s work as of January 2015 opens up an opportunity for the Gemeentemuseum to publish more of his works. The museum is working on a biography exploring the artist’s life via the 300 or so artworks in its collection, tentatively entitled “Mondriaan Real and Abstract: A Biography.” (He changed the spelling of his signature from Mondriaan in 1907.)“The new book would’ve been too hard to publish if there were still copyrights on the work,” Mr. Tempel said. “These kinds of books we don’t make money with; they’re meant to share our knowledge with the world, but to pay that much for a hundred reproductions would’ve been prohibitive.”The book, scheduled for publication in the autumn, will not be distributed in the United States because the copyright there still stands for some of the images, and the museum cannot afford to pay for those reproductions.AdvertisementBecause of the range of “dates of publication” for Mondrian’s artworks, about 45 percent of the works will enter the public domain between 2019 and 2061, according to the Mondrian/Holtzman Trust.“I can imagine that lawyers would love this case and be able to get their teeth into it,” Mr. Tempel said. “But for us it has nothing to do with Mondrian and his work. So we will only publish in Europe.”As for sharing its full collection of Mondrian artworks online, Mr. Tempel said that would probably not be possible, either, with United States copyright laws governing some of his works.Although it might seem odd that Europeans can now look at these works in reproduction, but Americans cannot, Mr. Hugenholtz said that was the way copyright issues sometimes played out.“I don’t see an immediate legal solution,” he added. “We’ll have to live for a long time with these divergent terms.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.