AdvertisementSupported byArt for TomorrowBy Celestine BohlenPARIS — Twelve years after France opened its doors wide to charitable giving, the role of private money in support of cultural institutions — particularly museums — remains touchy, sometimes embarrassing and recently disappointing.Backed by a proud history of state support for culture, French museum directors were for a long time reluctant to embrace corporate sponsorships and branding, benefit dinners and targeted solicitation as too commercial, too vulgar — in short, too American.“The Anglo-Saxon world is much more at ease with money; it’s the difference between Protestant and Catholic cultures,” noted François Debiesse, acting president of Admical, a Paris-based association that encourages corporate and individual philanthropy. “In the U.S., if you succeed and make money, you want to show it off; in France, if you succeed and make money, you want to hide it.”But that handicap was partially overcome after 2003 when France adopted Europe’s most generous tax breaks for charitable giving, which created a boom in philanthropy in all spheres, including culture. Private museums and foundations flourished; corporate support for the acquisition of artistic treasures (up to 90 percent tax deductible) was sought and found.From 2006 to 2009, the Louvre, the most visited museum in the world, almost tripled its private contributions to 28.5 million euros, or $32 million, from €10 million.But as the impact of the financial crisis of 2008 settled in, reducing state spending on culture, private donations for cultural projects and institutions also slowed dramatically, to €360 million in 2014 from €975 million in 2008, according to Admical. Not only do the French feel they have less money to give away, but corporate donors in particular have shifted toward social programs, mirroring the country’s economic concerns.“Philanthropy is not intended to compensate state funding, but rather to be complementary,” Mr. Debiesse said. “The two go together, and we see that when the state disengages, the private sector follows suit.”The budget for the Ministry of Culture now looks set to stabilize, at about €3 billion, for the next two years, but that still spells trouble for museums, as they look ahead to new projects and acquisitions. In its fifth such campaign, the Louvre recently raised €1 million from small contributors to acquire the unique jewel-incrusted 18th-century Teschen table from its private owners, but the museum still needs another €11 million to seal the deal.Mr. Debiesse said that France’s small and regional museums were becoming increasingly skilled at turning to local donors, as Paris-based corporations concentrate their money on the country’s cultural flagships.And he disputed the notion that the creation of private museums and foundations has come at the expense of support for public museums. He pointed to the Louis Vuitton Foundation’s support for the Monumenta exhibit at the Grand Palais, and contributions to the Palais de Tokyo by the philanthropist Pierre Bergé, even as he supports the private Pierre Bergé-Yves Saint Laurent Foundation and its Paris museum.“There has been a realization among companies and individuals that they have a role,” he said. “There is no going back. The manna from the state is going to go down.”One new response comes from France’s tech-savy minister of culture, Fleur Pellerin, who is pushing for increased use of crowd-funding as a new technique of what she calls “participative philanthropy.”But other initiatives, such as the growing practice of renting out facades of cultural institutions under construction for gigantic billboards — the most recent example was a 6,500-square-foot ad for Heineken beer draped across the Hôtel de la Monnaie, or National Mint, above the Seine River — have drawn criticism as a step too far in the wrong direction.Another kind of scandal erupted last year when it was discovered that a South Korean photographer, Ahae, whose shows in the gardens near the Louvre in 2012 and at Versailles in 2013 were accompanied by generous donations — sometimes called “rent” — equaling more than €1 million, was in fact Yoo Byung-eun, a businessman and cult leader with a criminal record who was the owner of the Sewol ferry that sank in April 2014, causing more than 300 deaths. Mr. Yoo was South Korea’s most wanted man until he was found dead in July 2014.An alert about Ahae’s true identity was sounded in the summer of 2013 by Bernard Hasquenoph, founder of the website louvrepourtous.fr, which regularly pillories France’s museum establishment. In an interview in the newspaper Le Monde last December, Mr. Hasquenoph said it had taken him 15 days of searching on the Internet to figure out that Ahae was Mr. Yoo, and he questioned the due diligence conducted by both Versailles and the Louvre.“If I understood,” he said, that Mr. Yoo “was hiding something strange, then how come these prestigious institutions weren’t worried?” he said.The Ahae case points up not only concerns about turning a blind eye to dodgy donors (the Louvre is known to have quietly turned away gifts from other questionable individuals) but also about who gets to decide which works of art are worthy of exposure in public places.That money plays a role in determining choices and tastes in art is hardly new. From the Medicis to the Lauders, rich patrons have built up collections that were then bequeathed to public museums, sometimes with conditions. In the United States, museums have long courted sponsors who have in turn benefited from shows devoted to their creations. The Guggenheim Museum was a forerunner in the late 1990s, with exhibits featuring clothes by the designer Giorgio Armani and motorcycles by BMW.Now, at the private museums and foundations popping up all over the world — the most recent example being the $135 million Fondation Louis Vuitton at the edge of Paris — corporations and private individuals can indulge their artistic preferences, skirting the cumbersome rules, bureaucracy and sensibilities of public institutions.Major public museums insist that their professional curatorial staffs have the final word, and mostly that’s fine with donors. “Donors support institutions because they cherish and value them, not because they are frustrated curators themselves and want to meddle,” said Bendor Grosvenor, editor of the British website Art History News.But these distinctions often have to be finessed at smaller museums, such as the Palais de Tokyo, a public contemporary art museum in Paris that has no permanent collection and depends on private sponsorships for 49 percent of its budget. It recently rented out space to the Hermès Foundation, which came with its own collection and curator.As private money for culture becomes scarcer, benefactors want more of a partnership with the public institutions, Mr. Debiesse said.That has always been true for sponsors, who do not benefit from the 2003 so-called Aillagon Law, which allows private donors to deduct 60 percent on their gifts from their taxes, and corporate donors to lop off up to 66 percent. Sponsorships — which involve heavy use of brand names and promotional items in gift shops — are seen as too clearly self-interested to warrant any tax breaks.But corporate donors, which are typically drawn to large projects, are also looking for greater involvement and respect from their public partners.“The old idea of ‘give your money and go’ is finished,” he said. “Corporate donors aren’t going to hang pictures, but they have experience that can be helpful — in management, in communications. There is something to be gained from the mix of culture and business.”Attitudes in France have changed since 2007, when a group of prominent curators began a petition against an initiative to create The Louvre Abu Dhabi, now set to open in December, which will bring almost a billion euros over 30 years, to French museums, mostly to its Paris-based parent for the right to use its name and borrow its works. “The Museums are not for Sale,” was the cry back then.Yet even as public funds dwindled, the French museum community remains wary of the influence of corporate and private money. “There is a preoccupation among curators about keeping their role, and not having donors come in and dictate their choices” said Mr. Debiesse.In an email from London, where the private-public model has advanced further than in Continental Europe, Mr. Grosvenor expressed impatience at this attitude. “Those who overstate the potential ‘threat’ to the independence of curators to perform their duties are simply creating excuses not to go and seek philanthropic support,” he said. “Securing donations is hard work.”Advertisement