Season 5, Episode 14, “Spend”Spoilers and lily-livered construction workers lurk below.Updated, 1:23 a.m. |  Eugene, who returned to action this week, has always been upfront about the yellow stripe down his back. “You really that much of a coward?” Tara asked early in the episode.“Yes I am,” Eugene said. “I told you I was.”But he has nothing on the Alexandrians in that regard. They abandoned everyone they could this week — friends, construction-crew colleagues, and most terribly, poor Noah, whose demise was perhaps the goriest we’ve seen for a core survivor. Glenn, who watched it all from a foot away, is going to feel that one for a while and the rest of us will, too.It was a particularly splattery episode, even by the standards of one of the bloodiest shows on television, but it opened quietly, with the return of the prodigal Father Gabriel, whom we saw considering a page in Leviticus. That page didn’t last long, as Gabriel, who seemed racked by either spiritual pain, conflicted loyalties or mind-bending indigestion, tore it and most of the rest of the Bible out as well.We know now that he was pondering his next move, which he executed later: Father Gabriel was back in betrayal mode, preaching against the people who had plied him with protection and their Doberman mixed grill, among other nourishment, as they kept him alive long enough to reach the safe-ish harbor of Alexandria.“They can’t be trusted; they’re dangerous,” he told Deanna. He ranted about false apostles of righteousness, quoting loosely from what the Internet tells me is 2 Corinthians.Which is pretty rich, coming from him. Father Gabriel, the priest who abandoned his flock sometime before we met him on “The Walking Dead,” mourned that act up to the moment he repeated it with his new group. Granted, he didn’t leave them to be slaughtered by zombies, as he’d done with the others, but he aims to damn them all the same. Seth Gilliam (the priest) and the writers have done a good job of concealing the true source of his agita. Perhaps his concern about Rick and company is genuine. But I suspect there’s an angle he’s working here. For all his sanctimony, this is a guy whose only real commandment is Thou Shalt Take Care of Father Gabriel. A possible flaw in Father Gabriel’s play: he doesn’t seem to understand who he’s dealing with on the other side of this thing. “The day will come when they put their own lives before yours and everyone else’s,” he tells Deanna, which by all evidence means they’ll blend right in. Because “putting your own life before everyone’s else’s” appears to be the Alexandria way.“We have a system,” the cowardly foreman says to explain why, during the walker attack at the construction site, he left poor Francine for dead before Abraham saved her.Later Nicholas, the episode goat, was even more direct. “You left them. We both did,” he told a doomed Aiden. “It’s who we are.” (I get it. The line seemed pretty on the nose in the context. Show me your cowardice, Nicholas, don’t tell me about it.)I sort of knew Aiden was a goner when he showed up this week seeming civil, his only act of egregious obnoxiousness limited to the dubstep mixtape in his van. That is, until he unloaded on a grenade-bearing walker during that disaster of a micro-inverter run. “Aiden, stop!” Glenn shouted, several seconds after I and probably everyone else did. But it was too late – kaboom! –  both for him and the cage in the warehouse that had been restraining the walkers. Undead heck broke loose as Tara bled from a mortal-seeming wound and Aiden, who survived the blast, was left skewered and dangling like a hunk of mystery meat in a kebab cart. It didn’t end well for him, and the camera lingered on his meal-making for what felt like an hour, speaking of egregious. (I know it’s silly to complain about graphic gore on this show but good Lord did it wallow in it this week.)The Aiden feast was but an appetizer for Noah’s grisly end, effected by the panicked flight of the loathsome Nicholas. I enjoyed the cleverness of the revolving-door conceit, though the scene, with it’s blood, sweat and maniacal shoving of clawing freaks reminded me less of a revolving door than the Q train. At least it did until Noah’s face was quite literally ripped apart before our eyes.The first clue that Noah was done for should have been his opening scene, when he was talking to Reg the therapist-builder about his future. (There’s no future in “The Walking Dead”!) You’re in it for the long haul, aren’t you? Reg says. Write it all down. Well, I have some good news and some bad news … Noah wasn’t the most popular survivor, at least judging from some of our commenters – many marked him for death this season and didn’t seem particularly distraught about it, especially after he led Tyreese to his own end a few episodes back. But I liked him. His physical frailty offered an inherently moving counterpoint to the more “heroic” survivors, of course, but Tyler James Williams didn’t lean on the limp. He brought a nice sensitivity to the role and was often more relatable than his samurai sword- and assault rifle-wielding cohorts. Despite the misery of losing his family and others, Noah’s sense of hope seemed intact even before the writers amped it up for maximum effect in his talk with Reg. Which is probably why the show opted to tear him apart in such symbolically graphic fashion. Speaking of no future, Pete, your number is just about up. Mr. Jessie showed up drunk at Rick’s, violating his personal space and aggressively promoting his physician’s services. I saw you at the party, he said in a playfully accusing tone, but he was talking about Rick’s booze consumption, he said. (Yeah, right.) “Let’s be friends, man,” he told Rick. “We kinda have to be.”Or, Rick can shoot you once he discovers you’re an abuser. One of those. “You’re going to have to kill him,” Carol tells Rick, after she drops the bombshell. And maybe he will, although that seems too obvious. And isn’t there another person in our group who has a special contempt for abusive husbands?A FEW THOUGHTS WHILE WE DUST OFF OUR BIBLE• Anyone know if there was any possible significance to having Father Gabriel’s Bible open to Leviticus in that first scene?• More Bible stuff, sort of: I figured it would have taken a reverse Samson scenario – the axing of the mullet — in order for Eugene to show some spine. I stand corrected.• “I put another one of your people in a position of power, you vouch for them. It’s becoming a pattern,” Deanna told Maggie, after appointing Abraham as leader of the construction efforts. “We know what we’re doing,” Maggie said. That’s all fine and good, Maggie, but I actually don’t know what you’re doing. What is your job, exactly?• In the scenes from next week, we saw Sasha, inevitably, shoot someone from the clocktower. Do we think it was an Alexandrian? Or some other invader? • What else struck you this week? Is this powder keg going to blow like a warehouse grenade next week? Has Abraham finally found his purpose? Has Carol found an adopted son? Please share your thoughts in the comments.