Season 6, Episode 15: “Open Source”After last week’s experimental trip inside the mind of Alicia Florrick, “The Good Wife” got back to normal on Sunday night.Normal, at this point, means an hour split between Alicia’s campaign for state’s attorney and a Florrick  Agos case. Can we agree that the political story line has been a bad idea? We can’t, of course, but for me it continues to drag the show down. There’s just such an utter lack of urgency about it.It’s as if the show’s creators, Michelle and Robert King, were looking at how campaigns are covered these days and said, ‘We’ll do better — we won’t engage in “horse race” coverage, we’ll really delve into the issues and the ethical and moral concerns of our fictional candidates.’ Which sounds great in theory but has been less than thrilling on screen. With the campaign stretching out over so many weeks, we could use a little of the horse race. When we were told that Alicia was up by 3 points with just three days left before the election, it hardly seemed to matter — it was just a piece of narrative bookkeeping. Part of the problem is that it’s hard to distinguish Alicia from her opponent, Frank Prady, who’s like her stick-in-the-mud older brother. David Hyde Pierce has given an impeccable, sensitive performance as Prady, but he hasn’t been given much to play.Having seen that Alicia, as expected, lied about Lemond’s financing of her campaign — and as a result received a key endorsement — we were plunged into her next dilemma. Frank responded to his dire straits by attacking Peter Florrick’s performance as state’s attorney, specifically Peter’s record on diversity hiring, and Alicia had to make a choice. Stand by Peter or pile on? Johnny and Josh, her campaign Svengalis, said that joining the attack was the best move. Eli, of course, in his double role as Alicia’s adviser and Peter’s chief of staff, was enraged that the J’s were encouraging her to throw her husband and his boss under the bus. (Eli’s daughter, Marissa, the wisecracking voice of the audience and Alicia’s most loyal retainer, was all for the throwing.)The best part of the campaign story line was a short, touching scene, one of Alicia and Frank’s frequent private moments (does that ever really happen during a campaign?), in which he came out to her as a Jesuit. This, he said, was the reason he hadn’t remarried. But he had refrained from saying so — thereby opening himself to accusations of being closeted — because it would cost him gay votes and it was, well, weird. “What person in this day and age takes Jesus Christ seriously when he says you can’t divorce?” he asked. “Not someone you want to get a beer with.” Alicia, moved by his admission, said, “You are better than I am,” and you know what? She’s right. What we’re supposed to do with that information is less clear.Adding intrigue was a subplot in which Eli had engineered an important new job for Johnny on a campaign in California, a job he now threatened to scuttle if Alicia spoke out against Peter. Johnny waffled, telling Alicia he’d changed his mind and giving her a new speech. But his feelings for Alicia, combined with a chewing-out from Marissa, changed his mind, and at the last minute he told Alicia to go back to the original plan. As she told a television audience that Peter had “made some mistakes,” Eli choked on his yogurt, called Johnny and told him he was out of a job. Johnny, the latest victim of Alicia’s 50-shades-of-gray-flannel sexiness, just watched her and smiled. In the episode’s closing scene, a chance elevator encounter, he got his reward: When Alicia coolly invited him into her room, he nearly fumbled his chance but then said “Whatever” and kissed her before the screen went black.Since Jalicia seems to be happening, the question needs to be asked: Do Steven Pasquale (as Johnny) and Julianna Margulies have any chemistry whatsoever? He always seems to be surprised to be in the same room with her. One problem with Alicia’s romances, post-Will, is that so little time is devoted to setting them up. You could argue that the fragmentary, captured-moment way in which we’ve seen the development of her relationships with Finn and Johnny is true to life, but to me it just gives them less force.On the other hand, Christine Baranski and Gary Cole need hardly any time at all to get us interested in the connection between Diane Lockhart and her husband, the gun expert Kurt McVeigh. Their relationship was central to the episode’s court case, in which Finn and Diane represented a plaintiff who had been paralyzed when a gun made with a 3-D printer misfired. Kurt was their expert witness, and as the case — in which the defendant, the designer of the gun, was represented by the always irritating Nancy Crozier (Mamie Gummer) — took its twists and turns, things got tense between Diane and Kurt. As Kurt was forced to reconsider his testimony (by the counter-arguments of a young, highly attractive blonde who had been his student), his desire to do the right thing clashed with Diane’s desire to win a big settlement for her client. It was a nice utilization of a great ancillary character — a staunch conservative and a passionate supporter of the Second Amendment who happens to be the most rigorously principled person in the show — and the best moments in the episode came when Ms. Baranski and Mr. Cole conveyed how much Diane and Kurt, with their mutual respect and attraction, turn each other on. The case? Oh, Kalinda showed up for 30 seconds to dig up a video online and feed Kurt the idea that won $5 million for the Florrick Agos client. Sharma erat demonstrandum. (And: do we assume that Kurt is the anonymous donor who ponied up the five mil?)That leaves the episode’s C plot, the comic relief (as it turned out), in which Alicia was called to the bedside of Louis Canning (Michael J. Fox). Last week he was practically half in the grave, but in a miraculous turn of events he had received a new kidney from a 13-year-old girl who died in a youth soccer game. Now he wanted to liquidate his fortune and give $18 million to the girls’ parents, and he wanted Alicia to handle it for him. The outlandishness of this should have alerted us to the way the story line would play out, but I managed to miss it until near the end.Good-girl Alicia tried to carry out his wishes, which grew more complicated when David Lee, Louis’s estate lawyer, told her that the parents wanted to donate the money to a new charity that supported pro-Palestinian causes. This set up a running gag — “You’re sending money to Hamas?” — that led to the big payoff: Eli told her she was being set up for embarrassment by her frenemies Louis and David. “Canning’s not going to prank me on his deathbed,” she said, but when she went to visit him again and he claimed not to remember the earlier conversation — Mr. Fox was reliably funny, moaning, “I was in a fugue state” — she saw the light. In a small comic moment that felt right for Alicia, she retaliated by refusing to hand him his telephone, even sliding it farther away from him as he protested, “Oh, now it’s ringing!”One snide observation before I go. Sitting at the bedside of a sleeping (seemingly comatose) Louis, Alicia took his hand, said she’d miss him if he died and added, “I seem to have some bad-boy issues.” Bad boys? Peter Florrick, Will Gardner, Finn Polmar and Johnny Elfman? Some of them might not be the best decision makers, but “bad boys” gives them too much credit. (On the other hand, if we’re supposed to think it’s funny that this is Alicia’s definition of a bad boy, then fine.)Please let us know what you thought of “Open Source” — and your thoughts on the future of Jalicia, and the impending election — in the comments. 