The Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Minneapolis Institute of Arts will announce Monday the details of a much-anticipated gift of Asian art from the estate of Mary Griggs Burke, whose collection of Japanese and other East Asian art ranks among the finest private collections in the world.Mrs. Burke grew up in St. Paul but spent her entire adult life in New York City. In 2006 she announced that after her death she planned to leave about a thousand of the works she began collecting in the early 1960s to the two museums she had worked with most closely over the years. She died in 2012.In a joint announcement, the museums said that the Minneapolis museum would receive nearly 700 works, and the Metropolitan more than 300, from a collection of more than 850 Japanese works in various media, as well as 90 Korean and 65 Chinese artworks. Each museum will also receive a cash endowment of $12.5 million.“This is a transformative gift,” said Matthew Welch, the deputy director and chief curator of the Minneapolis museum. “Curators throw that word around, but this is staggering.”Mrs. Burke’s specific intentions remained a mystery until November, when the Mary Livingston Griggs and Mary Griggs Burke Foundation, which oversaw the donations, sent a list of works to the museums. “We tried to present a logical case for our needs, but she remained very cagey throughout her life,” Mr. Welch said.The gift helps fill in the gaps of a collection strong in the Edo period, especially ukiyo-e paintings and prints, but spotty in other areas, such as ink paintings from the Muromachi period (1392-1573), which Mrs. Burke collected heavily. Her gift of ceramics and lacquerware brings new depth to two previously underrepresented areas.The Metropolitan Museum had a better idea of the works it might get. Miyeko Murase, Mrs. Burke’s principal art adviser, was a consultant to the Met, and many of the works in the collection were acquired with the museum’s needs in mind.The 320 works earmarked for the Met include an early medieval sculpture of the Buddhist protective deity Fudo Myoo by the master sculptor Kaikei, as well as Muromachi ink paintings and Edo-period works by the 18th-century painters Ito Jakuchu (“White Plum Blossoms and Moon”) and Soga Shohaku (“Lions at the Stone Bridge of Tendaisan”).“The Met aspires to show the best, world-class masterpieces, and this gift allows us to double our number of displayable objects,” said John T. Carpenter, who has been given the title of Mary Griggs Burke Curator of Japanese Art. “This is really going to allow us to organize some truly spectacular thematic exhibitions.”The Chinese works in the Burke collection will go to the Yale University Art Gallery.The Metropolitan has also received several other gifts timed to the 100th anniversary of its department of Asian art, notably 1,300 works of Asian art from Florence and Herbert Irving, longtime donors for whom several areas of the museum have been named, most recently the Asian galleries, which were renamed the Florence and Herbert Irving Wing in 2004.The museum is expected to announce that Mrs. Burke’s cash gift — together with donations from two longtime supporters, Oscar Tang and Mary Wallach — has put it halfway toward reaching its $70 million capital campaign goal for the Asian Art Department.Both museums will organize exhibitions in the fall showcasing the works from the Burke collection. In Minneapolis, “Gifts of Japanese and Korean Art From the Mary Griggs Burke Collection” will run from Sept. 26 through April 16, 2016. At the Met, “Celebrating the Arts of Japan: The Mary Griggs Burke Collection” will run from Oct. 20 through July 31, 2016.A version of this article appears in print on 03/16/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: A Minneapolis Museum and the Met to Share Gift.