Season 4, Episode 9: “Daddy Issues”
As its winking title suggests, this season’s penultimate episode is all about who’s a grown-up and who’s a child, and the games that both play. In the wake of last episode’s twin bombshells —  Hannah’s father, Tad, came out of the closet, and Marnie got engaged to ne’er-do-well Desi — most of the show’s major characters seem to spend time on both sides of that divide, with unusually messy results. Here to sort through the damage are your recappers, Lydia Polgreen and Joe Coscarelli.The HBO comedy by Lena Dunham.Lydia: We first find our heroine, Hannah Horvath (Lena Dunham), eating pierogies with her father, Tad, played by Peter Scolari, who awkwardly tries to make conversation as the two muddle through the fallout of his declaration to Hannah’s mother that he’s gay. Tad has come to New York presumably to talk things over with Hannah, who tells him that she is proud of him, acting very grown-up about the whole thing, even if she didn’t bring her wallet.“How’s Mom?” Hannah asks.“A lot of emotions,” Tad replies. “Who knew a person could have that many emotions?”Has he met his daughter? Hannah insists, perhaps for the first time in her life, that “at the end of the day, this isn’t really about me.”Joe: For probably the 67th time in “Girls” history, I almost fell for that brief flash of maturity from Hannah — it was the exact opposite of her mom’s reaction last week.Tad replies, “Sure it is — you’re part of this family,” because he’s an angel. But Hannah promptly hops back on her high horse of false wisdom, recalling her own relationship with a gay man, as if dating Elijah in college is in any way the same as what her parents are going through.It was nice to see Tad, doormat extraordinaire, shut her down by daring her to pay for the meal.
Lydia: Back at St. Justine’s, where Hannah is a substitute teacher, she corners Cleo (Maude Apatow), a student with whom she has had an inappropriately intimate friendship, to guilt trip her about not responding to her texts or emails over the weekend. When Cleo, who has clearly been avoiding Hannah, claims that her phone battery had run out, Hannah replies, “Your Instagram tells a very different story.”Things go south from there into some rude name-calling. “I thought we were friends, Cleo,” Hannah pleads. “Friends who could talk about things.”Joe: Even as a spoiled Park Slope kid, Cleo is rightly put off by Hannah’s neediness and Internet stalking (and let’s not forget what Hannah did to her with the under-the-tongue piercing). Cleo, again making a lot of sense, tells Hannah she’s “being really intense” and instead of babying her about the dad situation, drops a gem: “Everybody’s parents suck — welcome to reality.” Never forget that teenagers are almost always more sage than twentysomethings.Lydia: From the mouths of babes! (A side note: The show has gotten a lot of value out of young Cleo in just a few scenes. I loved how in a previous episode, when “wise” Hannah tried to tell her that Shia LaBeouf was not an attainable love interest because he is a celebrity, Cleo shot right back, “He lives in my building.” Ah, de Blasio’s New York.)Eventually the school’s principal intervenes, calling Hannah into his office for a lecture about boundaries. “You are an adult, and I know it sucks, but you have to start at least trying to keep some of the stuff inside,” he tells Hannah. Good luck with that.Joe: Like a lot of the real talk delivered by minor characters on this show who seem to live in a world that more resembles our own, that line could apply to all of the show’s main characters.Hannah’s then turning around and telling her dad that he needs boundaries when he starts discussing his sexuality in detail was rich. It reminded me of the great running gag in “The Sopranos,” when Dr. Melfi would impart some knowledge or idiom to Tony and he would mangle it while trying to recycle the line with the guys.I could have done without the “Queer Eye”-ing of Hannah’s dad (or “Daddy”) by Elijah, but that goes for most of Elijah’s scenes. I complained about him earlier this season and haven’t come around with more exposure, but I believe I’m still in the minority here.Lydia: I think you might have won me over to your side on this, Joe. There are so many expressions of male queerness in this city — why not make Elijah one of them? Even as Elijah disses the Michigan gays (“a lot of cargo pants”), I couldn’t help but think that Tad’s new look — white jeans, button-down with contrasting cuff and collar — was a lot sadder and more cliché than a nice pair of cargo pants. Apart from the “Daddy Issues,” this was an episode framed by messy love triangles and quadrangles, checking in with all the show’s awkward couplings. Shoshanna (Zosia Mamet) is adrift and jobless, so she throws all her energy into hosting an election night party for her ex-boyfriend, Ray Ploshansky, who is running for a community board seat in his neighborhood.Forlorn Shosh, who declares that she “couldn’t get hired to give away” oral sex at a bus station, is clearly energized by the role of political party planner, and her devotion to Ray (Alex Karpovsky) is touching. These two may not have a romantic future, but their friendship has become the purest on the show.Marnie (Allison Williams) — despite telling Desi (Ebon Moss-Bachrach) as they arrive at the party that she wants to keep their engagement secret for the time being — marches right over to Ray, who is not-so-secretly in love with her, and spills the beans. Though he offers hearty, though plainly insincere, congratulations, he can’t resist a jab.“Make an honest woman out of the trollop,” he says to Desi.Later, when he makes his victory speech, Ray speaks earnestly and from the heart. “We are at our best when we are together, even if it doesn’t seem like a perfect fit,” he says, ostensibly speaking to the voters who elected him but staring right at Marnie. “Whatever happens, know that I promise to always, always be here.”Joe: The only couple that’s more unappealing to me than Marnie and Desi is Marnie and Ray — I just don’t see it.Ray’s election plotline didn’t do it for me in general, especially as a vehicle for him to profess his love to Marnie, but quoting Ralph Nader in his victory speech was a nice touch. At the very least, Ray is a fully drawn character, right down to the poster for “The Long Goodbye” in his apartment. For all the caricatures on “Girls,” this man really exists in Brooklyn.Away from the political action, Jessa’s twisted master plan to set up Adam (Adam Driver) and Mimi-Rose (Gillian Jacobs) so she could have Ace to herself was a success, although it feels wrong using that word since all of these people are poisonous to the earth. (Well, maybe not Adam on a good day.)The result of that new unholy union was the first really creepy “Girls” sex scene we’ve had in a while. First Jessa (Jemima Kirke) tells Ace (Zachary Quinto), “You look like a teacher I had in fourth grade,” and just when you think he can’t top that, they start role-playing Tiffany’s “I Think We’re Alone Now” music video, eliciting the first of many shudders I experienced in this half-hour.I can’t help but love the emotional slasher film that is the Adam, Mimi-Rose, Jessa and Ace dynamic. Ace’s insistence that he and Jessa go say hello to his ex and her new boyfriend was an even more twisted idea than making her run around Brooklyn in high heels. But the awkwardness of Mimi-Rose having Adam fry up some sausages for the occasion gave me a sick thrill.The sociopathic face-off at the table — Mimi-Rose declaring she wants Ace back, to the disbelief of their new partners — also resulted, thankfully, in a reprise of this show’s chronically underused power pairing. I know I’m verging on fan-fiction territory here (it’s called “shipping”) but when Jessa said to Adam, “You’re a sucker, and if you have any sense at all you’ll leave with me and never look back,” I wanted them to not just leave the apartment, but to run away together to Berlin or something.As I said after this season’s third episode, the last time they spent time together on-screen, these two broken souls are just magnetic together. And even though Adam said he wouldn’t go to Ray’s victory party because he wanted to see Hannah “too much right now,” I thought I detected some disappointment from Jessa. Or maybe I’m projecting! Just please don’t let Hannah and Adam get back together in the season’s finale. We’ve seen that one before.Lydia: Indeed we have. I loved the final note of this episode: Ray and Hannah, side by side, watching as Marnie grabs the mike, hijacking Ray’s celebration, to announce to the world her coming nuptials. “I am faking it,” Ray says to Hannah as they watch a gleeful Marnie drive the dagger deeper into poor Ray’s heart. “I am faking everything,” Hannah replies. As St. Justine’s principal counseled, she’s holding it all in. Perhaps this young woman has finally learned something after all?  