By EVE M. KAHNOCT. 14, 2015
Susan Wagner is moving out. Frederick Douglass is moving in.A new art collection with ethnically varied roots is arriving this week at Gracie Mansion, the mayoral residence of New York City, in an effort to represent groups that have had little or no presence in the décor of the house over the years. The additions are the result of a collaboration between scholars and Mayor Bill de Blasio and his wife, Chirlane McCray, who are seeking to live among objects with powerful narratives.Evidence of past first families of New York and other elite New Yorkers is giving way to documents, paintings, textiles and ceramics from the late 1700s and early 1800s related to escaped slaves, Chinese artisans, women and Jewish, Italian and Irish immigrants.Kalia M. Brooks, the consulting curator for the Gracie Mansion Conservancy, chose about 50 pieces to borrow from local institutions in time for the house’s Oct. 25 reopening to the public. (The public areas have been closed for about 18 months, and the exterior has been engulfed in netting and scaffolding for restoration work during part of the first year of Mr. de Blasio’s tenancy.)“Mrs. Wagner is briefly going to meet Frederick Douglass,” Ms. Brooks said while giving a preview Tuesday. She was referring to a canvas portrait on the parlor wall of Susan Wagner, the delicate-looking blond wife of Robert F. Wagner, mayor from 1954 to 1965, that is to be removed, and the incoming print depicting the snowy-haired escaped slave. Alongside Douglass’s portrait will hang one of Henry Bibb, an abolitionist who, like Douglass, had a white father, fled a plantation and became an acclaimed author.AdvertisementMs. Brooks said that she coordinated with Mr. de Blasio and Ms. McCray for the new installation, which includes a poster from 1809 protesting prejudice against Irish Catholics. A sampler from the 1840s was stitched by Sarah Ricks, a student at Colored Public School No. 3 in Brooklyn. Miniatures of the prosperous black Toussaint family (circa 1825), attributed to Anthony Meucci, an immigrant from Rome, are headed for a ground-floor corridor.The displays also include a Sephardic Jewish couple’s marriage certificate; Chinese export porcelain; food storage vessels by the black ceramist Thomas W. Commeraw; portraits of street peddlers; slave manumission papers; and Native American beads, pottery and a tomahawk.AdvertisementThe transformation of Gracie Mansion is part of a nationwide trend at cultural institutions to focus on voices long unheard; numerous house museums, for instance, are restoring servant and slave quarters and bringing out related artifacts. In Manhattan, the Merchant’s House Museum has opened its top-floor former servants’ quarters to the public, and several Long Island estates are emphasizing the family slaves who made the owners’ luxurious lives possible.The freshly borrowed antiques at Gracie are distributed in formal rooms awash in floral upholstery, gilded mirrors, carved mantelpieces, wallpaper with scenes of aristocrats frolicking and crystal light fixtures. Portraits remain of the Gracie family, which built the house in the 1790s, and whose descendants eventually supported the Confederacy. Among the objects being returned to lending institutions or put into storage, in addition to Mrs. Wagner’s portrait, are a grayish Dutch armoire and paintings of landscapes, street scenes and smokestacks by artists as prominent as Maurice Prendergast.For one parlor, Ms. Brooks has brought in a Brooklyn scene, about eight feet wide, painted around 1820 by Louisa Ann Coleman. The audaciously large piece, Ms. Brooks said, suits a house with a strong personality.“There’s nothing subtle about this space,” she said.In a nearby room, recordings will play of actors reciting the chants of early New York street peddlers. “It’s going to add a level of audibility” to the installation’s tributes to the laborers who built the city’s economy, she said.Paul Gunther, the executive director of the Gracie Mansion Conservancy, said that the changes were appropriate to a residence that had changed with every administration. The new collection, he said, “fits seamlessly into a house that’s all about transition anyway.”A version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Mayor’s House Spruces Up and Diversifies Its Art Portfolio.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.