AUSTIN, Tex. — Perhaps nobody expected the  collaboration between Michael Showalter and Sally Field less than Sally Field. The Oscar-winning actress had never crossed creative paths with the director, who has built a career on sketch comedy and screenplays with an off-kilter approach to humor.But she took to Mr. Showalter’s and Laura Terruso’s script for an oddball film, “Hello, My Name Is Doris,” about an insular woman in her 60s who, after the death of her mother, falls for her much younger co-worker (Max Greenfield). The film, with physical comedy and double-entendres mixed  with tender moments, calls for performers who are not afraid to make themselves look a little ridiculous. But in that ridiculousness, Doris becomes a winning character.Ms. Field has flexed her comedy muscles plenty of times before in a career spanning five decades, from “Smokey and the Bandit” to “Soapdish” to “Mrs. Doubtfire,” but she steps into new territory here, building something of an outsider  who becomes more sympathetic with the embarrassments she endures.In an interview at the Driskill Hotel  here ahead of the film’s world premiere on Saturday, Ms. Field spoke about her role and her career. Below are excerpts from that conversation.Did Michael contact you about the script? Did he have you in mind?Yes. It was sent to me with a letter from Michael to please read it. And I responded and he was shocked. But I was shocked, too. Things don’t get written like this.What did you like about the role?It’s such a unique character. She’s just the strangest person. I loved the fact that it was an older woman. But we never really talk about age. It’s really more about everybody trying to move on with their lives and how hard it is to do that. No matter what stage of life we’re in, everybody’s the same. Reports from the South by Southwest conference and festival in Austin.It’s such an improv universe that he comes from. Was that something you had experience with?I do. I love improv. I come from the Actors Studio, which is a lot about finding your character through improv. So it’s a great way to work. I found it difficult to work in a circumstance when you’re not allowed to improv, when it comes in much more rigid.What was your approach to  this outsider character?I think all human beings, and certainly me, always feel left out, always feel that you’re slightly on the outside of things. A lot of people fake it better than others. But you call on that part of yourself that just feels like, they’re all doing something and I don’t know how to get in.Your character finds out that her crush likes indie electronic music, so she gets into it as well. Do you follow any indie artists?I’m very much out of it in that arena. My son usually has to tell me about somebody I should listen to, or even my granddaughters. I’m very much like Doris in that. All of that served me very well. Though the fact that the man that she has a crush on is 30 years younger than she is I think is more the issue than the fact that he’s into electronic music and she’s not.How does that play into her worldview, do you think?In reality, as you get older, sometimes you forget how old you are. You walk down the street and you see yourself in your mind’s eye as still being that 18-year-old. Because that 18-year-old is still there. But then there’s the other pieces of yourself.How would you assess your career at this point, in terms of roles you’re taking on?A career over 50 years is a whole lot of things. It’s a lot of ups and a lot of downs and a lot of sideways. And you just keep going. And looking for a piece that’s worth putting yourself into, like this was for me. Whether it ever comes out, I don’t even care.Do you see think there are fewer roles that interest you in playing?There’s a dearth of roles for women. I turn down a lot of stuff because there’s just nothing in it for me to do. But if you’re lucky, something like this comes along and you say, sure, I’ll leap off the cliff.