By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMARCH 15, 2015
10 P.M. (E!) THE ROYALS Elizabeth Hurley and Vincent Regan portray the foul-mouthed Queen Helena and bewildered King Simon, the rulers of a decadent if fictional British dynasty in this nighttime soap, the network’s first scripted series. Leading their unruly brood is Prince Liam (William Moseley, above center, with Ms. Hurley and Mr. Regan), the heir apparent after his older brother dies, who angers his mother by sleeping with the daughter (Merritt Patterson) of the queen’s head of security. Princess Eleanor (Alexandra Park), meanwhile, likes to drink, take drugs, seduce servants and bodyguards, and party in Paris nightclubs without any underwear. “The Royals” “should be a hoot, but it actually gets old, and dull, very quickly,” Alessandra Stanley wrote in The New York Times. “It turns out that campy faux queens and princes can’t keep up with the real-life Elizabeth II and her progeny — or with reality show royals.” The Season 10 opener of “Keeping Up With the Kardashians” — in which Kim and her husband, Kanye West, have sex in a bathroom, and family members act as if nothing were going on with Bruce Jenner, despite his ponytail and changing face — leads in at 9. Of the two series, “the Kardashians are better at keeping up appearances,” Ms. Stanley added. “The monarchy has survived in Britain for so many centuries partly because it protects its mystique and doesn’t bend to reality. The Kardashians have held onto their perch on cable television for 10 seasons for much the same reason.”10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Representative Trey Gowdy, Republican of South Carolina and chairman of the House Select Committee on Benghazi, discusses the latest in the investigation and how the controversy surrounding Hillary Rodham Clinton’s emails as secretary of state comes into play. He also appears on “Meet the Press,” at 10:30 on NBC.10:30 A.M. (CBS) FACE THE NATION Senator Tom Cotton of Arkansas discusses drafting the letter, signed by him and 46 other Senate Republicans, that warned Iranian officials against a nuclear deal with the Obama administration.8 P.M. (CBS) MADAM SECRETARY Elizabeth (Téa Leoni, left) secretly travels to Iran to prevent a coup that could damage the Dalton administration. In “The Good Wife,” at 9, Frank Prady (David Hyde Pierce) attacks the record of Peter (Chris Noth) during his campaign for state’s attorney, forcing Alicia (Julianna Margulies) to consider doing the same.Advertisement8 P.M. (Fusion) REBEL WITH A CAUSE: THE SAM SIMON STORY In his final months, Mr. Simon, one of the creative forces behind “The Simpsons,” allowed cameras to capture the two primary battles in his life: one for animal rights, the other against colon cancer, from which he died last Sunday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (Travel) BREAKING BORDERS The journalist Mariana van Zeller and the chef Michael Voltaggio, below, journey to parts of the world dominated by conflict and try to bridge the divide over a meal of local dishes in this new series. They begin in the Holy Land, where they visit sites of unrest in Jerusalem, eventually sitting down to dine in the West Bank with Palestinians and Israelis. “It’s a lovely idea, and it often even makes a difference on a small scale, yet the world’s enmities keep right on festering,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times. “So whether the breaking-bread version in this show actually accomplishes much is open to question. But it makes for a travel/cooking show that’s considerably livelier than most.”9 P.M. (ESPN) I HATE CHRISTIAN LAETTNER Rob Lowe narrates this “30 for 30” documentary, in which Rory Karpf interrogates former teammates and rivals of Mr. Laettner, the former Duke basketball star who went on to play in the N.B.A. for 13 years, about why they think he has been so disliked for so long.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowTHE DESTINY OF LESSER ANIMALS (2010) In this drama from the director Deron Albright, a Ghanaian police inspector sets out on a crime-laden quest to retrieve his stolen counterfeit passport so he can escape his past and move to the United States. (vyerfilms.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCK A version of this schedule appears in print on March 15, 2015, on Page SP14 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.