AdvertisementSupported byPlaylistBy Jon CaramanicaWar on WomenWAR ON WOMENShawna Potter, the frontwoman of the excellent feminist hardcore band War on Women, writes blunt manifestoes, then shouts them rousingly. On her band’s new self-titled album (on Bridge Nine), she’s on high alert, poking holes in hypocrisy and male privilege and cultures of silence about violence against women. “Say It” is a song about rape that moves from devastating — “If I was raped would you wanna know where I walked?/Would you wanna know what I wore?” — to empowering, with Ms. Potter chanting, “Say it! Say it! I was raped!” She also has little time for the politics that drive wedges between women, as heard on “Second Wave Goodbye,” an attack on feminists who were once the vanguard but now feel like the establishment. “You’re the kinda bitch that seeks to divide,” Ms. Potter sings, “but I’m the kinda bitch that seeks to unite.”RixtonLET THE ROADThe world doesn’t need more than one Maroon 5, but if we must have one, maybe it should be a more inspiring version than the one currently on offer. Enter Rixton, a British foursome with that band’s allergy to complexity but without its fundamental cynicism. Rixton’s debut album, “Let the Road” (School Boy/Giant Little Man/Mad Love/Interscope), is full of gooey fun like “Me and My Broken Heart,” a glossy bit of post-Police guitar pop. Conceptually, the band aims low: It’s “I Like Girls” one minute, and a command to “Make Out” the next. But the frontman, Jake Roche, has a sleek, seductive voice with a just a touch of tartness — even when he’s emotionally destitute, as on “Hotel Ceiling,” he never sounds completely deflated.QuarterbacksQUARTERBACKSHow bummed is Dean Engle? Pretty bummed. “One time I showed you a song/You only thought that it was kind of good,” he whines on “Pool,” from the new self-titled album by his band, Quarterbacks. Then, daunted, he retreats, continuing, “I never played it again/It wasn’t even about you.” This enrapturing album (released on Team Love) is full of such unanswered thoughts and feelings, never shared directly but instead told in lyrics. Mr. Engle excels in relating a whole world in a couple of couplets. The rest of the band plays a scrambled, jangly, bare-bones melodic punk to keep up with his rambling. It’s skeletal, but this album is alive in its sparseness — you can hear the rustle between drum hits almost as clearly as the drum hits themselves, just as you can hear Mr. Engle sweating between declarations of unrequited love.Lady Lamb the BeekeeperAFTERAly Spaltro is a theatrical singer masquerading as a modest one. Recording under the moniker Lady Lamb the Beekeeper, she has just released her second album, “After” (Mom+Pop), which has a scraped-together simplicity in service of songs with far greater ambition. But what really sets Ms. Spaltro apart is her singing, which is moody but powerful. Every now and again, she gets a hold of a lyric and twists it into a thing of unexpected beauty. “I know already how much TV will fail to comfort me in your absence,” she sings, as if mumbling to herself. “You have lovely eyes/And your bone structure is/Quite exquisite,” she sings, pulling the last word out and reshaping it like glass hot from the kiln.MournMOURNThe teenage punks from Barcelona, Spain, in Mourn are at the transition point between purposeful, urgent sloppiness and purposeful, careful sloppiness. On its self-titled debut album (on Captured Tracks), the extremely sturdy singer Jazz Rodríguez Bueno and her band mates toggle between the two modes. Sometimes, they’re at ease with quick and dirty whiny punk like “You Don’t Know Me” and “Misery Factory.” But the more promising songs on this assured album are the slightly more relaxed ones, the ones that take the adrenaline out of the arrangements and move it to the singing. The result is a sort of sloe-eyed, scraggly indie rock, with strong echoes of P J Harvey. But it still emanates a youthful sheen, especially when the shivery, nervous vocals are applied to a song like “Your Brain Is Made of Candy.”Advertisement