AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Mike HaleABC has T.G.I.T., its “Thank god it’s Thursday” lineup of Shonda Rhimes-produced shows. Now, for three weeks, PBS will have a trio of British dramas one after the other on Sunday nights. Maybe they could call it, “Stop Whinging, It’s Sunday.”Joining the already-in-progress “Indian Summers” on Sunday are another “Masterpiece” series, the six-part World War II story “Home Fires,” and a three-part true-crime thriller, “The Widower.” It’s enough period drama to placate the most ardent “Downton Abbey” fan.The influence of that PBS blockbuster can be seen in “Home Fires,” in which the disputatious relationship between rival women’s-club leaders played by Francesca Annis and Samantha Bond is similar to the pairing of Maggie Smith and Penelope Wilton in “Downton,” though less entertaining.“Home Fires” begins in 1939, just before Britain entered the war, and centers on the women in a fictional rural village. Much of the action involves a changing of the guard at the local Women’s Institute, a voluntary organization with surprising wartime powers like the ability to appropriate land for the planting of gardens. Much of the rest of the action involves wives and mothers trying to keep their husbands and sons from enlisting.The show was a hit for ITV in Britain, and a second season has been ordered, even though a big dramatic moment in the series might be an effort to reach a quorum at a meeting or a mother’s decision to leave her son’s name off a national registration form. In the large ensemble cast, Daisy Badger and Claire Rushbrook stand out as a high-spirited young maid and an abused wife who begins to find her voice. Men are largely ancillary, though Mark Bazeley makes an impression as the village sadist (a frustrated writer and journalist).It’s the kind of lushly produced, complexly plotted series that wraps everything in a wet towel of sentiment — at one point a character who’s contemplating an illegal act looks for guidance to her dog, who buries its face in its paws. If you stick with it, though, the sheer weight of the plot machinery and the performances will probably pull you in, beginning about midway through the third episode.“The Widower,” also an ITV production, is based on the life of the nurse Malcolm Webster, who killed or deceived a series of women. The mini-series picks up the tale with his first wedding, in 1993, and you can tell there’s something off about him right away, when his own parents give each other worried looks during his awkward toast. Soon he’s telling his new bride to take her hands out of her pockets because it looks slovenly.Webster is played by the comedian Reece Shearsmith (the film “Shaun of the Dead,” the TV series “The League of Gentlemen”), and the show’s style reflects his quiet, deadpan approach. The sociopath’s escalating series of offenses almost seems reasonable at first — he just wants to be left alone. Directed by Paul Whittington (“Vera,” “DCI Banks”), “The Widower” has a surprising undercurrent of humor, but it’s not enough to keep the unexceptional story interesting across three hours.Advertisement