OCT. 14, 2015
In 2010, Carl-Johan Forssen Ehrlin, a Swedish self-help author and life coach, self-published his first children’s book, “The Rabbit Who Wants to Fall Asleep.” The illustrations were amateurish, the prose clunky, the story strangely monotonous. But bleary-eyed parents couldn’t resist the book’s subtitle: “A new way of getting children to sleep.”Mr. Ehrlin, whose background is in psychology, built cognitive tricks into the storyline that soothed children to slumber. Enough parents in Sweden found his method successful that, in 2014, Mr. Ehrlin decided to translate his picture book into English, releasing it via Amazon’s self-publishing platform, CreateSpace. Buoyed by strong reader reviews, the book eventually became the first self-published title to top Amazon’s best-seller list, at times outperforming big novels like Harper Lee’s “Go Set a Watchman.”Last month, Mr. Ehrlin signed a major publishing deal with Penguin Random House, which is reissuing his first book (unchanged except for a higher quality paper stock) in the United States and Britain this month. Two more books in the series are to follow. Reached by phone at his home in the Swedish city of Husqvarna, Mr. Ehrlin said he was happy to be a role model for self-publishing. “Hopefully my story will inspire more people to dream of being authors as well.” The following are excerpts from a conversation.Q. Your book is not meant to be captivating in the same way as a story by the Brothers Grimm or Dr. Seuss. It’s boring, intentionally so.AdvertisementA. Yes, but it was actually very difficult to put the story on the right level of boring. It couldn’t be too interesting but it also had to be interesting enough to keep the children from being distracted.Q. Did you write this book after enduring many sleepless nights as a parent of a child who wouldn’t fall asleep?A. I now have a two-year old boy, but when I got the idea many years ago I didn’t have a child, and I wasn’t aware of any of my friends who had trouble getting their children to fall asleep. I had written other books in personal development, but I had never written a children’s book. It came as a surprise when I got the idea. But I just knew from the beginning that this was something I could help with.AdvertisementQ. Why is your main character, Roger (pronounced through a yawn, Raaah-Gerr), a rabbit? A. Rabbits are cute, neutral and friendly. There’s no threat — they’re just cozy, you can cuddle with them.There are characters in your book with names like Sleepy Snail and Uncle Yawn. You take every opportunity to remind children what the object of the book is. Is it really that easy to fool them?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. It depends on the age of the child. I hear stories from slightly older children and they know exactly what the book is doing. But often they want to relax and fall asleep, so they’ll ask for the rabbit book when it’s bedtime even though they know how it works.Q. There’s a lot of repetition of certain words — especially “now,” which is used to emphasize different commands, often variations of “fall asleep, now.” What is the theory behind that?A. Well, I think it’s pretty basic. I don’t want to tell the child to go to sleep tomorrow or in one hour. I want them to do it now.Q. Is this a form a hypnosis?A. The bedtime story? No, I wouldn’t say so. It’s more like a form of meditation — the way the words are repeated induces relaxation.Q. What other techniques do you use? A. I try to catch the child’s interest in the story by having them relate to and identify with the rabbit. So when the rabbit gets tired the child will follow and get tired as well. It’s a role model. And also the choice of words. It took me three and a half years to choose every word so it feels relaxing. There’s also goal training. I try to give the child a goal: You will fall asleep to this story.Q. You also instruct children to take whatever thoughts are “lingering in your head and put them in a box by the bed.”A. That technique works for adults as well, when we are lying there trying to fall asleep, thinking of everything we have to do the next day. If we just write it all down then we can let go of it. That’s what the metaphor is about in the story: Just put it in a box and tomorrow when you wake up you will have the answers. Stephen HeymanA version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.