AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimFor years, Ulysses has roamed the campus of Columbia University. The hero of Homer’s “The Odyssey” is an annual specter for students here: The epic is mandatory reading for every freshman. This year they’ve been able to encounter him up close in the exuberant collages of Romare Bearden’s “Black Odyssey,” part of an exhibition at the Wallach Art Gallery that closed this month. “The Odyssey” is also the subject of a program of French baroque music titled “Myths and Allegories,” which the period-instrument ensemble Les Délices is scheduled to present at the university’s Miller Theater on March 28 with the soprano Clara Rottsolk.But here, the epic’s female characters come to the fore: the guiding goddess Minerva; the temptress Circe; and Penelope, Ulysses’ faithful wife. The program is emblematic of Les Délices, a Cleveland-based ensemble led by the oboist Debra Nagy: thematically concise, richly expressive, and featuring composers few people have heard of and even fewer have performed. Concerts and recordings by Les Délices are journeys of discovery. Melissa Smey, Miller Theater’s executive director, likens the ensemble to an early-music group with an avant-garde appetite. Ms. Nagy, she said in a phone interview, “has a kind of spirit of adventure that’s very similar to a lot of the contemporary music ensembles that we work with at Miller.”The program includes selections from Jean-Féry Rebel’s opera “Ulysse,” which traces the love triangle between Circe, Ulysses and Penelope as well as his sonata “La Fidelle,” which here evokes the patient love of Penelope. The lure of the Sirens is the subject of a cantata, “Les Sirènes,” by Thomas-Louis Bourgeois (1676-1750); the clamor of war is revealed in a suite by Michel Pignolet de Montéclair (1667-1737). Elisabeth Jacquet de la Guerre (1665-1729), a child prodigy and protégée of King Louis XIV, is represented with the cantata “Le Sommeil d’Ulisse.”None of these composers are household names, and Ms. Nagy likes it that way. A scholar-performer, she sifts through the growing corpus of music manuscripts made available online by French libraries for overlooked gems, which she edits and arranges. She said she takes pride in presenting “music that people haven’t heard before. Our core audience has come to expect that they’re not going to recognize the names on the program. It’s ideas and themes and concepts — and of course very high artistic standards.”Ms. Nagy said that part of her mission is to dispel preconceived notions of French baroque music as “regimented or just littered with ornaments.” “I’m trying to emphasize the complexity and a great range of expression,” she said.The most recent program Les Délices presented in the Cleveland area consisted of music for Lent by Charpentier and Couperin. “You might think of this as a program of sacred music but it shouldn’t sound penitential,” Ms. Nagy said. Much of this music was written for singers from the opera, she explained, and well-heeled patrons “had others hold their seats two weeks in advance” to hear them.What gives performances of Les Délices a distinctly sensual feel is the sound of Ms. Nagy’s oboe, which is pliable, warm and sweet. The instrument is a copy of a late-17th-century instrument made of boxwood that is tuned to an extraordinarily low pitch, a full step below a modern concert A. With a row of recorder-like open finger holes, supplemented by two keys at the bottom, it allows Ms. Nagy to sculpt sustained notes with a subtle finger vibrato that is impossible on a modern oboe. In Montéclair’s instrumental suite “La Guerre” (“War”), part of the Miller Theater program as well as on the album “Myths and Allegories,” Ms. Nagy uses it to create startlingly human-sounding moans in a passage designed to evoke the cries of the wounded. One of the most delightful aspects of any performance by Les Délices is this exploration of the dramatic potential of pitch — how to curve, stretch or wilt a note in a way that’s emotionally resonant.For Ms. Nagy, that flexibility is the baroque oboe’s main advantage. The modern oboe, she said, built to “cut through 80 string players” and fitted with metal keys, doesn’t allow quite the same fluidity of articulation in baroque ornaments that are meant to sound spontaneous and free. She said she loves to work with great baroque string players — in Les Délices she partners with the violinists Scott Metcalfe and Julie Andrijeski — because it inspires her to emulate their command of variable bow speed. “With a baroque oboe I can do that, I can play with this wind speed that has its own expressive capabilities.” Another source of inspiration are singers. In the late 17th century, wind players looked to airs and other vocal material for solo repertory, she said, setting themselves the challenge of imitating not only the quality of a human voice but also the sound of certain consonants and vowels. No wonder French composers integrated the oboe into their operas so soon after its reinvention as an orchestral, indoor instrument in the 1660s. Before that, double-reed instruments like the shawm were played mostly outdoors and carried either pastoral or martial connotations.Those military overtones may also have influenced the composers of the Ulysses-themed pieces on Les Délices’s program to reach for the oboe. In the preface to the first book of études published for the instrument in 1695, the English oboist John Banister invoked the “inimitable charming sweetness” of its sound, which, “when well played upon,” could be every bit as majestic and stately as a trumpet — apt, then, as he put it with a refreshing lack of tact, for “the greatest heroes of the age who sometimes despise strung-instruments.”Advertisement