AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon ParelesThe Australian songwriter Courtney Barnett writes about the little, not always simple, things in life. An asthma attack. Insomnia in hotel rooms. House-hunting on a meager budget. Trying (and failing) to impress the swimmer in the next lane at the pool. Roadkill. And all sorts of ambivalence: about success, romance, the state of the world. “I’m no sociological genius,” she said via Skype from her home in Melbourne. “I just know what I know.”Her debut album, “Sometimes I Sit and Think, and Sometimes I Just Sit” (Milk!/Mom + Pop), due out on March 24, is full of matter-of-fact manifestoes in songs like “Pedestrian at Best,” a hurtling, distorted, four-chord rocker with lines like: “Put me on a pedestal and I’ll only disappoint you./Tell me I’m exceptional I promise to exploit you./Give me all your money and I’ll make some origami, honey.”Ms. Barnett’s dry mix of self-deprecation, bravado and introspection is carried by music that finds the through-line from grunge back through garage-punk to the mid-1960s. Her singing moves from the conversational to the urgent without coming anywhere near pitch correction; when her voice droops or scratches, it sounds only more candid. She can be droll and deadpan, or capture a complex emotion as a snippet of dialogue: “I know I let you down/You’re not keen on what you found/When’s the funeral? Do you want me to come?,” she sings in “Boxing Day Blues” on the new album.Her unvarnished songs have gathered listeners worldwide since Ms. Barnett started touring internationally in 2013. They’re living proof that the old indie-rock format — smart, scrappy guitar-based songs played in real time — can still say something.One fan is Britt Daniel, the leader of the Austin, Tex., band Spoon, who chose Ms. Barnett to share an arena bill with Spoon and the Decemberists on May 27 at Red Rocks in Colorado. “There’s something about the way she sings where I feel like I know that person, just from her inflection. I know women like that,” he said. “Her songs are fairly simple in their construction, and they’re carried by her lyrics, the way she finds humor in the mundane. When she sings, you can see the rhythm of her language, the way it expresses her personality. And it wouldn’t be right if it were all exactly on pitch.”In conversation, Ms. Barnett had the same down-to-earth tone as her songs: unpretentious, sensible, rooted in the concrete but slightly skewed. “I never write songs about anything wildly exciting,” she said. “They’re just everyday things. It just really interests me, those tiny little moments that could easily just pass you by. Sometimes they are probably a lot more important than we give them credit for. That time you dropped your watch down a drain on Main Street could be a turning point for the rest of your life.”Ms. Barnett decided to become a songwriter in high school. “It’s just what I liked doing, and it’s the only thing I was really good at,” she said. She studied art at the University of Tasmania, majoring in photography before she dropped out, honing the sense of detail that would turn up in her lyrics. She recently returned to using a Polaroid camera rather than her smartphone. “When I take photos on the phone, I take about 50 photos of the same thing, but it loses the special moment,” she said. “With the Polaroid, that is literally the moment. You press the button, and it prints out and it comes out of the camera. You can carry it around with you for the rest of your life and remember that one moment.”She moved to Melbourne at 20 and played guitar in various bands, among them Rapid Transit and Immigrant Union, before gaining enough confidence to record her own songs. When she did, she started her own label, Milk! — which now has a roster of like-minded songwriters — and in 2012 and 2013 she released two EPs, “I’ve Got a Friend Called Emily Ferris” and “How to Carve a Carrot Into a Rose.”Support from the Australia Council for the Arts helped her get to the CMJ Music Marathon in New York in 2013, where she was a sensation with songs like “Avant-Gardener,” the tale of a gardening-induced asthma attack, and “History Eraser,” a picaresque drunken fling. The whirlwind of afternoon and evening CMJ sets also contributed to her hotel insomnia song on the new album, “An Illustration of Loneliness (Sleepless in New York).” A year later, after the EPs had been combined and rereleased as “The Double EP: A Sea of Split Peas” and Ms. Barnett had toured clubs and festivals like Coachella, Bonnaroo and Glastonbury, she returned to CMJ in 2014 as one of its major headliners.She recorded her new album close to home, in the Melbourne suburb of Preston. Ms. Barnett and her three musicians played live in a studio that still uses recording tape, with the give-and-take of a working band; they overdubbed lead and backup vocals and a few guitars, and knocked out 11 songs in 10 days. For Ms. Barnett, the album was a considerable step up from earlier efforts with “someone hitting record and hoping for the best,” she said. “We experimented with sounds a little more and deconstructed songs a little bit. There were definitely hard moments, learning how to do things. But I’d hope I wouldn’t have it completely down on my first album, because then you have nowhere to go.”To write songs, Ms. Barnett, 27, collects verbal moments. “When I see something that interests me or hear someone say something interesting I try to make a copy of it on whatever piece of paper is close by,” she said. “A simple line about that moment can jog my memory of the other things around it pretty well. Which is weird, because I always say I’ve got a pretty bad memory, which I do. I never remember people’s names or what happened at a party. But for some reason, I can take myself back to little moments and recall things, small little details.”On tour with Immigrant Union a few years back, Ms. Barnett recalled, the band was driving from Melbourne to Sydney, and she noticed the roadkill. She jotted down the lines, “Taxidermied kangaroos are littered on the shoulders/A possum Jackson Pollock is painted on the tar.” Those were “great lines that I didn’t know what to do with,” she said. They turned up when she was working on the new album and became the starting point for “Dead Fox,” a road song with a Velvet Underground swagger and a touch of the Cure. Its seemingly casual narrative, with a chorus borrowed from a truckers’ safety slogan — “If you can’t see me, I can’t see you” — deftly touches on pollution, gas prices and big business versus local enterprise.The album’s longest and darkest song — and Ms. Barnett’s favorite — is “Kim’s Caravan,” which circles through two chords and climbs through a full-band crescendo worthy of Neil Young and Crazy Horse. In the lyrics, she takes a shoreline stroll and sees a dying seal, thinks about the destruction of the Great Barrier Reef, and ponders human interactions: “We either think we are invincible or that we are invisible/When realistically we’re somewhere in between,” she decides.As the music crests, Ms. Barnett repeatedly intones, “Take what you want from me.”She’ll be back on the road again this year, touring with indie-rock industriousness; she plays three nights at the Bowery Ballroom May 19 to 21. And she’s taking nothing for granted.“Every time I write a song, I feel like it pops out of me like a mistake,” she said. “And I wonder how it happened, and I hope it will happen again next time.”Advertisement