By MEGAN ANGELOMARCH 13, 2015
The most terrifying moment in the premiere episode of “Bloodline,” Netflix’s dark new drama, occurs when the actor Ben Mendelsohn stands up.Mr. Mendelsohn plays Danny Rayburn, the eldest son in a powerful Key West dynasty. Danny, who has been away from home for a long while, is a calculating drifter with an inherent shadiness that feels extra jarring in the South Florida sun. So when he rises to give an impromptu toast at a formal dinner for his family, so does the fear in the eyes of his younger brothers, the protective John (Kyle Chandler) and the hotheaded Kevin (Norbert Leo Butz); his sister, the peacemaking Meg (Linda Cardellini); and his weary parents (Sissy Spacek and Sam Shepard). The date Danny wasn’t supposed to bring drunkenly giggles, and the guests smile, but the Rayburns — and the audience — can feel the danger.“Danger” is one of the three words people who have worked with Mr. Mendelsohn, the Australian actor who gained notice in the United States in 2010 with his role in “Animal Kingdom,” unanimously reach for when discussing him. “He brings it to every role he plays,” Jacki Weaver, his Oscar-nominated co-star in “Kingdom,” wrote in an email. “It’s what makes him so compelling.”The second is “surprise.” The actor Jack O’Connell, who played Mr. Mendelsohn’s son in the 2014 British prison drama “Starred Up” (and played the lead in the World War II drama “Unbroken”) remembers having “the sense that Ben could go anywhere at any time. He’s very wiry.”AdvertisementThe third is “charm.” The “Girls” producer Jennifer Konner and Lena Dunham, the show’s creator, hired Mr. Mendelsohn to play the flighty father of the brash Jessa. “Lena and I had taken a hike with him and his wife, Emma, and pronounced him the world’s most charming man,” Ms. Konner wrote in an email. “The entire cast and crew fell in love with him.”AdvertisementMr. Mendelsohn’s sense of dashing and wiriness were on full display at a recent junket in New York. He is a door holder and an intense fidgeter, rocking forward to bump the hotel suite’s coffee table with his knees as he considers the underlying narrative of “Bloodline,” all 13 episodes of which will become available for streaming on Netflix on March 20: The more seemingly ideal a family (smiling group photographs of the Rayburns get an ample amount of camera time), the more sinister its secrets. “I don’t know that it exists, the perfect family,” he said. “It’s always complicated.”Born in Melbourne, Australia, Mr. Mendelsohn, 45, had a childhood marked by boarding school and fragmented living situations. “I was with my grandmother, while one of my brothers lived with my dad and one lived with my mom,” he said. “It wasn’t a great situation. Acting was the one good thing I was involved in.”His first steady work came in 1985, at 16, on a children’s program called “The Henderson Kids.” Two years later, his turn as a teenage rebel in the Australian film “The Year My Voice Broke” earned him minor notoriety (“People knew my face, but not my name,” he said). His film education consisted of a high school drama class and a well-worn VHS copy of “Taxi Driver.” “I probably watched it 70 times between the ages of 15 and 21,” Mr. Mendelsohn said. “I wanted to know what made De Niro so affecting while others just didn’t have that power.”Perhaps because he spent so much of his formative years with Travis Bickle, troubled characters like his “Animal Kingdom” drug dealer and his “Starred Up” con have become a specialty. “I’ve always taken it as a compliment to be able to play those parts,” Mr. Mendelsohn said. “They’re the ones that let you display the most feeling.” He’s been surprised and moved by fans who tell him they connect with his work, since by his own definition most men he has played are “detached and destructive.”It was those very qualities that brought the “Bloodline” co-creator Todd Kessler his way. In search of the black-sheep son who sets the action of the series into motion, Mr. Kessler, his brother Glenn, and Daniel Zelman (the trio also created “Damages,” starring Glenn Close) thought of Mr. Mendelsohn immediately. “He’s the only person we met with about Danny,” Mr. Kessler said. “He can be vulnerable, but he also has a great sense of menace.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The drama — Netflix’s most character-driven and slowest-burning original series to date — unravels the secrets of the Rayburns, a family that owns an idyllic Key West inn. Palm trees, the endless ocean and sudden rainstorms give the series the feel of a humid noir at points. The story often pivots on heated, intimate exchanges between Mr. Mendelsohn’s havoc-prone Danny and Mr. Chandler’s John, the local sheriff, who seems the most invested in returning Danny to the fold.“Ben is tricky,” said Mr. Chandler, on TV for the first time since starring as the beloved Coach Taylor in “Friday Night Lights.” “Just when you think you’re working with him, he can go behind your back.”Mr. Chandler noted that when the cast met for the first time in the Keys, Mr. Mendelsohn was late, the last to arrive. “He gave us an expletive-filled apology, and off we went,” Mr. Chandler said.What ensued over the next eight months in the Keys towns of Islamorada, Key Largo and Tavernier were countless face-offs with Mr. Chandler (“We’d come out of those scenes exhausted and disoriented,” Mr. Mendelsohn said) and night swimming shots filmed during shark feeding periods so dangerous, Mr. Kessler said, that a safety coordinator arranged 10 people around Mr. Mendelsohn to protect him.AdvertisementStill, the memory of shooting Danny’s unsolicited toast is the one that makes Mr. Mendelsohn wince. “That was a bad night,” he said, remembering the heat, the tension and his star-struck nerves in the presence of Ms. Spacek and Mr. Shepard. In the end, Danny decides against reading the notes he’d brought and cracks a joke, flooding the party with relief. But it was the loaded silent seconds before the punch line that broke the spell for Mr. Mendelsohn. “I was a bit shy about taking that long pause,” he said. “Finally, I just said: ‘I can do it. I know what I’m doing.’ ”A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2015, on Page AR16 of the New York edition with the headline: A Good Bad Man to Have Around.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.