By JOE COSCARELLIMARCH 13, 2015
The first time Tobias Jesso Jr. performed a song from his album, “Goon,” with other musicians was last month on “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon.” His backing band was the Roots.“You go into a place like that, and every day someone is having their dreams come true,” he said the next morning, marveling over the show’s house band. “For them, it’s a normal thing.”For him, not so much: Mr. Jesso, the 29-year-old Canadian singer-songwriter, had played just three proper shows as a solo artist before that national television debut. But “Goon,” out Tuesday from True Panther Sounds, is supposed to change everything.With production from indie-rock all-stars like Chet White, formerly of Girls, and Ariel Rechtshaid, known for his work with Vampire Weekend and Haim, the album is understated for a big break, the lovesick culmination of a few unsuccessful years of trying to make it as a songwriter in Los Angeles. It wasn’t until Mr. Jesso moved back, dejected, to his native Vancouver — spurred by an accident that sent the hood emblem of a Cadillac through his hand — that he took up piano and found the quaint ’70s style he now fully inhabits despite initially knowing little about the era’s music, save some Randy Newman. That greenness allows him to earnestly sing as if he were the first person to find out that “everybody lies in Hollywood.”AdvertisementIn between bites of a yogurt parfait, Mr. Jesso, who is the size of an N.B.A. small forward, with the energy — and hair — of a giddy teenager, discussed his rise and rumored relationship with Taylor Swift. These are excerpts from the conversation.Q. You’re a huge fan of Adele, and she recently posted on Twitter about you. How did your music get to her?A. I have no idea. Maybe I came up in her Google Alerts, because I always talk about her in interviews. I was happy she liked my song, but once you achieve something, you want the next thing. If you had told me three years ago that Adele would tweet about me, I would have said you’re out of your mind. Now she does, and I’m like, “Well, how do I talk to her?” Please call me, Adele!Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Are you getting more comfortable performing live?I don’t feel like I’m the type of performer who’s going to knock your socks off. I’m trying to get over my nerves. I’ve only spent the past year or so feeling like people really enjoy what they’re hearing. I spent all the time before that questioning myself.AdvertisementWhat was the music scene like where you grew up?My mom would say, “You should go down the Lynn Valley Center — they’re playing great music down there.” And I would say, “Isn’t it just a Beatles cover band?” She’d be like, “Yeah, everyone loves it.” L.A. is where I became an artist. In Vancouver, I just feel like the son of Tobias and Marsha.But you wrote most of “Goon” in Canada?When I went back to Vancouver and thought there was no opportunity for me, my insecurities fell away. I stopped thinking about the successes of my songwriting and started thinking about my enjoyment of it. I was putting songs on Facebook and YouTube, just for my friends. When one got over 100 plays, I would do a dance. The first time someone that I didn’t know commented, it was a dream come true. A year and a half later, I played “Fallon.”How does it feel to suddenly be at a level where gossip websites can say you’re dating Taylor Swift?It’s kind of wild. I didn’t realize that meeting someone could have that effect. That’s out of my range of understanding. For her, it’s a completely normal thing. She could kiss someone on the cheek, and it’s a headline for months. For people like that who have so many achievements, when somebody gets involved in their life and they haven’t achieved as much, that person has to take on the negative. It must be tough.A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2015, on Page AR2 of the New York edition with the headline: Adele, Fallon, an Album: He’s Taking It In.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.