AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael Cooper, Anthony Tommasini, Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim, Zachary Woolfe, David Allen and Vivien SchweitzerSo who should succeed Alan Gilbert when he steps down as the music director of the New York Philharmonic in 2017? Talk to music lovers, and a crystal-clear consensus emerges.The next music director should be a brilliant musician with impeccable credentials, experienced and World Famous in the way New Yorkers expect — but also daringly young and up-and-coming. The maestro must be a probing, subtle interpreter of the glorious classical canon who is also on the cutting edge of contemporary music. Someone who will satisfy the orchestra’s longtime subscribers while attracting new audiences. A taskmaster who can command its sometimes willful musicians while maintaining their respect and affection.Sadly, there may be no such animal. (Sir Esa Daniel Susanna Mariss Alsop Gustavo van Nelsons-Séguin, anyone?) But with the announcement this month that David Geffen would contribute $100 million to renovate — and rename — Avery Fisher Hall, there is renewed urgency to think about who should be the next leader of the hall’s main tenant, the Philharmonic.It has long been considered a tough job to fill. The Philharmonic’s music director is not typically a big fish in a small pond, as in some cities, but a medium fish in a big pond, whose orchestra must compete with New York’s opera and ballet companies and Broadway, not to mention the visiting world-class orchestras that play at Lincoln Center and Carnegie Hall.But much the same thing can be said of London, with its array of orchestras, opera and dance companies and, of course, the West End. Stiff cultural competition did not prevent Simon Rattle, whose tenure at the helm of the Berlin Philharmonic is nearing its end, from signing on as the next music director of the London Symphony Orchestra. His announcement this month that he would take the job was greeted there with something approaching euphoria.Can the New York Philharmonic woo someone who can thrill New Yorkers as much? Someone who can help raise funds in the nine figures for the coming renovation and who can keep audiences in the fold when the orchestra must play elsewhere in New York during at least two seasons of construction? Here, classical music critics for The New York Times weigh in with some of their thoughts on who the orchestra should look for — and who it should avoid. MICHAEL COOPERCalifornia StarThe job title is music director, not exalted interpreter of Beethoven, Brahms and Mahler. Of course, the New York Philharmonic needs an accomplished conductor who can inspire the players to give bracing performances of the great repertory works. Still, the larger visionary, cultural-leadership components of the role are at the core of the position’s responsibilities. I want someone who can excite audiences about classical music as a living, breathing art form. I would be disappointed if the Philharmonic goes with an eminent maestro who has not demonstrated palpable involvement with contemporary music and living composers.Of the names that have slipped out so far, the one best suited to my take on the job is Esa-Pekka Salonen. He is not just involved with living composers, he is one, and with an extensive personal network of composer colleagues. In comparison with the charismatic Gustavo Dudamel, Mr. Salonen’s successor at the Los Angeles Philharmonic, he may seem more laconic. But in his Finnish way, Mr. Salonen is a dynamo who enticed concertgoers in Los Angeles and never programmed down to people. That the Walt Disney Concert Hall was built on his watch, thanks in part to his galvanizing energy, is a tribute to his influence. I bet he would bond with New York City just as he did with West Coast culture and musical traditions.Mr. Salonen, 56, may not want another directorship in America. He has said he needs more time for composing. Where’s that opera he’s been talking about for years? Also, after basking in Disney Hall, the coolest American concert hall, would he be willing to lead the New York Philharmonic through two seasons of nomadic existence? I wonder.I’ll tell you who would, though: David Robertson, who was a serious candidate for the job when Alan Gilbert was ultimately appointed. Mr. Robertson, also 56, a brilliant technician, brings vitality and character to performances of the classics. His voracious curiosity for new music is infectious. He has a quirky personality and a droll sense of humor that could catch on with New York audiences.There are many lesser-known and younger possibilities. I suspect that after giving Mr. Gilbert a chance — a decision for which I will long salute the Philharmonic — the orchestra may want someone a little older, a known quantity. ANTHONY TOMMASINIMusts to AvoidSo your relationship is ending, and it’s time to move on. Maybe this last one wasn’t exactly what you had hoped for. Maybe you, as an orchestra, have changed. But have you grown wiser? As you wade into the dating pool again, here are five types of guys to avoid getting into bed with. (Or maybe it’s time for a woman?)The Frequent Flier His résumé is impressive, the stable of thoroughbred ensembles he has led is vast. But surely he’d drop everything for you, the New York Philharmonic? Don’t kid yourself. His heart will always be divided. You deserve someone fully committed to this relationship. The Tyrant Like Anastasia Steele, you long for a strong hand. So what, you tell yourself, if Toscanini broke batons and hurled scores at players? Beware. There’s nothing dreamy about bad behavior. Steer wide of anyone who has punched players, insulted audience members or demoted musicians minutes before a performance. The Revolutionary You know this one. “Who needs Tchaikovsky?” he says. “Why so much Brahms? And while we’re at it, who needs seats?” It’s all very thrilling until it’s time to meet the parents. You’re part of a family that includes the board and the audience. Will your romance survive if either of them disowns you? The Caretaker Nice, self-effacing, easygoing. The earth doesn’t quite shake when you make music together, but so what? Isn’t that what visiting conductors are for? News flash: This is the New York Philharmonic. It deserves better than someone to tide it over a few years. And audiences shouldn’t be popping caffeine pills along with their cough drops. The Older Guy An experienced, mature partner makes you feel safe. But let’s be honest: 70 is not the new 40. Remember, you’re looking for a long-term relationship. The right person may not need to be able to vault over the construction fence at Lincoln Center, but it still needs to be someone you can build, and make, a home with. CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMYes, but Can He or She Compose?One of the Philharmonic’s proudest traditions is that a sizable number of its music directors have been distinguished composers, including Mahler, Bernstein, Boulez, even Lorin Maazel. The orchestra has an opportunity to add another if it selects — or, perhaps, is able to persuade — Mr. Salonen to follow Mr. Gilbert.There are a great many conductors in the world, but vanishingly few who meet the Philharmonic’s needs at this crucial moment. While Mr. Gilbert’s expansions of the repertory and of the orchestra’s activities must be continued, recent performances have shown that improvements are needed to keep the ensemble’s sound consistently polished. Both a visionary and a workhorse is needed.Mr. Salonen may be the only one who truly fits the bill. He has international stature. As music director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic, he prepared for and opened the spectacular Disney Concert Hall, an experience that would come in handy, to say the least, as the Philharmonic confronts the rebuilding of what will soon be David Geffen Hall.He is a passionate advocate for new music but is penetrating in the core repertory, too. In a single program in 2011, he conducted the Philharmonic in Bartok’s one-act opera “Bluebeard’s Castle”; Ligeti’s “Romanian Concerto”; and Haydn’s Symphony No. 7 in C (“Le Midi”), and there was involving intensity to each. He has what, for New York, is more important than some faux-populist “common touch”: This Apple-ad star is actually cool.The Philharmonic has a few intriguing dark horse candidates to consider, among them Ludovic Morlot, James Gaffigan, Susanna Malkki and Daniel Harding, a ferociously talented British conductor whose idiosyncrasies are said to have settled in recent years.But they all hopefully have many decades ahead of them for such a position. Mr. Salonen is uniquely ready, and the Philharmonic is ready for him. ZACHARY WOOLFEFluent in Canon and Contemporary No clear candidate exists for the music directorship of the Philharmonic, and that’s partly a result of how the orchestra has structured its past seasons. Put aside the delays in replacing the retired concertmaster Glenn Dicterow and the uncertainty over the hall’s renovation. The Philharmonic’s strategy for selecting guest conductors has not been forward-looking, and programs have often been uninspiring. Many of those conductors are too old to be interested in the top job in the long term. Many are too raw.In ideal circumstances, my vote would go to someone dedicated to new music and secure in the old, to someone who spurns that very distinction — Mr. Salonen perhaps, or, more bravely, Pablo Heras-Casado or Ms. Malkki. But as next season’s schedule attests, the Philharmonic’s laudable radicalism under Mr. Gilbert is wavering. If Mr. Salonen prefers to focus on composing, the orchestra might head in a more conservative direction.If that’s the case, one more traditional candidate stands out. Manfred Honeck, the perfect age at 56, has superbly revived the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra. A violist in the Vienna Philharmonic in the 1980s and 1990s, he took time to learn from those who conducted him. Most of his recordings of Mahler, Dvorak, Strauss and Bruckner are electric and insightful.In New York, Mr. Honeck has already proved himself. Leading Carnegie Hall’s final Spring for Music concert last May, he showed real thought with his blending of readings, poetry and Mozart’s “Requiem.” His Philharmonic performances have seen noticeable improvement in the orchestra’s sound and energy, especially in an extraordinary Dvorak Ninth Symphony in December 2013. An eager fund-raiser, he’s also more adept with new music than many think, as performances here of James MacMillan’s “Woman of the Apocalypse” and Claude Vivier’s “Orion” have shown. DAVID ALLENSexy, Maybe; ‘Unhinged,’ YesIn a lively scene in “Mozart in the Jungle,” the fictional series on Amazon about an exuberant young conductor named Rodrigo De Souza and his New York orchestra, the poncho-clad maestro leads his troops off to rehearse in an abandoned lot. Locals gather on balconies as they play Tchaikovsky’s “1812 Overture” to a backdrop of graffiti and a burned-out car.Their playing, the conductor says, is “earthy,” “unsanctioned,” “unhinged” and “happening.” He tells a police officer that the musicians are on a field trip away from their stately concert hall.“Sexy and dangerous” — adjectives used to describe Rodrigo on the show — presumably aren’t in the job description for the New York Philharmonic’s next music director. But the ability to inspire “unhinged” interpretations — or at least renditions that remind us that there is nothing standard about the so-called standard repertory — is a must, as is a genuine commitment to contemporary music.A charismatic communicator and established conductor like Mr. Robertson — who has proved adept in a range of repertory, lure fresh faces and is a champion of living composers — seems an ideal match. And ideally, the next maestro or maestra will continue to loosen stuffy concert protocol. Hopefully, by the end of the next music director’s tenure, classical music newbies who show enthusiasm by clapping at the end of a movement won’t be silenced by haughty stares. VIVIEN SCHWEITZERAdvertisement