Season 1, Episode 7: “Bingo”After the extraordinary heights reached by last week’s episode, which focused on the wrenching, pre-Albuquerque history of Mike Ehrmantraut, “Better Call Saul” returned to its main plot threads with a more subdued 47 minutes of television. The good news is that Mike’s profile on the show has now been elevated. This week’s episode featured plenty of Mr. Ehrmantraut. More importantly, it included several scenes with Mike and Jimmy.Dramatically speaking, these guys need each other. Jimmy’s hand-waving, smart-aleck shtick shines brightest against the bleak background of Mike’s weather-beaten soul. And Mike is so morose and terse that the loquacious Jimmy is his perfect foil.We have the makings here of a really fine anti-buddy show.“Bingo” is all about transactions — about debts and obligations and about paying up and keeping your word, whether you like it or not. Mike commits a robbery for Jimmy to cover his legal bills. Jimmy returns a bribe to stay out of trouble. Kim Wexler stays at her law firm because the partners paid her law-school tuition (“I feel like I owe them,” she tells Jimmy.) The phrase “thank you” is repeated. Mike says it to Jimmy, Jimmy says it to Mike and Kim mouths it to Jimmy.Everyone understands that gratitude and the rules of give and take are what grease the wheels of the cosmos. Everyone except Craig Kettleman and his surprisingly gangsta wife, Betsy. The $1.6 million embezzled by the former in his capacity as county treasurer is the galvanizing center of action this week. The couple want to keep that cash. And they are so committed to the idea that when Kim, their attorney, describes the plea deal she’s worked out with a district attorney — Craig does 16 months and hands over the loot — the couple fire Kim and her firm. They demand a new lawyer — Jimmy.He doesn’t want the case, but he doesn’t have much choice. He took a bribe of $30,000 from the Kettlemans when he discovered them during their brief time as pup-tent fugitives. When Jimmy tells the couple that their only leverage with the authorities is the fortune they stole, and an admission of guilt, Betsy reminds Jimmy that returning the money could have some unfortunate consequences.“There would have to be a full accounting of it,” she says. “Every penny would have to be present. Every single penny, you understand?”He understands. Unable to find a way to win the case in court, he solves the Kettleman problem by dispatching Mike to steal their stash. It is sight to behold, Mike back in benign criminal mode, efficiently thieving from thieves.This leads to the episode’s payoff, the scene where Jimmy visits the Kettlemans and informs them that the sword they once held over his head is not just gone — it’s on its way to the D.A.’s office. Craig realizes that it’s time to turn himself in. Betsy doesn’t yield so easily. She talks about getting yet another lawyer, and about exposing Jimmy.“Criminals have no recourse,” Jimmy tells her, a lesson he learned from Nacho in episode two. “And you two are criminals, big time.”So as Mike delivers the money to the D.A., Jimmy delivers the Kettlemans to Kim. The only problem is that once the ledgers are square, Jimmy is $30,000 poorer, and that was cash he needed to lease the spacious suite he proudly showed off to Kim early in “Bingo.” He compromised himself to secure the money for that suite. By un-compromising himself, he is forced to give up the suite.Hence the outburst of noisy door and wall kicking that ends the show. He was just about to take a huge, affirmative step toward legitimacy. He could all but see the seniors in his elder law practice, sipping tea while he pitched his services. Instead, because he has done the right thing — he puts a version of that phrase in air quotes when he mentions it to Mike, underscoring how unpleasant the right thing feels — he is stuck again in his nail-salon office.You could describe “Better Call Saul” as the story of a struggling entrepreneur, one stuck in a system that is all but baiting him into illegal behavior. By accepting that bribe, Jimmy took the bait. This produced nothing except anxiety and further criminal action. So what lesson will Jimmy learn? There are at least two possibilities: 1) Never yield to such temptation; 2) If you do yield, yield smart — in a way that will allow you to keep whatever tempted you.Jimmy still seems like a guy who would like to internalize lesson No. 1. There’s a decency about him that is hard won; it comes from swearing off his days as a scam artist to his brother. But he also craves success. Given the name of the show, and his future as a consigliere, it’s safe to assume he’ll embrace lesson No. 2 soon enough.Some closing thoughts: The scene of Chuck and his efforts to cure himself of his electromagnetic sensitivity, by venturing outdoors, felt pretty dull to me. With the ascendancy of Mike, this subplot has become the least interesting in the show. I hope Chuck beats his psychosomatic illness, but the less time I spent watching him outside, gasping and counting, the better.Favorite line: Jimmy to Betsy, after he suggests she’d go to prison if she went public about her bribe: “You, you’ll probably wind up running your own gang.”Favorite pan: The opening shot, as the camera moves down, from the mugs on some most-wanted posters to Jimmy’s face. We know from the end of “Breaking Bad” that Jimmy will join that rogue’s gallery for real.Favorite flubbed word: Jimmy saying “kerfluffle” instead of “kerfuffle.” Initially, I thought this was to underscore that the future Saul Goodman is truly not Jewish. Then I hit the Internet and learned the word’s roots reside in the British Empire, not Yiddish as I always assumed. Go figure.Finally, I asked last time if there was any overlap in settings between “Better Call Saul” and “Breaking Bad.” I hadn’t noted any. (Though some of you mentioned a common diner.) Until this week. When Kim is at the window of Jimmy’s office, behind her is a highway, lined with a red sound barrier. I don’t know if it’s the same stretch of road where Jesse and Walter stand when they are picked up by Ed, aka the Disappearer, in “Breaking Bad.” But it sure looks similar.Anyone care to weigh in — confirming, denying or pointing out some other setting(s) that I missed?