Some fedoras were spotted, but no snakes were present at the premiere of “Raiders!” at SXSW on Saturday at an Alamo Drafthouse theater in Austin. The documentary tracks the enduring artistic commitment of Chris Strompolos and Eric Zala, two friends who spent their adolescent summer vacations creating a shot-for-shot remake of Steven Spielberg’s 1981 thriller, “Raiders of the Lost Ark.” Now in their 40s, the men reunited in June to shoot the one scene they never completed: the airplane fight sequence that pits Indiana Jones against a brutish mechanic near the blades of a moving airplane. (A camel and a few complicated explosions are also involved.)Their story previously inspired a Vanity Fair feature and a book. “Raiders!,” directed by Jeremy Coon and Tim Skousen, reviews the painstaking efforts Mr. Strompolos and Mr. Zala undertook as young amateur Spielbergs, highlighting the techniques they used to pull off complicated shots and special effects (blood squibs and other tricks were devised by their effects expert, Jayson Lamb). It also includes the shots that didn’t go as well: One scene ended with a young actor’s coat in flames. (The fire was eventually extinguished, but it wasn’t easy.)The documentarians were also present during the shooting of last year’s plane sequence, a production that involved a more professional crew made up of people, this time, well over the age of 13. Along the way, “Raiders!” touches on the personal lives of the filmmakers, chronicling the ups and downs of their friendship.The documentary played to an enthusiastic audience at the Alamo Drafthouse in south Austin — the chain’s original downtown Austin location was the first theater to screen a portion of the fan film publicly, in 2002. (It was shown as part of Harry Knowles’s annual marathon film festival; Mr. Knowles got his copy from the filmmaker Eli Roth.)Mr. Strompolos, Mr. Zala and the directors of “Raiders!” attended the screening and discussed both films. Mr. Knowles, also present, asked when the two would be adapting “Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom.” Another audience member asked about Mr. Zala’s job status — an emotional scene in “Raiders!” finds him begging his boss for additional days off so he can finish shooting the plane scene, risking his job in the process. “I’m O.K.” he said. “We didn’t have this adventure by playing it safe.”Reports from the South by Southwest conference and festival in Austin.“I’m fortunate enough to have a wife who values following dreams over financial security,” he added. (In the film, his wife encourages him to complete the shoot, regardless of the employment consequences.)As the documentary notes, “Raiders: The Adaptation” did eventually make it into Mr. Spielberg’s hands. The director invited Mr. Strompolos, Mr. Zala and Mr. Lamb to the Universal lot to meet and discuss the film. After the Q. and A., the festival screened “Raiders of the Lost Ark: The Adaptation,” with the newly filmed plane-fight sequence included for the first time. Perhaps Mr. Spielberg will take another look.