By NINA SIEGALOCT. 14, 2015
THE HAGUE — Mirrors play a dominant role in “Dutch Self Portraits: Selfies of the Golden Age” at the Mauritshuis museum here — an exhibition of old master paintings designed to make visitors reflect on a very contemporary form of self-absorption.The mirrors — full-length, smoky-hued and positioned to face many of the 27 paintings on view — serve several purposes.Most practically, they provide us with the image of how artists like Rembrandt, Carel Fabritius or Judith Leyster would have seen themselves when painting a self-portrait,  which could really only be accomplished with a mirror.Another role the mirrors play is to make the viewer self conscious, and by extension, contemplate how you might choose to make yourself look differently if you were going to set yourself down in brushstrokes.AdvertisementMost superficially, the mirrors provide visitors with a quick and easy photo op for a modern-day selfie, in the company of a 17th-century celebrity: i.e., Rembrandt and me. A small sign just outside the entrance to the exhibition even encourages museumgoers: “Selfies are allowed. (No flash please).”AdvertisementEmilie Gordenker, director of the Mauritshuis, acknowledged that the title of the show, which runs through Jan. 3, was a marketing choice, but said that choosing to emphasize the link between 400-year-old, laboriously crafted self-portraits by master painters and the modern one-second snapshot was not just a gimmicky approach to promoting ticket sales.“We’re really trying to respond to the question, Why are these old dark paintings still relevant today?” she said in an interview at the gallery. She added: “The more intellectual parallel that is to be made is really to ask: What happens to you when you start looking in the mirror? You start to think, How am I going to present myself, what choices am I going to make. Those were all things that these artists were thinking about too.”The exhibition is one of the first  anywhere to focus entirely on  17th-century Dutch self-portraits, though the practice of painting one’s self is a constant throughout art history, and many exhibitions around the world have been devoted to it.Five works in this fairly small show  come from the Mauritshuis’s  collection. The rest are on loan from the National Gallery of Art in Washington, the Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza in Madrid, the Frans Hals Museum in Haarlem, the Netherlands, the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, and other institutions and private collections.The exhibition’s designer, Jelena Stefanovic, said she was inspired by the Hall of Mirrors at the Palace of Versailles, the 17th-century passageway embedded with arched mirrors where courtiers would wait to meet the king and queen, Ms. Gordenker said.Artist self-portraits in the Dutch Golden Age were painted for a variety of reasons. Rembrandt, who made more images of himself than almost any other artist  — at least 80 paintings, etchings and drawings — sometimes used them as a calling card to demonstrate his skills, and many were sold to patrons.Other artists painted just one or two images of themselves — for personal reasons, and not necessarily to sell.Advertisement“Very often you find those works mentioned in the inventory of the artist’s family,” the curator of the exhibition, Ariane van Suchtelen, said in a phone interview. “So we think they were probably made for the family.”In some cases, such as the self-portrait of Jacob Willemsz Delff I (c. 1590) in the company of his three sons, the artist creates a family portrait when one is not possible. In this painting, on view in the show, he is holding a palette and working on a portrait of his deceased wife, Maria Joachimsdr Nagel, effectively resurrecting her.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brushes and palettes arrayed with dabs of paint play an important role in many of these images, as the painters sometimes sought to represent themselves as exemplars of their craft. But interestingly, they are rarely wearing the kinds of clothes that painters would wear while working, like  smocks or hats, which art historians say were the attire of the studio.Instead, they are dressed in their Sunday finest, typically formal attire that makes them resemble the merchants and nobleman who were the patrons of their art.Leyster, the sole female artist featured in the exhibition, for example, has portrayed herself in a satin or silk bodice, topped with an enormous and elaborate lace ruff. If she had owned these clothes in the 17th century, they would have been very costly and reserved for special occasions, Ms. van Suchtelen said.“They want to show off the best of their art, but also emphasize the best aspects of their appearance and to reflect their status,” she said. “If you have a formal portrait in the 17th century it would be quite unthinkable not to be dressed in a formal way.”There are some notable exceptions. Among them, a 1647-48 self-portrait of a 22- or 23-year old virile-looking  Fabritius (painter of “The Goldfinch,” which is  part of the Mauritshuis’s permanent collection) dressed in 16th-century  garb, a  jacket with a loosened white linen shirt, which reveals a thatch of chest hair. This was unthinkably informal for the 17th century, Ms. Gordenker said,  designed to mimic the 16th-century fashion stylings of his teacher, Rembrandt.In other cases, the artists presented themselves not as painters, but dressed in the costumes of other professions.Jan Steen fashioned himself a jolly theorbo player, leaning back in a chair with a great grin on his face next to a pewter jug (most likely filled with wine), in “Self-Portrait Playing the Lute” (circa 1663-65). If the effect is comical, it is also typical of Steen’s tavern or domestic scenes, which illustrate a range of human weaknesses amid social chaos.AdvertisementIn this case, he has turned his brushwork on himself, as if to say, I don’t think I’m any better than the rest of you.Taken together, even this select sampling of works represent a wide range of approaches to the subject of self-portraiture.What is clear upon leaving the show is that these images were not created in an instant. They were carefully constructed fictions of identity, designed to present a lasting impression.If “selfies” wasn’t such a catchy word at this particular moment in history, a better subtitle to the exhibition might have been: The artist as his own muse.Dutch Portraits: Selfies of the Golden Age. Mauritshuis. Through Jan. 3 .A version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.