Following Sunday’s finale of “The Jinx: The Life and Deaths of Robert Durst” on HBO, questions have arisen about the timeline of events presented in the documentary. (Gawker has a particularly detailed account here.) Whether it’s because of those unanswered questions or for other reasons, the director Andrew Jarecki has canceled previously scheduled appearances on “The Tonight Show” and MSNBC’s “All In With Chris Hayes,” as well as with other media outlets.The documentary series’ finale centered on a dramatic interview in which Mr. Durst, the real estate heir implicated in one disappearance and two deaths, was confronted with handwriting evidence that appeared to connect him to the killing of his friend Susan Berman in 2000. After the interview, when he walked into a restroom still wearing a live microphone, he was recorded saying to himself: “What the hell did I do? Killed them all, of course.” On Saturday, before the episode was shown, Mr. Durst was arrested in New Orleans in connection with Ms. Berman’s death.People associated with the production have told The New York Times that the interview took place in April 2012. Many viewers who watched Sunday night’s episode, however, assumed that the interview took place sometime after Mr. Durst’s August 2013 arrest for trespassing at his brother Douglas Durst’s property. The episode shows footage of Mr. Durst exiting court after being bailed out.Assuming that the dramatic interview shown in last night’s episode did indeed take place in April 2012 — 16 months before the arrest — here’s my best guess as to how the seeming conflict can be reconciled, given that even in our own interview with Mr. Jarecki, we could not pin down a precise timeline.The early parts of the episode are focused on the filmmakers’ frustrating attempts to schedule the final interview, which Mr. Durst continually delays — first he claims to be in Spain (which is apparently a lie), before simply deciding he doesn’t want to participate at all. Then, in a dramatic scene, the filmmakers learn of his arrest. Voiceovers and older footage establish that the arrest  stemmed in part from their own work — Mr. Durst had violated an order of protection taken out by Douglas Durst in 2012, following a filming session for the documentary during which Mr. Durst was taken to various locations associated with the Durst family.What comes next, at about the 19-minute mark, is a scene in which Mr. Jarecki listens to a voice message from Mr. Durst that refers to “walking up a stoop” and then speaks by phone with a lawyer about sharing footage. This, he tells someone off camera, “gives us a lot of leverage.” In the next sequence, we hear Mr. Durst saying, “I am ready to be filmed.”None of these scenes are dated onscreen, but as a viewer, based on the flow of events, it’s natural to assume that the voice message about the stoop and Mr. Jarecki’s discussion of sharing footage are in reference to Mr. Durst’s August 2013 arrest. It then seems to follow that Mr. Durst’s agreement to do the final interview also comes after that arrest.But it’s also possible that the telephone message, and the discussion with the lawyer, took place in 2012, at the time that Douglas Durst was asking for the order of protection. This would fit with a timeline in which the final interview was conducted in April 2012. (In an earlier scene in which the filmmakers are actively pursuing the interview, at about the 14:50 mark, a calendar on the wall is turned to January 2012, a year in which Martin Luther King Jr. Day fell on Monday, Jan. 16.)In this scenario, the episode was edited in such a way that the action jumped ahead a year and a half — to the trespassing arrest in August 2013 — and then back to the interview negotiations in 2012, thereby creating a false impression about when the interview took place.Without any further comment from Mr. Jarecki (who has released a statement that reads, “Given that we are likely to be called as witnesses in any case law enforcement may decide to bring against Robert Durst, it is not appropriate for us to comment further on these pending matters.”), one possibility is that there was a desire on the filmmakers’ part to include the 2013 arrest in the story, but that there was no natural place to put it, given that the real story arc of the documentary ended in 2012. In that case, putting it where they did made some sense because of its connection to the 2012 events, but it was a tenuous connection and the result was a confusing timeline.The lack of clarity in the episode about when the interview took place wouldn’t seem to have any bearing on the real-world case involving Mr. Durst, and it doesn’t really change any of the facts or conclusions of the documentary. But for a highly wrought and publicized work of narrative nonfiction, fostering a misleading impression about the timing of such an important series of events would be a significant lapse. The question of whether chronology has been obscured or fudged for dramatic effect comes up often in the documentary field; if that happened here, it will leave an unusually large number of viewers feeling cheated.