A stripped-down production of “The Color Purple,” the musical adaptation of the Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, will feature an up-and-coming British theater star and an Academy Award-winning American actress when it opens on Broadway this fall.The British actress, Cynthia Erivo, will reprise her performance as Celie, the show’s much-abused heroine, which she created in a 2013 production in London. And Jennifer Hudson, an “American Idol” alumna who won an Oscar for her performance in “Dreamgirls,” will join the production as Shug Avery, Celie’s rival-friend-mentor-lover. Both women are making their Broadway debuts.The revival of “The Color Purple” that they will lead is being directed by John Doyle, who is known for his minimalist approach to musical theater. The first staging of his production, at the Menier Chocolate Factory in London, won over skeptical critics. Ben Brantley, in The New York Times, called it “so lithe and muscular that at first it’s hard to detect even remnants of the big, bloated show that ‘The Color Purple’ once was.”“The Color Purple” was released in 1982 to great acclaim. In addition to the Pulitzer, its author, Alice Walker, won a National Book Award for the work, which depicts the race-and-gender-related struggles of a group of black women living in rural Georgia in the 1930s. In 1985, the book was adapted into a movie directed by Steven Spielberg and starring Oprah Winfrey and Whoopi Goldberg.The original musical adaptation, with a book by Marsha Norman, songs by Brenda Russell, Allee Willis and Stephen Bray, and a vocal champion in Ms. Winfrey, opened on Broadway in 2005; reviews were lukewarm, but LaChanze, who played Celie, won a Tony for her performance, and her replacement in the role, Fantasia, was much-praised. The musical made a profit, unlike most Broadway shows, running for 910 performances, and succeeded in attracting an unusually high number of black theatergoers.The revival is shorter and simpler than the original. “Nothing was rewritten, but things were cut and restructured,” Mr. Doyle said recently. “There aren’t as many big dance numbers, but it gets to the heart of things very well.” That heart, he said, “is a story about how women were treated in a certain environment at a certain time, about what love really is, and about how a person becomes empowered in an environment where they have no power, and how much courage does that journey take.”The Broadway revival, with Ms. Winfrey among its producers, is scheduled to begin performances in November at the Bernard B. Jacobs Theater, and to open on Dec. 3.“I’m completely over the moon,” Ms. Erivo said by phone from London. “Part of me is still in disbelief, and the other part of me is completely ready for the challenge, and another part is bubbling over for joy.”A version of this article appears in print on 03/17/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Actresses Announced For ‘The Color Purple’.