AdvertisementSupported byThe Art of CollectingBy David BelcherVENICE — It is the mid-1950s, and the Jackson Pollock painting “Alchemy” hangs in Peggy Guggenheim’s palazzo on the Grand Canal in Venice — unprotected by glass, soaking up dust and cigarette smoke from the art patroness’s many elegant parties.Fast-forward six decades to the same villa, now a museum and one of the most important in the world for modern art. The same Pollock painting from 1947, cleaned of years of grime after a painstaking restoration, is now the centerpiece of a homecoming exhibition: “Alchemy by Jackson Pollock: Discovering the Artist at Work,” through April 6.For Luciano Pensabene, the conservator of the Peggy Guggenheim Collection, restoring the 68-year-old painting has been a study in rediscovery — and revelation. The work, Pollock’s first so-called drip painting, signaled a shift in the artist’s technique from more straightforward renderings to the seemingly random splattering of paint for which he is known.The restoration of “Alchemy,” Mr. Pensabene said, also signals a shift — in how artwork can be rediscovered or reveal secrets beneath its surface.“This restoration has showed us that everything in this painting is intentional. Everything in the painting is in balance,” Mr. Pensabene said in his small studio at the museum with a view of the bobbing gondolas on the canal. “We need to change our perception of Pollock.”The exhibition displays the painting — unprotected only during the exhibition — alongside a full-size 3-D replica that will allow visitors to feel Pollock’s famous technique and make their own discoveries, Mr. Pensabene said.A major discovery about “Alchemy” was made through computer analysis during the restoration: Pollock constructed the work with a shape and balance comparable to a grid, with delicate outlines of white paint — a rational approach, rather than a haphazard thrashing of paint on a canvas.“We have always thought of him as experimental and random, but you can see another painting now,” Mr. Pensabene said.On a recent shimmering winter day, small crowds sauntered through the museum’s intimate rooms, soaking up the Giacometti, Klee, Ernst and Kandinsky. But Pollock is king here at the Peggy Guggenheim: By being early to buy his work and support his career, Ms. Guggenheim made Pollock an international name, and her palazzo, which was turned into a museum after her death in 1979, has become a place of pilgrimage for art historians and fans of the bad-boy artist.Over the past year, “Alchemy” was restored at Italy’s premier workshop, the Opificio delle Pietre Dure in Florence. Created in 1588, the workshop is known for salvaging scores of artworks damaged in 1966 by the disastrous flooding of Florence by the Arno River.The team of scientists from seven different research institutions numbered about 50, brushing away the grime from 4.5 kilograms of paint that Pollock splattered across the canvas in what Mr. Pensabene said was the first such treatment of a piece of modern art.Philip Rylands, director of the Peggy Guggenheim Collection, underscored the tough-love aspect of the restoration. “Cleaning such a painting is not just a matter of solvents and cotton swabs, but is preceded by months of research, using a variety of special rays and spectrometers, often with fascinating results,” he said.The museum’s homecoming for “Alchemy” will kick off a series of exhibitions and events this year about Pollock, his legacy and influence, and the enduring contribution that Ms. Guggenheim made to the art world.The museum’s 11 Pollock works, from 1942 to 1947, “cover the period when his work moved from the figurative abstraction to the fully abstract drip paintings,” Mr. Ryland said. “The pictorial space Pollock implies by the poured paintings puts Cubism into the past. It breaks the ice on a completely new approach to how paintings can be conceived.”The “Alchemy” exhibition guides visitors through details of the conservation with touch-screens, interactive devices, and documentation and original items loaned from Pollock’s studio at the Pollock-Krasner House and Study Center on Long Island, N.Y.“Many of these paintings are important, not only historically, but also because they show Pollock’s technique before and as he started with drip paintings,” Mr. Pensabene said.In addition to unveiling Pollock’s hidden technique, the brushing away of the dust from “Alchemy” has revealed other treasures, Mr. Pensabene said.“This painting is an explosion of color,” he said. “It has 19 colors, but we thought it had far fewer. We had no idea. We have found three different greens, red and whites. There are some white lines that you couldn’t see before.”The restoration involved a series of computer analyses, and a 3-D replica was created to make the painting’s relief-like surface vivid to the public. An entirely new painting was hidden, not only within the delicate white-painted grids, but also inside the blobs of paint, he said.“This painting is more difficult to restore because of the industrial colors and paints Pollock used,” Mr. Pensabene said. “We knew that he started using house paint in 1947, but we found peanut oil in some of these layers, which is a problem because it never dried very well. It’s still a little fresh.”The return of “Alchemy” will be followed, April 23 to Nov. 9, by another Pollock masterwork, “Mural,” which was restored over 21 months, beginning in 2012 at the Getty Center in Los Angeles. The 20-foot-long painting, which belongs to the University of Iowa Museum of Art, was commissioned by Ms. Guggenheim for her New York apartment in 1943, when Pollock was virtually unknown.Coinciding with the “Mural” exhibition, the museum will mount a first-ever retrospective of the works of Pollock’s eldest brother, Charles, who began to create serious abstract art just before Jackson Pollock died in 1956. “Charles lived in the shadow of Jackson all these years, but it never bothered him,” Mr. Ryland said, adding that Charles Pollock “was very balanced,” unlike his “tortured” brother.The turbulence in Jackson Pollock’s life — including alcoholism and an early death in a car crash at age 44 — adds to the mystique that still surrounds his work. The cleaning of “Alchemy” will further secure Pollock’s place with future generations of art scholars, Mr. Ryland said.“I remember taking some art history students from N.Y.U. around the museum once, and I had to really explain most artists. It was as if these students resented history,” he recalled. “But the minute they got to the Pollock room, I lost them. They knew exactly where they were. Pollock was not history to them. It was as if this is what they understood.”Advertisement