By HANNAH OLIVENNESMARCH 16, 2015
LONDON — “After World War II, we’ve systematically and historically failed. We just have,” said Mark Sealy, director of the nonprofit photo agency Autograph ABP. “We seamlessly move from one conflict zone to the next.”That progression of failure is the story, vividly told, of “Human Rights Human Wrongs,” an exhibition at the Photographers’ Gallery in London through April 6.The show is a collaboration between Autograph ABP, which promotes photography in the service of diversity and cultural identity, and the Ryerson Image Center in Toronto. It includes more than 300 original press prints from the Black Star Collection photo archive, spanning the years from 1945 to the early 1990s.The wealth of material is in part due to the fact that much of it was produced during a golden era for photojournalism. “This is a time when 36 photographs were taken, and 80 rolls of film would be shot on assignment,” said Mr. Sealy, curator of the exhibition. “When the cost of film was neither here nor there.”AdvertisementClare Grafik, head of exhibitions at the Photographer’s Gallery, said she hoped that younger generations — overloaded on images they can get immediately on a personal device — will start to see news photography in a new light.Advertisement“We’re very much hoping this will enable a reinvigorating of the debate around photojournalistic practice in the current culture,” she said.The tone for the exhibition is set by a quotation, spelled out in big gold letters on the wall: “Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person before the law.” It is the text of Article 6 of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights. “I'm encouraging people to think about recognition and responsibility,” Mr. Sealy said.The exhibition begins with the May 7, 1945, issue of Life magazine. Photographs of the Nazi concentration camps ran alongside a report on the United Nations convention in San Francisco, where the United Nations Charter was created.The images of genocide, put together in the magazine under the simple title of “Atrocities,” bear no mention of the ethnicity of the people killed. This omission, Mr. Sealy said, was an editorial decision — and it highlights the importance of interrogating where, when and how images are distributed to the world.“These are almost reproduced as if it is the first time that this is being known and seen, which of course is not factual,” he said. “Images from concentration camps were in circulation as early as the 1930s.” That the photographs appear in this particular issue of the magazine is “a very strategic visual conversation with what’s happening in San Francisco,” Mr. Sealy said.The exhibition arranges photographs not in a linear historical progression, but by grouping them to show the connections between them: a series around a certain event or theme, varying shots of the same scene, or similar images of different situations. For example, photos of the Civil Rights movement in the United States, including some of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., are shown alongside photos of the Pan-African movement that was going on around the same time.“I've always been very aware of the fact that time and history get wrapped up in certain moments,” Mr. Sealy said. “We tend to forget other things are happening at the same time.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The exhibition relies on the audience to make the connection between current events and what is displayed in the images, some of which are decades old: African-American protesters facing police forces in the United States, waterboarding in war zones, prisoners being set on fire in front of a camera.Advertisement“We live in times now that show we clearly haven’t learned,” Ms. Grafik said. “What function do these images have if they are to inform us?”Putting all these images together highlights the conjunction of events, but it is also a shocking visual representation of the amount of violence that has occurred within living memory. The wallpaper used in one of the rooms, made of dozens of images that were not used as prints in the show, reminds us that all these images come from the same archive.“It's a sense of pushing the envelope, overcrowding the space, bombarding the scenario,” Mr. Sealy said.The Photographers’ Gallery show follows a similarly themed exhibition at Tate Modern, on the other side of the river Thames. “Conflict, Time, Photography” looked at how conflict and violence affect and are affected by memory, whether individual or collective.But while that show, which closed March 15, was partly a reflection on how some lives end but others continue after conflict, “Human Rights Human Wrongs” takes a different tack, pushing the audience to question its perception of human rights.Pictures of children trying to get to school invite questions about the right to education; pictures of Israeli or North Vietnamese women soldiers in uniform, marching in the street, challenge stereotypes of women’s rights and the role of women in conflict.The show ends as it began, on genocide — this time, in Rwanda.“Photographs of ethnic cleansing yet again in full compliance of the Western knowledge,”’ Mr. Sealy said, walking though the last room. “We’ve come full circle.”A version of this special report appears in print on March 16, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.