By JAMES PONIEWOZIKOCT. 14, 2015
For their first primary debate, the Democrats went to Las Vegas. But they were not there to put on a show.Cable news had been spoiled by the first two Republican primary debates of this cycle, with a feisty, oversize field led by a professional reality-TV performer. The Democratic race, on the other hand, is led by two candidates who’ve seen political benefit in not attacking each other. Hillary Rodham Clinton, as front-runner, has avoided punching down. Mrs. Clinton’s chief rival, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, has refused to go negative, even when interviewers have all but offered to hold his coat for him.The walk-up coverage of the debate on CNN had held out hope that there would be drama. Maybe Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. would show up! Maybe one of the lesser-known candidates would create a viral moment!
Catch up on analysis of the first Democratic presidential debate  featuring Hillary Rodham Clinton, Bernie Sanders, Martin O’Malley, Jim Webb and Lincoln Chafee.“This time, what happens in Vegas,” a booming CNN ad promised hopefully, “definitely won’t stay in Vegas!” (Though what did this mean exactly? Would the candidates Martin O’Malley and Lincoln Chafee wake up the next morning to find a tiger in their bathroom?)AdvertisementThe moderator, Anderson Cooper of CNN, to his credit, said before the debate, “It’s not my job to force somebody to fight.” Instead, he came with a few jabs of his own ready, spending much of the night with his head cocked down at his note cards, rattling off questions like America’s toughest quiz show host. He hit candidates early at their vulnerabilities, asking Mrs. Clinton, “Will you say anything to get elected?” and asking Mr. Sanders if he could hope to get elected as a self-described Democratic socialist.AdvertisementMr. Cooper was hyper-prepared — at one point, he dashed off the population of Denmark, as though his chunky spectacles were Google Glass. And he was not shy about interrupting candidates, or policing them. When Jim Webb complained about not getting enough time to speak, Mr. Cooper curtly answered, “You agreed to these rules.”In the early going, it seemed as if the debate might become more contentious, as Mrs. Clinton took an opportunity to criticize Mr. Sanders as too soft on gun regulations. But Mr. Sanders, while holding forth with his trademark Larry David-like ire against Wall Street, mostly chose not to spar with her.The Times reporter Michael D. Shear analyzes key moments from the first Democratic presidential debate in Las Vegas on Tuesday.Just the opposite: The most-replayed moment of the entire debate may have come when Mr. Sanders took Mrs. Clinton’s side on the investigation of the private email server she had used while secretary of state. “The American people are sick and tired of hearing about your damn emails!” he said, prompting cheers from the Democratic audience and a hearty laugh and handshake from his opponent.If the Republican candidates went to their debates to deliver smackdowns, the Democrats showed up for a singalong. The heat from the stage was mostly directed outward, especially at the opposition party, and most especially at Donald J. Trump, whom Mr. O’Malley called “that carnival barker.” Mr. Trump is an unavoidable presence even at the other party’s debate, which he decided to crash via second-screen by reviewing it live on Twitter. (“Wow, I am giving a speech on OAN,” he wrote, referencing the One America News Network. “Much more exciting than debate!”)One can’t blame CNN if the candidates didn’t deliver the thrills Mr. Trump or others sought; beyond a point, whatever the format, candidates will have the kind of debate they want to have. There weren’t many innovations in CNN’s presentation — the anchor Don Lemon presented questions from Facebook, a device we’ve seen before — and the event ran a solid two hours, despite having fewer candidates than the Republican main-stage debates.In the end, the five Democrats mostly used the debate less to argue with one another than to present the versions of themselves — and their party — that they wanted voters to see. The tone was maybe best summed up toward the end, when Mr. Cooper asked the candidates which enemies they were proudest of making, and they gave a range of favorite progressive targets: Wall Street, the coal lobby, the Republicans in general. Mr. Webb did give a more colorful answer: the enemy soldier who wounded him with a grenade in battle — “but he’s not around right now.”If you were looking for combat on stage, sorry; what happened in Vegas was mostly staid in Vegas.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.