Sotheby’s reached outside the art world on Monday to appoint Tad Smith, a businessman with a background in the entertainment, sport and media industries who most recently led the Madison Square Garden Company, to replace the departing chief executive, William F. Ruprecht.Mr. Smith, 49, who describes himself as an art enthusiast but has no corporate experience in that market, enters an industry in flux as it confronts questions of profitability and how to expand into new global markets and respond to challenges posed by the Internet, where the selling of items has grown.Until Monday, Mr. Smith had spent a year as chief executive of the Madison Square Garden Company, which, among other businesses, owns the New York Knicks basketball team, the New York Rangers hockey team and Radio City Music Hall. Before that, he spent five years at Cablevision Systems, which like M.S.G. is controlled by the family of Charles Dolan. At Cablevision, he was president of local media and his responsibilities included digital and television advertising sales and the operations of the News 12 local television channels as well as the Newsday media group.In an interview, Mr. Smith said he could not add to the expertise of Sotheby’s art experts, but he could act as a business catalyst. “The market for art is very large, it is global and there is an immense amount of new wealth being created every year,” he said.Sotheby’s has struggled to increase its profits, in part because of an intense battle for market share with Christie’s that has led both auction houses to discount or give away commissions and other fees in an effort to attract sellers.Shortly after Mr. Ruprecht announced last November that he was stepping down, Christie’s announced that its chief executive, Steven P. Murphy, was departing after four years, suggesting to some analysts that, despite high prices and booming gross revenue, the auction house might not have been making sufficient profits to satisfy its owner.In its announcement on Monday, Sotheby’s said it was also splitting the jobs of chief executive and chairman of the board, both of which are held by Mr. Ruprecht. It said that Domenico De Sole, former chief executive of the Gucci Group and chairman of the luxury retailer Tom Ford International, who is currently Sotheby’s lead independent director, would become its new chairman.Mr. Ruprecht, a veteran art world insider who was originally a rug specialist, will leave Sotheby’s at the end of this month after more than a decade at the helm of the 271-year-old auction house.His departure follows bitter public criticism from some major shareholders who demanded improvements in financial performance.The hedge fund investor Daniel S. Loeb, for example, derided the company as “an old master painting in desperate need of restoration” until a truce last year gave Mr. Loeb three seats on the company’s board.In an interview, Mr. De Sole would not say how many candidates the board had interviewed for Mr. Ruprecht’s job. But he said that Mr. Loeb had been part of the search efforts, and that the board was unanimous in its approval of Mr. Smith.Mr. De Sole said the fact that Mr. Smith had no experience in the art world was a strength. “He comes with an open mind,” he said.In an internal memo to Sotheby’s staff, Mr. Smith said the fact he was not of the art world was the “elephant in the room.”But he said he did have experience working in industries that had faced similar issues, including “revenue growth challenges” and “disruptions in their historic business models.”Though he hardly qualifies as a collector, Mr. Smith said he was passionate about art and recently bought a work by the French-born artist JR, and was looking to buy pieces by Damien Hirst and the Chinese artist Ai Weiwei.Analysts said Mr. Smith and Mr. De Sole were potentially a good pairing: One has a recognized presence in the art world, while Mr. Smith’s wide business experience is what Sotheby’s lacked.“He is a strategy person, and it seems that is what Sotheby’s needs right now,” Kristine Koerber, an investment analyst at Barrington Research, said of Mr. Smith.Reed Phillips III, an investment banker specializing in media who has tracked Mr. Smith’s career, said that in hiring Mr. Smith, Sotheby’s was following the lead of Christie’s, which in hiring Mr. Murphy had also picked someone who was then an art market outsider.“He is well-connected,” Mr. Phillips said of Mr. Smith. “He is a well-polished executive. I can see where he plays well with the Sotheby’s clientele.”Michael Plummer, a principal in Artvest, an advisory company, called the appointment a bold move but said Mr. Smith faced a lot of work in stopping the erosion of auction commission margins and “to bring Sotheby’s back to parity with Christie’s in the three biggest growth areas: Contemporary art, Asian art and online selling.”In interviews, Mr. De Sole stressed Mr. Smith’s experience in “brand-building,” and Mr. Plummer said that meant there was potential for him to extend Sotheby’s reach to other industries, such as cultural travel or cultural entertainment.A version of this article appears in print on 03/17/2015, on page B3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Madison Square Garden Chief, an Art World Outsider, Will Lead Sothebyu2019s.