AdvertisementSupported byBy Alec M. Priester11:20 P.M. (Starz) THE AMAZING SPIDER-MAN 2 (2014) Peter Parker (Andrew Garfield, above) pines for information about his deceased parents and agonizes over his relationship with Gwen Stacy (Emma Stone) while attending to his responsibilities as Spider-Man in this sequel directed by Marc Webb. An Oscorp employee turned electrified, unhinged villain (Jamie Foxx) has a debilitating effect on New York City. Peter’s friend, the Oscorp heir Harry Osborn (Dane DeHaan), desperately seeks to cure the illness he inherited from his recently deceased father, with ghoulish consequences. The film “balances blockbuster bombast with human-scale drama, child-friendly comedy and gushers of tears,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “There are moments — as when the image freezes on the tucked, airborne Spider-Man, ready to spring into action like an Olympian — in which the movie taps into the giddy freedom and near-unboundedness that the character’s physical transformation has brought him.”  Hints of future villains should please fans. 8 P.M. (ABC) DANCING WITH THE STARS This competition show celebrates its 20th season, and 10th year on the air, as amateur dancers, including the singer Patti LaBelle, the actress Rumer Willis, Chris Soules of “The Bachelor” and Sgt. Noah Galloway, who lost his left arm and leg in an explosion in Iraq in 2005, take to the floor with professional partners. 8 P.M. (Discovery Family) DINOSAURS: THE UNTOLD STORY This four-part series — part of the channel’s monthlong Dino Madness programming block — answers questions about the evolutionary history, appearance, behavior and parenting skills of dinosaurs, starting with their genesis from the Eoraptor, which was about the size of a dog. At 9 p.m., the show heralds the arrival of a terrifying Jurassic predator. 8 P.M. (IFC) FIGHT CLUB (1999) David Fincher directs this grimy adaptation of the novel by Chuck Palahniuk. The nameless narrator (Edward Norton) is an insomniac office drone, unsure of himself and frustrated with the expectations of middle-American masculinity. When he meets the self-actualized Tyler Durden (Brad Pitt, above), he finds a role model and an outlet for his aggression. They create a secret society of henchmen, subsidized by soap sales. The society’s enterprises become increasingly nefarious as hallucinatory passages blur reality for the characters and viewer alike. Writing in The Times, Janet Maslin called the movie “an expertly shot and edited film spiked with clever computer-generated surprises.” 8:30 P.M. (FXX) THE SIMPSONS Springfield suffers a heat wave, and a popularity contest ensues between two families with swimming pools. Bart Simpson (Nancy Cartwright), confined to his bedroom with a broken leg, thinks he witnesses a murder through his telescope.  9 P.M. (Syfy) THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM (2007) Jason Bourne (Matt Damon) is a spy with no memory of his past or knowledge of his identity in this third installment in the series, directed by Paul Greengrass. He travels through Moscow, London, Madrid, Tangier and New York as he evades the C.I.A. while searching for details of his personal history. “Their sights set far beyond the usual genre coordinates, the three Bourne movies drill into your psyche as well as into your body,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. “They’re unusually smart works of industrial entertainment, with action choreography that’s as well considered as the direction.” 9 P.M. (CW) JANE THE VIRGIN Jane (Gina Rodriguez) tries to overcome writer’s block. Rogelio (Jaime Camil) hopes to become more believable in his new role as a detective by shadowing Michael (Brett Dier), a real one.9:30 P.M. (Travel) BIZARRE FOODS: DELICIOUS DESTINATIONS The adventurous eater Andrew Zimmern samples beer, schnitzel, spaetzle, knaidel and other Bavarian foods. WHAT’S STREAMING NOWMICHAEL JACKSON: THE IMMORTAL WORLD TOUR DOCUMENTARY The director Adrian Wills weaves together archival footage of Mr. Jackson and Cirque du Soleil performances with interviews with this company’s dancers, costume designers and musicians. The Jackson estate “collaborated with Cirque du Soleil, which conceived the Beatles ‘Love’ show in Las Vegas, to create this galumphing sensory assault, presumably a substitute for the Jackson ‘This Is It’ run of shows that never was,” Andy Webster wrote in The Times of the original tour featured in this documentary (vimeo.com). ALEC M. PRIESTERAdvertisement