By JON CARAMANICAMARCH 15, 2015
Ever since Joan Rivers died in September, “Fashion Police” — the E! show devoted to poking holes in celebrity pageantry that she had hosted since its inception — has been collapsing in plain view.The show returned for red-carpet season in January with Kathy Griffin in Ms. Rivers’s chair, and the chipper stylist Brad Goreski as a new panelist, joining Kelly Osbourne and Giuliana Rancic, who’ve been gabbing on the show since its beginning.From the outset, the new blend was slightly toxic. Ms. Griffin is a little more ribald than Ms. Rivers, who tended toward the scabrous. Often, when Ms. Griffin would say something inappropriate, the looks of shock on the panelists’ faces seemed authentic.But it’s Ms. Rancic who caused the loudest dust-up. During an Oscars wrap-up last month, she said of Zendaya, a young black starlet who’d worn elaborate dreadlocked extensions on the red carpet: “I feel like she smells like patchouli oil. Or weed.” Ms. Osbourne quickly distanced herself from the racially insensitive comment, and soon after parted ways with the show. Ms. Rancic apologized for the remark. Then, last week, after filming just seven episodes, Ms. Griffin announced her departure, suggesting in a statement that the show promoted unattainable body image ideas.AdvertisementThese departures, though, are only part of the quandary facing “Fashion Police,” which has been a regular presence on E! since 2010.AdvertisementAt its best, “Fashion Police” was a rare thing: a high-profile home for criticism on television, an “At the Movies” for celebrities and clothes. In the show’s most recent iteration, Mr. Goreski — who has come a long way from being Rachel Zoe’s besieged assistant on “The Rachel Zoe Project” — was a reliable source of historical information and insider perspective, and the disagreements, though sometimes crass, were at least about the merits of design.The primary goal of “Fashion Police” isn’t reasoned debate, though — it’s the triggering of endorphins that come with celeb-skewering and schadenfreude. It addresses the complementary desires of E! viewers to see stars at their brightest — the network hosts elaborate red-carpet shows for the Oscars, the Grammys, the Emmys and the Golden Globes — and then to see them taken down a peg. In a way, “Fashion Police” is a child of the Perez Hilton era of celebrity trashing, and a reflection of its mainstreaming.But E! is nothing without its celebrities — more so than the tabloids, it relies on their good will. (“Fashion Police” is also the name of a regular back-of-the-book feature in US Weekly in which photos of unfortunately dressed celebs are used as verbal dartboards for hack comedians, but US Weekly is less reliant on getting A-list celebrities to consent to interviews than E! is.)That makes “Fashion Police” part of an untenable setup that one day reveres celebrities on the red carpet and the next day marches them onto a gangplank and pushes them into the water.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As the show’s primary host, Ms. Rivers was acidic, incredulous, and often spiritually foul beyond reason. “Call FEMA — this is a disaster,” she said of one of Christina Hendricks’s dress, adding for a final flourish, “She needs a milking stool.” On the same show, she critiqued a Versace number worn by January Jones that appeared to be lifting at the front: “This woman obviously has a yeast infection and the doctor said to her, ‘Aerate it.’ ”Ms. Rivers, who’d articulated pain through meanness for much of her career, provided a sort of cover for the show. This was light work for her, the casual dismantling of celebrity preening. She was constitutionally impolite long before “Fashion Police”; the show provided her a platform. But without Ms. Rivers as ballast, the recent episodes felt slightly unhinged, a collection of lightweights punching upward when they weren’t busy fawning.E! is, only notionally, a news organization; it’s better known, and more effective, as a haven for celebrity reality TV like “Keeping Up With the Kardashians” and realty shows that capture the ugliness in striving for fame and beauty, like “#RichKids of Beverly Hills” and “Botched.”But in so much as news matters to E!, it is through the mouth of Ms. Rancic, the anchor and managing editor of “E! News.” In the E! family, Ms. Rancic is second in importance to only Ryan Seacrest, who hosts the network’s red carpet programming on award show nights, and who is an executive producer of “Keeping Up With the Kardashians” and its many offspring.AdvertisementIf Mr. Seacrest does not renew his contract, Ms. Rancic will have even more of the network’s authority on her shoulders. Perhaps not surprisingly, E! recently extended her contract through April of next year.But is Ms. Rancic a newswoman or a fashion critic? She underscored the problem in a recent episode of “Fashion Police,” referring to her “Amal Clooney moment,” in which she praised Ms. Clooney’s look on the red carpet at the Golden Globes, then tore her to shreds the next day on “Fashion Police.” For Ms. Rancic to simultaneously hold both roles — red carpet glad-hander and morning-after assassin, friend and foe — is a debacle waiting to happen. Last week, The Daily News reported that E! was considering canceling the show after the recent upheavals. An E! spokeswoman said Sunday that the show would return with Ms. Rancic and Mr. Goreski as co-hosts.The troubles on “Fashion Police” are just one part of an emerging reassessment of E!’s role as a magnifying glass of celebrity beauty. During the most recent award season, a handful of stars at the Screen Actors Guild Awards refused to submit to E!’s Mani Cam — a clever and gauche contraption in which female stars were asked to parade their hands, showing their manicures and jewelry (and in one case, an extended middle finger); it was removed for subsequent red carpets.So the backlash has begun, not just against the vacuity of red carpet coverage, but against E!’s role in promulgating it. That shouldn’t necessarily doom “Fashion Police” — its banter is lively, and it dares to suggest that there is something other than glamour on the red carpet. As day-after water cooler conversation, following the instant reactions on Twitter, it has merit. But conjoining celebrity love and hate is a tricky task, and even trickier business — maybe they’re better as next-door neighbors, not roommates.A critic’s notebook article on Monday about the E! show “Fashion Police” described incorrectly a hairstyle worn by the actress Zendaya, which was the subject of remarks by Giuliana Rancic on the show. She wore elaborate dreadlocked extensions, not braids.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Turmoil Amid Fashion and Comedy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.