By MIKE HALEMARCH 15, 2015
The BBC mini-series “Jamaica Inn” has a variety of hooks. For readers of Gothic thrillers, it’s based on a novel by the queen of the form, Daphne du Maurier. For film buffs, it’s a counterpart to an already well-known adaptation of the book, the 1939 movie of the same title by Alfred Hitchcock.But those are just details. Here’s the real scoop: For “Downton Abbey” fans, “Jamaica Inn” is a starring vehicle for Jessica Brown Findlay, always to be remembered as the beautifully tragic Sybil, Our Lady of High-Risk Childbirth.In “Jamaica Inn,” available online at Acorn TV in three weekly installments beginning Monday, Ms. Brown Findlay’s character is not to the abbey born. She’s Mary Yellan, an 1820s farmer’s daughter who, when orphaned, is sent to live with her aunt in Cornwall. At the dreary inn run by the aunt (Joanne Whalley) and the aunt’s glowering husband (Sean Harris), there are more secrets than customers, and the big one is that Mary’s new family business is wrecking — using lights to lure ships onto the rocks, stealing the cargo and killing the sailors as they swim ashore.Mary does not approve of this, just as Lady Sybil did not approve of the social norms of post-World War I Britain. Ms. Brown Findlay achieves much the same effect here as she did in “Downton Abbey,” projecting rectitude and self-righteousness even as Mary dallies with a hunky thief and solves the mystery of who’s really running the smuggling operation.AdvertisementHitchcock, recognizing that the brutal details of wrecking were more interesting than the story’s elements of mystery and romance, began his movie with a rollicking, grisly scene of the smugglers wading into the surf to kill a ship’s hapless crew. That slaughter doesn’t arrive until an hour and a half into the television version, in a glum, lackluster staging meant to remind us that we shouldn’t approve of the events being depicted.The scene is indicative of the overall tenor of the production, which — as scripted by Emma Frost (“The White Queen”) and directed by Philippa Lowthorpe (“Call the Midwife”) — is both portentous and dawdling, full of mood and handsome cinematography but devoid of much action or consequence.AdvertisementFans of “Downton” and of British period drama in general may be perfectly happy to endure three hours of this, however. They get to enjoy two dramatic landscapes: the moors and cliffs of Yorkshire, where “Jamaica Inn” was shot, and the high cheekbones, noble jaw and pale-blue eyes of Ms. Brown Findlay, who — spoiler alert — gets to stick around until the final credits this time.Jamaica InnAvailable for streaming on Mondays on Acorn.tv.Produced by Origin Pictures. Directed by Philippa Lowthorpe; written by Emma Frost, based on the novel by Daphne du Maurier; Ed Rubin, Joanie Blaikie, Hilary Heath and Sarah Stack, executive producers; David M. Thompson and Dan Winch, producers.WITH: Jessica Brown Findlay (Mary Yellan), Matthew McNulty (Jem Merlyn), Sean Harris (Joss Merlyn), Joanne Whalley (Aunt Patience), Ben Daniels (Francis Davey), Shirley Henderson (Hannah), Elliot Levey (Ambrose), Charles Furness (Thomas), Patrick O’Kane (Legassik), Andrew Scarborough (Magistrate Bassat), Tristan Sturrock (Eli), Christopher Fairbank (Harry) and Andy Gillies (Cakey).A version of this review appears in print on March 16, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: A du Maurier Thriller With a Whiff of ‘Downton’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.