AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasHave you ever wanted to take off your shoes and walk around an Isamu Noguchi set? On Friday night at the 92nd Street Y, this intermission treat came courtesy of the Martha Graham Dance Company. Preceding a performance of Graham’s “Cave of the Heart,” a distillation of the Medea story, audience members were given the rare chance to examine a serpent topped by a wire dress and a series of stones leading to an aorta-shaped sculpture, among the many pieces of décor that Noguchi designed for Graham. It was an Instagram moment too good to pass up, but did they have to step and sit on the set pieces? Was that what “no shoes” meant? It was brutal to watch. Part of the Harkness Dance Festival, the presentation — as mandated by its Stripped/Dressed format — split the evening in two. Up first was a display of Graham’s movement vocabulary that provided an excellent close-up view of her signature contraction and release with company members in practice clothes. The dashing Lloyd Mayor flew across the stage in an impassioned demonstration of a men’s jumping sequence from Graham’s “Rite of Spring.” PeiJu Chien-Pott later appeared as a vicious, glittering Medea, but the floor-exercise section afforded an even more intimate chance to witness the power of her torso, which coils and releases like a spring. She’s emotional, yet not histrionic; her crisp, whiplash speed allows her to fall and rise from the floor in a cartoonish blur. In “Cave of the Heart,” shown in its entirety in the second half with Noguchi’s set and the dancers in costumes, the Chorus (Natasha Diamond-Walker) fights to prevent Medea’s vengeance, but can’t succeed. Medea, consumed by jealousy after her husband, Jason (Ben Schultz), leaves her for a princess (Anne O’Donnell), is out for blood. It was strangely affecting to see “Cave of the Heart” at such proximity; as Ms. Chien-Pott delved into her character’s “inner landscape,” as Graham liked to put it, her primal instinct subsumed her until we were no longer looking at a dancer but a woman devoured by loathing. Earlier in the evening, the company’s artistic director, Janet Eilber, had spoken eloquently about Graham’s concept in which “emotion rides on the breath as when you laugh or when you sob.” Ms. Chien-Pott, all contrasting tautness and curves with a hint of a wicked smile, revealed those emotional extremes as she slithered through the space wreaking havoc at every turn. It was a good night for revenge. The Harkness Dance Festival continues through Sunday at the 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; 212-415-5500, 92y.org. Advertisement