By NEIL GENZLINGERMARCH 15, 2015
Let’s see, what’s the right adjective to describe the CW series that begins Tuesday night and is centered on the eating of human brains? Heck, there’s no getting around it: “Tasty” is the word.This ridiculously likable show is called “iZombie,” and it carves out a space in the crowded landscape of Undead Entertainment by lightening up. Unlike many of her TV and film counterparts, the featured zombie here, delightfully known as Liv (short for Olivia), is not all doom and gloom about being semideceased. She makes a conscious choice to be a force for good in the human world. All in all, a fine role model for our young people.Liv, engagingly played by Rose McIver, is in the early stages of a promising career as a doctor when she makes an ill-fated decision to attend a party aboard a boat. Things turn ugly, and she wakes up ashore as a zombie with a constant hunger for human brains.That forces a slight career change — she gets a job working in a morgue, where brains of the recently deceased, many of them murder victims, are readily available. And here the show, which is loosely based on a comic-book series, makes an inspired leap: It turns into a police procedural. See, eating someone’s brains gives Liv fragments of that person’s memory, enabling her to help solve the murders of those she snacks on.AdvertisementIt also gives her pieces of their personalities, at least for a time, providing the writers of this clever series with lots of comic possibilities. Liv suddenly speaks a language she didn’t know she spoke. She suddenly develops refined artistic tastes, becoming appalled by the decorating scheme in her own apartment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The supporting cast rides the nuttiness nicely, especially Rahul Kohli as her boss at the morgue, the only person who knows her secret. (He tolerates, even encourages her, because he wants to become the researcher who cures zombieism.) Malcolm Goodwin is the detective she works cases with, who accepts her inexplicable insights without pressing for many details — he just believes she’s psychic.Other shows and movies have merged comedy, drama and horror, none better than the “Buffy the Vampire Slayer” series on the old WB network, a predecessor to CW. Though zombies aren’t vampires, this show seems to be emulating that one in tone, characters, even casting. Ms. McIver bears a passing resemblance to Sarah Michelle Gellar, who played Buffy, and when another zombie whose intentions are less noble than Liv’s turns up, “Buffy” fans might think they’re looking at a reincarnation of James Marsters’s Spike. (It’s actually David Anders, playing an equally slippery character named Blaine.)AdvertisementBest of all, by the third and fourth episodes it seems as if “iZombie,” like “Buffy,” aspires to be more than just an amusing idea. Liv begins to discover that absorbing other people’s gray matter has consequences and that being an undead poser in the human world isn’t simply a matter of applying bronzer regularly. The show probably doesn’t need to resort to voice-overs as often as it does, but it’s generally pretty smart, witty and well acted, and not afraid to turn dark on occasion. If it delves deeper into the stresses of being a law-abiding zombie as it goes along, while keeping its sense of humor, the ride will be pretty enjoyable.iZombieCW, Tuesday nights at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time.Produced by Bonanza Productions in association with Spondoolie Productions and Warner Bros. Television. Rob Thomas, Diane Ruggiero-Wright, Danielle Stokdyk and Dan Etheridge, executive producers.WITH: Rose McIver (Olivia Moore), Malcolm Goodwin (Clive Babineaux), Rahul Kohli (Dr. Ravi Chakrabarti), Robert Buckley (Major Lilywhite) and David Anders (Blaine DeBeers). A version of this review appears in print on March 16, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Undead Become a Force for Good.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.