AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayA man, gripping a woman’s raised and parted legs by the ankles, presents those straightened legs to us like a V between him and us. Those ankles might be the handlebars of some motorcycle he’s riding; her supine torso and head are invisible to us. But he’s looking down fixedly at her groin, and there’s no doubt she’s being used for sex. She — the protagonist of Paul Taylor’s “Death and the Damsel,” new on Friday night at the David H. Koch Theater — is played by Jamie Rae Walker. The man, however, is just the first of a series of men — each of whom grip her ankles and gaze grimly down between her legs the same way. As an image of the coercion in sex trafficking, it’s powerful. What happens in “Death and the Damsel” has the layered ambiguity characteristic of this choreographer. The piece is generally thin, especially as dance; but, like so many of Mr. Taylor’s lesser pieces, we can see that it has the stuff from which a far more remarkable piece could be made. It’s set to Martinu’s Sonata No. 2 for piano and cello; and though that music’s changes of tempo and tone support it at every turn, we always feel — interestingly — that music and dance serve different functions. The sonata, played by Margaret Kampmeier (piano) and Myron Lutzke (cello), adds a distanced and analytical quality, placing a filter between us and the events onstage. In the first scene, Ms. Walker is alone on a bed in a small city apartment. Everyone else, dressed in sexily glamorous black (sets and costumes are by Santo Loquasto), is moving behind her: They seem to be the nightmares she’s having. But are they her past, and is she some kind of Blanche DuBois haunted by them? The horror reaches a peak as one of them, Michael Trusnovec, invades her space and stifles her with a pillow. Is this her death? Yet in the next beat she’s not dead, and what follows may be consequence or flashback. The scene changes to a dance club, where a duet with Mr. Trusnovec leads into the sex-trafficking episode — which in turn leads to a power struggle between her and a dominatrix/madam (Laura Halzack). Too bad that the whole piece feels half-baked.This premiere was sandwiched on Friday night between superb performances of Mr. Taylor’s “Beloved Renegade” (2008) and “Esplanade” (1975). The live music that is a crucial ingredient of this season, with the Orchestra of St. Luke’s conducted by Donald York, took wing, gloriously, for these performances: Poulenc’s “Gloria” for “Beloved Renegade” and Bach violin concertos for “Esplanade.” “Beloved Renegade” has never been played before with live singers and orchestra; the lyrical impact of music and dance expanded marvelously. As always since this great work was new, Mr. Trusnovec and Ms. Halzack led its dancing. He is the visionary artist recalling his life; she is the muse who becomes his angel of death: performances of superlative eloquence, marvelously economical but often imbued with sculptural power.“Death and the Damsel” will be performed on Wednesday, Saturday and March 29 at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com.Advertisement