AdvertisementSupported byBy Nina SiegalAMSTERDAM — Michaela DePrince was appearing here in the third act of Balanchine’s “Jewels” with the Dutch National Ballet on a recent evening. There were about a dozen ballerinas in bejeweled white tutus arrayed across the stage, and there she was all the way stage right in the front line.This 20-year-old American ballerina, who joined the Dutch National Ballet’s main company in August, is in some respects the equivalent of a chorus girl in a Broadway musical. But night after night, people show up just to see her dance.Ms. DePrince, who was an orphan in war-torn Sierra Leone and became a professional ballerina against staggering odds, has become a celebrity here since the publication late last year of her best-selling young-adult memoir, published in the United States as “Taking Flight: From War Orphan to Star Ballerina” and internationally as “Hope in a Ballet Shoe.”For the past several months, “there’s been a barrage of requests for personal appearances, interviews and talk shows,” said the company’s artistic director, Ted Brandsen, who instituted a media moratorium for a while, to let her focus on dancing. She has also been asked to be a model for fashion brands, a spokeswoman for international charitable organizations including War Child and the International Red Cross, and even a cultural ambassador for the Sierra Leone embassy in the Netherlands — all of which she has turned down.No one has been as surprised by her sudden celebrity as Ms. DePrince. “When I first started to do all this, I was like, ‘Why are you interested?’ ” she said in the cafeteria of the ballet and opera house, where she was preparing for five hours of rehearsals before a performance of “Jewels” that night. “But then I started to get it. I’d get messages from young girls and moms, and people in Africa, and so on.”This is a very different kind of life than anyone might have imagined for Ms. DePrince, born Mabinty Bangura in 1995, during an 11-year civil war that killed 50,000 people. Her father was the victim of a rebel-led massacre of workers in the diamond mines, killed when she was 3. She and her mother moved into the home of an uncle, who gave them so little food that her mother died of starvation. That same uncle then deposited the child in an orphanage.Mabinty, too, was twice cursed by her complexion: Her chocolate-brown skin has white patches around her neck and chest caused by vitiligo, a skin disease. In the orphanage she was nicknamed “devil’s child” and told that she was “too ugly” to be adopted.But one day, the West African trade winds blew a magazine through the orphanage gates. On its cover was a ballerina in a pink tutu, her leg bent in an elegant passé. Four-year old Mabinty was immediately captivated, and vowed that she would one day become just like that girl. At the time, she didn’t even know what ballet was.This account comes from her memoir, which she wrote with her mother, Elaine DePrince, who adopted Mabinty soon after the trade winds blew through the gate. In 2012, she was one of several ballet dancers featured in Bess Kargman’s documentary “First Position,” about contestants in the Youth America Grand Prix, a ballet competition that landed Ms. DePrince a scholarship to American Ballet Theater School.She told her own story in a TEDx Amsterdam talk in November that has been viewed about 25,000 times. Consequently, she has become a celebrity in the Netherlands, where she has been profiled in newspaper articles and appeared on television talk shows, and has become an inspiration to girls worldwide.Michaela DePrince is also impressing her audiences onstage. Within weeks of joining the main company here last year, she had an opportunity to perform a soloist role in “Swan Lake.” By a fluke, all five of the dancers in line ahead of her to dance a pas de trois were sick or injured. Her performance “made it immediately clear to everyone that this girl was doing what she should be doing,” Mr. Brandsen said. “She has an amazing jump and great technical faculties, but mostly she had a radiance onstage.”Mr. Brandsen hired Ms. DePrince to the junior company a year and a half ago after an open audition, and she quickly moved up the ranks. She is confirmed for two soloist roles in a program of four contemporary ballets, “Back to Bach,” in May, and she is cast for a soloist role in “Cool Britannia,” featuring work by three British choreographers, in June.“I’ve always wanted to prove people wrong, and that’s what drives me,” Ms. DePrince said. “I’ve been like that since Sierra Leone, when everyone said, ‘Nobody is ever going to want you; no one is ever going to adopt you.’ I’ve just kept trying to prove them wrong.”Ms. DePrince says she has landed at the right place with the Dutch National Ballet, where 30 nationalities are represented onstage and she is the only dancer of African origin. “Companies in Europe are going out of their way to do amazing contemporary pieces, and people take chances,” she said.Now she has to balance her celebrity with a rigorous schedule of rehearsals and performances. Her mother receives about 40 interview requests for her every day, Ms. DePrince said, and the ballet’s media office gets many more. “What is hardest to monitor is that nobody feels that she gets the breaks she gets because she’s a well-known figure,” Mr. Brandsen said. “You have to make clear to people that she gets the roles because of her talent and not because of her story.”Ms. DePrince said that she rarely spoke about her childhood with anyone other than family members, and that she was surprised there was so much interest. “I don’t like doing it,” she said, “but it’s my way of reaching out to people; it’s my way of inspiring people.” She added: “I just started to realize that talking about it can be therapeutic.”For now, Ms. DePrince is focused on dancing, but she said she would like to open a school for the arts in Sierra Leone after her dance career ends, “when I’m 40.” Before that, she wants to become a principal dancer in the Dutch National Ballet, an ambition that Mr. Brandsen believes she is capable of achieving.“She has the potential to really go further and do more soloists and principal roles, but she’s not there yet,” he said. “It’s about making sure she takes those opportunities.”Advertisement