Season 6, Episode 9: “Burned”Well, that didn’t work out the way it should have. For anyone.Not for Avery Markham, who held a party to persuade the Harlan residents to sell their land; not for Boyd Crowder, who planned for an explosion under the pizza parlor holding $10 million; and not for Raylan Givens, who planned on catching Boyd redhanded after that explosion.Still, this episode was a string of some wonderful scenes and one long clunker. The show starts out very promisingly with Raylan and Art, his former boss, paying a visit to Wynn Duffy, the “Dixie Mafia” enforcer. They accost him in his tanning bed, where he’s once again wearing his tiny thong. “That’s pretty high on the list of things I wish I hadn’t seen,” says Art. Few will disagree.They slam him around — there is that Raylan meanness again — and coerce him into informing on Boyd. The threat seems like a good one: If he doesn’t cooperate, they will tell his boss, Katherine Hale, that he was the informer who put her husband behind bars. We also got our dose of the graphic violence that the show is known for. Seabass, the last of Markham’s Iraq War vet gang, confronts Markham and Hale in their hotel room. Armed with a pistol, he demands her giant diamond engagement ring as payment. She talks him out of taking that by offering him the diamond tennis bracelet that’s in her purse. Poor Seabass never sees it coming. She shoots him in the chest with a tiny gun in her clutch purse then plugs him in the head. Markham is impressed, but more so when she calls a cleanup service and, using French, instructs them to get the brains off the wall.Another great scene: Loretta comes home to find a snake in the kitchen with its head shot off. In bursts a scruffy character with a revolver hanging from a holster, a kind of modern Billy the Kid. He tries to intimidate her with gun acrobatics — he can twirl a gun out of his holster like a movie cowboy — and he gets real close to her as he warns her not to cross Markham. His threats work. She looks scared. Then comes the big scene of the episode, the one that just didn’t work for me. Markham holds a big gathering at his pizza parlor for the Harlan residents whose land he wants to buy. Somehow we are to believe that good people show up at the bidding of a criminal just for free pizza and booze. Maybe things really are that bad in Harlan.Then Raylan saunters in. And the criminals carry on. I’d think that in the presence of a federal law enforcement officer, you’d be a bit more circumspect about your plans to grow a controlled substance. Then there were the speeches. Markham’s was mostly about his love for Hale. It didn’t seem too persuasive. He makes what would seem to be a big mistake by introducing Boyd. Now that is one loquacious guy you don’t want to give the floor to. He gives a good Chamber of Commerce pitch: “The people in this room need the money earned in their community to stay in their community.”Next up is Loretta, who announces she is now allied with Boyd. He looks uncomfortable and later tells her that wasn’t the brightest thing to do. Her speech is more of the outsiders vs. the insiders. “Throw in with me and we’ll make Harlan prosperous our own selves. Give this county back to the people the way we all know it should be.” The best part of the scene has to be the Billy the Kid character meeting Raylan. I use that description of him because this whole season has resonated with classic Western themes. The crazed adolescent psychopath is one of them. Do you think it’s clear he wants Raylan as a trophy and that it’s also clear there is nothing Raylan likes to shoot more than gun thugs?  Then of course there was crazy Uncle Zachariah chaining Boyd beneath the dynamite that was supposed to send the safe and the millions crashing down. Boyd extracts himself with seconds to spare by using a rock hammer to smash the steel chain and outruns the fireball to live another day Raylan sums it up when he says he hadn’t figured that Boyd wasn’t capable of pulling off the theft. “Boyd is just going to go after that money harder and stupider,” he says.The show drink: There’s not much to go on this week. There’s an open bar at the pizza party. The bartender asks him what he’d like. “It’s free right? The most expensive kind.” It looks like Blanton’s, which we saw in the first episode. Markham, you may have noticed, took a long swig on a beer. Ever the outsider. 