A scene from the film featuring Will Ferrell and Kevin Hart.AUSTIN, Tex. — The actor and comedian Will Ferrell arrived here on Monday with Kevin Hart to present the comedy “Get Hard.” Last week, we asked readers to submit questions for Mr. Ferrell. He sat down with us at the Four Seasons to answer some of them. Here are his responses: What’s your favorite role you’ve ever played? — Maureen Laufenberg, Facebook  Ron Burgundy. The film was such a struggle to get made and the character such a fun one to play. To have “Anchorman” go from this movie that no one wanted to make for three years, to have it go on to achieve comedy cult status, that’s the most satisfying thing. But I also loved doing our characters in “Step Brothers.” Buddy the elf was also surreal because at the time, it felt like it could go either way. It could have been a career-ender, running around the streets of New York in elf tights. But it totally hit the bulls-eye with people. What was it like working with Bob Newhart? — Chrislav, New York
 That was one of the most lovely experiences I will ever have. He was just the sweetest guy. And so funny. One memory I have from the set is Bob Newhart just patiently sitting in his chair eating his lunch in his elf suit. He’s one of my comedy heroes. He was one of the first to use his awkward nervous cadence as part of his comedy persona. What characters were your inspiration for Lord Business? — Henry (age 9, via his mother), Facebook  I don’t know if there was any one character per se. I was just trying to play a maniacal ego-driven C.E.O.-type. Maybe in the vein of Donald Trump, who our 9-year-old questioner would know perfectly.Do you choose your projects based on people you want to work with or the script itself? — Samantha Holmes, Facebook It’s a combination of both. I remember John C. Reilly did our first “Anchorman” read-through and he couldn’t do the movie. But he was so good that we had to find something to do with John. That’s what led to “Talladega Nights.” He wasn’t originally interested in that, but we kind of forced him to do it. Then there are other times when we’ve started with a premise and once we fleshed it out, it directed us to who would be perfect for it. And that’s what happened with “Get Hard.” Adam McKay had this idea of, what would it be like if you got the news you were going to prison. What would you possibly try to do? And it was Kevin’s name that came up as the perfect guy to put me through my paces. Will you be adding your considerable cowbell talents to any future recordings? — Brunella, Brooklyn I don’t have any immediate plans, even though the cowbell is at the ready. I think Mississippi State rings a cowbell for their football games and they were trying to get me down to come and march on the field with a cowbell. I’m a U.S.C. fan. Will, we are fraternity brothers of Delta Tau Delta, albeit different chapters and years. The recent awful situation with SAE has brought out the “frat haters” in droves. Could you comment on your own fraternity experience and why (or why not) fraternity membership is still a worthy consideration for a college student? — Stephen Browning,
Seattle  The incident in Oklahoma, that is a real argument for getting rid of the system altogether, in my opinion, even having been through a fraternity. Because when you break it down, it really is about creating cliques and clubs and being exclusionary. Fraternities were started as academic societies that were supposed to have a philanthropic arm to them. And when it’s governed by those kind of rules, then they’re still beneficial. But you gotta be careful. I was lucky in that the one I was in, we were really kind of the anti-fraternity fraternity. We were considered good enough to get the exchanges with the good sororities. We couldn’t get anyone to vote on anything, but if you needed 40 guys to show up and build a 20-foot-tall papier-mâchéversion of the Matterhorn, we were there and ready. But we didn’t take it too seriously. It was just about having fun. But I think it’s an interesting dilemma for universities these days. Which comedian(s) did you admire before your career took off? — Tim Jancelewicz, M.D.,
Memphis  There’s so many. I think it would be better described as moments. Before cable television, the only real outlet for any comedian was “The Tonight Show.” So I got in this habit of watching the beginning of “The Tonight Show.” If they introduced a comedian, I’d watch until the comedian came on. And if not, I’d go to bed.I always watched Saturday Night Live, people like Dan Aykroyd and Phil Hartman. Harry Shearer and Christopher Guest, those guys were super impressionable on me. Eddie Murphy, when I saw “48 Hours,” I was like, this is a funny, cool movie, but it’s really dark and scary at times too. And the first time I listened to a Steve Martin album, just how silly he was, so dumb and smart at the same time. How did you go about getting roles in comedy sketches, plays and movies when you were just starting out? — Tamara Siemerin, Rennes, France After college, I just started trying a little bit of standup, acting class, anything I could get my hands on. That’s when I found the Groundlings theater in Los Angeles. I went through their school and made it into their performing company and was seen by “Saturday Night Live” there, and cast onto the show.Once I was on S.N.L., I started doing one part here, one part there, cutting my teeth on some of those S.N.L. movies, enough to where I knew how to handle myself on a movie set. And then I just lucked out in that my first three movies leaving S.N.L. were “Old School,” “Anchorman” and “Elf.”