AUSTIN, Tex.­­ — The sprawl of the South by Southwest Music and Media Conference gradually shifts today toward the festival’s original core: music.The tech­ geek, all­-business participants of SXSW interactive will be packing up; the offerings at SXSW film start to feature more music. And the avalanche of bands ensues­­ — well above 1,500 of them ­­– from early­ morning broadcasts to the wee­ hours at after parties.Reports from the South by Southwest conference and festival in Austin.I’ll be trying to soak in as much as I can, mostly treating SXSW Music as what it used to be: a place where new or deserving bands could seize their chance to reach a wider audience. But of course, it’s many other things now: a non­stop party for those who grab free stuff fastest, a content generator for the Internet, a webcast bonanza, a relentless assault of branding and
marketing, a social­ media barrage, a place for big names to claim they’re still cool. All of which affects both how the baby bands gain attention and the kind of music they make to get it. I’ve got an overstuffed to­-see list and the certainty that the unexpected will arise.I started show-hopping on Monday night, taking in some knowns and unknowns. There was sinewy pop from the long­-running Austin band Spoon, some sultry but slyly argumentative pop ­R&B (part Erykah Badu, part Lana Del Rey) from the Colombian­-American songwriter Kali Uchis, some brooding, ratcheting electronic pop from the Danish duo Rangleklods and, best of all, a barn­-burning set by the Australian songwriter Courtney Barnett, making her rhythm guitar scrabble and roar through her down­-to­-earth, funny, hard­headed tales of the everyday — if your everyday includes a dose of feedback. But there were comparatively few bands playing for a presumed audience of film and tech people. Today the choices multiply.I’ll be blogging here, as will be Joe Coscarelli. And look for a photo slideshow from Ben Sklar, and a Spotify playlist of musical discoveries.SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
This playlist features songs by artists performing at South by Southwest. It will grow throughout the week. Spotify users can also find it here.
