For its new production of the musical “Into the Woods,” Theater Latté Da in Minneapolis didn’t look to fairy tales for inspiration. It went for something with more oom-pah: a German beer hall. Hot Bavarian pretzels from Aki’s Bread Haus and beer from Bauhaus brewery are sold at intermission. Ushers’ name tags are written in an old English font. For the show’s playbills and digital marketing, the designer Chris Everett created artwork that features German visual accents, like an alpine hat with a wolf’s ears poking through. (Concession-stand workers wear the same style hats.)“I love the idea of maybe the wolf is wearing lederhosen and this hat,” said Mr. Everett, a designer for KNOWN Branding, a consultancy in Minneapolis.  The artwork makes a bold but simple visual statement that reflects the company’s stripped-down production, which features trees made of snow fencing and a cast of 10 that plays all the roles. The monochromatic background is a deep forest green, a nod to the thicket where much of the show, written by Stephen Sondheim and James Lapine, is set.  Rope is used to evoke  Rapunzel’s hair.  The moon is a vintage timepiece. “In this show there’s a hint of danger lurking,” Mr. Everett said. “Time is always ticking in the background. I wanted to tell that story.”Mr. Everett recently spoke about these and other elements that inspired his design. Here are edited excerpts from the conversation: This is a very straightforward but also very different way to represent “Into the Woods.”  For someone who doesn’t know the show, I hope it feels evocative, and like something they haven’t seen before. I wanted to create an image that has layers, that has stories in it. I think it has a real sense of fairy-tale-ness about it, where things are turning on their heads and may not be what they seem. Why the tiny tuba? For the season we wanted to create a series of photo collages that always use musical instruments in the illustration. Music is always an element in some way in Latté Da’s shows. The German tuba stuck in the hat, and this idea of time and the moon, they are all visual cues from the show.  How does the minimalist approach to the poster match the production design? Latté Da has a real economy in how they tell their stories. That’s partially why I used the illustration style I did. You’ve got  to carry the weight of the story, but also the weight of the theater company that’s presenting and interpreting it.  Tell me about the choice of green for the background. I wanted things very graphic and clean to give it power and empty space, but also to let the color palette show through so people know it’s a Latté Da show. There’s no specific reason why we chose green for “Into the Woods.”  If the show had more tension we’d go with harder colors like red and orange.   I like the very simple font for the title. The font is Helvetica Neue Condensed.  I wanted to pull the title of it away.  I wanted the image to hold and contain on its own. You almost don’t need the title at all. The image says time ticking, and it has this German flair. I wanted the title of the show to be almost a footnote to let you know what it is, but beyond that you don’t need it.  I wonder what Stephen Sondheim thinks of that. [Laughs] I didn’t ask.
Theater Latté Da’s production of “Into the Woods” runs through March 29 at the Ritz Theater in Minneapolis. More information is at theaterlatteda.com.