Apologies to Tina Fey and Robert Carlock, but evidence suggests that “Community” is actually the most unbreakable comedy on television, even though it’s technically not on “television” anymore. The show’s new season debuted on  Tuesday at Yahoo’s video site, Yahoo Screen. The new episodes represent just the latest comeback for “Community,” which runs a makeshift family sitcom through a pop culture blender. It debuted on NBC in 2009 but has been circling the drain since at least its third season, when the network dropped it from the schedule. Fan outrage helped to bring it back, though the show’s creator, Dan Harmon, was soon ousted. After an underwhelming fourth season — the show has since referred to it as “the gas-leak year”— NBC improbably brought Mr. Harmon back for an equally improbable fifth season, before finally canceling the show once and for all last year.Yahoo brought on the show, its executives say, because of its devoted fan base. New installments will arrive each Tuesday. “It’s going to be a nice thing to wake up on Wednesday morning and not care at all about Nielsen ratings,” said Joel McHale, the show’s star, also known to viewers as the sardonic host of “The Soup” on E!.The new episodes find “Community” with much of the original cast intact and up to its usual self-referential tricks. The season is subtitled “The Age of Yahoo,” and the first episode weaves a double-helix narrative around the addition of Francesca, a new member of the core group played by Paget Brewster, who is also a new member of the cast. (“This is the first I’ve heard that I’m a character on a show,” Francesca says at one point.)The episode manages, The New York Times’s Mike Hale wrote in his review, to be “funny moment to moment while also being a thoughtful referendum on the nature and style of ‘Community’ and whether it needs to change.”Mr. McHale called from the set of “The Soup” to discuss the age of Yahoo, M.M.A. fighting and why “Community” is more than a collection of pop culture references. Here are edited excerpts from the conversation. How does it feel to star on a show that has been on the brink of cancellation for most of its life? I don’t know any different, so this is normal to me. I’ve never been on another series before this. I hear that it’s different at other shows. [Laughs.]  Were you ever tempted to just say “forget it” and move on? I was ready to do that when Dan Harmon was gone. The season without him was terrible. Well, “terrible” is unfair because the acting was very good. But it was not the same. It was not creatively at all where it was, and that was no fun. What’s different about being on Yahoo as opposed to NBC?Well, now there are no F.C.C. rules. You can do anything. But as Dan has said, he’s not changing the show just because now you can curse and show people having sex. That’s not happening. The show is still the show. As far as joke rate and stories, it’s still “Community.”It won’t be “Community After Dark.”No, though that would pretty be funny. “Yeah guys, it’s just strippers and M.M.A. fighting. That’s it now.”Is there anything that does feel different?We have new cast members, so that changes the dynamic. Paget Brewster is terrific. She’s ugly, but she’s terrific. Keith David is amazing and hilarious. Horrible voice. Weak. Do you ever ask him to just read things to you? Yes, “Keith, I need more outgoing messages.” How did the Chevy Chase cameo go? I don’t know. I don’t know about it. I haven’t seen him on set. He mentioned it in a Reddit interview. I cannot confirm or deny it, because I don’t know. I know it sounds like I’m hiding information but I really don’t know. If he said it, he’s probably been contacted. I don’t think Chevy would just make it up. What about the other two principal cast members who have moved on, Donald Glover and Yvette Nicole Brown? Donald’s not coming back. With Yvette, there might be something. I don’t know what the official word on it is. This is the one where I’m not saying anything because I’m not sure if I can. But no, Donald’s not coming back. He’s going to be Spiderman, probably. The show is built as a kind of pastiche of all these cultural references and genre cliches. What memorable concepts or constructs can people expect this season?We’re making a science-fiction movie that Abed (played by Danny Pudi) has written. That has been as fun as anything. I think people believe our show is about parodies and doing genres, and it is not. Yes, Abed makes tons of references. But when I hear people go, “It’s just reference humor” — what the hell does that mean? Does it mean it’s a cheaper form of comedy if someone references something? There is a lot of physical comedy and a lot of stand-alone jokes that have nothing to do with references.  It’s about the bond between these characters, but it does channel a number of cultural touchstones.It’s like an Edgar Wright movie. You have characters with high emotional stakes and important personal relationships, but the world around them is insane. 