By ALEC M. PRIESTERMARCH 17, 2015
9 P.M. (CW) IZOMBIE Olivia Moore (Rose McIver), a formerly driven medical student, becomes depressed and slovenly when she is turned into a zombie. She must now subsist on human brains, culled from the bodies in the morgue where she works, which give her flashes of the memories they contain. She uses them to aid a homicide detective (Malcolm Goodwin) in solving murders in this new series, which counts Rob Thomas and Diane Ruggiero-Wright of “Veronica Mars” fame among its executive producers. Writing in The New York Times, Neil Genzlinger called the show “ridiculously likable.”3:20 P.M. (Cinemax) KING KONG (2005) Carl Denham (Jack Black) enlists Ann Darrow (Naomi Watts) to star in a film he is directing, written by Jack Driscoll (Adrien Brody), her favorite author. While traveling to Singapore for filming, they make a detour at a mysterious, exotic island. There, Ann is kidnapped by King Kong, the gigantic ape, and tangles with dinosaurs as the crew tries to rescue her. King Kong and the film crew wind up in Depression-era New York City for more shenanigans. “In his gargantuan, mightily entertaining remake, ‘King Kong,’ Peter Jackson tries to pay homage to the original even as he labors to surpass it,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “The sheer audacious novelty of the first ‘King Kong’ is not something that can be replicated, but in throwing every available imaginative and technological resource into the effort, Mr. Jackson comes pretty close.”8 P.M. (Fox) HELL’S KITCHEN The 16 contestants have a seafood competition judged by the chef Michael Cimarusti.8 P.M. (ABC Family) PRETTY LITTLE LIARS Alison (Sasha Pieterse) is on trial. An unexpected witness shakes things up in the courtroom. Her friends try to prove her innocence.Advertisement10 P.M. (Sundance) BROKEBACK MOUNTAIN (2005) Ennis Del Mar (Heath Ledger) and Jack Twist (Jake Gyllenhaal) meet in the summer of 1963 on a Wyoming ranch and begin a relationship. When the summer ends they return to their respective lives, with each man eventually marrying and having children. After several years they rekindle their relationship, while trying to hide as much from their wives and society. The film depicts the progression of this arrangement over years and the struggle to live as one desires. “Mr. Ledger magically and mysteriously disappears beneath the skin of his lean, sinewy character,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “It is a great screen performance, as good as the best of Marlon Brando and Sean Penn.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10:30 P.M. (MSG) THE GARDEN’S DEFINING MOMENTS Liam Neeson narrates this new series, which recounts 20 memorable events at Madison Square Garden. It begins with “The Dunk,” an episode about the driving, left-handed tomahawk slam made by the Knicks’ John Starks in the last minute of Game 2 of the 1993 Eastern Conference finals against the Chicago Bulls. Other episodes look at the visit of Pope John Paul II, the “fight of the century” between Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier and the Knicks’ first championship win.11 P.M. (Spike) BOOGIE NIGHTS (1997) Eddie Adams (Mark Wahlberg) is cast by the director Jack Horner (Burt Reynolds) as Dirk Diggler, the lead in a pornographic film intended to transcend the form’s thin plot contrivances with artistic appeal. This bawdy story, set in Los Angeles in the 1970s and ’80s, was written and directed by Paul Thomas Anderson. “Boogie Nights” “invests much attention in enjoyable surface details,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times, among them a Greek chorus of a jukebox (“Oh what a lonely boy!” sings a pop song when the son of a porn queen can’t reach his mother at a party), witty film parodies and flashy costumes that are an evil treat.Advertisement What’s Streaming NowTHE HUNT (2013) Mads Mikkelsen (“Hannibal”) plays an archetype of Scandinavian stoicism as a teacher in a Danish village accused of sexually assaulting his best friend’s daughter. Writing in The Times, Stephen Holden called this drama, directed by Thomas Vinterberg, “a merciless examination of the fear and savagery roiling just below the surface of bourgeois life.” (netflix.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 17, 2015, on Page C8 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.