By RANDY KENNEDYMARCH 16, 2015
It’s a small work of art — precisely the size of an old Savarin coffee can jammed with artist’s paintbrushes — but in the history of postwar art and in the career of Jasper Johns, one of the most important artists of the last half century, it looms large.Created in 1960, “Painted Bronze” has been a fixture for more than three decades at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, where it has been on long-term loan from Mr. Johns’s personal collection. But now it will migrate north to a permanent home at the Museum of Modern Art, which will receive the sculpture as a promised gift from the collectors Henry R. Kravis and his wife, Marie-Josée Kravis, the Museum of Modern Art’s president, who recently bought it. The sculpture — which looks at first glance like a Duchampian ready-made, but on closer examination is a hand-painted bronze recreation of a painter’s age-old tools — will be the first seminal early sculpture by Mr. Johns to enter the Modern’s collection. Ann Temkin, the museum’s chief curator of painting and sculpture, said she considered it a landmark acquisition for several reasons, one of them being that the museum’s collection will underscore the work’s importance.“I think that MoMA provides a place for this sculpture as an icon in the history of 20th-century art, period,” Ms. Temkin said.While many of Mr. Johns’s sculptures from the late 1950s and ’60s have been lent for years to the Philadelphia Museum, Matthew Marks, whose gallery represents Mr. Johns, said that the artist recently decided to sell the work to the Kravises, for an undisclosed amount, if they agreed to give it eventually to the Modern, which has one of the most significant holdings of his paintings, drawings and prints.“It’s not easy to convince someone who’s kept something for himself for more than 50 years,” Mr. Marks said. “It’s a big deal for him, emotionally. And one can imagine all the people over all the years who have asked, all the institutions, all the collectors who have been told no, since I was a kid.”Timothy Rub, the Philadelphia Museum’s director, said, “We’re very sad to see it go, but grateful to have had it here for so long.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Painted Bronze,” which will be on display at MoMA occasionally and will come into the permanent collection at the Kravises’ deaths, was one of several acquisitions approved last week by the museum’s committee for painting and sculpture that mark firsts or unusual forays by a museum that has helped define Modernism but has sometimes struggled to incorporate more contemporary art.Among the new additions is the first painting to enter the permanent collection by Kerry James Marshall, the Chicago-based artist whose complex, mural-size paintings have depicted the lives of black Americans in the heroic terms of European history painting. The work the museum purchased, “Untitled (Club Scene),” from 2013, is a dim view of a nightclub, where the stage that would normally be occupied by musicians is empty.The museum has also acquired its first painting by Julian Schnabel — “St. Sebastian,” from 1979, a work of oil and wax on canvas — with the help of several donors. The addition of the painting is notable if only for the fact that the museum has taken so long to acquire the work of Mr. Schnabel, a major figure in the 1980s Neo-Expressionist movement and an outsize personality in the New York art world. William Rubin, who was for many years the Modern’s powerful curator of painting and sculpture, had a position against Mr. Schnabel’s painting so fixed that he wrote a 1984 letter to The New York Times suggesting a correction to a sentence in an article that said “the Modern has not yet acquired” a Schnabel. He said the sentence should not have included the word “yet.”But Ms. Temkin, the curator, noted that Mr. Schnabel’s work has a relevance with younger artists that is increasing. “We’re always looking at art, inevitably,” she said, “with today’s eyes.”A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: MoMA Lands a Prized Work by Johns.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.