By JON CARAMANICAMARCH 16, 2015
There were about a dozen items of clothing for sale at Meghan Trainor’s concert Sunday night at Irving Plaza. T-shirts in loud colors and sweatshirts that trumpeted “All About That Bass,” after Ms. Trainor’s breakout hit, took up a large swath of the wall behind the merchandise table, as if they’d been eagerly wheatpasted. Nearby, the tour sponsor, HP, set up a photo booth encouraging fans to “Capture Your Meghan Moment.”At the performance hall, dancers, backup singers and a decent-size band crammed onto a stage meant for maybe half as many people. Behind them, a huge LCD display flashed at high intensity.This is true pop star stuff, though in truth, it mostly underscored that Ms. Trainor is not quite a pop star — notwithstanding “All About That Bass,” which spent eight weeks atop the Billboard Hot 100, and “Lips Are Movin’,” the follow-up that got as high as No. 4.“Title” (Epic), her debut album, which was released in January, is full of innocent-sounding songs about slightly naughty things, and lyrics that can’t decide if they’re progressive or retrograde. On “Dear Future Husband,” she promises to buy groceries and then tells her man she has a job, “So don’t be thinking I’ll be home and baking apple pies.” On the title track, which is breezy ukulele pop, she sings: “Baby don’t call me a friend/If I hear that word again/You might never get a chance to see me naked in your bed.”AdvertisementHer music also embraces contrast. Its bedrock is doo-wop, the slickly sweet harmony pop of the 1950s that at the time was masking intense desire, but in the rear view, sounds angelic. Ms. Trainor makes it naughty again, like on “Walkashame,” which begins “Oh my god, I put my pants on inside out/I couldn’t tell ’cause the lights were out.” (And she likes to rap, too — offering her own counterpoint on plenty of songs here, like “My Selfish Heart.”)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Title” made its debut at No. 1 on the Billboard album chart, and Ms. Trainor was nominated for two Grammys (but did not win). This show, which was part of her first headlining tour, was the second time she’d played to a sold-out crowd in this venue in three days. That’s because, even though it can feel like Ms. Trainor is welded together from unlikely parts, she has an easy gift for songwriting and a voice that’s not so powerful that it overwhelms her. She is uncertain and torn between competing impulses, but O.K. with that; on her album, the improbability of it all makes her convincing.This show was done in around an hour, and that was with some padding. After “Bang Dem Sticks,” another song (like her big hit) that uses a musical metaphor for a bodily phenomenon, some snippets of Kurtis Blow’s “The Breaks” played over the speakers, followed by a long stretch of Mark Ronson and Bruno Mars’s “Uptown Funk.”AdvertisementDuring that song, Ms. Trainor and her dancers did a simple routine, and when Mr. Mars sang “that ice cold/Michelle Pfeiffer/that white gold,” Ms. Trainor pointed at herself and grinned, a perfect match for the lights flashing behind her.A version of this review appears in print on March 17, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Luring Fans With a Touch of the Past and a Naughty Streak.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.