AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerIt’s no longer unusual to find nontraditional families on television and for people in those families to be having babies. Apparently the makers of “One Big Happy,” an intelligence-insulting sitcom that begins Tuesday night on NBC, haven’t noticed, because every minute of their show screams: “Hey! We’ve got a pregnant lesbian! Bet you’ve never seen that before!”This subtlety-free series, for which Ellen DeGeneres is an executive producer, stars Elisha Cuthbert as Lizzy, a lesbian who lives with her straight friend Luke (Nick Zano). They have made a pact that is close to being a plotting cliché: If they reach their 30s unattached, they’ll have a baby together.Just before they find out they’ve achieved impregnation, Luke meets a British airhead, Prudence (Kelly Brook), and they impulsively marry. So there’s your nontraditional household, awaiting childbirth. That child will need a good pair of noise-canceling headphones, because every bit of dialogue on this show is delivered in a grating bray, and most of it doesn’t rise above the level of chatter at a 13-year-old boy’s birthday party. Genitals and breasts, to the writers, are hilarious. Lame double-entendres about gay sex, straight sex and bra size are everywhere. “The New Normal” (gay men having a baby through a surrogate) was sophisticated by comparison, and it barely hung on long enough for the kid to be born before being canceled in 2013.Ms. Cuthbert, Jack Bauer’s dour daughter in “24,” shows decent comedic skills — she sometimes calls to mind a younger Jane Curtin — though she has an annoying tendency to end a joke with an “I just said something funny” look. Mr. Zano, who has logged time in “2 Broke Girls” and “Happy Endings” (another show on Ms. Cuthbert’s résumé), here has the unenviable task of portraying the stupidest side of the triangle. That makes Luke pretty stupid indeed.One Big HappyNBC, Tuesday nights at 9:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 8:30, Central time.Produced by Warner Bros. Television and A Very Good Production. Created by Liz Feldman; Ms. Feldman, Ellen DeGeneres, Jeff Kleeman and Scott Ellis (pilot only), executive producers.WITH: Elisha Cuthbert (Lizzy), Nick Zano (Luke), Kelly Brook (Prudence), Brandon Mychal Smith (Marcus), Rebecca Corry (Leisha) and Chris Williams (Roy).Advertisement