AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayPHILADELPHIA — When, oh, when will America acquire an even half-decent staging of Tchaikovsky’s full-length “Swan Lake”? Having long had most of the world’s best “Nutcracker” productions, it now has the world’s two best stagings of Tchaikovsky’s “The Sleeping Beauty”: at American Ballet Theater (Alexei Ratmansky’s, new this month) and Boston Ballet (Ninette de Valois’s, with supplementary choreography by Frederick Ashton). But what about “Swan Lake”?Just now, alas, there is no definitive or entirely satisfactory “Swan Lake” anywhere in the world. Still, the Royal Ballet and Mariinsky companies’ current productions both have important virtues, which, if combined, might produce the ideal staging. In this country, however, the complete “Swan Lake” is invariably cheapened, distorted, trashed.Christopher Wheeldon’s 2004 production was revived this month by Pennsylvania Ballet, the company for which he created it, and was also performed in October by the Joffrey Ballet of Chicago. (The Joffrey has followed this up by commissioning  a new “Nutcracker” from Mr. Wheeldon for 2016.) On Sunday I went to see the final performance of this Pennsylvania revival, at the beautiful Academy of Music here.This Wheeldon “Swan Lake” is neither visually hideous, like the Peter Martins production for New York City Ballet, nor decoratively flashy and narratively silly, like Kevin McKenzie’s for American Ballet Theater. But it is more grating in its clumsy choice of musical text and far more pretentious. This production is not set in medieval Germany (as Tchaikovsky intended) but in the ballet studios of the Paris Opera at the time Tchaikovsky composed the score. (Tchaikovsky visited Paris, and Degas was his contemporary, so there you are.) Early on in Act I, Mr. Wheeldon interpolates a Tchaikovsky piece for piano without orchestra, and some of his switches between the 1877 and 1895 editions of the traditional “Swan Lake” score involve some nasty key changes.Although Mr. Wheeldon is by no means the first to think this ballet is principally about two men, I hope he is the only one to make its hero the Principal Dancer and its villain the Patron. Early in Act I, the Principal Dancer observes the Patron (one of the abonnés, the season subscribers, who frequent the Opera and avail themselves of its female dancers) advancing toward one of the Degas-type danseuses. Whereas the original “Swan Lake” makes the hero, Prince Siegfried, rather laddish in his inclination to drink with his friends and evade princely responsibilities, this version’s Principal is a paragon of moral rectitude. Described in Mr. Wheeldon’s synopsis as “suspicious of the Patron’s intentions,” he “does not like the power that patrons hold over the ballerinas and knows full well that their intentions are not always honorable.” The production is thus about the two men’s antagonism. Alas, the Principal keeps confusing reality with fantasy. Siegfried can seem a passive ninny in the traditional “Swan Lake”; here he’s even more passive and delusional.The heroine, a mere peg in this story, is brought into focus periodically by Mr. Wheeldon’s successive exercises in meta-fiction. The Patron keeps becoming the sorcerer von Rothbart in scenes from the traditional “Swan Lake”; the Principal Dancer likewise at times becomes Siegfried; and on cue a ballerina turns up to play either the poignant Odette or the seductress Odile. Mr. Wheeldon shows no real interest in Odette. In Act III, however, he gives us a striptease number (one woman allows eight men to remove successive items of her clothing until she finishes in saucy underwear) and a five-woman cancan before the Patron shows the poor Principal (why?) a mirror from which steps the lead ballerina, now dressed in black and playing Odile, with whom he does the usual set of clichés usually known as the “Black Swan” pas de deux.At the start of Act IV, the libretto tells us, “We journey back to the lakeside of the Principal Dancer’s mind.” Siegfried is too polite to try combating von Rothbart, so instead he leaves this task to the swan-maidens, who — the female of the species is evidently deadlier here — rebelliously polish him off. It is not made clear why they did not do so earlier. Then, as we journey back out of the lakeside of the Principal Dancer’s mind, we reach the most gruesomely anticlimactic ending of any “Swan Lake” I have ever seen: dancers arriving in the rehearsal room to start work, while the Principal Dancer adjusts to the loss of his fantasy. Since that’s how the story began, we assume the whole thing will happen all over again.Individual men do well in this Pennsylvania Ballet production: notably, on Sunday, Craig Wasserman in the pas de trois; Alexander Peters and Harrison Monaco in the pas de quatre; and Lorin Mathis as a courteous Siegfried, dancing with handsomely spacious style. But Lillian DiPiazza was a merely demure Odette and a conventionally scheming Odile. In this production, who could blame her? Advertisement