AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimAudience members won’t have to duck their heads at Tuesday’s world premiere of Johann Johannsson’s “Drone Mass,” and security guards at the Temple of Dendur need not worry about unauthorized surveillance photography. No pilotless aircraft accompanies this oratorio, which the Metropolitan Museum of Art presents in a performance by the vocal group Roomful of Teeth and members of the American Contemporary Music Ensemble, with Mr. Johannsson on electronics.The drone of Mr. Johannsson’s Mass is the musical kind, a compositional device that manages to feel both ancient and contemporary and is enjoying renewed popularity. “Living in the machine age, we are, in effect, living in a drone,” said Phil Kline, a composer who is using drones in an  opera he is writing about the inventor Nikola Tesla.In program notes for the Met performance, Mr. Johannsson acknowledges the new resonance that the term has gained recently as public fascination — and anxiety — with the airborne drone has grown. The text of his Mass is that of an ancient Egyptian Coptic hymn that consists of only free-floating vowels. “Putting these Gnostic texts in the context of the Temple of Dendur, with the title ‘Drone Mass,’ creates some kind of poetic resonance, which I can’t quite explain, either,” he said in an interview.A drone in music is a sustained note held for most or all of a piece. It’s an essential part of musical traditions around the world, from the continuous bleat of a bagpipe, to the om-like hum that gives Indian ragas their spacious feeling, to the cavernous burr of a didgeridoo. Classical composers have used it to evoke sounds of nature and a sense of something ancient, rustic or outside of time: Think of the gentle hum that opens Beethoven’s “Pastoral” Symphony, the almost inaudible whine at the beginning of Mahler’s Symphony No. 1 or the E flat at the bottom of the Prelude to Wagner’s “Rheingold,” which seeps into the listener’s consciousness like water.The composer Robert Ashley described the drone as sound that is detached from the temporal concerns of music, one that “exists apart from the listener’s participation.”Beginning in the 1960s, composers like La Monte Young took the drone and turned it into the focus — the everything — of compositions that often lasted hours. This month Randy Gibson, a composing student of Mr. Young, presented a “Drone Epic” at Wild Project in the East Village that lasted three-and-a-quarter hours. The drone consisted of a booming, throbbing sine wave that filled the room along with the aroma of burning incense before the first visitors filed in. Over time, two cellists, a violinist, a trombonist doubling as a singer, and Mr. Gibson, vocalizing into a microphone, joined in with notes that played off the overtones of the drone. Audience members were given blankets and encouraged to settle in with a glass of wine.Unlike participants in the marathon drone performances in downtown lofts during the 1960s, they did not have the aid of cannabis in opening themselves up to sustained sonic meditation. Even so, a sudden double-stopped fifth in one of the cellos — appearing sudden after what may have been 90 minutes of single notes played — registered as a gesture of monumental significance.Mr. Johannsson said that what drew him to drones was their visceral quality. “One very early influence was reading about John Cage’s experience in an anechoic room where the only sound you are left with is the high-pitched drone of your nervous system” and the low-pitched one of the blood pumping, he said. “For me, the drone is connected to the body. It’s a fundamental vibration that anchors music and gives you a foundation.”Mr. Kline said that drones were a natural fit for the opera he is writing, in collaboration with the writer-filmmaker Jim Jarmusch, about Tesla’s groundbreaking work with electricity. Mr. Kline, who grew up in a suburb of Akron, Ohio, and remembers harmonizing along to the sounds of lawn mowers — “It was this machine song that was happening every Saturday morning” — said he imagined that “Tesla must have sung along to machines, too, spending his days with things that hummed and droned and ticked.”Mr. Kline said he had been playing around with drones that he creates on his electric guitar, using them as the basis for improvisations he spins out of the feedback generated by an amplifier. When he began to incorporate these into his opera score, he said, “it was beautiful — it was like this cosmic howling wind that also sounded almost human.”Advertisement