AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe CoscarelliThis week, the Prettiots, a largely unknown, ukulele-led trio of young women, will join more than 2,000 other acts at the annual South by Southwest Music and Media Conference, and like many of these musicians, they will pay a lot for the privilege of playing several shows, mostly for free.Weaving down from New York to Austin, Tex., in a minivan will cost the Prettiots about $1,000 in gas, plus $3,000 to rent the van with insurance. Hiring someone to manage the tour will be $1,500. Cheap hotels along the way: $500. And once the band members arrive at the music marathon on Tuesday, they will stay at an Airbnb accommodation, which will run them another $2,500 for four nights — the going rate, as the city is overrun by thousands of visitors.All told, with incidentals and a $15 per diem for the musicians, the trip will cost the unsigned group nearly $10,000, said Asif Ahmed, the Prettiots’ manager, who is fronting some of the cost himself. “When you’re a band this young, it’s a necessary evil — spending money to eventually make it,” he said.By playing four shows, one an official showcase, in three days, the Prettiots hope to snag the attention of industry gatekeepers and tastemakers. But the band won’t be competing with other striving artists alone. Also participating are a growing number of spotlight-hogging acts, including John Legend, Spoon and Snoop Dogg, this year’s SXSW musical keynote speaker. Kanye West, who has popped up at SXSW three times since 2011, is scheduled to appear on “Jimmy Kimmel Live!,” which will broadcast from Austin this week, as it did last year.SXSW, once essentially a trade show for emerging acts and regional record labels, has mutated in its 28 years to what some industry observers liken to a hashtag carnival with a soundtrack, as stages have been stamped with sponsor logos, Nascar-style, from the likes of Miller Lite and Esurance, and shows are backed by major labels like Capitol, Warner Bros. and Republic Records.Yet the event has not lost its reputation as a place to discover and be discovered. So bands and smaller labels are left to decide whether to spend a modest fortune in the hopes of cutting through the corporate noise. This year, a few labels and their acts have forsaken the free tacos and tallboys, skipping the conference altogether. The Prettiots, however, hope to nab that elusive real-world buzz with a butterfly net.“I warned them,” said Mr. Ahmed, who has been attending SXSW since the mid-’90s, often with breakout bands like the Yeah Yeah Yeahs and TV on the Radio. “I told the girls, ‘You’re going to have fun, but you’re also going to want to kill everyone.’ ” He added, “Managing expectations while they’re still developing is really tough.”Bands playing an official SXSW showcase are offered the choice of a $250 cash payment — $100 for solo acts or duos — or a free pass to the rest of the festivities. About 13 percent take the money. (A music pass can cost attendees up to $895.)Payment for daytime parties and unofficial events varies. McDonald’s, a first-time SXSW sponsor, initially offered musicians only burgers and fries to play in its “lounge.” After an online backlash, it agreed to compensate the entertainment.Kay Kasparhauser, the lead singer of the Prettiots, has not been discouraged. “Maybe it’s more commercial now, but I’m not sponsored by McDonald’s, and I’m still ecstatic to be going,” she said. “I didn’t need anyone to tell me it’s an investment.”Lily Golightly, the Prettiots’ publicist, has six other small acts attending. “It’s so easy to get lost in the shuffle,” she said. Beyond the industry players, there are sideshows like General Electric’s “experimental interactive barbecue smoker” or Toyota’s Oculus Rift driving simulator. “Baby bands that are set to break in the next two years are still getting attention, but it’s definitely changed,” she said.And while the Prettiots hope to secure a label to release their debut album — featuring songs cute and cutting, like “Boys (I Dated in High School)” — the band is starting with a leg up, having attracted favorable coverage from fashion magazines like Nylon (which invited them to perform, unpaid, at a party it staged at the W Hotel); a music video directed by the photographer and underground auteur Richard Kern; and a full promotional team.“If there’s a small band without a manager and agent, I usually tell them it’s really not worth the money,” Ms. Golightly said.Morton Lorge, who manages the electro-pop trio Lolawolf, said that because of high expenses — baggage fees alone could total $1,000 each way for groups flying in — the trip “is really not an easy decision for a band on a small label,” even one with a fan base from touring with acts like Miley Cyrus and Lily Allen, and even with a frontwoman who happens to be Zoë Kravitz, the model-actress daughter of the singer Lenny Kravitz.“Everything has to come together,” said Mr. Lorge, who estimated that the band’s SXSW costs would be in the $7,500 to $10,000 range.Lolawolf has at least five shows planned for Austin, including a party hosted by Spin (sponsored by Axe grooming products and headlined by Mr. Legend) and the official Pandora showcase, both paid gigs. More crucially, the band is also booked as an opener on tour with Twin Shadow, beginning in Houston right after SXSW.Many bands, like the Prettiots, try to tour on their way to and from Austin, which has spawned festivals like Savannah Stopover and SXSW Overflow Fest.But, Mr. Ahmed said, “Even the routes that you take on the way to South By are oversaturated.” While the Prettiots have scheduled 10 tour dates on the way to SXSW, the band members will walk away with a total of $1,500 from those shows — “if they’re lucky,” he added.Some midmarket labels are avoiding the logjam altogether. Beggars Group, the parent company that owns or partners with indie label royalty like 4AD, Rough Trade, Matador Records, True Panther Sounds and XL Recordings, said none of those would host showcases at SXSW this year, although some individual bands would be present.“The middle class is completely gone,” Mr. Ahmed said.Andy Cohn, publisher of The Fader, an influential music magazine, believes that small bands can still succeed at SXSW. “Over the past few years, you’ve seen brands come down there and just really show up the wrong way, writing a massive check for the biggest name possible,” he said. (Doritos reportedly paid Lady Gaga $2.5 million for a 2014 show.)“There’s still way more people going to check out new stuff” than seeing well-known acts, Mr. Cohn said. “For struggling or emerging bands, it’s still a great place to go into debt on a credit card, because all it takes is one or two people there with an idea to really take to what you’re doing.”Judging by applications to perform — there were 7,960 last year — bands don’t need much convincing. Just playing SXSW, Ms. Kasparhauser said, “feels like an accomplishment in and of itself.”Advertisement