By ROSLYN SULCASMARCH 16, 2015
PARIS — “Singin’ in the Rain,” that much-beloved 1952 Gene Kelly and Stanley Donen movie, is in some ways a perfect offering for a stage musical. It has catchy songs, a hilarious book, extended dance sequences and the branded-on-Western-consciousness image of Gene Kelly twirling his umbrella as he splashes and tap dances with delirious happiness through puddles, in the song that gives the film its title.There have been many stage iterations, including a 1985 version by Twyla Tharp on Broadway. The latest, which opened at the Théâtre du Châtelet here on Thursday, follows hot on the heels of “An American in Paris,” which enjoyed a  sold-out run at the Châtelet before moving to Broadway this month. It’s the most recent in a string of American musicals presented at this theater by its director, Jean-Luc Choplin, who seems to have converted the Parisian public to the cause: “Singin’ in the Rain” was greeted with whoops and cheers by its fervently appreciative audience on Thursday, and its initial run (through March 26) is sold out. (It returns from Nov. 27 to Jan 15.)Directed by Robert Carsen and choreographed by Stephen Mear (who also choreographed a well-received 2000 production of the musical for the National Theater in London) this “Singin’ in the Rain” is a faithful homage to the original film, with songs by Nacio Herb Brown and Arthur Freed. The dialogue is reproduced almost word for word from the book by Betty Comden and Adolph Green, as is the action, and the four principal roles are played with textbook fidelity to the characters immortalized by Gene Kelly, Debbie Reynolds, Donald O’Connor and Jean Hagen.All of this makes for an enjoyable time at the theater, amplified by Tim Hatley’s stylish black and white décor and Anthony Powell’s matching costumes that evoke the shades-of-grey tones of pre-color movies. But it also makes for a certain blandness; everything is enjoyably familiar, nothing is revelatory.AdvertisementPerhaps asking for revelation in a musical is a tall order. But in the movie, the physical genius of numbers like “Fit as a Fiddle” and “Make ’em Laugh,” or the moment when Kelly is filmed from above as he whirls through the open and empty darkness of a deserted street in his “Singin’ in the Rain” solo, offer transcendent visions of joy that nothing in this stage version comes close to matching.AdvertisementThe story  is a straightforward one. The silent movie stars Don Lockwood (Dan Burton) and Lina Lamont (Emma Kate Nelson) suddenly have to adapt when Hollywood switches to talking pictures. But Lina has a voice like a Teletubby who grew up in the Bronx. (“She can’t sing, she can’t act, she can’t dance — a real triple threat,” says Cosmo Brown, Don’s sidekick, played by Daniel Crossley.) Enter Kathy Selden (Clare Halse), an aspiring actress and singer who meets Don by accident as he flees his rabid fans. When Cosmo and Don have the bright idea of transforming their dud silent movie “The Dueling Cavalier” into a musical, “The Dancing Cavalier,” they dub Lina’s voice with Kathy’s. If you don’t already know how it ends, you can probably work it out.“Singin’ in the Rain” is a movie that is a loving homage to the movies. That idea becomes more problematic when the action is set in an inherently more limited and more realistic context, without the repertoire of visual effects (cuts, close-ups, transpositions) that a film can achieve. At times, Mr. Carsen does find ingenious and effective ways of rendering hard-to translate scenes, particularly when he turns the theater public into the audience that is supposedly watching stars arrive on a red carpet, or witnessing the revelation that it is Kathy supplying Lina’s singing voice. The film clips that show us the over-acted pantomime of Don and Lina’s silent movies are seamlessly integrated with the live action, and often very funny.These moments, and a fabulous final “Singin’ in the Rain” reprisal, which has the entire ensemble in yellow raincoats, wielding umbrellas (a clever reference to the film’s opening credits) as cameramen circle around them, are moments when Mr. Carsen and Mr. Mear find theatrical equivalents for film techniques and a dramatic identity for the show.But because the décor isn’t used in a particularly fluid way to change the settings, transitions between scenes are often are awkwardly achieved, including the start of the all-important “Singin’ in the Rain” solo and the discussion between Don, Kathy and Cosmo that leads to the “Good Morning” number. Much of the musical feels like a slightly pallid imitation of the movie. When Mr. Burton danced in the rain, I thought more about the mechanics of the water-delivery (it didn’t seem very wet for a while) than the actual performance.These are partly staging and choreographic issues, partly a problem of performance. Mr. Mear’s choreography is competent and attractive — his ensemble numbers are particularly adroit — but rarely memorable. Mr. Burton and Mr. Crossley both sing impeccably and are pretty good dancers, but neither have the charisma or the physical wit of Kelly or O’Connor, and the choice to so closely imitate the screen actors’ delivery and personalities doesn’t help the inevitable comparison.Only in the marvelous “Moses Supposes” does the chemistry between the two men come to life, and that’s in no small part due to a  performance from Jennie Dale as the diction coach who joins their tap-dancing duet with gusto.Ms. Dale’s scenery-chewing approach — and the audience’s response — suggests that the other actors might try a less decorous tack. Ms. Halse is perfectly fine as Kathy, but there is little to suggest a star might be in the making. As Lina, Ms. Nelson has impeccable comic timing and exaggerated flair in filmed closeups, but is less effective in person, partly because, though her high-pitched shriek of a voice is hilarious, her accent wanders from Texas to Brooklyn. (Like most of the cast, she is British.)These caveats won’t matter too much to most of the audience. The show is pretty to look at and easy on the ear, and the Chamber Orchestra of Paris, conducted by Gareth Valentine, sounds terrifically full-bodied. It probably won’t make you jump for joy into a puddle, but it might leave you humming the tune.AdvertisementSingin’ in the Rain.  Directed by Robert Carsen. Théâtre du Châtelet. Through March 26; Nov. 27 through Jan 15.A version of this review appears in print on March 17, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.