“We’ll get it right this time.” Mark Latimer coos this to his newborn daughter, Lizzie, soon after birth. It’s said with shaky determination and deep regret, and amid the Latimer’s grief and marital struggles, a “right” childhood seems impossible. But they and everyone else in the town of Broadchurch soldier on, each on a mission for redemption — the driving force of Season 2. What’s been remarkable, then, is how conflicting and destructive each of these redemptive missions is. And no one has brought this idea to life more brilliantly than Marianne Jean-Baptiste, playing defense attorney Sharon Bishop, helping the wrong man for the right reasons. Despite sharing scenes with some of the greatest British actors alive and stepping into a well-established universe, the conflicted, raging Baptiste is emerging as the season’s MVP. What do we know about Baptiste’s Bishop? She’s an outsider in many ways: as a Londoner, as an acidic skeptic, as one of the few black characters to arrive in this very pasty town. (The other black actor to get significant screen time, Chloe’s boyfriend, Dean, slunk around the edges as a cocaine connection/secret paintballer and has not returned this season.) She’s trained her junior partner to be sharp, charming and ruthless, but still keeps her distance: When Abby Thompson gets a head start on a part of the case, Sharon declines to use her work; she’d rather do it herself. She relishes power, being in the spotlight, and antagonizing people, and she’s extremely good at all three.In this episode, we finally discover the reason for the massive chip on her shoulder. On the morning of a trial date, Sharon rises heavily at 3:30 in the morning and makes the long trip to visit her incarcerated son, Jonah. When Abby had previously alluded to this looming plot point in Sharon’s office, she avoided Sharon’s steely gaze and then changed the subject. But the fearsome lawyer is a completely different animal when sitting across the table from Jonah, who has six more years to go and stares at his mother with a weary detachment. “You’ve got to stay positive about this,” she pleads, but it’s not clear that she believes it herself, and she moves on to a bland question about the jail food. It’s far from an emotional breakdown, but Baptiste reveals Sharon’s underbelly with brilliant subtlety. From these few moments we immediately see why she took on Joe Miller’s case: she’s trying to right the wrongs of a jumpy and prejudiced court system.When Sharon returns to the courtroom, she’s as cunning and harsh as ever. She skillfully navigates herself out of a tight spot regarding Joe and Danny’s email correspondence, sending Alec Hardy from the room in a fury. And when she gets Ellie Miller on the stand, she eagerly circles her prey, picking apart every detail from her sex life to her sleeping pills. As she drops the sledgehammer by insinuating an affair between Ellie and Hardy, you see these two formidable women transforming in different directions: Sharon sharpening all her penned up fury into a pointed stick, and Ellie slowly realizing she’s being backed into a corner, lips quivering and composure slipping from frame to frame. “Together, you’ve put an innocent man in the dock,” Sharon rails against the detective pair, and in this twisted moment, she’s the tortured mother demanding justice for her beloved child, by shielding a very guilty child killer.While Sharon is becoming more and more of a conflicted hero (or antihero), a clearer villain emerges. Claire Ashworth inches from victim to suspect with every additional moment that her ex-husband Lee is back in her life. She angrily turns on Hardy, who has been protecting her for months, goads Ellie into a terrible double one-night stand, and gives a couple different vague accounts of what happened the night of the Sandbrook murder. She has a real femme fatale vibe.Meanwhile, it seems like creator and writer Chris Chibnall is going to continue to string us along with this whole bluebell MacGuffin. He better have a shocking resolution to these little flowers, because I’m over them already. Top 5 Insults, in an episode full of them:5) Hardy to Ellie: “What is the point of you, Miller!”
4) Mark Latimer to Reverend Paul Coates: “God’s not in this house — surely that’s clear by now.”
3) Ellie to Hardy: “I hope you bloody well crash and have a heart attack while you’re crashing!”
2) Hardy, on Bishop: “Those barristers. Who are they? They’ve never done anything in their life, they just stand there sniping!”
1) Ellie to Hardy: “Why are you being such a f***wit about this?”