AUSTIN, Tex. — When the director George Miller was announced and came onstage to introduce a 35mm screening of “Mad Max: The Road Warrior” here on Monday, the crowd rose instantly to their (happy) feet. Mr. Miller’s 1981 film built a grungy, postapocalyptic world that has often been imitated (and at this festival with the movie “Turbo Kid,” humorously saluted), but not quite duplicated. It is arguably the most discussed in the franchise by critics and audiences, with its blistering airy landscapes, sparse dialogue, inventive camerawork and amplified action. At the screening, the first audience member to ask a question was the director Robert Rodriguez. He kept his inquiry simple: “How the hell did you do it?”Mr. Miller also introduced some footage from “Mad Max: Fury Road,” giving the audience a taste of the continuation of his franchise with a new lead actor (Tom Hardy). The new film is scheduled to open nationwide on May 15. In an interview at the Four Seasons hotel on Tuesday, Mr. Miller discussed the franchise and what to expect from “Fury Road.” Here are edited excerpts of that conversation. What first got you interested in telling the “Mad Max”  story — and a postapocalyptic tale in general? The essential thing on the very first “Mad Max” was something very mundane. We didn’t have the budget to set it in real streets. So I decided to set it a few years from now, which meant we could shoot in isolated streets with decayed buildings. It allowed the story to be more hyperbolic.When it got seen around the world, the French were the first to call it a “western on wheels.” After that, the second one was much more consciously a postapocalyptic story.  There’s so little dialogue in these films, particularly from the main character. Could you talk about the decision to tell these stories more visually? I was very influenced by a book written by the critic Kevin Brownlow called “The Parade’s Gone By.” He said the main part of the parade has gone by the advent of sound in cinema. This new language that we called cinema had mostly evolved in the silent era. What differentiated it from theater were the action pieces, the chase pieces. And I really got interested in that. Hitchcock had this wonderful saying: “I try to make films where they don’t have to read the subtitles in Japan.” And that was what I tried to do in “Mad Max 1,” and I’m still trying to do that three decades later with “Fury Road.” What compelled you to return to this world? I didn’t intend to. I was making family films, because they were the only movies I got to watch with my kids. When my kids grew up, I started watching more grown-up films again. The idea occurred to me to make the film out of the blue, and no matter what I did to push it away it kept coming back. We set about to do it in 2001, and it’s taken all this time to do it because things kept getting in the way. The American dollar dropped 25 percent 11 weeks before we were to shoot it with Mel Gibson after 9/11. I went on to do “Happy Feet,” which took three and a half years. We regrouped to do “Mad Max,” casting Tom Hardy and Charlize Theron. Then our location in the center of Australia, Broken Hill — there were unprecedented rains. It hadn’t rained for 15 years, and suddenly what was vast, red, flat earth was now a flower garden. The great salt lakes were now full of pelicans and frogs. We had to take all our equipment and ship it across the Indian Ocean to Namibia. So we shot it on the western coast of Africa, where it never rains.
 Where does “Fury Road” sit in the timeline of the “Mad Max” films? In terms of chronology, it’s a bit complicated. The first film was a few years from now. “Road Warrior” was maybe 15 years later. This film is 45 years from now.  This one happens in a more reduced landscape, where it’s now treeless.Reports from the South by Southwest conference and festival in Austin. Could you tell me about some of the technological changes that allowed for a different way of shooting on this film? Our biggest thing was safety. We could wire or harness our cast safely in the most dangerous positions. There was no way we could do that in the past, because we had no way of digitally erasing the wires. Second thing, we could put a camera anywhere. And then we had this incredible thing called the edge arm, a car with a crane on it. Three guys with toggle switches could literally go in amongst these big car battles and film anywhere. They could put the camera inches off the ground or high up over the big trucks.