What counts as a No. 1 album? These days the answer — or at least the way the music industry tries to spin the question — is sometimes open to interpretation.On this week’s chart it was a tight race between new albums: Madonna’s “Rebel Heart” and the soundtrack to Fox’s hit TV show “Empire.” Late on Tuesday, Madonna’s publicists circulated a triumphant news release calling “Rebel Heart” “the best-selling album in the country.”That was true. But the distinction no longer guarantees a No. 1.Late last year, after months of consultation with record labels, Billboard changed the way it computes its standard album chart, the Billboard 200. Rather than counting only sales of complete albums — as it had for decades — the magazine began to incorporate streams and individual track sales.“The revamped Billboard 200 is designed to provide a larger representation of album consumption activity, reflecting the overall popularity of an album,” Silvio Pietroluongo, the magazine’s vice president of charts and data development, explained on Wednesday.In the four months since the new rules went into effect there have been two instances when the top-selling album did not reach No. 1. In early February, Taylor Swift’s “1989” beat the compilation “Now That’s What I Call Music!” Vol. 53, despite selling fewer copies. (It won on track sales.) And now “Empire” has topped Madonna.According to Nielsen Music, Madonna’s “Rebel Heart” (Interscope) sold 116,000 copies, while the “Empire” soundtrack (Columbia) sold 110,000. But “Empire” had nearly three times as many streams as “Rebel Heart,” as well as more than four times as many downloads of individual songs, pushing it into the lead.In the end “Empire” was credited with 130,000 “album equivalent units,” in Billboard’s new chart jargon, and Madonna with 121,000 — another win for Lucious Lyon.The fact that disparities like this have come up twice already suggests that many more examples may be coming down the road, with multiple albums claiming to have reached the top. And technically, “Rebel Heart” is No. 1 on Billboard’s separate album sales chart — it is just not the No. 1.Also this week on the all-inclusive, all-important Billboard 200, Luke Bryan’s “Spring Break … Checkin’ Out” (Capitol Nashville) opens at No. 3, the “Fifty Shades of Grey” soundtrack (Republic) falls two spots to No. 4 and Ms. Swift’s “1989” (Big Machine) is No. 5. Last week’s No. 1, Kelly Clarkson’s “Piece by Piece” (RCA), fell to No. 11.A version of this article appears in print on 03/19/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: u2018Empireu2019 Soundtrack vs. Madonna in Battle for No. 1.