The classical music critics of The New York Times recently pondered who should take over as music director of the New York Philharmonic after Alan Gilbert steps down in 2017.The critics — Anthony Tommasini, Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim, Zachary Woolfe, David Allen and Vivien Schweitzer— put forth a variety of possible successors. Their contenders included well-known figures like Esa-Pekka Salonen and David Robertson as well as some dark horse candidates, including Ludovic Morlot, James Gaffigan and Susanna Malkki.Many readers had their own ideas. Below, Mr. Tommasini, the chief classical critic for The Times, responds to some of their suggestions. Reader comments have been edited and condensed for clarity.Is it possible to have two leaders? (Not an associate conductor but a partner.) A young American — a product of American training — and a more established conductor. Is it possible to share control? — Carrie, New York City Well, there could be intriguing aspects to the concept of a shared directorship, as you suggest. It’s been sort of tried now and then. When Robert Spano was appointed music director of the Atlanta Symphony in 2000, Donald Runnicles was concurrently appointed principal guest conductor. It was announced that they would share leadership, though to the public Mr. Spano has always seemed in charge. There can be potential conflicts in having two music directors, as you point out. But if one is basically the director, it could work. Conductors might be chosen with complementary strengths. Still, the Philharmonic has always defined itself by the artistic interests and personality of a music director and I can’t see that changing.  I leave the advice to the experts, except to echo one thought of Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim: Whoever becomes the music director of our Philharmonic should mostly stay put, stay with the orchestra, stay in New York, not try to polish a résumé with too many guest appearances in other halls, whether stately or modern, and not require the Philharmonic to troop in so many guest conductors trying to polish their résumés. — Jay65, New York City I agree that the Philharmonic needs a music director who will, as you say, “stay put.” I’ve been impressed that Mr. Gilbert, to his credit, instead of holding a concurrent directorship somewhere else, leads the conducting program at the Juilliard School, where he works with aspiring student conductors. How about Ivan Fisher, the acclaimed and popular conductor of the Budapest Festival Orchestra? He is talented, loved by American audiences and is a composer. He would be a perfect cosmopolitan-multicultural candidate for the cosmopolitan-multicultural New York. — — Gmarton, Melbourne Of course there are many other artists I didn’t mention who would be strong possibilities, including some named in these comments, like Mr. Fischer and Vladimir Jurowski. I have huge admiration for Gianandrea Noseda, whose name has also come up in this exchange. But there are internal issues at an orchestra that it’s hard to know about from the outside. Maybe there are reasons why, say, Mr. Jurowski would not work out. Ludovic Morlot is an exciting and substantive musician. But he seems such a good fit for Seattle. Things are going so well for him and the orchestra and its audience. I think the openness and informality of the community there has allowed him to take chances. I’m not sure he’d want to leave at this stage of his career. Marin Alsop, an exciting, brilliant and deeply committed conductor, and the first female conductor (finally!) appointed to lead a major American symphony orchestra. She should have been first choice the last time around. Learn her story, watch her programming, read her reviews, talk to the musicians and give New York what it deserves. — Bernard Zaslav, Stanford, Calif. I’m very pleased to see many people mention Ms. Alsop. She is an impressive artist, an excellent conductor, a born educator and a visionary. She would certainly be a groundbreaking appointment. I would cheer it. But in my contribution to this feature I was trying to grapple what the Philharmonic’s leadership and players consider Mr. Gilbert’s limitations. The main one, from what I can gather, is that his performances of staples like the Beethoven and Brahms symphonies are somehow not monumental enough. Now, I don’t really agree, or even agree that this should be the main consideration. But if that’s what’s wanted, I think the administration may see Ms. Alsop as too similar in artistic profile to Mr. Gilbert. Once again, Mr. Tommasini makes his pick based on the new music director’s ability-sympathy with modern music. This is the same critic who picked Debussy, Bartok and Stravinsky on his list of 10 greatest composers of all time and left off Haydn, Mahler and Tchaikovsky (not to mention Dvorak). You can’t force audiences to like something they don’t, and they-we don’t like modern music. Give me someone who excels at Beethoven, Haydn, Mozart, Tchaikovsky, Mahler, Mendelssohn, Schumann, Brahms, Sibelius, Schubert and so on. The garbage Mr. Tommasini is talking about will be forgotten in 10 years. Why should we have to put up with it in the meantime? — Richard77, Nyack, N.Y. Well, in these comments several people debunked contemporary music and the seeming obsession among critics for contemporary music. I’m picking you, “Richard77,” as a representative of this point of view to make a reply.There’s not much I can say if you really think that most new music is “garbage” that will be forgotten in 10 years. But it’s long baffled me that culturally minded people who are very curious about new paintings, new novels, new plays, new films, new dances, even so-called “modern” dances, will be so closed to new music. Are musical languages that incorporate elements of atonality and a high dose of dissonance (however you define that) more jarring, more shocking than, say, Abstract Expressionist paintings? Anyway, the big news this past weekend at the New York Philharmonic has been the audacious British composer Thomas Adès, who is conducting his dark, stunning symphony-cantata “Totentanz” with the orchestra. I not suggesting here that composers like Adès are “the future” and we all better get used to it. I’m suggesting that Adès and Company are the present! And what an exciting present. You and I just have to agree to disagree.And, yes, I absolutely would rule out of consideration any conductor who does not have a voracious curiosity for new music.By the way, remember that the classics you revere today were considered garbage by many people, including some critics, when new. Here is a London critic in 1825 on Beethoven’s Seventh Symphony: “We cannot discover any design in it, neither can we trace any connection in its parts.” A French critic (30 years after Beethoven’s death!) writing of the Seventh Symphony denounced its “melodic ugliness” and “harmonic ugliness.” Give a look and listen to Carlos Kalmar of the Oregon Symphony. We would miss him. Your gain. —
Borkins, Deer Island, Ore. Now, Mr. Kalmar is an interesting suggestion and points out the difficulties of this search process. In 2001 he brought his Oregon Symphony to Carnegie Hall for one of the best-received, most thoughtfully planned programs of the entire “Spring for Music”  festival. If given a chance, an artist of his gifts might well rise to the challenge and be a strong leader. But there are many candidates in that roster of artists of whom the same could be said, conductors who have had little exposure in New York but are making news elsewhere. Mr. Kalmar has yet to make his New York Philharmonic debut. And the orchestra is planning on having someone in place for the 2017-18 season, which will be here before you know it.