Some worthy showcases from the first day of the SXSW Music festival:Reports from the South by Southwest conference and festival in Austin.Serendipity is still possible at SXSW: an empty time slot, a nearby gig. I wandered, during a lull in the late ­afternoon on Tuesday, into a showcase of music from Chile and ran across the songwriter La Guacha, who has released two albums in that country. She’s a supple, exuberant singer who sometimes raps; her songs dip into cumbia, ranchera, funk and jazzy pop. They’re articulate, playful love songs that, she said backstage, are about not only romance but also “spiritual freedom.” La Guacha, born Soledad del Río, is a carefully chosen stage name; “guacha” means a female orphan, but in Chilean slang it’s also a casual term for a friend. La Guacha said she also chose it because she believes that Chilean music is orphaned among imported traditions like cumbia and ranchera and needs to build its own identity. With songwriters like La Guacha — and a kindred spirit, the rapper and singer Ana Tijoux, who has wider international recognition — that identity promises to be both cosmopolitan and undiluted.Slide Show: Scenes from SXSWEven in a complicated, crass modern world, Kate Tempest demands a moral compass. She’s an award­-winning English poet and a playwright, and when she’s backed by the synthesizer-­topped wallop of her band, she’s also a fully skilled rapper with vehement momentum and an intense rhythmic drive. Her cascades of high-speed rhymes often observe every detail of daily encounters — “the cool new band with the retro feel,” she sarcastically noted, perfect for SXSW — and leap from them to thoughts about truth, dignity, determination, anti­-materialism and human connection. She insisted she wasn’t preaching, but of course she was — preaching in the best way, with passion, intelligence and equal parts fury and hope. “More empathy, less greed,” she urged.Sophie, a D.J.-producer­-remixer who played one of Tuesday’s closing sets during the wee hours, didn’t go out of his way to make people dance. For some stretches he didn’t bother with a beat, offering instead a drone that was nicely designed to maximize aural irritation: a low, sustained, distorted throb with a wavering high note at around the pitch of a crying baby. That was one extreme. He slammed it against others: fast, sporadic, kick­drum salvos and saw-toothed, stop­-start bass lines. The coup de grâce, though, was an extreme opposite: shimmery keyboard sounds and voices — either female or pitch-­shifted up that high — singing happy tidings about good times, love and “soaring through the sky,” all pop exuberance and reassurance. Of course, Sophie didn’t fill in the pop­ song arrangements; he left out bass lines and chords and he made the beat appear, disappear or turn up in savagely distorted tones. It was a test of pop’s tenacious pleasures, a love­-hate relationship acted out in sound, vicious and amusing. When a perky voice chirped, “till I tell you to stop,” the music suddenly did exactly that: stopped cold.SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
This playlist features songs by artists performing at South by Southwest. It will grow throughout the week. Spotify users can also find it here.
