LONDON — Ever since last summer, when Nicholas Penny, the director of the National Gallery here, announced his plans to retire, speculation and rumors about who might succeed him abounded. On Wednesday, the National Gallery announced that Gabriele Finaldi, the deputy director for collections and research at the Prado museum in Madrid, would take up the post. The appointment was confirmed by the British prime minister, David Cameron.Mr. Finaldi, who will take up the new position on Aug. 17, will most likely need to address a continuing labor dispute and strikes over the National Gallery’s plans to privatize its visitor and security services. He will also have to contend with a 15 percent budget reduction as a result of government cuts that began in 2010.“He will start with the staff largely on his side, having won many friends in his previous stint at the gallery,” Will Gompertz, the BBC’s arts editor, wrote on the BBC website. “The trick will be to keep them happy, while delivering more money-spinning blockbusters, without losing sight of the free-to-see collection displays.”Mr. Finaldi, 49, is no stranger to the National Gallery, having worked as a curator there from 1992 to 2002, first on the Spanish painting collection and later on the Italian collection. He was born in London, and studied art history at Dulwich College and the Courtauld Institute of Art, where he earned his doctorate after writing a dissertation on the 17th-century Spanish Baroque painter Jusepe de Ribera. He taught at universities in Reading, England, and in London; worked at the National Gallery; and then moved to the Prado.In Madrid, he worked closely with Miguel Zugaza, the director of the Prado, in overseeing a modernization of the museum that included overhauling its organizational structure, the rehanging of its collection and the opening of an extension in 2007.In a news release, Mr. Finaldi said that he looked forward to developing an exciting exhibition program and to strengthening the National Gallery’s “bond with the public, and its international standing.”