World premieres: Seven. Balanchine ballets: 28. Dancers: 94. Composers danced to: 47, including Ellis Ludwig-Leone of the band San Fermin and Bryce Dessner of the National, who were commissioned to write scores. New York City Ballet’s 2015-16 season, which was announced on Wednesday, will be a mix of old and new — including “Swan Lake,” seminal works by Balanchine and Jerome Robbins, and several new works by young choreographers. Balanchine’s full-length ballets “Jewels,” “A Midsummer Night’s Dream,” and, of course, “The Nutcracker” will all be performed.Four of the world premieres will be given Sept. 30 at the company’s fall gala. Justin Peck — City Ballet’s resident choreographer and the subject of the recent documentary “Ballet 422” — will create a dance to Steve Reich’s “Variations for Vibes, Pianos and Strings.”Troy Schumacher, a member of the company’s corps de ballet and the founder of BalletCollective, will choreograph his second work for City Ballet to a score by Mr. Ludwig-Leone. Robert Binet, a Canadian-born choreographer, will create his first dance for City Ballet, to two movements from “Miroirs,” the Ravel piano work. And Myles Thatcher, a member of the San Francisco Ballet’s corps de ballet and a protégé of the choreographer Alexei Ratmansky, will choreograph the first movement of William Walton’s Piano Quartet in D minor.In October, City Ballet will debut a new work by Kim Brandstrup, a Danish-born, British-based choreographer who is setting his ballet to Debussy’s “Jeux,” which was commissioned by Diaghilev for the Ballets Russes.The winter season will feature the world premiere of Mr. Peck’s first narrative ballet, based on the Hans Christian Andersen fairytale “The Most Incredible Thing,” about a young man who creates a magnificent clock to win a contest. The score will be by Mr. Dessner, the visual and costume design by the artist Marcel Dzama, and the ballet will feature more than 50 dancers, including 11 children from the School of American Ballet. A new Christopher Wheeldon ballet will have its premiere in the spring — details will be announced later. One of the company’s new developments next season will not be onstage, but in the orchestra pit. Andrew Litton, a conductor with roots in the concert hall, is becoming the company’s new music director. The opening night of the company’s winter season on Jan. 19 will feature dances to music by three American composers who have influenced Mr. Litton: Leonard Bernstein (Jerome Robbins’s “Fancy Free”), Samuel Barber (Peter Martins’s “Barber Violin Concerto”) and George Gershwin (Balanchine’s “Who Cares?”).A version of this article appears in print on 03/19/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: New and Old to Mix in City Ballet Season.