By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMARCH 18, 2015
10 P.M. (ABC) THE UNTOLD STORY OF ‘THE SOUND OF MUSIC’ Diane Sawyer travels to Austria with Julie Andrews in this “20/20” special celebrating the 50th anniversary of the film “The Sound of Music,” and explores its cultural impact during a time of unrest in the United States. In Salzburg they trace the steps of the von Trapp family, who inspired the movie; tour the former home of Maria von Trapp, the character Ms. Andrews portrayed; visit the train station where the family escaped the Nazis; and speak with the Mother Abbess of the Nonnberg Abbey, where Maria was a postulant after World War I. Christopher Plummer, who played Captain von Trapp, also shares his recollections of the film and his relationship with Ms. Andrews, who chimes in about a few of her favorite things.1:25 P.M. (Starz Cinema) THE AVIATOR (2004) Leonardo DiCaprio, in an Oscar-nominated performance, stars as a young Howard Hughes, the eccentric empire builder and recluse, in this biopic directed by Martin Scorsese, which covers the late 1920s through the ’40s, when Hughes was dabbling in filmmaking and aviation. Manohla Dargis, writing in The New York Times, called the movie “visually sumptuous if disappointingly hollow,” though it went on to win five Oscars, including one for best supporting actress for Cate Blanchett in her role as Katharine Hepburn, whom Hughes courted. Old Hollywood glamour is recreated by Kate Beckinsale as Ava Gardner, Gwen Stefani as Jean Harlow, Jude Law as Errol Flynn and Edward Herrmann as the film censor Joseph Breen.9 P.M. (VH1) WALK OF SHAME SHUTTLE The drivers Kellyann Wargo, Jordan Pease and Michelle Collins offer real-life partyers a ride home the morning after in cars equipped with cameras, the better to capture passengers’ stories about the night before. In “Barely Famous,” at 9:30, the sisters Erin and Sara Foster play sisters who vow never to do a reality show — but are being followed by a camera crew as they try to catch a break in Hollywood.9 P.M. (Showtime) HOOPS U (2015) The Notre Dame and University of Maryland men’s basketball teams prepare for the N.C.A.A. Tournament.Advertisement10 P.M. (BBC America) BROADCHURCH Detectives Hardy (David Tennant) and Miller (Olivia Colman) re-evaluate their hunches after stunning new evidence. Life changes dramatically for Mark (Andrew Buchan) and Beth (Jodie Whittaker).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (TV Land) HOT IN CLEVELAND Elka (Betty White) becomes acting mayor after her predecessor dies, and she makes an investigation into who killed him her first order of business. Victoria (Wendie Malick), meanwhile, frets over negative feedback on her HBO show; Joy (Jane Leeves) tries to plan a perfect first kiss; and Melanie (Valerie Bertinelli) unwittingly leaks confidential information to a reporter (Billy Baldwin).Advertisement10:30 P.M. (Comedy Central) BROAD CITY A runaway teenager hijacks the 23rd birthday party of Ilana (Ilana Glazer) on St. Marks Place.10:30 P.M. (Pop) IMPRESS ME Ross Marquand and Jim Meskimen try to swap celebrity impressions for serious drama in this comedy, originally on YouTube, from SoulPancake, Rainn Wilson’s production company.What’s Streaming NowJAMAICA INN Jessica Brown Findlay (Lady Sybil on “Downton Abbey”) plays Mary Yellan, an 1820s British farmer’s daughter who, after being orphaned, is sent to live with her aunt and uncle at their Cornwall inn in this BBC mini-series, based on the Gothic novel by Daphne du Maurier. But secrets abound — not least that Mary’s family specializes in wrecking ships on the rocks, stealing their cargo and killing the sailors as they swim ashore. Writing in The Times, Mike Hale called this production, written by Emma Frost and directed by Philippa Lowthorpe, “both portentous and dawdling, full of mood and handsome cinematography but devoid of much action or consequence.” Still, “fans of ‘Downton’ and of British period drama in general may be perfectly happy to endure three hours of this,” he added. “They get to enjoy two dramatic landscapes: the moors and cliffs of Yorkshire, where ‘Jamaica Inn’ was shot, and the high cheekbones, noble jaw and pale-blue eyes of Ms. Brown Findlay, who — spoiler alert — gets to stick around until the final credits this time.” The first episode is currently available for streaming; new episodes drop each Monday. (acorn.tv)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 18, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.