By JON CARAMANICAMARCH 17, 2015
Calling mainstream hip-hop a series of compromises is unfair, but the genre is far from where it was even a decade ago. It’s still a privileged space for black expression, but has also become extremely conscious of everyone else listening in. Broadly speaking, it has reframed its concerns as universal, not specific. It is, by and large, polite — a warm and welcoming host.Which is why Kendrick Lamar is the most ornery of modern rap stars. His concerns are personal, local, interior. He prefers narratives to anthems, verses to choruses, intricate feelings to intricate rhymes (though he has those, too).And yet despite those things — or maybe because of them — he has fashioned a following, and a huge one at that — one that could make him a potential change agent for the whole genre. His 2012 major label debut album, “good kid, m.A.A.d. city,” a long read about growing up in Compton, Calif., sold more than a million copies, a rare platinum hip-hop album in parched times, an exceptional exception.That album’s success has weighed on Mr. Lamar, and also emboldened him. His follow up, “To Pimp a Butterfly” (TDE/Aftermath/Interscope), which in a surprise was released just before midnight on Sunday — is more brazen, more preoccupied with social politics and more revealing about the struggles of Mr. Lamar, the adult. It’s a work about living under constant racialized surveillance and how that can lead to many types of internal monologues, some empowered, some self-loathing.Advertisement“Loving you is complicated,” Mr. Lamar intones 10 times at the beginning of “u,” a song in which he pillories himself for mistakes he has made during his rise. On “Mortal Man,” he warns, “As I lead this army, make room for mistakes and depression.” On “How Much a Dollar Cost,” he tells a story about blowing off a beggar who, at the song’s end, reveals himself to be God.So Mr. Lamar is an imperfect warrior for change. But he has been agonizing over this role for years, long before the burden truly fell on his shoulders. In 2011, he was featured on “Buried Alive (Interlude),” on Drake’s album “Take Care.” His verse was meandering and paranoid, a young rapper tasting the spoils available to him and unsure whether to dig in or recoil in disgust.AdvertisementSomehow, in “To Pimp a Butterfly,” he does both. The album takes on bold, huge themes, reflective of Mr. Lamar’s increasing confidence and increasing dissatisfaction. It’s about ethics and community responsibility, about white terror and black resilience, about self-doubt and self-punishment, about melting under the klieg lights of fame.At its best, it’s a howling work of black protest art on par with Amiri Baraka’s incendiary play “Dutchman,” or David Hammons’s moving decapitated hoodie “In the Hood” (seen most recently on the cover of Claudia Rankine’s poetry collection “Citizen: An American Lyric”) — works rooted in both pride and fear.On “For Free? (Interlude),” he’s indignant, lashing out at a society that gave him only the barest essentials and dared him to thrive: “Like I never made ends meet eatin’ your leftovers and raw meat.” On “The Blacker the Berry,” he returns time and again to a wounded question — “You hate me, don’t you?” — and calls out the structures of power that suggest that black lives don’t matter:It’s evident that I’m irrelevant to societyThat’s what you’re telling me, penitentiary would only hire meCurse me till I’m deadChurch me with your fake prophesizing that I’ma be just another slave in my headMr. Lamar has at best been a reluctant star, and also the rare artist who has become more interesting while in the crucible of fame, who hasn’t smoothed out his rough edges. He likes playing characters: On “Institutionalized,” he takes on the role of a friend who, when exposed to the new world Mr. Lamar has access to, tries to capitalize on it. And he likes bending his voice into unexpected shapes: On “u,” he raps in a scarred, cracking voice, between tears and aggression.While he has paved the way for the resurgence of Compton as a creative hotbed, with rappers like YG and Vince Staples making nouveau gangster rap, he is heavy with the burdens of yesterday. Ancestors hover over this album — Dr. Dre as life coach on “Wesley’s Theory” (“Anybody can get it/The hard part is keeping it”); Snoop Dogg as the Slick Rick-like narrator of “Institutionalized”; and Tupac Shakur, resurrected for an eerie mock interview on “Mortal Man.”AdvertisementMusically, this album is a jolt of the old. Make no mistake, it is a jolt. It’s full of neo-soul, regular old soul, jazz and funk, and the songs bubble with a furious spontaneity. There are implicit nods to J. Dilla, as on “Complexion (A Zulu Love),” which also features the classicist Pete Rock. The scrambling saxophones on “u” — by Terrace Martin, Kamasi Washington and Adam Turchin — are rousing. They continue on the next song, “Alright,” produced partly by Pharrell Williams, and the closest thing this album has to a traditional single. (It has the faintest echo of Clipse’s “When the Last Time.”)Mr. Lamar has always been a fluent technician, if an insular and anomic presence. But the increase in musicality around him has reshaped him. In the past, he has sometimes sounded as if he was rapping at the beat, not on it. But he’s more comfortable in his pockets now.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There are several times when he veers into spoken-word territory on this album, a reminder that although aesthetics matter more here than on any prior effort by Mr. Lamar, he’ll still look past them when trying to make a point.He hasn’t outrun his tendency toward clutter. He is a dense rapper, and even though he’s more at ease with the music now, he still runs the risk of suffocation. He has also crammed “To Pimp a Butterfly” full: It totals 79 minutes, just shy of a typical CD’s maximum capacity. It is a test, or a reflection of Mr. Lamar’s faith in his followers.Even though he memorably took on his hip-hop peers in 2013, on his verse on Big Sean’s “Control, ” the moments on this album in which he casts aspersions at other rappers feel unnecessary. That’s because “To Pimp a Butterfly” is bigger than any minor intra-rapper friction. An album that asks questions as big as this one does, and that will be heard by so many, is a huge taunt to Mr. Lamar’s peers — it’s a dare to ride along, a dare to be different, a dare to be great.A Critic’s Notebook article on Wednesday about Kendrick Lamar’s new album, “To Pimp a Butterfly,” using information from the liner notes, misspelled the surname of a saxophonist who performs on it. He is Adam Turchin, not Turchan.A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Emboldened, but Burdened, by Success.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.