AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinThe plotlines of “Empire,” Fox’s hip-hop prime-time soap opera, tell a complicated tale of family rivalry and skulduggery. The text messages exchanged by Fox executives as the show’s success improbably grew week by week told a more succinct story. “Lots of emojis,” Brian Grazer, an executive producer of “Empire,” said in an interview as he scrolled through his cellphone checking his correspondence with Dana Walden, co-chief executive of the Fox television group. “There’s the party hat emoji. That’s a little party hat with a little band and confetti coming out. There’s that one with the two gold hats. We did those. Lots of smiley faces with hearts in the eyes. Then it graduates to mini crowns.”And then?“Bags of money,” he said.“Empire,” about a music executive who has a terminal illness and is planning to choose the heir to his business empire from among his three sons, turned into the smash hit of the winter, the No. 1 new show in the 18-to-49 age group coveted by advertisers. The two-hour season finale will be shown Wednesday night.This wasn’t the anticipated outcome. Mr. Grazer said that expectations for the premiere were “on the reasonably high side,” maybe a 2.0 Nielsen rating; instead it pulled a 3.8, equal to about 9.8 million viewers. A week later, it achieved the rare feat of actually increasing the audience for the second episode, avoiding the usual drop-off after the premiere. And then there was the entirely unexpected week-by-week growth, over nine weeks, culminating in a season-high 14.9 million viewers last Wednesday. By this time, jubilant Fox executives had gone all in. “We have never supported a show to this level post-launch, with the possible exception for one of the early seasons of ‘American Idol,’ ” said Joe Earley, chief operating officer of the Fox television group.By support, he meant a lot of things, including local affiliates promoting the show, but he also meant something quite tangible: Fox’s marketing budget for “Empire.” Mr. Earley wouldn’t provide figures for that budget, but said that purchases of off-air advertising were supposed to wind down after the third episode. Instead, with ratings gains each week, Fox kept advertising on cable TV shows, the radio and online for the entire first season. “We really jumped in,” Mr. Earley said, calling the marketing efforts atypical.Part of the show’s success has been its ability to create excitement on social media. Mr. Earley said the plan was to follow a formula that made “Scandal” a success for ABC — both in the Nielsen ratings and on Twitter. He said that the cast and writers of “Scandal” are devoted social media users, and he wanted the same from “Empire.”“Empire” averages 451,270 tweets per episode, according to Nielsen Social. Since the new television season began in September, that is the highest average of any show, including “The Walking Dead” and “Scandal.” (Last week’s episode of “Empire” got 750,258 tweets.) One of the more active tweeters is Taraji P. Henson, one of the show’s stars, who has 3.25 million Twitter followers. The show has an overwhelmingly African-American cast, and a wide appeal among all demographics. Back when it debuted in January, Mr. Earley said, he had a feeling it would resonate among African-Americans, Latinos, women who watch scripted dramas and “women who watch those sort of saucy unscripted shows where housewives are on the verge of attacking each other every week.” Fox executives were less sure how big the draw would be among men. But the show is the No. 1 new broadcast drama among 18-to-49-year-old men (it’s the No. 1 drama over all for women in the same age group). It’s a big-tent show.But what is it about “Empire” that makes it so appealing?The show’s protagonist, Lucious Lyon, is played by Terrence Howard. His ex-wife, Cookie, played by Ms. Henson, has a taste for designer labels that include Balmain, Gucci and Louboutin stilettos; she has been the breakout star of the series. There are also murders and a gay coming-out story.“This is a show about fashion, about power, it’s a soap opera, it’s what it’s like to be a gay artist in the urban music world,” Mr. Earley said. “Empire” wasn’t originally designed for television. The co-creator, Danny Strong, said he pitched it to Lee Daniels as a movie about two years ago (Mr. Daniels produced the 2013 film “Lee Daniels’ The Butler,” and Mr. Strong wrote it).“Lee called me the next day and said, ‘I can’t stop thinking about your idea, but I think it’s a TV show, not a movie,’ ” Mr. Strong said. “And I said, ‘You’re absolutely right because it’s about a family.’ And great successful TV shows are about families. And then we were talking about ‘Dynasty’ and ‘Dallas.’ ” Mr. Strong has become a devoted follower of the ratings, and he’s not alone. Over the last several weeks, Fox executives and producers for the show described Thursday rituals of checking their phones early in the morning. “I’ve never been a numbers junkie,” said Ilene Chaiken, the show runner and an executive producer. “Not even my own show that I created. I couldn’t even tell you what the numbers on ‘The L Word’ were. And here, I’m pretty vividly and explicitly aware of what the numbers are on ‘Empire.’ ”Last week, Ms. Walden, the Fox TV co-chief executive, ordered up a proper celebration. She took the cast and producers of the show out to a dinner at Nobu in West Hollywood.Mr. Grazer said: “They all had the greatest cars picking them up at the studio. Like really fancy black beautiful cars. A Mercedes. A stretch Rolls-Royce that was so groovy. And Dana gave everybody a Rolex watch at dinner. At studios, nobody does that. It was a supergenerous thing and unifying and collegial. And we were all screaming, ‘Oh my God!’ ”They were screaming when they got the watches, that is. And how much did they cost? “They were expensive watches,” Ms. Walden said, laughing. “It was all very elegant. There was an extravagance to it that felt appropriate for the show.”Because the show is over the top and extravagant?“Because the success is so extravagant,” she said. “The success is extraordinary and we wanted to do something extraordinary.”Where’s that bag of money emoji?Advertisement