By SIOBHAN BURKEMARCH 17, 2015
A year ago, on the cusp of its 60th anniversary, the Paul Taylor Dance Company announced its new identity as Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance. On Saturday night at the David H. Koch Theater, one aspect of the troupe’s expanded mission — to preserve modern dance masterworks by artists other than Mr. Taylor — began to take shape, with the presentation of Doris Humphrey’s 1938 “Passacaglia and Fugue in C Minor.”We don’t see a lot of Ms. Humphrey’s work  these days, despite her undisputed influence in early modern dance. As a glimpse into dance history, into an aesthetic that Mr. Taylor both borrowed and departed from, this rare sighting was enlightening.Yet it also felt out of place. In an unconventional programming choice, Mr. Taylor enlisted the Limón Dance Company to perform the work, inserting it between his own “Syzygy” (1987) and “Beloved Renegade” (2008). (This season’s other acquisition, Shen Wei’s “Rite of Spring,” will be danced by Mr. Shen’s ensemble.)One pleasure of watching Mr. Taylor’s dancers is getting to know them over the course of an evening — their gifts, their idiosyncrasies, how they transform from one piece to the next — and the introduction of 16 new faces required some adjusting on the viewer’s part. How to elegantly integrate non-Taylor works into the repertory remains a puzzle.AdvertisementThough the Limón dancers lack the full clarity and authority of the Taylor group, they gave a committed performance, aided by the organist Kent Tritle, who played Bach’s at once macabre and exultant score. Mounted on a staircase and pedestals, the ensemble, led by the poised Kristen Foote and Durell R. Comedy, descended and reascended in a kind of sweeping and staccato prayer, fanning out into symmetrical formations or kneeling with clasped hands. (Ms. Humphrey was inspired, she wrote, “by the need for love, tolerance and nobility in a world given more and more to the denial of these things.”) Certain motions, like wide-legged side-to-side rocking — the body as a pendulum — could have been prototypes of Mr. Taylor’s vocabulary.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Passacaglia” read as a dusty but intriguing curiosity, but other pieces on Saturday had more urgency. Like blazing comets, the dancers sped through “Syzygy” (its pace is unrelenting) with even more gusto than on opening night. In “Beloved Renegade,” Mr. Taylor’s ode to Walt Whitman, they formed a lyrical society, guided by Michael Trusnovec, Laura Halzack and the heavenly voices of St. George’s Choral Society, in a live rendition of Poulenc’s “Gloria.”The addition of live music, another signature of American Modern Dance, has so far proved uneven. During “Eventide” (1997), on Saturday’s matinee, scratchy playing from the Orchestra of St. Luke’s drew attention away from the tender relationships onstage.AdvertisementOn the other hand, in “Cloven Kingdom” (1976), first on that program, the mix of Baroque music with percussive rumblings aligned perfectly with Mr. Taylor’s wacky exploration of humankind’s inner beast. The delicious “Company B” (1991) retains its recorded Andrews Sisters soundtrack — and its relevance, in spite of the 1940s theme, as Mr. Taylor subtly blurs the body language of falling in love and going to war.“Passacaglia” repeats on Sunday and on March 27 and 29; Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance’s season runs through March 29 at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com. We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.