AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony TommasiniPierre Boulez emerged in the late 1940s in Paris as a combative modernist, the brash new leader of the avant-garde. By 1952 he declared that any musician who had not felt the “necessity of the dodecaphonic language” was “of no use.” Despite subsequent decades of winning over mainstream classical music audiences through his work as a conductor with lucid, colorful performances of everything from Wagner operas to Mahler symphonies, Mr. Boulez, who turns 90 on March 26, has never shaken his early reputation for writing pieces of off-putting complexity.I wonder if those who feel this way might have had an epiphany from the Boulez program on Monday night at Zankel Hall. The masterly French pianist Pierre-Laurent Aimard, along with a former student, the brilliant Yugoslav-born pianist Tamara Stefanovich, offered a rare chance for an immersion in some of Mr. Boulez’s most fiendishly difficult pieces. Between them they played the complete solo piano works, including the three seminal sonatas, as well as Book II of “Structures” for two pianos. In these dazzling, rhapsodic and nuanced performances, Mr. Boulez’s thorny pieces came across as radical, yes; extreme, for sure; but stunningly inventive and supremely musical.Before playing “Douze Notations,” a set of 12 miniatures that Mr. Boulez wrote in 1945 when he was 20, Mr. Aimard, a close associate of the composer, explained that the piano was Mr. Boulez’s main instrument for exploration of new compositional challenges. Yet the “Notations” are like character pieces, he said, a quality Mr. Aimard conveyed in his vibrant performance, full of restless energy and myriad shadings. For all the bursts of steely chords and spiraling pointillist flights, echoes of Messiaen, Stravinsky and Schoenberg came through. In this context, the Piano Sonata No. 1, from 1946, which Mr. Aimard played next, one heard the young Mr. Boulez taking a leap into audacious originality. More jarring than the skittish streams of 12-tone rows and whatnot is the rhythmic radicalism of the sonata. For all the breathless intensity, there is little sense of pulse here. The music unfolds in organic gestures, all fits and starts and stops. Yet Mr. Aimard drew captivating lyricism from the music as well. A gesture would begin with clanking clusters and splintering lines, then trail off into delicate curlicues with crucial lingering notes . Ms. Stefanovich then played the Sonata No. 2 (completed in 1948), a monumental work in four movements, one of the hardest pieces ever written. Here the young Mr. Boulez was taking on Beethoven, writing a tradition-bashing answer to the challenge of the mighty “Hammerklavier” Sonata. Ms. Stefanovich’s performance was staggeringly brilliant, especially the frenzied, explosive climax of the final fast movement. Mr. Aimard returned for the Sonata No. 3 (completed in 1957), music that alternates between musical assertions and pensive ruminations. Ms. Stefanovich then played “Incises,” composed in 1994 for a piano competition, a work she aptly described as a “21st-century neurotic toccata.” For once Mr. Boulez gives us a piece with streams of repeated notes and pulsing rhythmic riffs. Mr. Aimard also played “Une Page d’Éphéméride,” a short work that Mr. Boulez was asked to write in 2005 as part of an album for young pianists. Being Boulez, though, he clearly had in mind aspiring pianists who already had considerable technique. Finally, these two Boulez champions performed Book II of “Structures” (completed in 1961), in which the pianists play with significant independence from each other, according to their in-the-moment choices. Even the sequence of events is not predetermined. By reputation this is a piece of formidable complexity, both for performers and listeners. Yet in this arresting, at times impish performance, it sounded delightful. Advertisement