By CLAUDIA BARBIERIMARCH 17, 2015
PARIS — In Pierre Bonnard’s 1900 painting “L’Homme et la femme” (Man and Woman) — one of his earliest nudes of his mistress Marthe, later his wife — she lolls on a bed, leg crooked, while Bonnard himself stands naked, half in shadow. The center of the picture is occupied by a dark, folded screen — a void separating the lovers.The figure on the margins and the empty space at the center were formal devices in much of Bonnard’s work. A similar detachment often seemed to mark his own life, lived mostly on the sidelines of the early 20th century’s political and artistic revolutions. But this month Bonnard is having a moment at center stage here, with a blockbuster retrospective opening at the Musée d’Orsay and an important sale of paintings, drawings and memorabilia in nearby Fontainebleau.Five years in preparation, following the influential 2009 “Late Interiors” exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, “Pierre Bonnard: Painting Arcadia” at the Orsay runs through July 19 and covers the full arc of the artist’s career, from his student years in fin-de-siècle Paris to his death in 1947. The museum, which holds the world’s largest collection of Bonnard’s work (including “L’Homme et la femme”), has brought together 32 of its own paintings, mostly dating from the 1890s and the first two decades of the 20th century, with about 60 borrowed from museums and private collections worldwide. In addition to other French museums, contributors include the Guggenheim, the Metropolitan and the Museum of Modern Art in New York; the Hermitage in St. Petersburg, Russia, and the National Museum of Western Art in Tokyo.Guy Cogeval, the Orsay’s president, said in an interview that one of the main goals of the show is to reassert the importance of Bonnard’s early and middle years. “We wanted to show a young Bonnard, who had great passions in his life,” he said. “The early works were also masterpieces.”AdvertisementThe curators also aim to rescue the artist’s reputation from the image of a painter of domestic bliss and decorative scenery and to establish him as a modern master — a designation that has been fiercely debated. While Matisse, a personal friend, praised him after his death in 1947 as “a great painter, for today and for the future,” Picasso, no admirer, called his painting style “a potpourri of indecision.”AdvertisementThe exhibition starts in 1890s Montmartre, where Bonnard was a member of the Nabi group, a radical disciple of Paul Gauguin’s pure color theories and Japanese printmaking aesthetics, rebelling against classical art and Impressionism. In paintings and photographs, it charts his transformation from Parisian intellectual and designer of chic decors, through a fallow period during World War I, into an Expressionist painter of landscapes, introspective self-portraits and intimate domesticity.Mr. Cogeval said that critics and historians have tended to write about Bonnard — “as if he never changed: that the man was the same person in 1900 as in 1940. But he was not at all the same Bonnard. We know more about Bonnard today and we can speak more freely about his personal life and its influence on his art.” The Orsay show, he said, “is a new view of Bonnard.”For the British painter and art writer Timothy Hyman, the author of “Bonnard,” a 1998 study of his life and work, the artist uses “the exploration of the emotional power of space like no other artist in the 20th century.” This is illustrated in his famous bathroom series: studies — several of which are on view in the show — of a nude Marthe washing, or in the bath, painted mostly between 1925, when the couple married after 32 years together, and her death in 1942.Few people knew more about that personal life and its artistic consequences than the art historian Antoine Terrasse, Bonnard’s great-nephew, to whom the Orsay show is dedicated. Terrasse died in 2013, and his private collection of the artist’s work goes under the hammer in Fontainebleau, where he lived, on March 29. The 130 lots, which the Osenat auction house has estimated in excess of 2.3 million euros, or $2.4 million, include a dozen fine oil paintings and a collection of preliminary studies, graphical works and book illustrations, notebooks and diaries. The top lot is an 1899 oil painting, “Petite fille au chat, Renée Terrasse” (Little girl with cat, Renée Terrasse) estimated at €350,000 to €450,000.Over three generations, the Terrasse clan was Bonnard’s cocoon, starting with the composer Claude Terrasse, his brother-in-law, who provided the childless painter with an adoptive family. Claude’s son Charles and his grandsons Michel and Antoine, all artists or art historians, later acted as gatekeepers, carefully constructing and protecting the image of the artist as a family man, immersed in and inspired by everyday serenities.They were perhaps too protective, say some critics, who hold the Terrasse family at least partly responsible for what they say is an overly facile public understanding of a complex artist. “They made Bonnard into a charming garden,” Mr. Hyman said, but “all that sense of psychological tension was lost.”Obscured in the received narrative, he said, was Bonnard the youthful anarchist, and more important, Bonnard the conflicted lover of two mistresses, one of whom, Renée Monchaty, killed herself when he married the other, Marthe, a neurotic obsessive who retreated over the years into isolation.AdvertisementThe French art historian Jean Clair, curator of a 1984 Bonnard show at the Pompidou Center in Paris, said that the basic point about Bonnard’s reputation is true, but argued that Antoine Terrasse, at least, is not guilty as charged.“Toward the end of his life, Terrasse sought to shatter the myth of the ‘nice, kind Bonnard,”’ Mr. Clair wrote in the catalog for the Fontainebleau sale. Revealing the truth about Bonnard’s relationship with Monchaty, and her death, “was Antoine’s chief goal during the last years of his life.”What Bonnard himself felt is, like his painted self-images, veiled. “He who sings is not always happy” he wrote in his diary on Jan 17, 1944. In “The Boxer,” a 1931 self-portrait, he paints himself as a puny but defiant figure, thumping himself on the chest. His eyes are invisible. In later self-portraits they stare emptily, dark and dispassionate. The artist sees out but you cannot see in: always the void at the center.A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.