By PETER KEEPNEWSMARCH 16, 2015
Daevid Allen, an eccentric Australian-born guitarist, singer and poet who was an original member of the psychedelic rock group the Soft Machine and went on to found Gong, an aggressively avant-garde band whose influence far exceeded its relatively modest success, died on Friday in Australia. He was 77.The band’s website confirmed his death but gave no other details. Mr. Allen had skin cancer and announced last month that it had spread to his lungs. He had decided not to seek further treatment, he said, adding that “the time has come to stop resisting and denying.”Gong, which was formed in France in the late 1960s and began making records in 1970, never reached a wide audience. But it attracted a following and, with its emphasis on improvisation and unorthodox musical structures, became an early influence on the genre known as prog (short for progressive) rock.Its sound, however, was less grandiose than that of better-known prog-rock bands like Yes or Emerson, Lake and Palmer. Jon Pareles of The New York Times, reviewing a 25th-anniversary performance by the band at the Knitting Factory in Manhattan in 1996, described Gong’s music as “a lighthearted, lightheaded ramble, stringing together riffs from basic rock ’n’ roll, odd-metered jazz-rock or ragalike patterns, then floating into improvisation.”AdvertisementThe lyrics Mr. Allen wrote for Gong’s freewheeling music were whimsical, mystical, sometimes impenetrable and often very funny. What are probably the band’s best-known albums, “Flying Teapot,” “Angel’s Egg” and “You,” collectively tell a convoluted story involving (among other things) “pothead pixies” from the Planet Gong and a yogi who likes to drink Foster’s Lager.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Gong underwent many personnel changes over the years, and offshoots performed under different names, including New York Gong and Mother Gong. Mr. Allen left the band in 1975 to pursue a solo career, but in the 1990s he reunited with most of the members of the early-1970s incarnation. That version of Gong had been performing sporadically ever since and released an album, “I See You,” last year.Christopher David Allen (he stopped using his first name and added the “e” himself) was born on Jan. 13, 1938, and grew up in Melbourne, Australia. While living in Canterbury, England, in the 1960s he and other musicians, inspired by free jazz and Beat poetry as much as by contemporary rock, formed the Soft Machine.He moved to France in 1967, and while the Soft Machine carried on without him, he began laying the groundwork for what would become Gong, joined by the vocalist Gilli Smyth (whom he married, and with whom he continued to work after they divorced) and the saxophonist and flutist Didier Malherbe. Other members, notably the guitarist Steve Hillage, joined shortly afterward.Mr. Allen’s survivors include four children.A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2015, on Page A26 of the New York edition with the headline: Daevid Allen, 77, Founder Of Gong and Soft Machine .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.