A new gallery with a long history will join the downtown art scene this weekend. Equity Gallery, founded by New York Artists Equity Association, a nonprofit advocacy group, will host its inaugural exhibition on Saturday on the Lower East Side. The association, known as Artists Equity, was founded in 1947 by more than 150 leading artists — including Edward Hopper, Louise Nevelson and Thomas Hart Benton — as a way to promote and support artistic careers. Since then, it has helped artists find health insurance, connect with curators and exhibit their work.But the group has been without a gallery since 2011, when a previous space, Broome Street Gallery, closed after about 10 years, because the building housing it was sold. Equity Gallery, at 245 Broome Street, was endowed by a gift from the painters Jacob Lawrence and Gwendolyn Knight Lawrence, both former members. Mr. Lawrence, who died in 2000, was also a past president of Artists Equity.Though starting another gallery was on their wishlist, “it wasn’t possible until the gift,” said Melinda Wang, the executive director of Artists Equity. The money allowed them to secure a three-year lease on the 700-square-foot space, which they also plan to turn into a community and event hub.  Though it’s a nonprofit, and will be staffed by volunteers, the idea is that it will still bring in sales. “We’re trying to go back to the core mission of being a resource for artists,” Ms. Wang said.There are currently about 300 Artists Equity members, down from about 3,000 in its heyday in the 1960s. Ms. Wang hopes that the new gallery’s visibility will help encourage enrollment, starting, perhaps, with the eight artists — Alva CalyMayor, Jim D’Amato, Ambre Kelly, Karen Lee, Patrick Meagher, Kambui Olujimi, Jonathan Rider and Gretchen Scherer — in the inaugural show, “2015:1947.” She asked each of them to take inspiration from a founder of Artists Equity: some went for well-known figures, like the modernist Yasuo Kuniyoshi, the organization’s first president; or the photographer Charles Sheeler; others chose unsung heroes. The exhibition will include paintings, sculpture and video, and runs through November 28th.A version of this article appears in print on 10/17/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Artists Equity Reopening a Gallery in Manhattan.