Michael Conforti, director of the Sterling and Francine Clark Art Institute in the Berkshires since 1994, who spent almost 15 years reimagining the museum through a renovation and expansion, announced on Thursday that he would retire in August.Mr. Conforti’s legacy will likely rest on the transformation of the Clark, a jewel box in Williamstown, Mass., with a revered collection of European, British and American art by masters like Degas, Sargent, Constable and Monet.But during his tenure, he also led the growth of the museum’s endowment from $128 million to $357 million and completed a $145 million capital campaign to support the Clark’s dual missions: as an art museum and center for research and education in the visual arts.“The reality is that we worked on this for a very long time and it’s completed,” Mr. Conforti said in a telephone interview. “We have prepared the institution for another leap, and I’m going to have a great deal of fun watching” what the next generation of leaders will do.In 2001 he hired the Japanese architect Tadao Ando, known for his austere and serene designs, to build the Clark Center, the new visitor, exhibition and conference center, and the Lunder Center at Stone Hill, which opened in 2008 with small exhibition galleries and the Williamstown Art Conservation Center.Mr. Ando, who lives in Japan and commuted over 12 years, said initially he didn’t know where Williamstown was. He told a New York Times interviewer that he signed on because of the natural beauty of the site and the “masterpieces” in the Clark’s collection.Later Mr. Conforti hired the New York architect Annabelle Selfdorf to redesign the interiors of two original buildings: a 1955 neo-Classical-style temple that Sterling and Francine Clark had commissioned  the architect Daniel Deverell Perry to design, which houses the permanent art collection, and a 1970s brutalist addition in granite by Pietro Belluschi. Scheduled to open  later this year, it is now the Manton Research Center, housing an art library and new galleries for  works on paper. Reed Hilderbrand Landscape Architecture of Boston renewed the pastoral campus.“In a time of hubristic museum expansionism, the beloved if rather fusty Sterling and Francine Clark Art Institute here has managed something distinctly surprising: It has gotten bigger and better,” Roberta Smith wrote last July, when Mr. Ando’s second building, the Clark Center, opened. She credited Mr. Conforti and the trustees for fashioning the museum “into a welcoming, comfortable place, where looking at art is the first order of business, environmental responsibility has become a lived commitment, and education is an increasingly multileveled project.”In 1994, when Mr. Conforti arrived, “there were two people giving the Clark $1,000 a year, and that was the extent of our fundraising,” he said. “We had people who liked us but they didn’t support us because they were never asked.”In 2007, on his watch, the museum received a transformative gift from the Manton Foundation: 300 paintings, including 50 by John Constable, and $50 million to support its mission.“It took time,” the director said. “We now have a coterie of supporters, and we have this building, and it is still an envelope for surprises. I’m going to be very interested in seeing where the board of trustees and a new director takes it.”A version of this article appears in print on 03/21/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Director Stepping Down at Clark Art Institute.