AUSTIN, Tex. — From intimate indies to blockbuster debuts, this year’s South by Southwest film festival was again a place for discoveries.The festival has long served studios as a starting point for their comedies, using enthusiastic fans as a barometer of how they might play in wide release. So it’s no surprise that the Amy Schumer-starring “Trainwreck” was wildly embraced, or that the action comedy “Spy,” with Melissa McCarthy, drew big laughs. Universal Pictures even offered a surprise screening of “Furious 7” to audiences, who let out raucous cheers during its biggest and most complicated action-set pieces.Reports from the South by Southwest conference and festival in Austin.Smaller films in varying genres were  also percolating, and were frequently the answer to the question, “What should I see?”  One such film was “The Invitation,” from the director Karyn Kusama (“Jennifer’s Body,” “Girlfight”). This psychological drama involves a man who is invited to a dinner party by his ex and her new husband. At the party, he fears his ex has a sinister agenda. Variety called the film “a teasingly effective thriller.”Another much-talked-about title was Benjamin Dickinson’s futuristic Brooklyn comedy “Creative Control.” Mr. Dickinson, whose previous film, “First Winter,” made its debut at Tribeca in 2012, stars in his latest, as an advertising executive handling the marketing for a Google Glass-type device. Audiences and critics were impressed by the low-budget but effective visual effects, and  stark black-and-white camerawork. It won  special jury recognition for visual excellence.The comedy “Night Owls,” from Charles Hood, received strong notices for its winning approach to a familiar romantic comedy setup. The film is mostly a two-hander, with Adam Pally and Rosa Salazar as two people set for a one-night stand when the night doesn’t go as expected. Some likened it to “The Apartment,” others to “Before Sunrise,” and the festival added an additional screening because of the good word.And the drama “Krisha,” from the writer and director Trey Edward Shults, won over critics and the festival jury, taking the grand prize for narrative feature. The director cast his aunt (Krisha Fairchild) in the lead role in this portrait of an alcoholic and the rifts she creates in her family.Among documentaries, musical subjects generated much goodwill. The rousing “Mavis!” from Jessica Edwards looks at the six-decade career of the gospel singer Mavis Staples. Taking in the Sunday-morning screening was akin to going to church, as viewers applauded some of the filmed performances, nodded their heads to the music and rose for a standing ovation at the end. Ms. Staples was on hand for a Q. and A. and sang, as well.“All Things Must Pass,” the first documentary feature from the actor Colin Hanks, also played to enthusiasm. The film tracks the rise and fall of the Tower Records chain,  interviewing former employees and musicians alike. The Playlist at Indiewire called the film an “insightful tribute to the retailer.”Other talked-about nonfiction films included “Peace Officer,” a timely look at the rising militarization of American police forces, directed by Scott Christopherson and Brad Barber. It won the grand jury prize in the documentary competition. Also receiving accolades was “Tab Hunter Confidential,” from Jeffrey Schwarz (“I Am Divine”), about the 1950s heartthrob who was  secretly gay.Some  films received relatively high-profile distribution deals. They included Hannah Fidell’s “6 Years” and J. Davis’s “Manson Family Vacation,” both picked up by Netflix; and Alex Gibney’s “Steve Jobs: The Man in the Machine,” picked up by Magnolia and CNN Films.