Times critics share what they’ve been listening to lately.TCHAIKOVSKY: ‘Iolanta’
Anna Netrebko, Sergey Skorokhodov, Alexey Markov and other singers; Slovenian Philharmonic Orchestra, Emmanuel Villaume, conductor
(Deutsche Grammophon 479 3969; two CDs)
Just in time for the Metropolitan Opera’s new production of Tchaikovsky’s final opera, “Iolanta,” Deutsche Grammophon has released a winning live 2012 recording from the Philharmonie Essen in Germany featuring Anna Netrebko, the star of the Met’s production, in the title role. This tender, rich one-act fairy-tale opera tells of a young princess who has been raised by her overprotective father so that she does not realize she is blind, though something about her constricted world seems off to her. Ms. Netrebko brings an engrossing combination of aching vulnerability and vocal charisma to Iolanta. The whole cast is excellent. Best of all may be the glowing, warm playing that the conductor Emmanuel Villaume draws from the Slovenian Philharmonic Orchestra. (Anthony Tommasini)AURORA ORCHESTRA: ‘Road Trip’
Sam Amidon, Dawn Landes, voices; Nicholas Collon, conductor
(Warner, 0825646327911)
Nicholas Collon and the Aurora Orchestra have been innovative, energetic mainstays of the London scene since 2005, but they’re almost unknown in the United States. This wonderful release, their first for Warner, should change that, not least because of its American theme. I haven’t heard an album that’s so cohesive a listening experience as this in ages, with the hyperactivity of John Adams’s “Chamber Symphony” balanced by Nico Muhly’s arrangements of ballads, and Ives’s “The Housatonic at Stockbridge” balmed by the chamber version of Copland’s ecstatic “Appalachian Spring.” (David Allen)HANDEL: ‘Music for Queen Caroline’
Tim Mead, Sean Clayton, Lisandro Abadie, singers; Les Arts Florissants; William Christie, conductor
(Éditions Arts Florissants, AF 004)
Queen Caroline, King George II’s wife and patron of the arts, was among Handel’s most important supporters. “Giulio Cesare” was dedicated to her, and Handel reserved some of his finest music in celebration of her life. Three such pieces, suavely played with typical finesse and dramatic sense, make up this luxuriously presented recording. A “Te Deum” and one of the Coronation Anthems, “The King shall rejoice,” are festive and brilliant, but Caroline’s funeral anthem, “The ways of Zion do mourn,” is exquisite, somber, burning with sadness. (Allen)LANGGAARD: Symphony No. 1; ‘Fra Dybet’
Danish National Radio Symphony Orchestra and Choir; Leif Segerstam, conductor
(Chandos, CHAN 9249)
There’s a Langgaard revival going on. The Danish composer was forgotten during his lifetime — blame Nielsen — but that’s now being put right. A pastoral debuted by Max Fielder and the Berlin Philharmonic in 1913, when the composer was just 19, the massive First Symphony blends searching lyricism with chunks seemingly ripped from Tchaikovsky, Richard Strauss and Bruckner. In a 1993 recording, the composer-conductor Leif Segerstam very nearly manages to make this glorious mess feel coherent. (Allen)SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
Tracks from the recordings discussed this week. (Spotify users can also find it here.)