AUSTIN, Tex. — As scruffy, if striving, bands descended here for the annual South by Southwest Music conference on Wednesday, a twisted fairy-tale version of the music business was playing out simultaneously on the season finale of  “Empire,” the hit TV show on Fox. Reports from the South by Southwest conference and festival in Austin.And while the divide between the real and fictional worlds may have seemed irreconcilable – hustling musicians looking for any opportunity versus an I.P.O. for the Empire record label —  there was one man in Austin who could claim citizenship in both. Slide Show: Scenes from SXSWMalcolm Spellman, a writer and co-producer on “Empire,” arrived in Austin  as the co-owner of Blackball Universe, a tiny record label, and manager of Xavier Dphrepaulezz, a rising but obscure blues rock singer known as Fantastic Negrito. “We don’t really know what we’re doing in the music industry,” said Mr. Spellman over deluxe hot dogs on 4th Street in downtown Austin as “Empire” played on a flat-screen overhead. “I did not get hired on the show because of any expertise in the business.”His foray into music started only about six months before he was hired on “Empire,” but the convergence has come in handy in the writer’s room. “It helps as we’re having discussions about the show to throw an anecdote about the label,” Mr. Spellman, 45, said. “I bring it to the room all the time.”And it works both ways. When producers and executives, like Rick Rubin, come in as advisers on “Empire,” Mr. Spellman said, “I can apply what I learn to Negrito. It’s very symbiotic.”Although the show’s depiction of the music industry can be fantastical when it serves the plot, he added, “Anything we’re doing with the label, the Lyon family is also doing, just on a bigger scale.”“Oh, this is about to be big,” Mr. Spellman warned, shifting his attention to the television before a major character’s death. Amorality on that scale may be overblown, but the essence of corruption on “Empire” rings true, he said: “Maybe 90 percent of people in the music business are awful.”Dealing with them both on screen and at, say, South by Southwest, has been “surreal,” Mr. Spellman said. And the other “Empire” writers “understand the irony” of his side hustle, which has managed to suck a lot of his earnings from “Empire,” Mr. Spellman said.But the show has also opened doors in music. “With that ‘Empire’ producer credit, everybody takes my call now,” he said. And it may help Fantastic Negrito. “The show wants to have him on,” Mr. Spellman said. “We just have to figure out how to make it work.”SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
This playlist features songs by artists performing at South by Southwest. It will grow throughout the week. Spotify users can also find it here.
