Season 3, Episode 8: ‘Divestment’Товарищи, вы верите, что единый народ может изменить мир?
(Comrades, do you believe that united, people can change the world?)What is worse than a suitcase? Or amateur dental work?Watching a “necklacing,” which involves ringing the victim’s neck with a rubber tire, dousing him with a can of gasoline and setting him aflame. Excruciating. Horrible. So stomach-turningly vivid was the footage of the burning man that you could almost smell the searing flesh and singeing hair. The screams were nearly unendurable.Is this way of eliminating an enemy easier to swallow because the victim is an evil racist who has killed before and plans to kill again? Eugene Venter, a high-ranking South African intelligence officer, was the man who got necklaced. His job? To keep the nonwhite majority in South Africa under the crushing pressure of apartheid.He came to the United States with the intention of setting off a bomb at George Washington University, an explosive powerful enough to cause multiple deaths. According to his plan, the explosion would be blamed on the anti-apartheid student movement. His tool in the plot was his young student agent, Todd, the anti-Hans, who kept the bomb in his dorm room.Elizabeth had planned to dispatch him with a gun, but Reuben Ncgobo, the South African liberation fighter, said, “No, no, Mama.” He said his people had their own way of doing things, and he did it. He had overwhelming personal and political reasons for revenge.Elizabeth and Philip, still in their very hip leathery disguises, looked a little ill as they watched. But was Ncgobo’s action any crueler than some of the deaths they’ve been responsible for?(Before he was consumed by the fire, Venter, between screamed invectives, tells Ncgobo that the Communists care nothing for the anti-apartheid struggle; they only want the gold, the diamonds, the land.)Ah, this week’s episode was just the kind we love. It’s shocking, it asks big questions, it brings back all our favorite characters — some under tremendous stress — and it ties up a few loose ends while presenting some knotty new problems.Line of the week, at the Rezidentura.Arkady recounts to Oleg the story of a phone call, on a secure line, from Oleg’s father, questioning why Arkady has not shipped his son back to Moscow as Papa Igor ordered.With his tough-guy Russian assurance, Arkady shrugs off the possibility that he will have to pay for defying the order. “He’s the minister of railways,” Oleg reminds him.“So … next time I’m home I won’t be able to ride the train?” Arkady says.The return of Anton Baklanov. We knew Nina would get back in the game. Her assignment, should she decide to accept it, is to “get inside the head of” (and we all know what that’s a euphemism for) the defector the Soviets abducted to see whether he is really working hard enough at his old job.If she succeeds, she will go free, or so she is told.In her new digs, which are either a prison suite or a Soviet hotel (it’s hard to ascertain which), she has some of the comforts of home, included some nasty looking pantyhose. But soon she is out of her tracksuit and into her career wear.She tries to serve Baklanov some tea as he works. He is suspicious, of course, when she says she is there to help him.“Are you a scientist?” he asks.
“Nyet,” she says.
“Then you are of no use to me.”Seeking mercy from Gabriel.When Elizabeth goes to Gabriel to ask a favor, is she engineering some kind of trade involving Paige and Mischa? If Gabriel arranges for Philip’s son Mischa to be spared from combat in Afghanistan, Philip will be indebted, but will he be so relieved that in exchange he will happily turn over Paige for spy training?Alpha-Bits for dinner.Paige cooks nutritious eggs for Henry, but she subsists on her reading and some sugar-laden cereal. After some time with the old microfiche (hmm, just a small step to microfilm dots), she has some questions about whether Gregory Thomas was a good guy or a bad guy. Just as Elizabeth, back in Mom mode, once again tries to nudge Paige over the blurred line of the law so she can understand that violating it for the right reasons can be noble, Paige draws back, saying, “We can’t just go rob banks and things.”So, which way is she leaning today?Martha speaks.She acquits herself beautifully in the interrogation by Walter Taffet, the investigator looking into the bug in Agent Gaad’s office. And she speaks quite forcefully to “Clark.” She thought he was the one keeping an eye on Gaad for possible wrongdoing. In a masterly scene, she pours out her heart and gains sympathy that she had largely managed to avoid since Season 1. “Clark” responds in kind with a declaration of love so tender and desperate and impassioned that we begin to believe he really was carried away by her.And in the end, they are in bed together, divested of their clothes. Finis.Comments on the comments.Good point, MTF Tobin, about the comforts of the Rezidentura. Elizabeth still seems to hold onto the idealism, if that’s what it is, of her youth when she unquestioningly continues to see the Soviet system as successful and morally superior. Does she really believe the society back home is egalitarian?WigSpy! Great idea, David Israels. The domain name seems to be available. Snap it up! But not any old wig will do.And Cynthia, you were so right. It was Dee Dee Ramone whom Philip resembled.Товарищи, иногда мы должны отказаться даже от тех вещей, которые нам дороги.
(Comrades, sometimes we have to discard even those things that are valuable to us.)