AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck7 P.M. (HBO) ADMISSION (2013) Tina Fey portrays Portia Nathan, an admissions officer at Princeton who seems to take a special kind of glee in controlling the fate of students applying to the university. She also has a goal of her own: to succeed the retiring dean of admissions (Wallace Shawn) and beat out her office rival (Gloria Reuben) while reclaiming Princeton’s place at the top of the U.S. News & World Report rankings. But just as her smug English-professor boyfriend (Michael Sheen) dumps her for an aggressive Virginia Woolf scholar (Sonya Walger), a fellow Dartmouth alum (Paul Rudd) comes along with an unusual student (Nat Wolff) he wants Portia to consider. “How could anyone make light of the brutal, capricious system by which our young people are judged and sorted?” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times about this comedy from Paul Weitz, adapted from the novel by Jean Hanff Korelitz. “I must confess that I don’t know whether to be relieved or disappointed that ‘Admission,’ which had the potential to be a sharp, satirical jab at the soft belly of middle-class anxiety, chose instead to be a warm and wacky fable of wish fulfillment.”7 P.M. (SNY) TOMMY JOHN EFFECT: HARVEY’S ROAD TO RECOVERY This special looks at the rehabilitation of Matt Harvey, the Mets pitcher who underwent Tommy John surgery in October 2013, as he returns to the mound.8 P.M. (NBC) ROBERT DURST: INSIDE THE LONG, STRANGE TRIP In this “Dateline NBC” special, Dennis Murphy examines the murder charge against Mr. Durst, the New York real estate heir, through interviews with detectives, investigators and friends of Susan Berman, whom he is accused of shooting in December 2000.10 P.M. (ABC) AMERICAN CRIME A month after the arraignment of the accused in the death of Matt Skokie, Carter (Elvis Nolasco) is offered help by his sister (Regina King), who disapproves of his relationship with Aubry (Caitlin Gerard); Alonzo (Benito Martinez) questions whether he was a good father to Tony (Johnny Ortiz); and Hector (Richard Cabral) is recognized by a fellow gang member. Barb (Felicity Huffman), meanwhile, works with the head (Lily Taylor) of a victims’ rights group to have her son’s murder classified as a hate crime.10 P.M. (USA) DIG After his pursuit of Yussef Khalid (Omar Metwally) hits a wall at the United States Consulate, Peter (Jason Isaacs) teams with Golan (Ori Pfeffer) to follow clues hidden in the journal of Emma (Alison Sudol) and gets close to discovering a global conspiracy. Debbie (Lauren Ambrose) allows Josh (Zen McGrath) to venture beyond the compound walls. And Avram (Guy Selenik) and his red heifer make a potentially fatal detour on their journey.10 P.M. (NBC) THE SLAP Aisha (Thandie Newton) and Hector (Peter Sarsgaard) reveal their secrets on a romantic getaway.10:30 P.M. (Showtime 2) THE PERKS OF BEING A WALLFLOWER (2012) Charlie (Logan Lerman), a melancholic teenager in 1991, has his prayer of making it through a new school year answered when he is befriended by the nonconformists Patrick (Ezra Miller); his stepsister, Sam (Emma Watson); and the sexually charged Mary Elizabeth (Mae Whitman) in Stephen Chbosky’s adaptation of his own young-adult novel. “Charlie experiences what almost every teenage hero does in an American movie about nominal outsiders,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. “He finds his tribe and then himself.”What’s Streaming Now MASTERS OF THEIR CRAFT SundanceNow Doc Club presents a collection of documentaries about artistic expression. The lineup includes “Eames: The Architect and the Painter” (2011), Jason Cohn and Bill Jersey’s exploration of the relationship between Charles Eames and his wife, Ray Eames; “Pina” (2011), Wim Wenders’s Oscar-nominated study of the modern-dance choreographer Pina Bausch; and Brad Bernstein’s “Far Out Isn’t Far Enough: The Tomi Ungerer Story” (2012), which chronicles 70 years in the career of this children’s book author and illustrator also known for his ad campaigns and erotic drawings. (An exhibition of Mr. Ungerer’s work continues through Sunday at the Drawing Center in Manhattan.) (docclub.com)Advertisement