AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Jon CaramanicaA family-run hip-hop label is under siege: First there are the competitors, who are stealing the label’s artists; then there are the artists themselves, who are unreliable and prideful; and finally, there’s the internal strife between brothers. Sound familiar? Twelve years before the feisty Lyon clan came to television on Fox’s megahit “Empire,” there was the Rhames family on “Platinum,” the slick, ambitious drama that ran on UPN for one six-episode season in the spring of 2003 and has been all but lost to time. The germ of “Platinum” came from, of all places, Francis Ford Coppola, who called up John Ridley, then a writer with TV credits including “Martin” and “The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air,” and said that his daughter, Sofia, was interested in doing a TV show set in the world of hip-hop. (Mr. Coppola received an executive producer credit on “Platinum.”) Mr. Ridley and Ms. Coppola created the show together: this, before Ms. Coppola was an Academy Award-winning screenwriter and much-lauded director, and long before Mr. Ridley won his own Oscar for writing “12 Years a Slave.” The core of the show was the medium-size independent record label named Sweetback Entertainment, founded and run by the half-brothers Jackson Rhames (Jason George), a smooth businessman, and Grady Rhames (an earthy Sticky Fingaz), a streetwise hustler. The plotlines were hilarious and often flavored with details pulled from the real-life hip-hop industry. Sweetback’s biggest act was a white rapper, VersIs (Vishiss), with a gun problem. Part Eminem, part 50 Cent, VersIs liked to shoot people; when things came full circle and he was on the receiving end of the bullets, he screamed, “I gotta know how many times I got shot!” When the rival label head Max Colt (a stern, fierce N’Bushe Wright) was being blackmailed by some goonish associates of her former partner, she grabbed a wine bottle off her desk and beat one of them with it (echoing Puff Daddy’s Champagne bottle incident). And when a journalist threatened to expose the financial problems at Sweetback, some of Grady’s buddies visited him to offer some friendly discouragement; one of them dangled him off a balcony, à la Suge Knight, then dropped him.“Platinum” was originally called “Empire,” Mr. Ridley said in a recent interview, but there was an issue in securing the rights to the name. It was bought by HBO, but after a few passes at the script, a pilot was never filmed. Mr. Ridley and Ms. Coppola took the show to broadcast networks, only to be met largely with silence: “I think that was a challenge to bring it to the networks, that it was a black show and black people, but we were not all one type,” Mr. Ridley said. Eventually UPN bit, despite the fact that “Platinum” was different from its usual half-hour comedy fare. Though the show was set in New York, it was filmed in Toronto, in the harsh winter of 2003. By then, Ms. Coppola had left for Tokyo to work on “Lost in Translation,” leaving Mr. Ridley in the driver’s seat. “I found myself alone in Toronto trying to put this TV show together,” he recalled. “I really wanted to shoot little films; I did not want to shoot traditional television.” And indeed, for off-brand network drama in 2003, “Platinum” was glossy and often beautifully shot. Up against UPN’s comedy slate, it looked like it was imported from a different network. “UPN stepped off a ledge and did something that wasn’t being done at that time,” Sticky Fingaz recalled in an interview. And indeed, “Platinum” was a rare thing — an hour-length network drama revolving around black characters who came from a range of socio-economic and cultural backgrounds. As the cast member with the closest ties to the hip-hop industry, Sticky Fingaz says he helped out with the verisimilitude, pitching in on “some dialogue, maybe some wardrobe choices.” More than being a mostly faithful rendering of the inner workings of a hip-hop label, “Platinum” also did an admirable job in its treatment of women. Many of its strong characters were female — especially Max, and a rising female artist, Lady Bryce (Kia Goodwin), trapped in a toxic, codependent marriage — and several story lines took hip-hop’s traditional masculinity to task. In one episode, label executives found an old videotape that depicted one of its artists seeming to rape a young woman, and chose to turn it over to authorities. In another, MC Lyte played an aging star and demanding diva who confronted Jackson, taking him to task for favoring his younger artists while trying to nudge her out of the way. For all of its charms, though, “Platinum” didn’t connect with viewers. Ratings were low and costs were high — it was canceled. “It hurt so painfully when the show did not get picked up,” Mr. Ridley said. “Platinum” was not released on DVD and has never been available on any streaming service — “one of the ongoing pains of my life,” Mr. Ridley said, only half-joking. A representative for CBS Television Distribution, which owns the rights to the show, declined to expand on whether it would be made available digitally. Mr. Ridley thinks that the cost of music rights might be prohibitive — often licenses were purchased for the broadcast of an episode but not future distribution. Several things have changed in the decade since “Platinum” had its premiere: Hip-hop is more firmly a part of the fabric of American popular culture, premium-cable values are starting to seep into network TV, and years of VH1’s “Love & Hip-Hop” franchise, among other reality shows that use hip-hop as a milieu, have primed the audience. Because of those shifts, a show like “Empire” can thrive, though the ghost of “Platinum” hovers lightly over it. “If it had been two years after we’d done ‘Platinum,’ I would probably take no joy in its success,” said Mr. Ridley, whose show “American Crime” is now in its first season on ABC. “But somebody figured out a way to do it. For me, anything that proves that there’s an audience for people of color in complicated storytelling is great.” Sticky Fingaz put it more simply: “They biting!”Advertisement