AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — The art collection and Hollywood Hills mansion that for decades were a physical representation of the Goldwyn dynasty’s staying power in film are being sold following the death of Samuel Goldwyn Jr.The collection, estimated to be worth $25 million to $30 million, will be auctioned across nine sales by Sotheby’s in New York. The two most valuable paintings — a 1948 Picasso portrait and 1946 Matisse still life, both bought by the Goldwyns soon after they were painted — will come up for bids on May 5 in Sotheby’s Impressionist and Modern art evening sale.Sotheby’s will sell 25 works in total, including paintings by David Hockney, Milton Avery and Diego Rivera. The family was advised by a friend, Tobias Meyer, who left Sotheby’s in 2013 after a long stint as its chief auctioneer.The Georgian mansion in which they were hung is also for sale. Built in 1934 by Samuel Goldwyn Sr. — the G in M.G.M. and a producer of films like “Wuthering Heights” and “The Best Years of Our Lives” — the house became the home of Mr. Goldwyn Jr., who died in January at 88 after a career as an art house film producer. The asking price is $39 million.A third generation is still making a mark. John Goldwyn is a producer and a former Paramount executive, and Tony Goldwyn is a star of ABC’s “Scandal.”But the sale of the family treasures nonetheless represents the end of an era. “For the stars and moguls who came to dinner, they telegraphed stability,” John Goldwyn said. “We’ve survived, we’re not going away, we’re part of a permanent government.”Some historians have traced the start of the art collection to a box-office cold spurt by Samuel Goldwyn Sr. Worried that he had fallen out of touch with postwar audiences, he supposedly turned to art for inspiration. But the person driving the collecting may actually have been his wife, Frances Goldwyn.“She would present it to the outside world as his eye, but the archives show that she was more involved,” said Catherine Goldwyn, who is a sister of Tony and John Goldwyn’s.Some pieces were sold over the years — a notable Chagall in particular — but the Picasso and Matisse never budged after their purchase, which “makes them particularly desirable in the marketplace,” said Simon Shaw, Sotheby’s co-head of Impressionist and Modern art. (The Goldwyns bought the brightly colored Matisse, “Anémones et Grenades,” in 1948 for $13,500, or about $131,000 in today’s money. A low estimate of its current value is $5 million. The Picasso is valued at $12 million or more.)“To me, these film pioneers and these artists had the same spirit and energy,” Mr. Shaw said. “The art had to be bold, I suppose, to hold its own in that house.”Advertisement