By ALASTAIR MACAULAYMARCH 18, 2015
New York has seen the sensational Russian ballerina Natalia Osipova in a wide range of ballets — but, curiously, never in the illustrious double role of Odette-Odile in “Swan Lake.” This now changes, but on screen, not onstage. Now in her second season as a principal of the Royal Ballet in London, she recently danced the role three times at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden; the last of these, performed on Tuesday, is to be streamed to American cinemas in HD, starting tonight in East Coast theaters. (West Coast streamings occur later this month.) I saw the first, on Feb. 21, during a trip to London.Ms. Osipova was riveting throughout. Her no-holds-barred way (here, as with every role) shows that she’s still an incomplete but growing artist; but her energy and concentration ensure that you can’t take your eyes off her. It’s fascinating that, though she’s made her name as a whiz-kid virtuoso, she found fewer rewards in the bravura of the antiheroine Odile on this occasion — whereas as Odette, the Swan Queen, she made a powerful impression.Though other companies establish Odette’s heroic grandeur and lyrical phrasing, no troupe matches the Royal’s long tradition of showing Odette as a creature of complex poignancy; she acquires a narrative far more detailed than the one printed in the scenario. It’s this aspect that Ms. Osipova, ardent but vulnerable, embraced.A number of other Russian ballerinas, even when appearing with the Royal, have avoided mime in “Swan Lake.” Yet Ms. Osipova immediately demonstrated Odette’s plight with sweeping and incisive mime that had all her characteristic intensity.AdvertisementIn the lakeside dances, she never let narrative or psychological tension drop. Each phrase revealed a different aspect of hope, doubt, tenderness, diffidence, resolution. One stylistic misjudgment came in some of the arched “swan” positions she took with Prince Siegfried’s support; instead of the swan’s heroic lines, Ms. Osipova often employed softer arm contours that belonged to some different ballet.AdvertisementAs Odile, she was both minx and tornado. While she played most of the role with impressive seriousness, she showed none of this seductress’s grand glamour. She also employed a largely Soviet version of the choreography, large, flashy, but without the small glittering steps that give it dimension. The result is relentless, lacking the contrasts of scale and amplitude of line that characterize Marius Petipa’s original choreography. Even so, she’s a force of nature; in the fouetté turns, as well as in the multiple pirouettes of her solo variation, her sheer velocity, even violence, had something of the demonic.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Her Prince Siegfried was Matthew Golding, who joined the Royal Ballet at much the same time she did. He would have Brad Pitt looks but for two things: He has what have been called bedroom eyes (narrow, never remotely showing their whites to the audience) and, when demonstrating nobility, he has a nervous habit of hoisting his jaw upward (as if to look haughty). Even so, he already has far more stage presence than in “The Sleeping Beauty” a year ago; and his dancing now demonstrates real brilliance and prowess.In several crucial respects, this “Swan Lake” (though this is to be its farewell season) is a yardstick for others, and not just in the large degree to which it is faithful to the records of the 1895 St. Petersburg production choreographed by Petipa and Lev Ivanov. The extent of mime in both lakeside scenes and the contributions of child-swans in the first one (at two points ringing Odette’s feet like supplicants) make “Swan Lake” far more textured; the world of the swan-maidens becomes a layered society of mutual supportiveness and complex responsibility. More vital is the way the company makes that choreography suspenseful, musical and dramatically serious.Yolanda Sonnabend’s sets and costumes make what many “Swan Lake” purists, myself included, consider a mistake in placing the ballet in late-19th-century Russia. The mythic dimension of Arthurian chivalry is lost. Since the staging has had remarkable longevity, they have also encouraged many people to think “Swan Lake” occurs in a relatively recent historical era; a number of lesser productions have followed its lead in this respect.This modern-history version of “Swan Lake” is redeemed by the best Royal Ballet actors. Elizabeth McGorian as the Prince’s mother gives one of the most remarkable mime performances in world ballet: She’s no imposing gorgon but a poised woman of exceptional dignity and subtle emotion. The way she distinguishes between public and private gestures is beautiful — we know when she is speaking intimately to her son, when she is addressing the court, and when she cannot help her feelings becoming evident outside her immediate circle. The whole world of the ballet becomes more real when she is onstage.The Royal Ballet’s “Swan Lake” will have staggered screenings in the United States. Times and movie theaters are at roh.org.uk/cinema. A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Force of Nature in a Double Role in ‘Swan Lake’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.