By ALASTAIR MACAULAYMARCH 18, 2015
Among the endlessly interesting aspects of the performing arts is the matter of physical projection. Why is it that this dancer (or singer or actor) stands and moves in a way that doesn’t read beyond a few rows of the auditorium, whereas another seems to effortlessly exude presence and legibility fit for a stadium? In dance, the difference is often more striking among companies.This is likely to become a recurrent issue now that Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance, currently in residence at the David H. Koch Theater, has become a hybrid in which non-Taylor modern companies make guest appearances. Much modern dance was never meant for large theaters; although I admired the way in which the Martha Graham Dance Company registered in opera houses in the 1970s, Graham dancers from the 1930s argued that much had been lost and perverted to make this larger scale possible. In truth, the scale of the Koch Theater challenges even the Taylor dancers to their utmost; it’s altogether less congenial to some others.On Tuesday, when the Taylor Dance Company (the old name applies to just its dancers) shared its program with Shen Wei Dance Arts, the contrast seemed immense. Mr. Shen’s dancers were skilled, committed, well rehearsed; but the capacious space of the Koch dwarves them. You can see the details of their movement from far back in the auditorium but not feel them. By contrast, the Taylor dancers registered as giants. The difference has partly to do with physical style (the Taylor idiom is more striking in muscular force, physical rigor, linear outline), partly to do with contrasts of dynamics and scale.The Shen dancers performed his “Rite of Spring” (2003), set to Fazil Say’s recording of the four-hand piano version of Stravinsky’s score. This is a non-narrative, carefully structured ensemble version of the “Rite” — the Chosen Maiden’s dance becomes a study in the equal distribution of labor among the 16 dancers — set on a patterned floor-cloth of Mr. Shen’s design (its shapes evoke some of the drawings in Nijinsky’s diaries). We see individuals, the full group, subgroups, sometimes three units moving differently but simultaneously; we see changing geometries, with dancers sometimes waiting on the peripheries to enter the main stage area.I report — and regret — that I missed this performance’s first five minutes. Though there were many cheers at the end, I can’t help but feel that the Koch is twice the right size for it. Its colors are muted; its dynamics and internal contrasts are limited.AdvertisementOn Tuesday, when the Taylor dancers followed it with “The Word” (1998), they blew it away. The sculptural shapes and groupings, punching rhythms, and controlled violence of this Taylor piece, set to an original orchestral score by David Israel, are remarkable. What it says or implies is mightily strange: Groups of men and women, dressed like children in one school uniform, are inflamed — by, it would seem, the inspiration of a single woman (Parisa Khobdeh), whom they seem never to see but who passes through them.She is in body tights, with colored nipples, that make her look naked; her hair is loose and she moves melodramatically, like a licentious fury. Is she the embodiment of sin? Is she the word of God? Is she a force of evil masquerading as divine tidings? What’s unsettling is that she doesn’t turn these followers to sin but to a more intense and equally regimented form of orthodoxy.AdvertisementThe performance ended with an equally vehement account of Mr. Taylor’s “Promethean Fire” (2002) — set to Bach music orchestrated by Leopold Stokowski. This, too, is choreography whose shapes, meters and energy flood the auditorium on a heroic scale. We see patterns, patterns, patterns; but they hit us like drama, and the male-female duet in the center (Ms. Khobdeh and James Samson) hits us as drama of another, personally impassioned, even desperate, kind. The Orchestra of St Luke’s, after some off-color performances last week, was in brilliant form for both these Taylor works, with Donald York conducting. The potent alchemy of dance with live music was another factor in making both works project throughout the Koch.“Rite of Spring” and “Promethean Fire” are in repertory to March 28; “The Word” to Saturday, at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; davidhkochtheater.com. A version of this review appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Watch This Space: It Shapes the Show.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.