By BRIAN SEIBERTMARCH 18, 2015
Across a foggy stage, illuminated from the sides, dancers run past like extras in a disaster movie, anxiously looking in every direction. This is the start of a work called “Breakthrough,” but if the dancers or their audiences are searching for an artistic one, they will search in vain.Instead, this piece, the newest on the Ailey II program that opened at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday, is just another example of the low level of choreography often foisted upon the spirited, highly skilled dancers of this junior company. What the choreographer, Manuel Vignoulle, seems to intend to break through are stultifying social conventions — the dancers act like zombies — but the work is itself mired in stultifying dance conventions: spasms on the beat as if from electrocution, running in place.Where “Breakthrough” is novel is in its use of stretchy shirts. Dancers identified in the program as “outsiders” periodically pull their shirts up over their faces. Later, when a woman can’t keep pace with the racing pack, a man stretches his shirt over both of their heads. They stay connected like that through an acrobatic duet that includes her balancing upside down and fully extended on his shoulders — an effect more silly than haunting, but one I’ve never seen before.Dwight Rhoden’s “Hissy Fits” (2006) isn’t so laughably bad. It’s merely empty, and at least it’s accurately titled. The women exhibit “attitude,” slapping and stepping on the men, who sometimes persuade them with hugs into letting down their guard. Yet women and men alike are trapped within the flashy shell of the choreography. The score samples various Bach pieces, and Mr. Rhoden’s blunt responses restore “baroque” as a term of disparagement.On this program, as in previous Ailey II shows, the inoffensiveness of Amy Hall Gardner’s “Virtues” (2012) feels virtuous by comparison. The music, by Karl Jenkins, sounds like a cross between “The Lion King” and “Mamma Mia!,” but it’s peppy, and Ms. Gardner’s shoulder-swiveling struts and celebratory finale allow the dancers some dignity. Among those dancers, as usual, are performers it is easy to imagine moving up into the main Ailey troupe. Shay Bland and Aubree Brown are standouts; the statuesque Annellyse Munroe glows with promise.It used to be that learning how to enliven shoddy choreography was an essential skill for an Ailey dancer, but that has become less true under the recent direction of Robert Battle. Troy Powell, who took over Ailey II in 2012, might also try giving his dancers something better.Ailey II continues through Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-242-0800, joyce.org.A version of this review appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Acrobatic Tussles Between the Sexes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.