By LORNE MANLYMARCH 18, 2015
After a rocky start, the luxury condominiums at One Museum Mile, the 19-story, Robert A. M. Stern-designed tower anchoring the northeast corner of Central Park, are all occupied now.But six years after its projected opening, the building’s most prominent space, the new home for the Africa Center, remains little more than bare concrete walls, and the institution’s blueprint for the future also remains unfinished.To remedy this, the center has hired an Africa expert, Michelle D. Gavin, to lead an organization that has been transformed by mission overhauls and stymied by fund-raising obstacles.Ms. Gavin, the new managing director, served as the United States ambassador to Botswana from 2011 to 2014 and previously worked as a special assistant to President Obama and senior director for Africa on the National Security Council.AdvertisementThe dexterity and discretion honed in such roles were on display when she was asked in an interview when the center, whose launch has been postponed six times, might finally open. At this point, she said, the timing is unclear.Advertisement“The reason I don’t want to pluck dates from the calendar goes back to this: I don’t want to make promises I can’t keep,” she said. “That’s the first way to lose credibility, especially when you’re new.”But the tasks ahead seem likely to tax even Ms. Gavin’s considerable diplomatic skills.The Africa Center, whose last projected construction budget neared $100 million, must raise a considerable amount in a competitive environment for cultural institutions, in a city in which costs have escalated since the institution last put its construction work out for bid.Ms. Gavin must also flesh out the new vision for what was created more than 30 years ago as the Museum for African Art and is now remaking itself as a hybrid organization — part cultural outpost, part public policy institute and part international business forum.And she will have to accomplish this while repairing a frayed relationship with some leaders in the community who say the institution, once touted by the city as “the cultural gateway to Harlem,” has had little interaction with the neighborhood.“From a community point of view, it’s a broken promise, a dream deferred,” said State Senator Bill Perkins, whose Harlem district encompasses the Africa Center. Matthew S. Washington, chairman of Community Board 11, said he had yet to hear from anyone at the Africa Center about its vision. “An email here, an email there, a phone call — it’s not a lot to ask,” he said.Last year, for reasons of efficiency, the center reduced its board of trustees to five members from 25, leaving none from the surrounding neighborhood or the world of African art.Ms. Gavin said she is setting off on a listening tour to hear such concerns and to help her fine-tune and weave together the component parts of the institution’s mission, which resembles, in part, that of the Asia Society.Advertisement“Let’s stress test our ideas, bounce them off others, including those who are skeptical,” she said.Her appointment is the latest twist in the life of the museum. The brainchild of the art historian and curator Susan Mullin Vogel, it opened in 1984 as the Museum for African Art in two Upper East Side townhouses, then later relocated to SoHo and Long Island City, Queens. Though the museum has organized a number of critically acclaimed traveling shows over the years, it currently is not presenting any exhibitions.In 1997, Elsie McCabe Thompson, a lawyer who had served as chief of staff for Mayor David Dinkins, assumed the presidency, and the ambitions grew. She began pushing for the museum to build a grand headquarters and eventually settled on a soaring space inside the proposed building at the northeast corner of Fifth Avenue and 110th Street.“A museum is very much an edifice, and you can’t attract a loyal and dedicated audience if you’re constantly on the move,” Ms. Thompson said.But she resigned in 2012, and financial realities intruded despite the commitment of more than $32 million in public funds. Unable to meet its $135 million construction budget, the center last year scaled back its design and said it hoped to raise the final $20 million needed to finish the project by the fall. But only $9.5 million was raised. Now, to help with fund-raising and strategy, the center has enlisted Pamela Puchalski, an urban planner, as a consultant. It has also named Fab 5 Freddy, an artist, filmmaker and hip-hop pioneer, to be chief creative consultant.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Gavin traces her interest in Africa to her days at Georgetown’s School of Foreign Service, during which she lived in Cameroon to help her pass a foreign-language proficiency test. It was 1994, a year of contrast on the continent — Nelson Mandela dancing to celebrate a new, apartheid-free South Africa even as some 800,000 people were slaughtered by ethnic Hutu extremists in Rwanda.“If you weren’t captivated by the stakes of what was happening in Africa in 1994, then you weren’t paying attention,” she said.Returning last spring from her service in Botswana, she had planned to take a year off.But she cut short her sabbatical after receiving an entreaty last fall from Hadeel Ibrahim, the co-chairwoman of the board alongside Chelsea Clinton (and the daughter of the Sudanese-born billionaire and philanthropist Mo Ibrahim.)“The big idea of the Africa Center,” Ms. Gavin said, “which is helping America better understand and engage with contemporary Africa, that is a really good reason to go to work every morning.”AdvertisementShe said American impressions of Africa are typically imprecise. “Either it’s the death, despair, disease narrative, where it’s all one undifferentiated mass of disaster,” she said. “Or else it’s the Africa rising narrative, which is equally undifferentiated, where everything is awesome.”In the first three to five years, she said, the center will focus on three subject areas: urbanization in Africa, managing diversity, and youth engagement and empowerment.Ms. Gavin said her experience running an embassy with about 350 employees taught her to recognize what she doesn’t know.“I’m not an African art expert,” she said. “I’m not going to pretend to be. We’re going to get the right people who are steeped in that expertise and have the curatorial skill to help realize the vision of the Center.”The institution’s collection consists of about 550 objects from Africa or the African diaspora, including a bronze Benin head, carved wood figures, and masks and paintings by the Sudanese artist Ibrahim El-Salahi.Ms. Thompson said she wishes her successor the best and is hopeful that the populist vision for the museum, symbolized by the soaring trapezoid-shaped windows looking out to Central Park, comes through when the Africa Center opens its doors.“The brilliant Robert A.M. Stern architecture literally opens its walls to the community,” she said. “All they need to do programmatically is invite them in.”The curiosity appears to exist.One blustery day in February, a visitor wandered into the lobby of the condominium to ask where he could find the entrance to the Africa Center.“Come back in a year: It should be open then,” a doorman told him. “Maybe.”A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Work (Still) in Progress.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.