By NEIL GENZLINGEROCT. 2, 2015
When last we saw Noah in “The Affair,” he was being read his rights, and the series, one of Showtime’s more refined dramas, felt as if it might need significant changes if it were going to continue. Sure enough, Season 2 opens with Noah in a prison jumpsuit and the tone more caustically comedic — “The Affair” Is the New “Orange Is the New Black.”Just kidding. But Season 2 really does incorporate a major change: Whereas the first round gave us the alternating perspectives of Noah (Dominic West) and his lover, Alison (Ruth Wilson), the first two episodes of the new season expand the viewpoints to four. Noah and Alison are still represented, but so are Helen (Maura Tierney), Noah’s wife back in Season 1, and Cole (Joshua Jackson), Alison’s husband then.The status of those two marriages is of course one of the things fans of this well-acted show will be eager to check up on. So is the status of the Noah-Alison relationship, which went through an on-again/off-again cycle so often in Season 1 that it was a bit hard to track.In any case, the change in structure certainly helps the series, which though one of TV’s more ambitious writing experiments was beginning to seem limited by its own gimmick. The more we learned about Alison and Noah, the less likable each became. She was a sympathetic character at first, unable to get past the loss of her child, but eventually was revealed to be manipulative as well. And he emerged as a self-indulgent clod with no concern for how his actions affected others.AdvertisementFrom the midway point of Season 1 on, Helen and Cole were considerably more interesting as characters than Alison and Noah. But although promoting them to the A list is good for the show, it’s bad for Helen and Cole. In this series, having your perspective featured is a gateway to poor decision-making. Certainly Helen, the most levelheaded character last season, seems to have made a questionable choice in the heavy-breathing opening moments of her segment in the season premiere.Season 2 may require some readjusting for fans who had become accustomed to Season 1’s quickening pace as it built the police-investigation story line to a cliffhanger conclusion that saw Noah arrested. The new season returns to the languid pace of the early part of Season 1.AdvertisementThat's an invitation to revisit the show’s biggest weakness, which is its glossy idle-rich view of affairs. Characters rarely have to punch a clock in this series. They’re prone to overly literate speechifying. Waterfront views are the norm, even Cole’s financially troubled extended family seems to live comfortably, children magically disappear whenever sexual urges need to be indulged, and there’s always a friend’s empty house available. True, the consequences of the affair that set the series in motion are substantial and never-ending, but it’s all coated in an idyllic sheen, like a promotional video for the Ashley Madison website.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: The Wronged Parties, Tumbling From Their Pedestals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.