AdvertisementSupported byBy the NumbersBy Stephen HeymanFor the past three years, Freemuse, a nonprofit organization based in Copenhagen, has systematically tracked violations of artistic freedom in about 50 countries around the world. This subject became especially prominent this year after the deadly attacks in Paris and Copenhagen, which targeted cartoonists.The group, which was founded in 2000 and now consults with the U.N.’s Economic and Social Council, is on the lookout for all types of activity meant to silence artists from state censorship to kidnapping, imprisonment and terrorist attacks. In a new report, the organization cataloged a total of 237 different incidents last year, up nearly 20 percent from 2013.That increase, said the group’s co-founder Ole Reitov, does not necessarily mean that the state of artistic freedom is worsening around the globe but that Freemuse is doing a better job of verifying individual violations. Freemuse only records incidents that are confirmed through a reliable source such as an attorney representing the artist, an artists’ rights organization like PEN International, or a reputable media outlet. Mr. Reitov said there were many more cases that were difficult to confirm because they might occur in lawless areas under the control of groups like the Islamic State, the Taliban or Boko Haram.“This is just the tip of the iceberg,” he added. “A lot of times these violations affect artists who are not really connected to the world.”Last year, the group reported three artists who were killed because of their work: Hashem Shaabani, an Arab-Iranian poet; the Thai poet and activist Mainueng K. Kunthee; and the Pashto singer Gulnaz.While Mr. Reitov cautioned against using his organization’s statistics to make generalizations about the global state of artistic freedom, he did say the numbers can reveal trends in certain countries. In Russia, for instance, six violations of artistic freedom were recorded in 2013, but last year the number shot up to 22 — an increase Mr. Reitov attributed in part to an ultra-nationalist climate connected to the war in Ukraine. Seven of these incidents were violent attacks on artists, including the beating in St. Petersburg of the composer Ilya Demutsky, whose new opera about pedophilia had been canceled because of death threats. Mr. Reitov said Freemuse tried to spread awareness of less publicized cases like Mr. Demutsky’s. “You have Ai Weiwei and Pussy Riot and then you have hundreds of others who are not well-known and have no connections,” Mr. Reitov said. Advertisement