By JANE L. LEVEREMARCH 18, 2015
While the Alice of Lewis Carroll’s “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland” was a fictional British character, she has touched the hearts of young and old worldwide, particularly in the United States.So it will come as no surprise that many of this year’s commemorations of the 150th anniversary of the novel’s 1865 publication are taking place in this country, also the headquarters of the thriving Lewis Carroll Society of North America.Exhibitions that are already underway include “Peanuts in Wonderland,” at the Charles M. Schulz Museum in Santa Rosa, Calif., through April 26, which displays Schulz’s parodies of the Carroll tale and of its illustrations by John Tenniel. A show running through mid-June at the Vassar College Archives and Special Collections Library features material from its children’s books collection.An exhibition through July 6 at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin features 200 items, including Salvador Dalí illustrations for a 1969 edition of “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland”; a restored 1933 paper filmstrip, called “Alice and the Mad Hatter”; and an area where children and the young at heart can enjoy a pretend tea party. Exhibitions are planned at the Houghton Library at Harvard, starting May 18, and at the Hornbake Library at the University of Maryland in September.AdvertisementMany of the main events will unfold in New York, where the Morgan Library & Museum will display Carroll’s original manuscript, on loan from the British Library, from June 26 through Oct. 11. The exhibition will include items related to Carroll’s young muse, Alice Liddell, including his hand-colored photograph of her; her writing case and purse; and Carroll’s diary entry of July 4, 1862, the day be began to compose the story on a boating excursion on the Thames with her. The show will include original drawings and hand-colored proofs of Tenniel illustrations.Lewis Carroll was the pseudonym of Charles Dodgson, a University of Oxford mathematician who wrote “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland” and its 1871 sequel, “Through the Looking-Glass and What Alice Found There” for Alice, a daughter of his Oxford dean, Henry Liddell.AdvertisementThe fall will bring other Alice activity to New York: From Sept. 16 through Nov. 21, the Grolier Club will offer an exhibition of “Alice” in translation and sponsor a colloquium on Oct. 7 and 8 on the translations. The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts plans an exhibition, not yet scheduled, called “Alice Live!,” featuring works from its dance, theater and music archives and screenings of Alice films.The Rosenbach Museum & Library, part of the Free Library of Philadelphia, is also getting in on the act, exhibiting the British Library manuscript in a five-day pop-up exhibition after the document’s display in New York. Through early 2016, it will also offer shows on its own Lewis Carroll holdings, among other subjects, and open an interactive room based on Carroll’s games and puzzles.A. S. W. Rosenbach — a rare-book and manuscript dealer whose collection, along with that of his brother, Philip, an art and antiques dealer, were the foundation of the Rosenbach — was, in fact, instrumental in the British Library’s acquisition of Carroll’s original Alice manuscript.After falling on hard times, the adult Alice — Alice Liddell Hargreaves — put the manuscript up for auction at Sotheby’s in 1928. Dr. Rosenbach bought it and eventually sold it to Eldridge Johnson, founder of the Victor Talking Machine Company. After Mr. Johnson died in 1945, Dr. Rosenbach purchased the manuscript on behalf of anonymous American subscribers, who gave it to the British Library in 1948, partly to recognize Britain’s service to the Allies during World War II.Stephanie Lovett, president of the Lewis Carroll Society of North America, which is coordinating many of the exhibitions and activities, described the two Alice novels as “likely the most frequently quoted works of fiction in the English-speaking world, standing alongside only Shakespeare in frequency of citation.” They are also among the most widely illustrated and translated pieces of English fiction, she said, published in more than 170 languages in several thousand editions.Interpretations of the stories and anecdotes about their relevance to today’s readers abound.Jon A. Lindseth, a curator of the Grolier Club exhibition and a retired Cleveland businessman, said in an interview that as a former manager, he was “particularly intrigued” by an episode in “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland” in which she meets the Cheshire Cat and asks it which way she should head. He said the cat’s response — that it doesn’t matter which way Alice goes, given that she doesn’t much care where she goes — was “an enormous lesson in life: You had better know what your objectives are if you expect to achieve them.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For Carolyn Vega, curator of the exhibition at the Morgan, the appeal of both “Alice” books is that they are essentially about learning how to “navigate the world” — a challenge that she said remained highly relevant today.AdvertisementDerick Dreher, director of the Rosenbach, called “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland” “an adventure story with almost unparalleled innovation.”“It delights and surprises at every turn,” he said.He also emphasized the elements of science and logic that Carroll wove into the book, which tend to intrigue puzzle lovers. And, Mr. Dreher said, it’s about “overcoming adversity.”“A lot of people who don’t look like Alice,” he continued, “can identify with her story.”A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page F4 of the New York edition with the headline: Stampeding Down the Rabbit Hole.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.