AdvertisementSupported byBy Alice RawsthornLONDON — Whenever he had free time, the Hungarian designer Gyorgy Kepes would disappear into a makeshift darkroom at the Institute of Design, an experimental school he had founded with a group of friends in Chicago in 1939, to create abstract, often surreal images of familiar objects like stones, leaves and slices of bread.Several dozen of these images are now displayed at Tate Liverpool in northern England in “Gyorgy Kepes,” an exhibition devoted to a decade of this designer’s work, from his arrival in the United States in 1937 until 1947, when he was teaching at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.The show, which runs through May 31, reflects growing interest in the legacy of Kepes, who died in 2001 at 95. Together with his zest for forging collaborations among artists, designers, curators, scientists and technologists, his work is now recognized as an important influence on the construction of the digital imagery on our computer and phone screens.“When I think back to his influence on me, it was to think big and simple at the same time,” said Nicholas Negroponte, founder and chairman emeritus of the M.I.T. Media Lab, who had Kepes as one of his thesis advisers. His legacy, he added, “is undeniable.”In addition to exploring Kepes’s influence on artists and curators, the Tate Liverpool show recognizes his importance to the history of digital culture at a time when museums around the world are only starting to address that field. The Victoria and Albert Museum in London plans to devote a series of galleries to the evolution of digital design in a new satellite museum to be built in Olympic Park. In New York, both the Museum of Modern Art and Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum, are expanding the digital components of their collections. The cultural impact of digital technology is also a theme of the global multidisciplinary debates organized by the Swiss curator Hans Ulrich Obrist, co-director of the Serpentine Galleries in London.Born in northern Hungary in 1906, Kepes attended art school in Budapest. After joining a group of radical young artists, he forsook painting to experiment with the relatively new medium of film. In 1930 he moved to Berlin to work with his compatriot Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, a former teacher at the Bauhaus school in Germany, who was pioneering developments in filmmaking and another shared passion, photography.At the time, the art establishment dismissed industrially constructed media, like photography and film, as banal, commercial disciplines. Convinced that these media could express the spirit of the modern age, Moholy-Nagy and Kepes were committed to exploring their creative possibilities and potential impact on society.In the mid-1930s, the two men fled Nazi Germany to escape the repression of the avant-garde. They continued their research in London and, later, Chicago, where they founded the New Bauhaus design school in 1937 and then the Institute of Design. Kepes remained there until 1943, when he left to teach at Brooklyn College. Among his students was the graphic designer and future movie-title innovator Saul Bass. The evocative title sequences Bass designed for Alfred Hitchcock’s “Vertigo” and Stanley Kubrick’s “Spartacus,” experienced by millions of moviegoers, reflect Kepes’s radical influence.In that first decade in the United States explored in the Tate Liverpool show, Kepes conducted experiments that produced exquisitely composed and technically ingenious photographs, photo collages and photograms: images created without a camera by arranging and exposing objects on photographic paper.By choosing mundane subjects like scraps of newspaper and engine parts as well as stones, leaves and bread, Kepes focused attention on the unusual effects produced by manipulating the photographic process to create nuances of light, shadow and translucence. Some of the images have been acquired by Tate, the first examples by Kepes in its collection.Those experiments helped Kepes formulate the inclusive vision of visual culture described in his books, starting with “Language of Vision” in 1944. The following year he was invited to teach visual communication at M.I.T., an opportunity he seized to encourage scientists there to exchange ideas with artists and designers in an era when such encounters were rare.“Kepes must have found it quite alienating to be the first artist on the staff at M.I.T.,” said Stephanie Straine, the curator of the Tate Liverpool show. “The scientists there wouldn’t necessarily have wanted to work with him, but he was determined to find areas of overlap and collaboration.” Settling into a Modernist house on Cape Cod designed by a fellow Hungarian émigré, the Bauhaus-trained architect Marcel Breuer, Kepes began organizing seminars, workshops and exhibitions at M.I.T. and wrote and lectured extensively. Testimony to his influence is the stellar cast of contributors in the six “Vision + Value” books he edited in the mid-1960s to portray how artists, scientists and intellectuals visualized the future. Along with the composer John Cage and the artist Ad Reinhardt, contributors included the mathematician Jacob Bronowski, the media theorist Marshall McLuhan, the architect R. Buckminster Fuller and the faithful Bass.“Vision + Value” served as a manifesto for the Center for Advanced Visual Studies, which Kepes founded at M.I.T. in 1967 as a forum where artists and designers conducted experiments with scientists, engineers and mathematicians who were at the forefront of innovations in computing. Such collaborations imbued computer programming and digital design with the same experimental and collaborative spirit that he and Moholy-Nagy had once applied to photography.Kepes retired as director of the center in 1974; it survived until 2010, when it became part of M.I.T.’s new Program in Art, Culture and Technology. His work at M.I.T. is to be explored in another exhibition in Liverpool, “The New Landscape,” opening on April 15 at the Exhibition Research Center at Liverpool John Moores University.It is partly thanks to Kepes that we are no longer surprised to see artists working with mathematicians and to hear physicists and designers taking part in the same debates.“Kepes had an amazing capacity not only to make junctions between objects, but between people in different fields,” Mr. Obrist said. “He has given us the courage to go beyond the fear of pooling knowledge.”Advertisement