By JANE L. LEVEREMARCH 18, 2015
It’s now easier for mainland Chinese to visit the United States, thanks to relaxed visa rules instituted late last year, allowing 10 years before visa renewal rather than one year. The change is expected to increase Chinese tourism and real estate investment, but it will also have a less obvious beneficiary: American museums.According to the Los Angeles Tourism and Convention Board, China was the city’s biggest driver of overseas visits in 2014, with an increase of more than 20 percent over the previous year; it was the third straight year China was the top source of overseas tourists. More than 740,000 Chinese visited New York last year, almost five times as many as in 2009.These tourists spend, on average, $7,200 per visit per person, including travel and lodging, according to the U.S. Travel Association. While a big part of the money goes toward shopping — indulged in by 85 percent of Chinese tourists — art museums and galleries are also high on many visitors’ lists, with 36 percent choosing them in 2013, according to the association.Fred Dixon, chief executive of NYC & Company, New York’s tourism marketing organization, said “icons” lure Chinese visitors — especially the Metropolitan Museum of Art. “They like the status,” he said. “The heritage and history are real draws for them as well.”AdvertisementMuseums of all sizes and types across the United States are trying to cater to the Chinese. The efforts include audio tours and maps in Mandarin; acceptance of UnionPay, a Chinese credit card; and promotion on Weibo, a Chinese social media platform.AdvertisementNot surprisingly, the Met has been at the forefront of these activities, responding to the steep rise in Chinese visitors. In the museum’s last fiscal year, ended on June 30, Chinese for the first time became the largest segment of its foreign visitors; the number more than quadrupled over five years, from 50,000 in fiscal year 2009, to 209,000 in fiscal year 2014.Among the museum’s many initiatives for Chinese visitors are a floor plan, an audio guide for a tour of masterpieces and a volunteer-led one-hour walking tour of collection highlights, all in Mandarin. The Mandarin version of the Met’s guidebook to its collection sells better than any of the book’s 10 other foreign-language editions.The Met has a presence on Weibo and offers an iPad app in both traditional and simplified Chinese. It has created shows that have traveled to China, one of masterpieces from its collection and another of bronze statues from the American West, to spread the museum’s renown there.It is also mounting exhibitions in New York this year that no doubt will appeal to Chinese tourists. One is a yearlong celebration of the centennial of its Asian art department, which kicked off during Lunar New Year last month. The other is the Costume Institute’s annual spring exhibition, whose theme will be “China: Through the Looking Glass.” To promote that show, the museum sent a delegation to Beijing in January, including its chief executive, Thomas P. Campbell, and Anna Wintour, the editor of Vogue, who organizes the institute’s annual fund-raising gala.Both the Met and the Museum of Modern Art participated in promotional missions arranged by NYC & Company to mainland China, visiting Guangzhou, Shanghai, Nanjing and Tianjin in November. MoMA also accepts UnionPay, has a Weibo account and offers an audio guide of its permanent collection in Mandarin and a map in simplified and traditional Chinese.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In September, when the Ullens Center for Contemporary Art in Beijing mounted an exhibition called “The Los Angeles Project,” featuring seven contemporary Los Angeles-based artists, one member of the city’s delegation to the opening was Michael McDowell, vice president for cultural tourism for the Los Angeles Tourism & Convention Board. He said his visit generated “a lot of coverage of the show in China” and talk among members of the Chinese travel trade, the news media and consumers “about Los Angeles as a cultural destination.”“Although we’re well known worldwide for the entertainment industry,” he continued, “the cultural message is getting a lot of traction.”Last year the board introduced a “China Ready” continuing-education certification program for its members, providing tools and tips to attract, and cater to, Chinese visitors. Monthly sessions cover topics from digital marketing to recruiting and managing Mandarin-speaking staff and preparing for the Chinese New Year.AdvertisementMore than 150 travel-related organizations, including eight museums, have participated in the program. Among these are the J. Paul Getty Museum and the Getty Villa. David Singleman, the Getty’s group sales/tourism coordinator, said the program helped the museum teach staff members and volunteers “how to make a good experience for visitors” who might have a “cultural difference” and how to “properly welcome them.”Among initiatives instituted at the Getty as a result of the program are a map and guides in simplified Chinese, audio guides in Mandarin and a cafe menu with special dishes for the Chinese New Year. The museum also plans to teach frontline staff members, including those in security services and at the bookstore, how to speak basic Mandarin.To increase visits by Chinese, the Art Institute of Chicago is “working with tour groups, bringing in local tourism leaders,” said its director, Douglas Druick.The institute also offers an audio tour and a “what to do in an hour” brochure in Mandarin, and has established a Weibo presence. And it is working to expand its Asian holdings, hiring the Chinese art scholar Tao Wang from Sotheby’s New York last fall to lead its Asian art department.Smaller institutions are also reaching out to the Chinese. The Corning Museum of Glass in Corning, N.Y., translates maps, brochures and demonstrations into Mandarin and serves Asian dishes in its cafe. The Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Mich., which in 2008 established a partnership with the Shanghai Auto Museum, hosts business delegations and tourist groups. A museum spokeswoman said many Chinese admired Henry Ford as an outstanding entrepreneur. The gift shop at the Asian Art Museum in San Francisco caters to the tastes of Chinese visitors by offering high-quality vintage and antique Chinese merchandise and art books generally not available in China.As varied as it is now, American museums’ outreach to the mainland Chinese is likely to grow far more diverse in the future: The United States Department of Commerce projects that visits by Chinese will increase an average of 18 percent annually through 2019, reaching 4.9 million and making China America’s largest overseas visitor market.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page F12 of the New York edition with the headline: Making Chinese Tourists Feel at Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.