By PATRICIA COHENMARCH 17, 2015
Annalee Tai, a 16-year-old junior at Bard High School on Manhattan’s Lower East Side, has only the sketchiest recollection of planes smashing into the World Trade Center in 2001.“I have very faint memories of my parents watching television and being very concerned and very distraught,” Ms. Tai said on a recent Saturday morning as she sat on a bench at the National September 11 Memorial Museum, just a few steps from a mammoth twisted beam salvaged from the wreckage.Being at such a remove from the day’s trauma is ultimately what spurred Ms. Tai to learn more about what happened. “Because of that, I think it’s almost my duty to become more knowledgeable about the subject,” she said.Ms. Tai is one of six teenagers to complete the museum’s inaugural “ambassador” program, an after-school initiative for New York City high school students that began last fall. Every week, she trekked to ground zero to examine the museum’s collection of artifacts, talk to survivors and rescuers and finally create her own hourlong tour of the museum.Advertisement“My 9/11 narrative isn’t original,” Ms. Tai said. “It’s a collection of others.’”Confronting overwhelming horror and death can be profoundly disturbing for even hardened adults, let alone adolescents. But as Alice Greenwald, the museum’s director, put it, “We live in a world where nothing is hidden anymore, and these children want to understand it — they need to understand it.”AdvertisementModeled on a similar program that Ms. Greenwald instituted when she worked at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, the ground-zero museum curriculum was carefully constructed. Candidates were screened to ensure that they were emotionally as well as intellectually mature enough to handle the material, she said.David Rothblatt, an 11th grader at Stuyvesant High School — a four-block walk from ground zero — who completed the program in December, knows Harry Waizer, a severely burned survivor and tax lawyer who wore a mask during his recovery that is now in the museum’s collection.Sarah AlShabboot, an American-born junior at Loyola High School on the Upper East Side whose father is a diplomat in the Iraqi mission to the United Nations, joined the program in February. “Carrying both sides of the story as a Muslim, an Iraqi and an American, I feel obligated to try to spread awareness for the lives lost to terrorism,” she wrote in her application. “I desire to leave a small mark, showing how Muslims will not stand for terrorism in the name of their faith.”For Ms. Tai, one of the high points — and most emotionally wrenching moments — was meeting Bill Spade, a retired firefighter who was in a stairwell of the North Tower when the South Tower fell. He ended up helping evacuate a chain of people from the rubble. Eleven other members of his unit, Rescue Company 5 from Staten Island, died that day. He later learned that his uncle was on the hijacked United Airlines plane that crashed in Shanksville, Pa.Each of the students picked out five artifacts on display in the museum and built a tour around them. The first one Ms. Tai was drawn to wasn’t from ground zero. It was a brick from the compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan, where Osama bin Laden was killed in a special forces raid in 2011.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s not the most showy,” she said, but it was an event that she personally recalled. The brick is in a display case along with the sand-colored shirt worn by a member of the Navy SEALs who stormed the Qaeda leader’s hide-out.She also chose a sprawling artwork of 2,983 squares of blue paper by Spencer Finch — one for each victim of the Sept. 11 attacks and the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center — that greets visitors as they descend to the bedrock level of the site, beneath the plaza and outdoor waterfall memorial. She included “The Last Column,” the final steel beam removed from the World Trade Center site at the end of a nine-month recovery effort, and a piece of bent steel from where the first plane hit. A crushed fire truck, Ladder 3, was not originally part of her tour, but she incorporated it after realizing that visitors inevitably stopped to look at it as they passed by.Elena Messinger, 14, a ninth grader at Hunter College High School who took Ms. Tai’s tour on a recent Saturday, said, “I found it really impressive seeing someone my age with such an ability to speak to us about these things.”AdvertisementMs. Tai, who graduated from the semester-long ambassador program in December, still returns to teach art classes for younger children on Saturday mornings. She said some of her friends didn’t understand why she would return every week to a place that can be depressing.“It’s not the first thing on most teenagers’ list of things to do,” Ms. Tai acknowledged. “I think teenagers in general tend to overlook the story of 9/11.”But Ms. Tai said that knowing the story of what happened and remembering those who died overrode such discomfort. “There are endless tragic stories,” she said, “but there’s also stories of heroism or resilience and things like that.”An article on March 19 about teenage guides at the National September 11 Memorial Museum misidentified the World Trade Center tower that fell on Sept. 11 while Bill Spade, a retired firefighter, was in the stairwell of the North Tower. It was the South Tower, not the North.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page F8 of the New York edition with the headline: Coming of Age as a Guide at Ground Zero.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.