By DAVID WALLISMARCH 17, 2015
Like a primatologist observing gorillas in the wild, Judy Rand sometimes prowls around museums to spy on visitors. Ms. Rand, a museum consultant in Seattle and an acclaimed writer of exhibit labels, loves spotting guests reading her work aloud.When visitors share information from labels, “we are reaching new readers — pass-along readers,” Ms. Rand said. “Then they have a chance to have a conversation about it. Then they can remember things.”Lucy Harland, a museum consultant in Glasgow, encourages her clients to monitor their museums covertly for mutterers. “When you see people muttering under their breath, that is when you know” the label fails, she said.Museums increasingly pay attention to labels — or “brief, little ambassadors,” in the words of Beverly Serrell, author of “Exhibit Labels: An Interpretive Approach.” Specialists often write, edit and design labels, and some museums impanel focus groups to test them. Many cultural institutions have also turned to digital technology to transform static labels into compelling interactive attractions.AdvertisementIt is a monumental shift from the clay drum discovered in the ruins of Ennigaldi-Nanna’s museum in Babylon (now modern-day Iraq). The cylinder, which has text in three languages, dates to the sixth century B.C. and is considered to be the first object label.Advertisement“Labels have always been a big topic in museological practice,” said Seb Chan, director of digital and emerging media at the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum. He cites a blistering 1963 article, “Why Johnny Can’t Read Labels,” published in Curator: The Museum Journal. The author, George Weiner of the Smithsonian Institution, derided many midcentury museums as “veritable masterpieces of cryptography” because of terse, uninformative labels (called tombstones in curatorial jargon). He also railed against rambling labels “designed to frighten off all but the most persevering museum viewer.”Some curators apparently use labels to show off their scholarship. (The Bad Label Hall of Fame website catalogs egregious examples.) “It often feels like museum labels are written for peers, not the public,” Mr. Chan said. Ms. Harland agreed. “If you need to write 50,000 words,” she advised colleagues, “do a talk for the local historical society.”In a lecture, “Adventures in Label Land,” Ms. Rand, who tries to limit labels to about 50 words, highlights a vintage label that described a meteorite from the Field Museum in Chicago: “With the rise of the nickel content to around 14 percent, plessite prevails wholly, the kamacite becomes vestigial, and the structure becomes a nickel-rich ataxite (see label at right).” Written for mineralogists rather than families, the label, it seems, required its own label.“The ‘label at right’ was a second, equally dense label,” Ms. Rand said.Research by Stephen Bitgood, a psychology professor at Jacksonville State University in Alabama, proves that brevity pays off. Mr. Bitgood timed museum visitors reading a 150-word label and the same text divided into three 50-word panels. More than twice as many visitors read the shorter panels.“Breaking down a long text passage into shorter ones changes the perception of the task, making it seem easier,” Mr. Bitgood wrote in an email. He likened labels to formal education. “If you break down a long chapter into smaller units and give a test for each unit, students do much better,” he said.John Russick, director of curatorial affairs at the Chicago History Museum and coordinator of the annual label-writing competition by the American Alliance of Museums (winners get online accolades, not plaques), notices more experimental entries, including limericks and poems. To complement a portrait of the painter Waldo Peirce (who looked like Ulysses S. Grant), the de Young Museum in San Francisco published a poem by Ben Erickson, a fourth grader:Paint me sittingOn a wooden benchHolding a canePaint me with a dull brownOvercoat and a turquoise sweaterPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Paint me with a yellow handResting on a wine red hatPaint me betrayingNo emotionThe writer Joseph Dresch and the editor Eugene Dillenburg of the University of Michigan Museum of Natural History were among last year’s winners for a collection of clever labels illuminating “The Secret Life of Birds,” a recent exhibition. The labels deliver insights about mallards, kingfishers and other birds. The label for quail — titled “This Bird Knows What Women Want” — reveals that males “attract their mates by quickly offering up bits of food. Called Tidbitting, the ritual is something of a race, with the fastest male often winning the female.”In “This Bird Is Not a Registered Trademark,” viewers learn that marketers — specifically of “a certain fruit-flavored breakfast cereal” — often rely on toucans to brand products. “This mascot bird is so recognizable that when the Mayan Archaeology Initiative used it in their logo, Kellogg threatened to sue,” the label reads. “The case was soon dropped, perhaps because it was just too silly.”AdvertisementMr. Chan of the Cooper Hewitt previously worked at the Powerhouse Museum in Sydney, Australia, one of the first to install Quick Response codes on labels, which provide visitors with smartphone access to an archive of information.“We did it as an experiment and, of course, it failed,” Mr. Chan acknowledged. The codes now require a reader app, and many visitors resisted downloading it. “And that barrier is just too high for the casual person,” Mr. Chan said.Learning from his mistake, Mr. Chan and his team at the Cooper Hewitt designed “the label whisperer,” software that enables visitors to snap a photo of a label and email it to an address, which then sends back the object’s collection records.Visitors to the Cooper Hewitt, which reopened in December after a renovation lasting more than three years, will be able to borrow a pen, like a stylus, that interacts with Near-Field Communication technology incorporated into labels. “Behind each label there’s an N.F.C. tag,” Mr. Chan explained, “that allows you to basically collect objects as you walk around the galleries in a relatively straightforward way and then bring them back to explore on large interactive tables.”Some museum directors view traditional labels as intrusive and would not object to a funeral for the so-called tombstones. In 2013, the Worcester Art Museum in Massachusetts staged a label-free exhibition of paintings by old masters. Instead, the museum set up iPad stations that focused on individual paintings and printed guides listing basic information, like the title, the artist’s name and the date it was acquired. Trained docents and museum guards milled about to act as truly interactive labels and provoke discussions with visitors about the art.“Our ultimate goal in removing labels from the gallery walls was to create a deeper museum experience,” said the museum’s director, Matthias Waschek, by email. “We want our visitors to slow down and experience the art on their own terms.” The digitization of museums, he added, means that the landscape for labels “may be changing more radically than most of us dare to think.”A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page F36 of the New York edition with the headline: You Are Here Now, Looking at This.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.