AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen JonesPushcart peddlers once filled Orchard Street. Early-20th-century Socialists gathered in Straus Square. The streets of the Lower East Side of Manhattan are indelibly stamped with the lives of the immigrants who made them their entry points to the United States. Walking these same streets today “can be the best classroom to the city’s history,” said Annie Polland, senior vice president for programs and education at the Lower East Side Tenement Museum. Housed in a former tenement on the corner of Orchard and Allen Streets, the museum sponsors neighborhood walking tours like “Food of the Lower East Side” and “Outside the Home” to extend visitors’ experience beyond the four walls of the museum. “We tell the stories of the daily lives of immigrants in our building,” Dr. Polland said, but the stories do not end there. Because of the overcrowding of tenement apartments, “people lived much of their lives outside of them,” on the streets or in communal spaces. The neighborhood tours help visitors “connect the past with the present,” she said. “That is the heart of our mission,” she continued.The museum’s newest tour, “Building on the Lower East Side,” tells the stories of buildings and “the people who used them, changed them and adapted them,” said Adam Steinberg, a senior education associate at the museum. Dr. Steinberg cites the Angel Orensanz Foundation building as an example. In 1850 it was one of New York City’s most important synagogues, but by the 1970s, the building “was abandoned and in disrepair, because the congregation could no longer maintain it,” he said. The Spanish artist Angel Orensanz purchased the building in 1986 and adapted it as a studio and a foundation “to help others create and present art here,” Dr. Steinberg said. Artists who have given presentations there include Maya Angelou, Spike Lee and Salman Rushdie. “But Angel Orensanz had the same problem the former Jewish congregation had, which was where to get the money to maintain the building,” Mr. Steinberg said. “One way was to rent it out for events, and Sarah Jessica Parker and Matthew Broderick were married here in 1997.” The Museum of Chinese in America is another Lower Manhattan institution where collection and community converge. From April through early December, the museum offers walking tours of Chinatown, which in the late 19th century “occupied about a seven-block radius,” said Michael Robison, a senior educator at the museum. It has been “growing and transforming ever since” and today encompasses nearly 40 blocks, he said.“From Coffeehouse to Banquet Halls” is a walking tour centered on food, an important part of Chinese-American history, Mr. Robison said. “Unlike the laundry business, restaurants required more personal interaction, and that meant overcoming the language barrier, if you wanted to become successful,” he added. In addition to discussing the area’s diverse cuisines, the tour demonstrates the ways Chinese food changed to suit American tastes. “A lot of Chinese chefs would see asking for extra salt as an insult,” he said. “That was something they had to accommodate.” Such community-based museums are common in many parts of the world. In Haworth, a picturesque village in Yorkshire, England, the Brontë Parsonage Museum is tightly intertwined with its locale. The museum is the former home of the sisters Charlotte and Emily Brontë, whose 19th-century novels, among them “Jane Eyre” and “Wuthering Heights,” are “very much rooted in Haworth,” said Susan Newby, the education officer. The museum leads a walking tour around Haworth, whose main street and surrounding moors have a distinctly Victorian-era look and feel. “We are lucky that as far as the built environment is concerned, the area has changed very little since the Brontës’ day,” Ms. Newby said. The challenge of the tour, she said, “is to bring to life how very different it would have been in other ways.” Though Haworth is “a lively tourist destination full of nice tea shops and cafes,” it was, in the mid-1800s, an overcrowded working village with severe poverty and myriad health hazards, Ms. Newby said. The average life span was 25 years, and all the Brontë siblings who survived childhood — Charlotte, Emily, Anne and Branwell — died before the age of 40.“The Brontës saw conflict and social change at their doorstep, and that environment provided context for their novels,” Ms. Newby said. “Though the sisters were extremely well read and had diverse literary influences, there is a directness and lack of overrefinement about their writing. I think that has a lot to do with where they grew up.”Ford W. Bell, the president of the American Alliance of Museums, observed: “Visitors are fascinated by authenticity. It is one thing to see the Brontë house and the museum collection and how they lived, but then to walk the same sidewalks and get a feel for what life was like then creates a totality of experience beyond the physical museum.” Advertisement