By DAVID GELLESMARCH 16, 2015
Across the country, museums are playing landlord.Possessing unusual real estate holdings and in need of additional revenue, a number of institutions are expanding their missions beyond preserving and displaying priceless artworks. They are branching out to choosing tenants, collecting rents and even developing dilapidated neighborhoods.“Museums in big cities help create very desirable living environments,” said Ford W. Bell, president of the American Alliance of Museums. “It can make sense for a museum to encourage development nearby.”One of the most ambitious of such projects is underway near the banks of the Allegheny River, where the Children’s Museum of Pittsburgh has accumulated an unusual portfolio of properties.In the 1980s, the museum occupied an abandoned post office in the North Shore neighborhood. In the late 1990s, it expanded into a neighboring building to accommodate more visitors.AdvertisementBut in growing to 80,000 square feet from 20,000 square feet, the Children’s Museum of Pittsburgh realized that it didn’t have nearly enough exhibits to fill the space.AdvertisementSo over the next few years, it welcomed six tenants into its enlarged home. One was a public school; one was a nonprofit that promotes reading; and another was a radio organization. The museum charged below-market rents to the groups, but still, the income made a difference.“They’re contributing to the costs of utilities and capital needs over time,” said Chris Siefert, the museum’s deputy director. “And on the business side, they’re contributing to our earned revenue.”The Children’s Museum of Pittsburgh’s success with those initial tenants gave it confidence that it could expand its footprint. Soon the museum took over management of a park in front of the museum. Then it partnered with other arts groups, including the nearby Andy Warhol Museum, to renovate a local theater and advise on programming for the space.Now the museum is looking at taking over a 45,000-square-foot abandoned library. The plan is to create a multi-use arts and research center that the museum will operate on a long-term lease from the city.“We look at our four blocks here as a campus,” Mr. Siefert said. “It’s a community asset.”Overall, the Children’s Museum’s real estate ventures have bolstered its finances while allowing it to shape its neighborhood. The museum now charges to provide advice to other museums looking to develop nearby real estate.And for the city of Pittsburgh, which has hundreds of abandoned properties, the museum’s efforts are a welcome antidote to urban blight.While the Children’s Museum of Pittsburgh is at the vanguard of this movement, other institutions are following its lead.AdvertisementThe Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art occupies an old factory complex in North Adams. With some of the space that it isn’t using to display artwork by the likes of Sol LeWitt and Joseph Beuys, the museum leases space to businesses, including law and accounting firms and a medical billing company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Santa Cruz, Calif., the Museum of Art and History manages a commercial office building under a 50-year lease. During the financial crisis, as other museums’ endowments took a beating, the museum was able to rely on its rent.“We’ve been able to keep the building full and keep the income stream steady, even as we were seeing other museums struggle during the downturn,” said Nina Simon, the museum’s executive director.“It feels like a more secure way to have some unrestricted operating income, and it can also have bearing on the operations,” she added.Now the museum plans to open a new marketplace on the ground floor of the building, and it also has room to grow should it need more exhibition space.And in Tampa, Fla., the Museum of Science and Industry has a long-term management agreement for 73 acres of prime real estate owned by Hillsborough County. Flanked by the campus of the University of South Florida and an amusement park, the land allows the museum to expand its influence in the community.“We’ve utilized very little of it so far,” said Molly Demeulenaere, the museum’s interim president. “We’re not landlocked like a lot of museums are.”Currently, the museum hosts just a few tenants; much of the acreage is protected wilderness. But it also contains an institute that studies home safety and an elementary school, whose teachers use the museum’s resources to bolster the science curriculum.Now the museum is looking to bring in other groups with similar causes, including a French company developing self-driving cars, and it is considering plans for a greenhouse and even a hotel.“We have looked to our land use to supplement our operations, but not to the detriment of our mission,” Ms. Demeulenaere said.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page F22 of the New York edition with the headline: Adding Something New to the Collection: Tenants.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.