Il Trovatore
Dutch National Opera.
Through Nov. 1.Verdi set his opera in 15th-century Spain; this production updates the action to the First World War, and features a chorus wearing gas masks. Àlex Ollé, one of the directors of the radical Catalan theater group La Fura dels Baus, which, since the late 1970s, has staged dark theater spectacles inspired by religious ritual, directed the production. Maurizio Benini will conduct.Hiroshi Hamaya: Photographs 1930s-1960s
Setagaya Art Museum.
Through Nov. 15.Hiroshi Hamaya (1915-1999), who lived and worked in Japan, chronicled the relationship between the city and the country. He focused in particular on how rural Japan was getting left behind as cities modernized and integrated with the region and the world. This exhibition brings together photographs from his early career, with portrait photography, urban scenes and landscapes.The Fabric of India
Victoria and Albert Museum.
Through Jan. 10.This exhibition brings together woven work from India, including some from the distant past and some from the present day. It focuses in particular on how the country’s ancient traditions can be seen in contemporary textiles and fashion designs. The exhibition is part of the museum’s India Festival, a series of exhibitions showcasing works and artifacts from the subcontinent. As part of the series, “Bejeweled Treasures” is a show focused on jewelry made in and influenced by India.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Myth+Magic: Art of the Sepik River, Papua New Guinea
National Gallery of Australia.
Through Nov. 1.Papua New Guinea, which was part of Australia for most of the 20th century, became an independent nation in 1975. This exhibition, a display of artworks from the cultures that live along the Sepik River in the country’s north, marks the 40th anniversary of the country’s independence. The show includes artifacts, jewelry and sculpture. Some works come from the 20th century and many are made from natural materials found along the river’s shores.XLIII Festival Internacional Cervantino
Various venues.
Through Oct. 25.Traditional music, opera, theater and dance all play a part in this annual festival, which mixes Mexican art with an array of offerings from abroad. A number of works blend international and local talent: On Oct. 21, the Xalapa Symphony Orchestra will play the Mexican premiere of John Adams’s “Doctor Atomic Symphony,” inspired by the moments leading up to the first nuclear bomb explosion. The festival closes Oct. 25 with a performance by the traditional dance and song group Ballet Folklórico de México de Amalia Hernández, shown above performing in Colombia.Seoul Performing Arts Festival
Various venues. Through Oct. 31.This eclectic festival offers a range of cutting-edge performance from cross-disciplinary companies from  South Korea and Europe. The Workcenter of Jerzy Grotowski and Thomas Richard — an artistic working group co-founded by the late, cutting edge Polish theater director Grotowski — will present “The Living Room,” a dance and music spectacle. South Korean productions include “Afternoon of a Faun,” an exploration of humans’ animalistic urges, choreographed by Jin-han Choi.George S. Zimbel: A Humanist Photographer
Montreal Museum of Fine Arts.
Through Jan. 3.The American photographer George S. Zimbel (born 1929) is best known for his portrait of Marilyn Monroe standing over a grate, holding her skirt down as the wind blows it upward. The artist’s portraits of Marilyn Monroe are on view in this exhibition, alongside other works from across his career. Though Zimbel photographed celebrities, he was also interested in portraits of ordinary people, some of which are showing. The exhibition is a hometown celebration of the artist, who has lived in Montreal since the early 1980s.The Botticelli Renaissance
Gemäldegalerie.
Through Jan. 24.After his death, the Florentine painter Botticelli’s (circa 1445-1510) reputation slowly declined until the 19th century, when the pre-Raphaelites, a group of rebellious young British painters, rediscovered him and, by celebrating his work, restored him to some of his former glory. This exhibition, which includes a mix of works by Botticelli and works inspired by him, examines the artists’s resurgence and the legacy he bequeathed to contemporary artists. Andy Warhol, Cindy Sherman, Degas and the pre-Raphaelite Dante Gabriel Rossetti are among the artists on view.Poly/Graphic Triennial
Various venues.
Oct. 24-Feb. 27.This triennial focuses on graphic arts like printmaking, and on the effect that the digital revolution has had on the form. Artists in the exhibition — which takes place at galleries and museums — hail from Latin America and the United States. Their works stem from different traditions: Myrna Báez, born 1931 in Puerto Rico, creates traditional prints; younger artists like Karlo Andrei Ibarra and Amalia Pica incorporate contemporary electronics and installation elements into their artwork.