AdvertisementSupported byBy Julie LaskyRobin Cembalest, an arts consultant and former executive editor of ARTnews, used the Yiddish word “haimish” to describe Lowery Stokes Sims, the chief curator of the Museum of Arts and Design. Roughly translated, “haimish” means all the good qualities associated with home: informal, warm, approachable and comforting.But Ms. Cembalest, who has known Ms. Sims since 1982, was concerned that many readers would not understand the word. “Say ‘humanistic’ instead,” she suggested, though it felt not quite up to the job.On April 5, Ms. Sims will retire from the Museum of Arts and Design after seven and a half years there and 43 in the art world altogether. Her departure is timed to the end of “New Territories,” an exhibition of Latin American design, art and craft she has organized that will be her last there as chief curator.Typical of Ms. Sims, 66, it’s an extravaganza of unexpected materials molded into utilitarian forms with multiple meanings. There are Venezuelan padded chairs converted from oil drums, carpets woven to look like stretches of a Havana sidewalk and a Mexican homage to Ettore Sottsass’s Carlton room divider, a totem of postmodernism recreated in wire.For Ms. Cembalest, the show is visionary. Ms. Sims, she said, has been “doing the thing that a lot of other people are paying lip service to,” knocking down divisions between art and design, high and low, and individual and collective.Ms. Sims’s associates say that a big embrace comes naturally to her. Halley K. Harrisburg, director of the Michael Rosenfeld Gallery in New York, who has collaborated on projects with Ms. Sims for more than 25 years, cited her championing of artists, especially minority artists whom she helped bring to prominence. (Norman Lewis and Betye Saar are examples.)She was the first — and, as yet, only — African-American curator at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, which she joined in 1972 as an assistant educator in the department of community programs and left in 1999 as a curator of 20th-century art. In 2000 she became executive director of the Studio Museum in Harlem and was appointed its president in 2005. Throughout her career, she has been a role model and adviser for a gradually diversifying art world.Thelma Golden, the Studio Museum’s current director and chief curator, wrote in an email: “When, at age 13, I read a profile of Dr. Sims in The New York Times, I had for the first time a literal picture of who I might be in the world and what I might accomplish.”On a recent Tuesday, Ms. Sims could be found in her office on the eighth floor of the Museum of Arts and Design’s building overlooking Columbus Circle. When Holly Hotchner, who was then director, hired her in 2007, the institution had recently changed its identity. Long known as the American Craft Museum, it took a new name in 2002 and broadened its scope to emphasize the materials and processes involved in making decorative and functional objects internationally.Design and craft were not part of her portfolio, but she had long been used to considering craft and unsung domestic arts in the context of the fine arts. (She is the reason that Faith Ringgold’s story quilts and Magdalene Odundo’s ceramics are represented in the Met’s collection.) “The communities of color and feminist art trends I was associated with in the ’80s and ’90s directed my research in those genres,” she said.The Museum of Arts and Design gave Ms. Sims a stage for inclusiveness beyond any she had encountered. In 2010 she and Leslie King Hammond, the director of the Center for Race and Culture at the Maryland Institute College of Art, mounted “The Global Africa Project.” It traced the influence of African art and design on such diverse entities as Milanese furniture showrooms, Harlem millinery and Baltimore architecture. In 2013 Ms. Sims organized “Against the Grain,” which offered around 90 variations on the use of wood in furniture, sculpture and even platform shoes.The ambitious scale of these exhibitions has drawn a mix of admiration and criticism, sometimes in the same breath. Reviewing “The Global Africa Project” for The New York Times, Roberta Smith wrote that the show was “plagued by too much ersatz stuff in all categories.” But the “massing of information and accomplishment,” she went on, “is often incredibly moving.”Dr. King Hammond said that Ms. Sims had broadened the conversation about how traditions, aesthetics and materials were used. (The two have a long history: They were Girl Scouts together in Queens, and they both attended Queens College and graduate school at Johns Hopkins.) Valorizing a humble material like wood, she added, is just one example of how Ms. Sims has imposed “a new kind of language and a new kind of hierarchy in how we look at art and what we should be looking at.”In her view, it was not a moment too soon. “Actually,” Dr. King-Hammond said of the old hierarchy, “it was getting a little boring.”Advertisement