By JANE L. LEVEREMARCH 16, 2015
Four American museums, established after the first generation of major museums got their start in the 1870s, are observing their centennials this year and next: the Baltimore Museum of Art, incorporated in 1914 and celebrating its anniversary through early summer; the Minneapolis Institute of Arts, opened in 1915; the Memphis Brooks Museum of Art, which opened in 1916; and the Cleveland Museum of Art, which opened in 1916. And, not surprisingly, the centennial celebrations of the four museums look back at their history and the civic leaders who founded them, in many cases using 21st-century ways to engage local communities.Kathleen A. Curran, a professor of fine arts at Trinity College in Hartford, said the museums in Minneapolis, Cleveland and Baltimore had been modeled after two prominent 1870s predecessors, the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York and the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Planners relied on administrators, curators and art historians from each to set up their operations and create collections. Ms. Curran said they even drew inspiration from the New York and Boston museums’ architecture, calling the neo-Classical building of the Cleveland Museum of Art, by a local firm, Hubbell & Benes, “a smaller version of the M.F.A.”Katherine Grier, director of the museum studies program at the University of Delaware, said the era from the 1870s to World War I in the United States featured “the rise of the industrial city.”“There was lots of money, a new money culture,” she added. “What you get are moneyed families collecting art for themselves, but they’re also starting to get the idea, particularly from their travels in Europe, that being a great city means having great cultural institutions.”AdvertisementThe City Beautiful movement, she said, “the idea you can create public architecture, public spaces, a vision of public culture based on uplift,” grew out of these observations.AdvertisementWilliam M. Griswold, director of the Cleveland Museum of Art, said the motivations of the founders of the museums observing their centennial were similar. “The idea of the democratization of art was very, very important,” he said. “There was a strong belief that museums could support and develop art, craft and industry.”The Memphis Brooks Museum of Art, which opened as the Brooks Memorial Art Gallery in 1916 and changed its name in 1983, came out of one charitable gift: Bessie Vance Brooks, the widow of a wealthy grocer, Samuel Hamilton Brooks, donated $100,000 to the City of Memphis in 1913 to build a museum to honor her husband; its Beaux-Arts structure is in a park. The museum plans to kick off its centennial celebrations in May 2016 with what it describes as its “biggest community day to date”; also planned are an exhibition of the work of the Nashville-born artist Red Grooms and the opening of an interactive gallery for families.The Baltimore Museum of Art, which grew out of lobbying efforts by the city’s Municipal Art Society, was incorporated in 1914. It opened in its current location, Wyman Park Dell, which was designed by the landscape architectural firm the Olmsted Brothers, in 1929. It began its centennial celebration last September and is continuing it through June 28.A “B.M.A. 100-day celebration” last year included a “question of the week” quiz on a local radio station; a “build a giant birthday cake” program for families; and the introduction of a new app that lets users share their thoughts on the museum and its future. Last year the museum’s American wing, housed in its original John Russell Pope building, reopened after a two-year renovation, while later this year, newly expanded African and Asian galleries will reopen.The roots of the Minneapolis Institute of Arts, which in 2015 is holding a yearlong 100th-anniversary celebration, are similar to those of the Baltimore museum. In 1883, 25 citizens founded the Minneapolis Society of Fine Arts, whose goal was to promote “a knowledge and love of art in the community”; its neo-Classical building, by McKim, Mead & White, opened in 1915.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The museum’s director, Kaywin Feldman, said anniversary activities were meant to “celebrate in a big way the partnership we have with the community.”“From the beginning, it’s not just about us,” she said. “Our birthday celebration is about surprise and gift giving.”Thus it is offering one “surprise” a week for the entire year, including the loan of Vermeer’s “Woman Reading a Letter” (circa 1663) by the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, and the creation of a giant dragon-shaped ice sculpture next to Lake Calhoun in Minneapolis, symbolizing its collection of Asian art. Later this year the museum will wrap water towers around Minnesota with reproductions of art from its collection, and work with the crop artist Stan Herd to create a reproduction of its van Gogh painting, “Olive Trees” (1889), in a field near the Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport. The anniversary celebration also includes exhibitions of American Modernist art from the collection of a local businessman, Myron Kunin; works from the collection of the Hapsburg dynasty; and paintings by Delacroix and artists he influenced.AdvertisementThe Cleveland Museum of Art opened in a neo-Classical building in 1916, with funding from local businessmen, on park land donated by another. The museum’s campus underwent a $320 million, eight-year renovation and expansion by Rafael Viñoly that was completed in 2013.Mr. Griswold said the museum’s yearlong centennial celebration in 2016 would be a “very important chance to celebrate the past and look to the future.”“It will be an opportunity,” he continued, “to bring new audiences — local, regional, national and international — to the museum.”Plans include displaying artwork from what Mr. Griswold called “peer institutions” alongside works from the museum’s own collections; a new publication on the 1928 Olmsted Brothers’ Fine Arts Garden, which occupies one of the museum’s approaches; and what Mr. Griswold described as a “very extensive range of programs of all types and community engagement efforts.”He said two months in 2016 would be particularly important: June, celebrating the museum’s June 6, 1916, opening, and July, the arrival of the 2016 Republication National Convention.Frederic Allen Whiting, the museum’s first director, came up with the concept for the Association of Art Museum Directors, created to help museums assist one another, discuss loans and plan exhibitions together. Founded in 1916 by Mr. Whiting and the directors of 11 other museums, many in Midwestern cities, the association now has 239 members. It, too, will celebrate its centennial next year by expanding programs like its collaboration with the United Negro College Fund and public engagement efforts.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.