AdvertisementSupported byBy Hilarie M. SheetsCAMBRIDGE, MASS. — Shortly after Paul Ha became director of the List Visual Arts Center at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in late 2011, he was surprised to learn that Joan Jonas, the pioneering performance art and video artist, was a longtime faculty member at the university. He invited her to lunch to introduce himself and reveal his plan: to propose her as the artist representative for the United States at the 2015 Venice Biennale.“She said, ‘Oh no, don’t do that,’ ” Mr. Ha recalled recently at his office here. “I said, I think I will do it and I think we’re going to win. I’ve sat on the panel choosing the artists before, and all it can take is one passionate person to be there in your corner.”Mr. Ha won over Ms. Jonas and, ultimately, the committee, which typically chooses a representative from about 30 submissions. Ms. Jonas’s new multimedia installation opens May 9 in the five rooms of the United States Pavilion at the biennale’s 56th International Art Exhibition.“Venice is an almost perfect site to present her stories about nature and disappearance and mythmaking,” Mr. Ha, the commissioner and co-curator of the exhibition, said. “Not that many people, even in the arts, have seen Joan’s work in person. All the ideas she’s worked with for the past 40 years are more current than ever.” A retrospective of Ms. Jonas’s films and videos from 1972 to 2005 is to go on view at the List on April 7. “It’s a formidable job to organize an artist for the American pavilion,” Ms. Jonas said. “Paul was so positive when he invited me to do this. He has given me complete freedom in my work.”Mr. Ha has a long track record of supporting artists, whether drawing attention to their work later in their careers or recognizing their talent at the start. As executive director of White Columns, a New York gallery, in the 1990s, he gave early exhibitions to Sarah Sze, Anna Gaskell, Christoph Buchel and Jessica Craig-Martin, among others. At the Contemporary Art Museum in St. Louis, where he was the founding director from 2001 to 2011, he presented the first museum shows of a number of artists, including Laylah Ali, Lutz Bacher and Gedi Sibony. “Paul has a really natural dialogue with artists,” said Ms. Sze, who had her first solo show in 1997 at White Columns and represented the United States at the Venice Biennale in 2013. “He’s very interested in artists’ processes and the entire trajectory of how a work of art is made. That gives him a lot of insight as a curator.”Mr. Ha, who was born in Seoul, South Korea, in 1963 and moved with his family to the Washington area at age 9, studied painting at the University of Maryland. While technically skilled, he was the first to admit he didn’t have ideas of his own. “Anne Truitt, a fantastic teacher, flipped one of my paintings around and said, ‘Isn’t that better now?’ ” Mr. Ha said. “It was.” He decided to work with artists as a curator and arts administrator. He worked at the Washington Projects for the Arts while attending Maryland, before moving to the Hirschl & Adler Modern gallery in New York after graduating. Simultaneously, he volunteered at White Columns and was asked to take over there in 1993.“My big growth period was at White Columns, dealing with thousands of graduates and emerging artists and understanding that being accessible is such an important thing,” Mr. Ha said. During his tenure there, he averaged 900 studio visits a year, a number that seemed so impossibly high that the National Endowment for the Arts sought verification when judging a White Columns grant application. Hired as the deputy director of programs and external affairs at the Yale University Art Gallery in 2001, Mr. Ha was soon recruited to lead what later became the Contemporary Art Museum in St. Louis and the construction of its facilities. “It’s not often you get to build a building and introduce something new to a city,” said Mr. Ha, who relocated to the Midwest for 10 years with his wife, the painter Eva Lundsager, and their two children. He brought in well-established artists who had not had a show in St. Louis, like Richard Artschwager and Cindy Sherman, to “have that city feel like it was part of a larger context internationally.”Since coming to the List, Mr. Ha has been raising the profile of the arts at M.I.T., which is more closely identified with science and technology. He initiated List Projects, a half-dozen small exhibitions each year of artists who haven’t shown before in New England, to augment the center’s three main annual exhibitions. He has increased the amount and the variety of the tours of M.I.T.’s under-heralded public-art collection, which numbers 66 site-specific works by artists including Sol LeWitt, Anish Kapoor, Louise Nevelson, Matthew Ritchie and Elizabeth Murray. Since 1968, the university has commissioned art for every new building or renovation project that costs more than $3 million through its Percent-for-Art program.“We consider the entire campus a sculpture park,” said Mr. Ha, who oversees the selection process for M.I.T. commissions. New projects by Antony Gormley, Leo Villareal and Olafur Eliasson are in the works. Mr. Ha said he realized many students weren’t aware of the List. He created a position dedicated to campus outreach and has expanded M.I.T.’s unusual Student Loan Art Program, which allows students to borrow from more than 600 works — by artists from Picasso to Matthew Barney — for their rooms or communal areas for two semesters. To help draw traffic, the List stages a salon-style exhibition of the available works and distributes them via a lottery at the beginning of each school year. “Paul has been on mission getting students and faculty over to the List and building up its reputation,” said Philip S. Khoury, associate provost in charge of the arts at M.I.T. The core of Mr. Ha’s work remains art, artists and art making. “At the List, we’re experimenting as a kunsthalle to discover what’s new and what’s out there,” said Mr. Ha, who organized the current exhibition of the Icelandic artist Katrin Sigurdardottir that is on view at the List through April 12. He compares the style of the List’s exhibition program to that of the Renaissance Society at the University of Chicago, also a noncollecting experimental center, and cites Susanne Ghez, who ran it for four decades, as one of his two idols.“The exhibitions she did were so in advance of everyone else,” he said. He named Marcia Tucker, who founded the New Museum in New York in 1977, as his other role model. “She was going through all the things of creating a new institution, but when you talk to artists, they’ll tell you she was the first one in their studios,” he said. “I always think, ‘What would Marcia do today?’ ”Advertisement