AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck9 P.M. (Starz) STILL ALICE (2014) Julianne Moore won an Oscar playing a Columbia linguistics professor struggling to maintain some semblance of normality as she deteriorates from early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Alec Baldwin is her husband, a research physician, who can’t quite cope as his wife becomes a shadow of her former self. And Kristen Stewart, Kate Bosworth and Hunter Parrish are the children who may or may not have inherited the gene. Ms. Moore’s performance is “exquisitely nuanced,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. But Alice’s impressive job, well-raised children, Manhattan brownstone and lovely beach house feel “like a too tidy garden that has been planted for the sole purpose of introducing a blight and observing its ravages,” he added. “The story is sad and sincerely told, but it is too removed from life to carry the full measure of pain that Alice deserves.” (Image: Ms. Moore)8:30 P.M. (NBC) TRUTH BE TOLD Two couples (Bresha Webb and Tone Bell, and Vanessa Lachey and Mark-Paul Gosselaar), who just happen to be neighbors and best friends, can’t help obsessing over everything, starting with a Jay Z concert and a babysitter who may be a porn star.9 P.M. (CUNY) TIMESTALKS Charles McGrath, a writer at large for The Times, interviews Kate Winslet, Danny Boyle and Aaron Sorkin about their film “Steve Jobs.” (Also at 8 a.m. and 4 p.m.)9 P.M. (13) KERN & HAMMERSTEIN’S SHOW BOAT IN CONCERT WITH THE NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC But did Lady Mary know he could sing? Julian Ovenden (that “Downton Abbey” heartthrob Charles Blake, to the uninitiated), Vanessa Williams and Norm Lewis lead the cast in this “Live From Lincoln Center” presentation of Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein II’s 1927 musical about show folk on the Mississippi. You’ll be humming along to “Make Believe,” “Can’t Help Lovin’ Dat Man” and “Ol’ Man River.”10 P.M. (Cinemax) THE KNICK The Knickerbocker Hospital prepares to move uptown, with Dr. Edwards lobbying to be appointed permanent chief of surgery while Dr. Thackery leaves his taste for cocaine and heroin behind in turn-of-the-20th-century rehab. Clive Owen plays Thackery with a dark magnetism, but “ ‘The Knick’ has become much more than another tortured-genius antihero story,” James Poniewozik wrote in The Times. “It has developed a sprawl reminiscent of HBO’s ‘Deadwood,’ stretching to the mansion and the gutter with equal familiarity.”10 P.M. (Pivot) PLEASE LIKE ME Season 3 finds Josh (Josh Thomas) piling gesture upon grand romantic gesture — elaborate dates, unpalatable vegetarian meals, even fluffy chicks — but he still can’t get Arnold (Keegan Joyce) to commit to being his boyfriend.10 P.M. (HBO) REAL TIME WITH BILL MAHER The Democratic presidential candidates Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Lawrence Lessig, a Harvard law professor, are the interview guests. The Republican strategist John Feehery, the British journalist Johann Hari, and Katrina vanden Heuvel, the editor and publisher of The Nation, are at the round table.1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK Jesse Green of New York magazine, Michael Musto of Out.com and Patrick Pacheco of The Los Angeles Times discuss the new Broadway season.What’s Streaming NowBEASTS OF NO NATION (2015) A boy flees a West African country ripped apart by civil war and is captured by young guerrilla soldiers led by the fierce Commandant, who soon trains him to cope with pain through violence. Idris Elba and Abraham Attah star in this drama written and directed by Cary Joji Fukunaga, the first fictional feature distributed by Netflix. “The line between innocence and evil is thinner than the blade of a machete,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “The movie itself is an effective nightmare, and a solid piece of filmmaking, strong enough to make you wish that it could have borne the full weight of the tragedy it set out to depict.” (netflix.com) (Image: Mr. Elba)Advertisement