AUSTIN, Tex. — With parties and performances lasting well into the early morning hours all week, the music portion of the South by Southwest Conference was certainly asking something of its attendees by scheduling this year’s music keynote address, a Q. & A. with the incomparable Snoop Dogg, for 11 a.m. on Friday. This is not a place for morning people. Reports from the South by Southwest conference and festival in Austin.Yet the ballroom here in the Austin Convention Center did fill up with groggy faces, all of whom were given a wake-up call by Chicago’s lively Hypnotic Brass Ensemble, a 10-piece horn and hip-hop group, ahead of Snoop Dogg’s sit-down.When the rapper did appear, he was joined not, as planned, by Allen Hughes, the director of hood classics like “Menace II Society” and “Dead Presidents,” but by his longtime manager, Ted Chung. Their relationship may have contributed to the conversation’s focus on internal business and self-mythologizing — “I only lost one battle out of 300 or 400,” Snoop Dogg said of his early career as a battle rapper — rather than the main focus of SXSW itself: the discovery of emerging artists and the future of the music industry writ large.After a screening of Snoop Dogg’s new psychedelic music video, “Peaches N Cream,” and a highlight reel of his rise from gangster to cuddly American pop figure, the rapper, in a Polo vest and blue bow tie, told an abridged version of his origin story — what Mr. Chung called “the D.N.A. of Snoop.” That meant some platitudes: “My pen is for everybody who’s been through something,” Snoop Dogg said. “No matter what color you are, what age, or where you come from. That’s why I feel like my connection is to the people. I always write for the people.”
PhotoCredit Ben Sklar for The New York TimesAnd some plugs: For the HBO show he is developing, with Mr. Hughes and Mr. Chung, about a struggling family in 1980s Los Angeles; his youth football league, which has sent underprivileged kids to college; TrapFlicks.com, his “urban streaming network”; the rapper’s partnership with YouTube (which happens to be sponsoring a SXSW party featuring Snoop Dogg later in the day); his venture capital investments in tech (and cannabis); and his new album, “Bush,” produced entirely by Pharrell Williams. The most compelling sections of the talk, though, focused on Snoop Dogg’s collaborations with other artists. Of Mr. Williams, he said the producer encouraged him to write more loving songs after years of raps seen as disrespectful to women. “I was blindfolded,” Snoop Dogg said. “I didn’t know I could make music like that — for the women. Music that wasn’t considered soft but that felt good.”He also spoke of his collaborations with Willie Nelson, playing into the audience’s preconceived notions about their point of connection — namely, marijuana. “I don’t know why people don’t think me and Willie don’t have nothing in common,” Snoop Dogg said, smirking. “First of all, we like animals. We like good music.” And, he added finally, “We like grass.” (The pair first bonded in Amsterdam, he said, over a smoke-and-dominoes session and a trip to the drive-through at Kentucky Fried Chicken.) While he is a classic storyteller, Snoop Dogg’s real allure for the music business professionals and aspiring musicians in the audience may have been his longevity and knack for constant reinvention. “I keep my ear to the street and I keep my feet to the pavement,” he said. “I always pay attention to what’s going on in the industry that I’m in, whether it’s the new talent or it’s the old talent — what’s hot, what’s not. What’s in, what’s out.”“To be able to still be relevant is key,” he added. “It’s not like I’m an old man trying to infringe — it’s like, ‘That’s uncle Snoop,’ and it’s all good.”SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
This playlist features songs by artists performing at South by Southwest. It will grow throughout the week. Spotify users can also find it here.
