By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMOCT. 15, 2015
There’s not much to do, or look at, in prison. Not much to listen to either, other than shouts, curses and the mechanical clicks and whirs of the building.But as the vocalist Gelsey Bell and the artist Erik Ruin suggested with their uncomfortably powerful show “Prisoner’s Song” at Roulette in Brooklyn on Wednesday, given time — lots of it — the human mind fills the void.An inmate may tend to the memories of trees with the proprietary care of a gardener. Ink can be made out of baby oil and the color scraped off the Sunday funnies. And music?There wasn’t all that much of it during this program of song, image and recorded testimonials by former convicts, which was thoughtfully directed by Rick Burkhardt. Ms. Bell did open with a raw a cappella rendition of “Another Man Done Gone,” supplementing the old blues lament with eerie ingressive shrieks and ululations. Later she offered her own folk-inflected settings of texts drawn from contemporary prison narratives and the writings of an Elizabethan highwayman.AdvertisementBut when Mr. Ruin, standing at an overhead projector, displayed a list of prisoners’ inventions, Ms. Bell only supplied unnerving pops, clicks and gurgles through a microphone. There was a deceptive simplicity to much of the performance that managed to evoke the restrictive and impoverished reality of incarceration even as it paid tribute to the resilience, ingenuity and poetry that can transcend it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The voices filling the space for most of the evening were those of former inmates. Mr. Ruin, a printmaker and shadow puppeteer living in Philadelphia, conducted the interviews himself, and created a number of spellbinding cut-paper animations to accompany the recordings.AdvertisementSome were difficult to watch. For an account of solitary confinement, Mr. Ruin projected a simple silhouette of a man’s head. As the man’s voice continued to recount the mental anguish he suffered, Mr. Ruin noisily tore paper strips off a sheet and laid them on top of the image until it was obliterated by thick bars.Other sequences evoked streams of consciousness. On long scrolls of paper, Mr. Ruin created intricate cutouts with people, buildings and fences blending into abstract latticework patterns. When he gently pulled these over the projector the images on the screen moved with hallucinatory fluidity.When Laura Whitehorn, a former prisoner and activist, recalled the emotional sustenance she drew from a tree half-glimpsed through a milk-glass window, Mr. Ruin conjured a botanical dream world. For Luke Hutton’s “Black Dog of Newgate,” a nightmarish account of conditions in a 16th-century dungeon, which Ms. Bell sang in the manner of an old folk ballad, Mr. Ruin provided a hypnotic stream of illustrations which only stopped moving when they reached an execution square crowded with expectant faces.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.