By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIMMARCH 20, 2015
Detractors of the bel canto style typically dislike it because, they argue, it is only that: beautiful singing. In the music of composers like Donizetti and Bellini the action stops and words take a back seat. All that matters, for the duration of an aria, is the glory of the human voice and its ability to dart up and down octaves while dashing off trills and other ornaments in a fizzy display of vocal pyrotechnics.If that is true, Joyce DiDonato never got the memo. This magnetic mezzo-soprano wrapped up her Perspectives series at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday evening with a selection of arias and scenes from Bel Canto operas, sharing the stage with the Philadelphia Orchestra led by Maurizio Benini, the tenor Lawrence Brownlee and the soprano Laura Claycomb. The singing hit all the technical buttons, from the rich lyricism of Mr. Brownlee’s legato to the nimble precision of Ms. Claycomb’s coloratura and the thrilling speed of Ms. DiDonato’s signature trills. But what shone through most clearly was concentrated emotion of insistent, immediate relevance.Ms. DiDonato’s riveting performance as Romeo opposite Ms. Claycomb’s Juliet of a scene from Bellini’s “I Capuleti e I Montecchi” felt as if layer upon layer of craft and technique had turned transparent: What the audience witnessed was not an artful reading of Bellini’s adaptation of of the librettist’s take on an ancient Veronese tragedy but the feeling itself of hotheaded, never-mind-the-consequences passion.The selections, many taken from Ms. DiDonato’s CD “Stella di Napoli,” included rarities from unfamiliar operas. But a listener need not have studied up on plotlines and character back stories to grasp the despair simmering beneath the prayer’s surface in Ms. DiDonato’s rendition of “L’amica ancor non torna,” from Carafa’s “Le Nozze di Lammermoor,” or to recognize the hard-edged egotism of the heroine singing “Ove t’aggiri, o barbaro,” from Giovanni Pacini’s “Stella di Napoli,” with its stiletto-sharp staccato scales and aggressively flamboyant ornaments.Mr. Brownlee sang two smooth-flowing arias by Donizetti, “Una furtiva lagrima” from “L’Elisir d’Amore” and “Ange si pur” from “La Favorite,” which showed off his immaculate legato line and the beauty of his molten-silver tenor. In “Prendi, per me sei libero,” from “L’Elisir,” he and Ms. Claycomb were vocally alluring but dramatically cautious. Nothing was held back, however, in the encore, “À la faveur de cette nuit obscure,” from Rossini’s “Le Comte Ory,” which brought all three singers together in a fast, fun and saucy threesome.Under the direction of Mr. Benini, who is currently conducting a revival of Donizetti’s “Lucia di Lammermoor” at the Metropolitan Opera, the orchestra played with expressive commitment though not without the occasional imperfection. But the strings brought fresh articulation and swing to their often formulaic parts and there were luscious solos. In Bellini’s “Eccomi in lieta vesta,” the warm and noble sound of Jennifer Montone’s horn partnered beautifully with that of Ms. Claycomb’s soprano. During the protracted ovation at the end of the concert, Ms. DiDonato expressed her thanks to the Philadelphia players, saying, “You cannot ask to be driven around in a more luxurious vehicle.”An earlier version of this review included an erroneous reference to the source material for Bellini’s “I Capuleti e I Montecchi.” The opera is based on Italian sources, not Shakespeare’s “Romeo and Juliet.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.