Monet and the Birth of Impressionism
Städel Museum.
Through June 21.The formal elements at play in Claude Monet’s “The Luncheon” provide the opening point for this exhibition, which focuses on the Impressionist master’s early works and how they laid the groundwork for a revolution in painting. In addition to a range of works from early in Monet’s career, the show includes other famous names who were involved in the Impressionist movement, like Cézanne, Sisley and Renoir. The exhibition is part of the museum’s ongoing celebration of its 200th anniversary. Parasophia: Kyoto International Festival of Contemporary Culture
Various venues.
Through May 10.This event will feature artworks from Yasumasa Morimura, who created a version of Velázquez’s “Las Meninas” featuring himself as each figure in the painting; Cai Guo-Qiang, who makes drawings by exploding gunpowder onto canvas; and Danh Vo, who is slowly building a to-scale replica of the Statue of Liberty. The festival, coordinated by organizations including several of the city’s major universities and museums, includes a number of lectures, workshops and performances alongside the exhibitions. Several artists, like Mr. Vo and Brandt Junceau, created new works for the occasion. Symphysis
Various venues.
Through June 5.The Nederlands Dans Theater’s second company, consisting of emerging dancers, just embarked on a tour of the Netherlands with this mixed bill. The program includes the popular pieces “Left Right Left Right” and “I New Then,” as well as two world premieres — “A Honeydew Hunt” by Jiri Pokorny and “mutual comfort” by the rising Romanian choreographer Edward Clug.JR: A Survey Exhibition
The Pulse.
Through April 12.The French artist JR made his name by placing large-scale black-and-white portraits satirizing the “clichés of the ghetto” in public spaces around the Paris suburbs shortly before large-scale riots broke out there in 2005. Since then, his work has taken off globally — the artist has made portraits in places from rural China to Brazilian slums and inside the Panthéon in Paris. He often involves struggling communities in the creation of his works. This exhibition, which opened alongside Art Basel Hong Kong, provides a photographic glimpse back at some of his projects. International Mstislav Rostropovich Festival
Various venues.
March 27-April 2.Valery Gergiev, the director of the Mariinsky Theater and the principal conductor of London’s leading symphony, founded this festival in 2008 to pay homage to the late conductor Mstislav Rostropovich. This year’s event includes six major concerts. On March 28, Zubin Mehta will play an evening of Mussorgsky, Rachmaninov and Tchaikovsky with the orchestra of the Maggio Musicale Fiorentino. On March 29, the festival will host a special tribute to Prokofiev, featuring the rising conductor Kazuki Yamada and the star cellist Lizi Ramishvili. A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Calder: Discipline of the Dance
Museo Jumex.
March 22-June 28.The American sculptor Alexander Calder, best known for his spinning mobile designs, studied as an engineer before abandoning the profession to become an artist. This exhibition brings together pieces from across his career, with a particular emphasis on works inspired by Latin America (a statue that Calder built for the 1968 Olympic Games in Mexico City still stands next to the city’s Aztec Stadium). A number of paintings are on display alongside the better-known sculpture works. Last month, the museum canceled a show it had planned to dedicate to the controversial Austrian artist Hermann Nitsch, citing Mexico’s unstable political situation as the reason. Tallinn Music Week
Various venues.
March 25-29.Electro pop, house and techno will take center stage at this festival of contemporary music from the Baltics, Russia and across Europe. Acts include the Denmark-based remix artist Felix De Luca, the London-based melodic throwback band Desert Mountain Tribe and a string of techno artists from Estonia. Around 200 bands will perform in all. On March 27, a “classical music rave,” featuring remixed versions of orchestral music, will take place in a century-old power plant. Easter Festival
Festspielhaus Baden Baden.
March 27-April 6.A number of Baden-Baden’s small churches and formal halls will host chamber concerts performed by members of the Berlin Philharmonic during this festival. The action will center on two performances helmed by the Philharmonic’s outgoing conductor Simon Rattle: A new production of Strauss’s light opera “Der Rosenkavalier,” and a concert version of Berlioz’s “La Damnation de Faust.” On March 31, members of the Philharmonic (which organizes and curates the festival) will perform alongside a silent film version of “Der Rosenkavalier.” Velázquez
Grand Palais.
March 25-July 13.Velázquez, who grew up in Seville, forged a quiet revolution in Spanish religious painting and domestic scenes before turning his attention to the aristocracy when King Philip IV appointed him a court painter at the age of 24. Among the king’s most prized painters, Velázquez made a series of iconic portraits of him and his family. This comprehensive exhibition brings together work from each stage of the artist’s career. 