AUSTIN, Tex. — The biggest buzz around town on Thursday, as the South by Southwest music mayhem hit its stride, was not about a breakout band from Brooklyn or Sweden, nor was it focused on the previous night’s exclusive Iggy Azalea set for Samsung. Instead, the increasingly loud whispers around Austin came straight from  trending topics for 2013: Miley Cyrus was rumored to be making an appearance. Slide Show: Scenes from SXSWSure enough, unlike Kanye West, who has yet to materialize, Ms. Cyrus did pop up, not long before 9 p.m. at the Fader Fort, the 14th annual iteration of the exceptionally on-trend SXSW venue, presented this year by Converse. Reports from the South by Southwest conference and festival in Austin.Her brief three-song appearance — the pop music equivalent of saying “Remember me?” after a relatively quiet six months — came during the organized chaos of a headlining set billed as “Mike Will Made-It and Friends,” for the Atlanta producer who escorted Ms. Cyrus through her hip-hop phase on “Bangerz,” the 2013 album that buried Hannah Montana once and for all. Ms. Cyrus was preceded by a more on-brand parade of Mike Will-affiliated rappers, including the wonderfully cartoonish Riff Raff; Future, who had club anthems to spare; and the rambunctious duo Rae Sremmurd. So it was a bit jarring to see some of those eclectic but ultimately like-minded artists — and their plentiful crew members — wave their hands side to side as Ms. Cyrus transitioned from her elementary rap verse on Mike Will’s “23” into her “’bout that life” party anthem, “We Can’t Stop.” But the young men on stage were game, even amid the novelty factor — they know who pays the bills around here. Flashy as ever in a sparkly camo-print dress and matching jacket, plus a sizable Chanel choker, Ms. Cyrus shot the crowd with a water gun and stuck out her tongue in trademark snotty fashion. She also attempted to stand in for the reigning pop-rap queen Nicki Minaj on Rae Sremmurd’s strip club banger, “Throw Sum Mo,” after encouraging Mike Will’s latest protégés to perform another song. Not quite cutting it on the microphone, Ms. Cyrus turned her back to the crowd and just danced, quite convincingly.SPOTIFY PLAYLIST
This playlist features songs by artists performing at South by Southwest. It will grow throughout the week. Spotify users can also find it here.
