By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMARCH 20, 2015
11 P.M. (Pop) THE DESCENDANTS (2011) Matt King (George Clooney, in an Oscar-nominated role), whose ancestors include the earliest white settlers in Hawaii, struggles to make the right decision about his family’s birthright, a pristine tract on Kauai — should it be sold to developers? — while his wife, Elizabeth (Patricia Hastie), lies in a coma after a boating accident. Not long after Matt learns he is about to become a widower and a single father to unruly daughters, Scottie (Amara Miller) and Alex (Shailene Woodley), he discovers that his wife had an affair. And Elizabeth’s father (Robert Forster) blames Matt for his daughter’s condition. The director Alexander Payne, “with a light touch and a keen sense of place — this Hawaii is as real and peculiar as the Nebraska of ‘About Schmidt’ or the California wine country of ‘Sideways’ — has made a movie that, for all its modesty, is as big as life,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “Its heart is occupied by grief, pain and the haunting silence of Elizabeth, whose version of events is the only one we never hear. And yet it is also full of warmth, humor and the kind of grace that can result from our clumsy attempts to make things better.”1:30 P.M. (HBO) SOMETHING NEW (2006) Sanaa Lathan plays an executive at a Los Angeles accounting firm whose backyard is in desperate need of an overhaul. Simon Baker is the gardener who comes to her rescue. She’s black, he’s white, and the result is a chemical combustion in this feature debut from Sanaa Hamri. “Reader, he digs her — and she digs him, this being a Hollywood fantasia,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times. “First comes k-i-s-s-i-n-g, and then comes some lightly steamed boudoir nuzzling, including the best toenail-polishing since ‘Lolita,’ followed by the expected complications with family and friends.” Nevertheless, Ms. Dargis added, the film is “a store-bought valentine with real heart.”7:30 P.M. (CUNY) SCIENCE GOES TO THE MOVIES Faith Salie, a pop culture commentator; Heather Berlin, a neuroscientist; and Rosario Gennaro, a professor of computer science at the City College of New York, dissect films and plays about Alan Turing, the pioneering British computer scientist, including “The Imitation Game” and “Breaking the Code.”8 P.M. (Fox) GLEE After six seasons, the series ends by flashing back to explain how the original choristers (including Rachel, played by Lea Michele) found their way into the ensemble, and reviewing where the road has taken them.Advertisement9 P.M. (MTV) 2015 MTVU WOODIE AWARDS SPECIAL Jack Antonoff of the band Bleachers hosts this 11th annual ceremony, broadcast live from the South by Southwest Music Festival in Austin, Tex., which honors students’ favorite artists, including Charli XCX, FKA twigs, J. Cole, Run the Jewels and Sam Smith.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (HBO) REAL TIME WITH BILL MAHER The sportscaster Bob Costas and Gerald Posner, the author of “God’s Bankers: A History of Money and Power at the Vatican,” are the interview guests. Former Representative Jack Kingston, Republican of Georgia; Mercedes Schlapp, a conservative political strategist; and Christine C. Quinn, the former New York City Council speaker, are seated at the round table.1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK Theodore S. Chapin, the president and executive director of Rodgers & Hammerstein: An Imagem Company, and Tom Santopietro, the author of “The Sound of Music Story,” look back at the 1959 musical and 1965 film adaptation. Also, the D.J. duo AndrewAndrew attends a rehearsal for the coming musical “Something Rotten!”AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowIF YOU DON’T, I WILL (2014) Emmanuelle Devos and Mathieu Amalric portray Pomme and Pierre, a French couple in their 40s whose strained marriage is on the brink of collapse in this film directed by Sophie Fillières. Then Pomme ventures into the woods and doesn’t return, prompting Pierre to search for her — a few days later. “ ‘If You Don’t, I Will’ is a dour, acutely observed comedy about marital boredom that doesn’t glamorize or overdramatize the characters’ angst,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times. “Its lived-in performances evoke an excruciating stalemate that can be ended only by a radical break. But can a weeklong vacation from each other refresh a marriage that has been going sour for years?” (iTunes)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C19 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.