By LAUREL GRAEBERMARCH 19, 2015
‘The Magic Garden, or, The Princess Who Grew Antlers’To disappear, or not to disappear?That is the question for many puppet troupes, whose members can fade into the background with the aid of devices like curtains and black bodysuits, or remain in full view, obtrusively unobtrusive. But the players of the Czechoslovak-American Marionette Theater have their own strategy: They become their marionettes’ colorful doubles.In “The Magic Garden, or, The Princess Who Grew Antlers,” a new family production at Theater for the New City, Vit Horejs, the company’s artistic director, manipulates a marionette that’s a wizard disguised as an old beggar; he also wears an almost identical costume and mimics the puppet’s actions. At the same time, he and the other performers — Theresa Linnihan, Michelle Beshaw and her sister, Deborah Beshaw-Farrell — switch wardrobe elements and marionettes to play additional folk-tale roles, while also portraying a centuries-old itinerant Czech puppet troupe, whose culture they periodically explain in asides.Whether all this confuses or amuses depends on the theatergoer. Small children are likely to be bewildered, but those over 7 or 8 may be intrigued by this foreign fairy-tale world, which incorporates a clownlike character — the potbellied Kasparek — and a princess who’d never star in a Disney adaptation. Not only is she positively venal, but she also acquires horns.“The Magic Garden” centers on her story, whose hero, an impoverished former soldier, earns valuable gifts from the beggar-wizard by handing over his last bit of food. The sorcerer first rewards him with a magic pipe, perpetually full, warning him to be careful about sharing it. (Don’t expect traditional Czech tales to include antismoking messages.) The retired soldier ignores this advice when he visits the princess’s palace, where she and her father make him fall asleep and replace the pipe with an ordinary one.AdvertisementThis switcheroo occurs with two more enchanted gifts until the hero stumbles upon a means to win back his goods and wreak his revenge.AdvertisementAlthough “The Magic Garden,” which Mr. Horejs wrote (with the cast’s help) and directed, isn’t one of the company’s top efforts, it’s performed with the troupe’s usual artistry and dazzling marionettes. (Some are antique; Jakub Krejci and Milos Kasal designed most of the contemporary ones.) Including two other tales, the show also answers a question that might have inspired folklore through the ages: Why does the camel have such a sour disposition?(Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 3 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.; 155 First Avenue, near 10th Street, East Village; 212-254-1109, theaterforthenewcity.net.) LAUREL GRAEBERFor Children‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘The Bully’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company has revived this ever-topical musical, by John Gregor and David L. Williams, which refreshingly avoids the trap of bullying its own audiences with heavy moralizing. Instead, the many pitfalls of the typical middle school relationship of victimizer and victim are revealed through wit, humor and a killer of a sly twist. (Through April 26.) At 3:30 p.m., McGinn-Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor; 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Camp Kappawanna’ (Saturday and Sunday) If the spring equinox is here, can summer camp be far behind? This new musical from Atlantic for Kids, the children’s division of the Atlantic Theater Company, focuses on a 12-year old, Jennifer Jenkins, who is facing the challenge of leaving home for the first time. With music and lyrics by Lisa Loeb, Michelle Lewis and Dan Petty, and a book by Cusi Cram and Peter Hirsch, it features lots of singing, and not just around the campfire. (Through April 12.) At 10:30 a.m., Linda Gross Theater, 336 West 20th Street, Chelsea; 866-811-4111, atlantictheater.org.Children’s Museum of the Arts Persian Festival (Sunday) Where do paisley patterns come from? How about geometric styling? Children can investigate the ancient legacies and contemporary innovations associated with Persia, now Iran, in this celebration, part of an annual series honoring the traditions of different cultures. Programming this weekend includes an interactive theater performance based on Iranian literature and an art project centered on radial symmetry. Other highlights will be creating paisley-themed stop-motion films and remixing Iranian pop music. From 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.‘Fancy Nancy the Musical’  (Saturday) One of the arts’ youngest divas has returned to the McGinn/Cazale Theater. This musical from Vital Theater Company focuses on a little girl who wants everything to be fancy — especially herself. Based on the book series written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, the production explores the predicament that ensues when Nancy finds out that she hasn’t been cast as the glamorous mermaid she’d hoped to be in the coming dance show. With a book by Susan DiLallo, a score by Danny Abosch, and lyrics by both, the musical humorously follows Nancy’s attempts to cope with a most unfancy role: that of a tree. (Through April 5.) At 1:30 p.m., 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.Advertisement‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘Hakanai’ (Friday through Sunday) Geometry can be a lot of fun when you create it with your body. In this performance, part of the BAMkids series at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, a single dancer enters a cube in which images are projected on the walls. These patterns respond digitally to movement, so that when the dancer traces an arc or a sine wave, the images shift and morph. Composed and directed by Adrien Mondot and Claire Bardainne, the installation is also offering young visitors a chance to explore the cube themselves in groups of 20, in half-hour sessions, on Saturday from 2 to 5 p.m. and on Sunday from 2 to 4 p.m. Tickets are sold out online, but some will become available at the door. Shows: Friday and Saturday at 7 p.m., Sunday at 6 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene; 718-636-4100, bam.org/kids. Reservations are required for the sessions within the cube.‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Inspector Pulse Pops a String’ (Sunday) The composer Bruce Adolphe’s alter ego, Inspector Pulse, a musical detective he refers to as a “private ear,” is at it again. In this program for children 6 and older, part of the Meet the Music! series from the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, the inspector breaks a string on a piano. (And he thought those instruments were just about keys.) This leads to an exploration of the secrets of strings with the help of the Amphion String Quartet. A preconcert “instrument petting zoo” is at 1 p.m.; the concert at 2; Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one sprouts indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which has revived Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays at 1 p.m. (Some shows are sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park; 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.Kids ‘N Comedy: ‘Prepping for Pranks Show’ (Sunday) The class clown gets applause, not detention, at this monthly series, in which tween and teenage comics perform stand-up. Here, in honor of the approaching April Fools’ Day, they offer a show focusing on all the tricks — successful and not — associated with that tradition. The material is recommended for children 9 and older, but there’s no need to worry about appropriateness (profanity is banned) or knock-knock jokes (this crew is sophisticated). Reservations required. At 1 p.m., Gotham Comedy Club, 208 West 23rd Street, Chelsea, 212-877-6115, kidsncomedy.com.La MaMa Kids (Saturday) La MaMa, the downtown theater famous for cultivating cutting-edge adults, has in recent years been turning its attention to cutting-edge kids, too. This series for families, which presents interactive workshops and performances, continues this weekend with “The Blue Marble.” Presented by Jane Catherine Shaw, curator of La MaMa Puppet Slam, this puppet play invites children to accompany a child named Cassie Day on her adventures into outer space and back. At 11 a.m., Ellen Stewart Theater, 74 East Fourth Street, East Village, 212-475-7710, lamama.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton; 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.‘The Little Prince’ (Friday and Sunday) Long before E.T., another extraterrestrial won the hearts of children: the title character of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry’s fable “The Little Prince,” who lived on a distant planet with only a rose for company. Hang a Tale, a new theater company, is presenting Rick Cummins and John Scoullar’s adaptation of the story, a multimedia production that incorporates video projections, original songs and puppets and masks. Friday at 2 and 7 p.m.; Saturday at 2 p.m.; Sunday at 10:30 a.m. and 7 p.m.; Pearl Theater, 555 West 42nd Street, Clinton; hangatale.org.AdvertisementElizabeth Mitchell and You Are My Flower (Saturday) This concert is a family affair. Elizabeth Mitchell, who specializes in creating children’s versions of classic folk tunes, will perform with her daughter, Storey, and her husband, Daniel Littleton, as part of the Just Kidding series at Symphony Space. Joining them will be Ms. Mitchell’s band You Are My Flower and assorted guests. Young listeners 3 and older can expect to hear original music, too, from Ms. Mitchell’s albums “Catch the Moon” and “Blue Clouds.” At 11 a.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.New York International Children’s Film Festival (Saturday and Sunday) This is the last weekend of the festival, and the last chance to experience a universe of unusual and challenging global cinema. In addition to several shorts programs, features on the schedule include the documentaries “Landfillharmonic,” about teenagers in Paraguay who made an orchestra of instruments from trash, and “Ballet Boys,” which focuses on three teenage male dancers in Norway, navigating a female-dominated world. (Both screen on Saturday.) And tickets still remain for Sunday’s closing-night celebration, which includes awards presentations and an 80-minute program of the best short films in the monthlong festival, as voted on by the jury and audience members. (Tickets may be available at the door for screenings listed as sold out.) At various locations; full schedule is on the website; 212-349-0330, gkids.com/fest2015.‘Pinocchio’ (Saturday and Sunday) In this stage version of Carlo Collodi’s classic tale, the title character doesn’t just want to be a boy; he also wants to be a star. Presented at the New Victory Theater by the acclaimed Windmill Theater of Australia, and closing this weekend, this two-hour rock musical, with a score by Jethro Woodward, portrays Pinocchio as a youth — his nose grows before the audience’s eyes — who’s easily seduced by contemporary glamour. Written by Rosemary Myers and Julianne O’Brien, the show includes puppetry and animated projections. Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 5 p.m.; 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan; 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday and Sunday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through May 10.) Saturday at 1 p.m., Sunday at noon, 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, rapunzarellawhite.bpt.me.‘Shaping the Lowline With the Young Designers Program’ (Sunday through Thursday) You know about the Highline; now comes the Lowline. This project, a planned underground park on the Lower East Side, has solicited ideas from area students through its Young Designers Program, an after-school initiative. This free exhibition at the Mark Miller Gallery, which kicks off with a daylong reception on Sunday, includes 3-D models of the new park, along with written explanations and photos. It also offers interactive exhibits at which visitors can deliver their own suggestions and feedback. (Through March 29.) The reception, for which online registration is requested, is from noon to 6 p.m. Gallery hours are also noon to 6 p.m. At 92 Orchard Street, near Broome Street, Lower East Side, 212-253-9479, thelowline.org/exhibit.Spring Fling Family Fun Field Day (Saturday) Spring is in the air — or at least on the calendar — and Asphalt Green, the sports and fitness nonprofit, will welcome it with this free outdoor celebration at its Upper East Side location. There will be plenty of games to play (soccer, gaga, baseball); activities to enjoy (Zumba, martial arts); and art projects to create, for those who don’t want to sweat. Snacks will be provided, too. (The event will take place regardless of the weather; the field will be cleared of any snow.) From 2:30 to 4:30 p.m., 555 East 90th Street, Manhattan, asphaltgreen.org/ues.Sun/Earth Day (Saturday) The sun isn’t just the center of the universe; it’s what makes life on Earth possible. In this program at the American Museum of Natural History, children can learn about the relationship between our planet and its star. Highlights include meeting scientists who study climate change; watching Part 3 of the HBO documentary “Saving My Tomorrow,” which features young people from around the world speaking on environmental issues; seeing visualizations of the Earth’s magnetosphere and the sun’s atmosphere; and visiting a portable planetarium. From 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., Cullman Hall of the Universe, Rose Center for Earth and Space, Central Park West, at 81st Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.AdvertisementSuper Sábado: ‘The Big Screen’ (Saturday) Sabádo means Saturday, and El Museo del Barrio tries to make the third one each month a super event for children. (And it’s always free.) This celebration, “The Big Screen,” centers on the museum’s current exhibition “Under the Mexican Sky: Gabriel Figueroa — Art and Film.” In addition to going on guided tours of the show, devoted to the work of this Mexican cinematographer, young visitors can make thaumatropes (vintage-style moving-image toys) or short animations; take part in interactive storytelling; learn Mexican dances; and attend a performance by Ballet Hispanico. From noon to 5 p.m., 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street, East Harlem, 212-831-7272, elmuseo.org.‘Through the Looking Glass’ (Friday through Sunday) Lewis Carroll himself, portrayed by a member of the Gingerbread Players of St. Luke’s Church in Queens, narrates this musical theater adaptation of Alice’s continuing adventures, closing this weekend. With a score by William Ryden and a book by Louise Guinther, the show, first performed in 1999, has been updated to suit its current cast. Expect the usual characters — Humpty Dumpty, the Jabberwock, the Red and White Queens — along with something Alice would have appreciated during her journey: gingerbread for sale. Friday at 7:30 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 2:30 p.m.; St. Luke’s Church, 85 Greenway South, between Ascan Avenue and Harrow Street, Forest Hills, 718-268-7772, gingerbreadplayers.org.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘Tunes With Tina’ (Sunday) That’s Tina deVaron, a jazz musician and singer, whose musical brunch for young people at the Measure Lounge at Langham Place, Fifth Avenue, a hotel in Midtown Manhattan, has returned. Ms. deVaron, who often sings show tunes for children, also improvises and gears her performances to the audience. On selected Sundays throughout the season, she will be accompanied by Broadway performers. Singing along is encouraged. (Through May 31.) At noon, 400 Fifth Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-695-4005, measurenyc.com.UniverSoul Circus (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Don’t expect hurdy-gurdy tunes at this big-top event. Emphasizing African-American contributions to circus arts, UniverSoul performs its acts to hip-hop, R&B, soul and gospel. This year’s show also presents performances from around the world, including Cuba, China, Ecuador and Ethiopia. Among the acts are flying trapeze artists, acrobats, Caribbean dancers and clowns. (Through April 5.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and 7:30 p.m.; Saturdays at noon and 4 and 7:30 p.m.; Sundays at 12:30, 3:30 and 6:30 p.m., 149th Street and Exterior Street, Mott Haven, the Bronx, 800-345-7000, ticketmaster.com; universoulcircus.com.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Sundays through March 29, at 1, 1:45 and 2:30 p.m., the museum will also feature the Matzo Bakery, a program in which children can grind wheat into flour and roll and bake their own matzos in preparation for Passover. Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; to 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Whodunnit Family Scavenger Hunt (Saturday) Imagine playing the game of Clue when the board consists of the halls of a great museum. That’s what this scavenger hunt for children 10 and older, from Watson Adventures, is like: They’ll trail a killer who has committed a murder in the Metropolitan Museum of Art. He’s mocked the police with an intriguing series of hints about his name, the weapon he used and the gallery where he hid the body. Teams, which must each include at least one adult and one child (six is the maximum number for a team), will receive a list of suspects, weapons and hiding places. Then the sleuthing begins. At 10:30 a.m., 877-946-4868, Ext. 12, watsonadventures.com. The meeting place will be revealed upon registration, which is required at the Web site or by phone.Worlds Collide Convention (Saturday) Fans love conventions, and why shouldn’t book lovers have them, too? Scholastic, publisher of a number of adventure and fantasy series, is hosting this event celebrating four of them: The 39 Clues, Spirit Animals, Infinity Ring and TombQuest. Geared to children over 8, the convention will feature series authors giving interactive performances based on the books; demonstrations of online games they’ve inspired; and related craft projects and giveaways. From 1 to 4 p.m., Scholastic headquarters, 557 Broadway, near Prince Street, SoHo, scholastic.com/worldscollidecon. The event is free, but online registration is required. LAUREL GRAEBERA version of this schedule appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C14 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.