By JOSHUA BARONEMARCH 19, 2015
Around TownMuseums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and other diseases? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out diseases. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.BRIC and the Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Mapping Brooklyn’ (through Sept. 6) This exhibition features artworks that incorporate themes of mapping and cartography in historical maps. The artists here are exploring the ways maps represent the practical and metaphoric aspects of life. The show is on view at BRIC House through May 3. Tuesdays through Saturdays from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Sundays to 6 p.m., 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. The show will also be at the Brooklyn Historical Society through Sept. 6. Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5 p.m., 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Grolier Club: ‘Aldus Manutius: A Legacy More Lasting Than Bronze’ (through April 25) To celebrate the quincentennial of Aldus Manutius’s death, the Grolier Club has assembled over 130 rare books, called Aldines, from that scholar-printer’s Italian Renaissance press. The exhibition explores the ways in which, to this day, Manutius influences how we preserve and disseminate knowledge. As Jennifer Schuessler wrote in The New York Times, “Anyone who has ever sat in a cafe, or in the bath, with a paperback owes a debt to Aldus and the small, cleanly designed editions of the secular classics.” 47 East 60th Street, Manhattan, 212-838-6690, grolierclub.org; free.Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘La Celestina’ (Friday through March 29) This site-specific video opera is a “Rashomon”-like story in which characters tell their own versions of a tragic Spanish tale, “La Celestina,” published more than 500 years ago. The installation, with video projections and multichannel audio, blends Spanish polyphonic vocal music with Judeo-Spanish, Arabic and Andalusian folk music. Daily, during museum hours, in the museum’s Vélez Blanco Patio, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org.AdvertisementMorgan Library & Museum: ‘Lincoln Speaks: Words That Transformed a Nation’ (through June 7) This exhibition, which is presented thematically and chronologically, homes in on Abraham Lincoln’s leadership and its relationship to language. In his exhibition review for The New York Times, Neil Genzlinger wrote: “For Lincoln admirers, simply being in the same room with so many artifacts he touched will be a delight. And if they give the exhibition the time it requires, they will certainly come away with a fuller appreciation of the man.” 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.AdvertisementMuseum of the Moving Image: ‘Matthew Weiner’s “Mad Men” ’ (through June 14) As one of the most critically acclaimed TV shows in recent years nears its finale, “Mad Men” gets the exhibition treatment in this look at the series’s creative process. On display are large-scale sets, such as Don Draper’s office, as well as costumes, art and research material used by the show’s staff. Viewers should expect not only a look behind the scenes of the show, but also, like “Mad Men” itself, a peek into the era it depicts. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.New-York Historical Society: ‘Audubon’s Aviary: The Final Flight (Part III of the Complete Flock)’ (through May 10) The third installment of “Audubon’s Aviary: The Complete Flock” comprises nearly 130 plates from the watercolors in John James Audubon’s “The Birds of America” collection, engraved by Robert Havell Jr. The exhibition, as William Grimes wrote in an article for The New York Times, “underlines the natural wealth of the American land, and Audubon’s remarkable talent for producing art as varied as his subject matter.” 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Chinese American: Exclusion/Inclusion’ (through April 19) In his review for The New York Times, Edward Rothstein called this show a “vigorous and imaginative new exhibition,” that includes a look at “how Chinese-American identity came to be, how immigration and discrimination were followed by recrimination and conflict, and how, finally, a people’s trials give way to celebration.” Tuesday through Thursday and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Friday until 8 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Transit Museum: ‘Spanning the Narrows: The Verrazano Bridge at 50’ (through next fall) Photographs, maps, drawings, models and other archival materials related to the construction of the bridge (including correspondence from Robert Moses, who oversaw the project) are part of this exhibition commemorating its 50th anniversary. Tuesdays through Fridays from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-694-1600, mta.info/mta/museum.New York Transit Museum Grand Central Terminal Gallery Annex: ‘New York’s Transportation Landmarks’ (through Nov. 1) It’s been 50 years since New York passed its Landmarks Law, which covers over 30,000 buildings and structures around the city. To celebrate the anniversary, the New York Transit Museum has created an exhibition that explores the history of development, use and even rescue of these landmarks. More information: 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum. On Tuesday, the museum will host its AfterHours program, “A Lasting Legacy: Historic Preservation and the M.T.A.,” at its Brooklyn location, with Hollie Wells from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, and Sara McIvor, a historic preservationist. At 6:30 p.m., New York Transit Museum, Schermerhorn Street, at Boerum Place, Brooklyn, 718-694-1600.Red Bull Studios: ‘Alone Together’  (through April 12) The artist Ryder Ripps has created a site-specific work that acts as sculpture and performance. It’s a system that covers two floors: Below are six performers whose computer activity is sent above to a collective, frenzied display. Visitors to the exhibition play the part of voyeurs. Mr. Ripps’s idea is that the Internet creates a paradox in which the more connected we are, the more physically withdrawn we become. Thursdays through Sundays from noon to 7 p.m., 220 West 18th Street, Chelsea, redbullstudios.com/newyork; free.Events‘Bascove/Bridges: Transporting the Metropolis’ (through July 12) This exhibition features more than 30 paintings and drawings of city bridges by the artist Anne Bascove, including the Brooklyn Bridge, the Outerbridge Crossing and the George Washington Bridge. Thursdays through Sundays from 1 to 5 p.m.; also by appointment; Noble Maritime Collection, Snug Harbor Cultural Center and Botanical Garden, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, Staten Island, 718-447-6490, noblemaritime.org.AdvertisementHaZamir: The International Jewish High School Choir (Sunday) HaZamir, with 350 singers from 26 chapters in the United States and Israel, performs a selection of classical and modern music. The program includes a premiere by Gerald Cohen. The group will be joined by an alumni ensemble, with sets by the HaZamir Chamber Choir and the HaZamir’s Israeli singers. A 4 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-721-6500, lincolncenter.org.Videology Presents Movie Trivia (Tuesdays) Videology, the Brooklyn bar and cinema, hosts a free film-themed trivia contest every week. The game varies; you will want to know theme songs, facts, quotes (especially ones from Nicolas Cage) and more. The winning team receives a free round of drinks, and there are chances to win free drinks each round. At 8:30 p.m., 308 Bedford Avenue, at South First Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-3468, videology.info.Spoken WordGeoff Dyer (Thursday) Mr. Dyer, an authority on contemporary British literature, wrote the introduction for a new edition of Raymond Williams’s “Politics and Letters,” a collection of interviews with the New Left Review, a political magazine. Mr. Dyer will discuss the book with Jenny Davidson, an English and comparative literature teacher at Columbia University, as well as Nikil Saval, author of “Cubed: A Secret History of the Workplace” and an editor at the journal n+1. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.An Evening With Amy Tan (Tuesday) This writer discusses her career and experiences as the daughter of Chinese immigrants with Ken Smith, a critic for the Financial Times. Ms. Tan is the author of multiple best-selling novels, including “The Joy Luck Club,” an exploration of family and Chinese identity. At 6:30 p.m., New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.Gary Hustwit (Wednesday) The filmmaker Gary Hustwit discusses his book “Helvetica/Objectified/Urbanized: The Complete Interviews,” a companion to his trilogy of documentaries about design. He will lead a panel with the designer Paula Scher, the type designer Tobias Frere-Jones, the industrial designer Karim Rashid, Smart Design founder Davin Stowell and the architecture expert Noah Chasin. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Love Thy Neighbor: Brooklyn in Black and White’ (Thursday) This workshop aims to foster conversations about community and diversity in Brooklyn, and includes an overview of the borough’s history of racial justice from the 17th century to the present. There will be remarks from the writer and social activist Darnell L. Moore, as well as an activity led by Jenny Douglas from the Brooklyn Cottage. At 7 p.m., Old Stone House, 336 Third Street, between Fourth and Fifth Avenues, Park Slope, Brooklyn, theoldstonehouse.org; free.Dawn Luebbe (Tuesday) Ms. Luebbe, a cast member at the Upright Citizen’s Brigade, rides her nostalgia back to the early ’90s in “My 1992 Diary.” Back then, she was an 11-year-old in Nebraska who was obsessed with “Beverly Hills 90210” and Kurt Cobain. Audience members can expect those topics to come up, in addition to Bubble Tape and big bangs. At 7 p.m., Word, 126 Franklin Street, at Milton Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, wordbookstores.com.Out by Ten (Thursday) Joseph Keckler, a storyteller with a three-octave vocal range, hosts this monthly performance series featuring stories and music. The program will be followed by an open mike. At 7:30 p.m., Spectrum NYC, 121 Ludlow Street, second floor, Lower East Side, outbyten.com.RuPaul (Friday) This mononymous cultural figure joins Paul Holdengräber of the New York Public Library as part of its Live From the NYPL series. The host of “RuPaul’s Drag Race” will, as the show’s name suggests, discuss all things drag, though the evening’s talk will be open to a variety of topics. At 7 p.m., Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, New York Public Library, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman.AdvertisementColson Whitehead (Wednesday) This writer joins the New York Public Library for its Books at Noon series to discusses his most recent work, “The Noble Hustle: Poker, Beef Jerky, and Death.” Mr. Whitehead, a Pulitzer Prize finalist and MacArthur Fellowship recipient, will recount how a magazine writing assignment led to his brief stint at the World Series of Poker. At noon, Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, New York Public Library, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman; free.Walking ToursFlatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.The Ghosts of Grand Central (Saturdays) This tour offers shelter from the cold, though discovering the ghosts of Grand Central Terminal may bring a different sort of chill. There will be history of the Vanderbilts, as well as August Belmont, Franklin Roosevelt and his dog, Fala. The tour meets west of the M.T.A. information booth under the four-faced clock in the station’s Grand Concourse. (Through April 25.) At 7:30 p.m., 646-493-7092, ghostsofny.com.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.Musical Green-Wood Trolley Tour (Saturday) Green-Wood Cemetery has about 560,000 permanent residents — some famous musicians among them. This tour, led by Marge Raymond, makes stops at graves of the likes of Leonard Bernstein and Fred Ebb, while celebrating their lives and listening to some of their greatest works. At 1 p.m., Fifth Avenue and 25th Street, Greenwood Heights, Brooklyn, 718-768-7300, green-wood.com/toursevents.Opening the Way: A Women’s History Walk (Sundays) This tour covers the history of Manhattan and the influence women — writers, abolitionists and suffragists from a broad range of time periods — had in its development. The tour, which makes 21 stops, is presented by Women’s eNews. It was researched by Betsy Wade, a former editor at The New York Times, and the historian James Boylan. Registration is required. At 11 a.m., 6 Barclay Street, near Broadway, Lower Manhattan, 212-244-1720, womensenews.org/openingtheway; free.‘Satan’s Seat’ (Saturday) Big Onion Walking Tours offers a guide to New York during prohibition, based on the Ken Burns documentary “Prohibition.” Stops include landmarks and sites associated with Fiorello H. La Guardia and Margaret Sanger, as well as dives like John McGurk’s Suicide Hall. The tour meets at 1 p.m. at the northeast corner of the Bowery and Houston Street. 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.Skyscrapers Gallery Tour (Saturday) Within only three blocks, this tour makes seven stops at Midtown galleries. Expect enormous hand-blown glass installations, whimsical paintings, and miniature models of synagogues, mosques and churches made with weapons and ammunition. At 1 p.m., 24 West 57th Street, near Fifth Avenue, 212-946-1548, nygallerytours.com.AdvertisementA Taste of Jewish New York (Sundays) Participants in this tour will get an insider’s look at Borough Park, Brooklyn, by learning about the customs of its Hasidic residents. There will also be the chance to try a range of food. This tour includes a stop at a lively shopping area, as well as at a matzo bakery — with free samples, of course. The tour meets at 9:45 p.m. at Fort Hamilton Parkway and 44th Street; 718-339-2302, timelinetouring.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.The World of ‘Mad Men’ (Saturday and Sunday) As “Mad Men” wraps up its seven-season run, this tour, starting at 1 p.m., joins the crowded field of New York celebrations of the series. Stops include the Time Life Building, the real location of Don Draper’s fictional office, the Seagram Building and the Waldorf Astoria. Meeting information will be shared with reservations, which can be made by calling 212-465-3331. JOSHUA BARONEInformation on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. A version of this schedule appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C14 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.