MARCH 19, 2015
Museums and galleries are in Manhattan unless otherwise noted. Full reviews of recent art shows: nytimes.com/art. A searchable guide to these and many other art shows is at nytimes.com/events.Museums★ Asia Society: ‘Buddhist Art of Myanmar’ (through May 10) In 1962, Myanmar, once known as Burma, closed its doors to the world and threw away the key for almost 40 years. Under surveillance-obsessed military rule, little from outside could get in, and little from inside could get out, including art. Recently, the country has re-established international contact, and even made efforts to advertise its cultural riches. They couldn’t have made a more persuasive case than with this splendidly designed exhibition of some 70 sculptures and paintings, from small portable eighth- and ninth-century Buddha statuettes, each basically a mobile communication device, a spiritual smart phone kept close for use on the road or at home; to a single towering 19th-century lacquered wood shrine, glinting with gilt and cut glass and rising, tier upon tier, to the ceiling. Welcome to Bliss City. 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org. (Holland Cotter)★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Kehinde Wiley: A New Republic’ (through May 24) You can love or hate this artist’s bright, brash, history-laden, kitsch-tinged portraits of confident, even imperious young black men and women usurping heroic roles from the generally lily-white history of Western painting. No matter, the two-decade survey of his extravagant, mind-teasing canvases rewards. His career seems to be one of ceaseless ambition, socially conscious generosity and an uncanny skill that he is still harnessing. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Roberta Smith)★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Judith Scott — Bound and Unbound’  (through March 29) Judith Scott’s mesmerizing sculptures sit like large, unopened bundles, contents mysterious, in the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art at the Brooklyn Museum. In a few, solid forms can be made out under wrappings of yarn, string and fabric strips; others suggest gift-wrapped boulders. You can call them abstract and stop there, or go further and connect them to art history, specifically the history of fiber art, or go further and consider them in the light of Ms. Scott’s history: She was born in 1943 with Down syndrome, started making art only in her early 40s and kept making it until her death at 61. However approached, the work is complex and brilliant. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Cotter)Advertisement★ Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum (continuing) The stately doors of the 1902 Andrew Carnegie mansion, home to the Cooper Hewitt, are open again after an overhaul and expansion of the premises. Historic house and modern museum have always made an awkward fit, a standoff between preservation and innovation, and the problem remains, but the renovation has brought a wide-open new gallery space, a cafe and a raft of be-your-own-designer digital enhancements. Best of all, more of the museum’s vast permanent collection is now on view, including an Op Art weaving, miniature spiral staircases, ballistic face masks and a dainty enameled 18th-century version of a Swiss knife. Like design itself, this institution is built on tumult and friction, and you feel it. 2 East 91st Street, at Fifth Avenue, 212-849-8400, cooperhewitt.org. (Cotter)Advertisement★ Guggenheim Museum: ‘On Kawara — Silence’  (through May 3) The first retrospective of this Conceptual Art giant turns the museum’s spiral into a vortex suffused with the consciousness of time, life’s supreme ruler, in all its quotidian daily unfoldings, historical events and almost incomprehensible grandeur. The presentation of date paintings, “I Got Up” postcards and “I Am Still Alive” telegrams echoes Mr. Kawara’s exquisite sense of discipline and craft. This is an extraordinary tribute. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. (Smith)Institute for the Study of the Ancient World: ‘From Ancient to Modern: Archaeology and Aesthetics’ (through June 7) Small but bursting with ideas, this show tells a fascinating tale about the 20th-century excavation and interpretation of some ancient Sumerian artifacts. It focuses on about 50 objects that were unearthed in the 1920s and ’30s in Mesopotamia, including sumptuous jewelry and wide-eyed, bearded men carved from stone. Along with these are profuse archaeological documentation; paintings and sculptures by 20th-century artists like Willem de Kooning and Henry Moore who were inspired by Sumerian art; and politically fraught works by two contemporary artists, Jananne al-Ani and Michael Rakowitz. Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, 15 East 84th Street, Manhattan, 212-992-7800, isaw.nyu.edu. (Ken Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘The Plains Indians: Artists of Earth and Sky’ (through May 10) Some of the earliest surviving art by native North Americans left America long ago. Soldiers, traders and priests, with magpie eyes for brilliant things, bundled it up and shipped it across the sea to Europe. Painted robes, embroidered slippers and feathered headdresses tinkling with chimes found their way into cupboards in 18th-century London and Paris, and lay there half-forgotten. Now, with the arrival at the Met of this traveling show, some of those wondrous things — truly world masterpieces — have come home in an exhibition context that carries the Native American story from 100 B.C. into the 21st century. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Ennion: Master of Roman Glass’ (through April 13) Active sometime between A.D. 1 and A.D. 50, Ennion is the first known artisan to produce mold-blown glass: objects made by blowing bubbles of molten glass into patterned molds. His elegant cups, bowls, beakers, jugs and flasks decorated with geometric and botanical motifs were sought after by wealthy Romans and traded throughout the Mediterranean world. Today only about 50 to 55 Ennion pieces are known to have survived. This exhibition presents 22 of them, along with fragments of two others. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Reimagining Modernism: 1900-1950’ (continuing) One of the greatest encyclopedic museums in the world fulfills its mission a little more with an ambitious reinstallation of works of early European modernism with their American counterparts for the first time in nearly 30 years. Objects of design and paintings by a few self-taught artists further the integration. It is quite a sight, with interesting rotations and fine-tunings to come. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Thomas Hart Benton’s “America Today” Mural Rediscovered’ (through April 19) The prickly American Regionalist Thomas Hart Benton had his share of detractors. But even they would probably acknowledge that his early mural “America Today” is the best of its kind, a raucous, cartwheeling, wide-angle look at 1920s America that set the standard for the Works Progress Administration’s mural program and has remained a New York City treasure. Now installed at the Met in a reconstruction of its original setting (a boardroom at the New School for Social Research), it captivates with period details (from the cut of a flapper gown to the mechanics of a blast furnace) and timely signs of socioeconomic and environmental distress (exhausted coal miners and hands reaching for coffee and bread). 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Karen Rosenberg)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Warriors and Mothers: Epic Mbembe Art’ (through Sept. 7) If a dozen masterpiece Renaissance sculptures, done in an unknown and wildly unorthodox style, suddenly turned up in the Italian countryside, the find would make the news. You’ll encounter the equivalent of such a discovery in this show of spectacular weatherworn, wood-carved figures, some dating to before the 17th century, that were made by the Mbeme in southeastern Nigeria and taken to Paris by an African dealer in the early 1970s. They caused a sensation among collectors and scholars at the time, and you can see why. But the effort to find more of them proved fruitless. The examples at the Met, which include the original dozen, represent all the fully intact stand-alone Mbembe figures known to exist. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)AdvertisementMoMA PS1: ‘Samara Golden: The Flat Side of the Knife’ (through Sept. 7) Standing at a railing where you look into the museum’s two-story-tall Duplex Gallery, you behold a confoundingly complicated interior architecture with furniture, stairways, musical instruments, wheelchairs and many other domestic items rendered in silvery, foil-clad foam board. The gallery’s floor is covered by a grid of large mirrors so that everything is doubled. What you think is up may really be down and what you take to be real might be a virtual reflection of the real. 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Johnson)★ Museum of Biblical Art: ‘Sculpture in the Age of Donatello: Renaissance Masterpieces From Florence Cathedral’ (through June 14) This terrific 23-piece show features three major works by the early Renaissance sculptor Donatello (1386-1466), including the life-size statue of a bald prophet known as “lo Zuccone” or “Pumpkin Head,” which is widely considered the sculptor’s greatest work. Along with a half-dozen other works by or attributed to Donatello are sculptures by Nanni di Banco (circa 1386-1421), Donatello’s main competitor, including his monumental representation in marble of St. Luke. With the addition of a series of octagonal marble reliefs by Luca della Robbia and wooden models of the Florence Cathedral’s enormous dome attributed to its designer, Filippo Brunelleschi, the exhibition amounts to a tightly cropped snapshot of the birth of the Renaissance. 1865 Broadway, at 61st Street, 212-408-1500, mobia.org. (Johnson)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Björk’ (through June 7) More than most, an exhibition devoted to the Iceland phenomenon — the most avant-garde popular singer of her time — needs to justify its place in a major museum. But MoMA was clearly unable to commit in terms of space, curatorial imagination or a serious catalog. The result is something of a shambles, but at least the music videos — projected on a large screen with surround sound — confirm the visual side of Björk’s complex sensibility and achievement. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘The Forever Now: Contemporary Painting in an Atemporal World’ (through April 5) Despite being predictable and market-oriented in its choice of 17 artists, this museum’s first painting survey in decades is well worth seeing. About half the artists are exceptional and the rest are represented by their best work. Based on the premise that all historical painting styles are equally available today, the exhibition has been smartly installed to juxtapose different approaches: figurative and abstract, digital and handmade, spare and opulent. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Jean Dubuffet: Soul of the Underground’ (through April 5) “Look at what lies at your feet!” Jean Dubuffet wrote in a 1957 essay. “A crack in the ground, sparkling gravel, a tuft of grass, some crushed debris, offer equally worthy subjects for your applause and admiration.” In MoMA’s stimulating show, drawn entirely from its collection, we can see how Dubuffet’s earthbound gaze nourished his reinvention of the painted surface. On view are several canvases smeared with a mixture of oil, putty, sand and gravel, some of them with incised drawings that seem to equate painting with plowing. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Rosenberg)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Modern Photographs from the Thomas Walther Collection, 1909-1949’ (through April 19) Overflowing with prints by Berenice Abbott, Andre Kertesz, Edward Weston and other luminaries from the first half of the 20th century, this exhibition would seem to be a straightforward look at photography’s past. But the show, packaged with a book, a symposium and an engrossing interactive website, is really a bold attempt to visualize the future of photography inside the museum as it reckons with the unwieldy, image-saturated culture outside the galleries. With works by Aleksandr Rodchenko, Ms. Abbott, Alvin Langdon Coburn and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy that explore cities from unusual angles or abstract their infrastructure, the show’s largest section, “Dynamics of the City,” best encapsulates the Walther Collection’s distinctly urban, peripatetic take on Modernism. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Rosenberg)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Everything Is Design: The Work of Paul Rand’  (through July 19) You may not know the name Paul Rand (1914-96), the immensely influential advertising art director, illustrator and graphic designer, but it’s a safe bet you’re familiar with some of his works. After shaking up American advertising and book cover design in the 1940s and ’50s, he created logos for UPS, IBM, Westinghouse and other American corporations. His admirers called him “the Picasso of graphic design.” This show tracks his six-decade career with 150 examples of vintage magazines, book covers, three-dimensional containers, children’s books and books by Mr. Rand about principles of design. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Johnson)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Neue Galerie: ‘Egon Schiele: Portraits’ (through April 20) Of the approximately 125 items in this terrific show, there are only 11 oil paintings, which is a good thing. Except for a large picture of his wife, Edith, in a colorful striped dress, Schiele’s works on canvas are dark and turgid. But his drawings are nimble and nuanced. Working on paper with pencil, charcoal, ink, gouache, watercolor and crayons, he portrayed himself and others with infectious avidity. There’s hardly a single sheet here that doesn’t warrant close looking for its virtuoso draftsmanship and psychological acuity. 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street, 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org. (Johnson)★ New Museum: ‘Surround Audience: 2015 Triennial’ (through May 24) If you’re fed up with big joke-shop sculpture, diva spectacle and brain-dead abstraction, this museum’s 2015 Triennial will come as a break in the clouds — not a full flood of new light, but a pull in a different direction. It’s a glimpse of terrain composed almost entirely of border crossings in media, art disciplines, ethnicities, genders and species. The in-between as an aesthetic is no surprise given the curators: Lauren Cornell of the New Museum, who has been paying astute attention to digital art and the Internet for years, and the artist Trecartin, whose laptop-generated, YouTube-distributed, hourslong pop-epic videos add up to some of the most thoroughly genre-collapsing art of the past decade. If nothing by the 51 artists from 25 countries is as genius as his work, there is still a lot to ponder in a show that represents a welcome shift to microgravity flux within a gross-objects industry. 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Cotter)Advertisement★ New-York Historical Society: ‘Freedom Journey 1965: Photographs of the Selma to Montgomery March by Stephen Somerstein’ (through April 19) Almost 50 years ago, the picture editor of a campus newspaper at City College of New York assigned himself a breaking story: covering what promised to be a massive march in Alabama, led by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., to demand free-and-clear voting rights for African-Americans. On short notice the editor, Stephen Somerstein, grabbed his cameras, climbed on a bus and headed south. The 55 pictures of black leaders and everyday people in this show, installed in a hallway and small gallery, are some that he shot that day. The image of Dr. King’s head seen in monumental silhouette that has become a virtual logo of the film “Selma” is based on a Somerstein original. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org. (Cotter)★ Rubin Museum of Art: ‘The All-Knowing Buddha: A Secret Guide’ (through April 13) This show presents 54 paintings that illustrate step-by-step instructions for followers of Tibetan Buddhism. Delicately painted on 10-by-10-inch paper sheets, most of the pages depict a monk having fabulous visions in a verdant landscape. Thought to have been commissioned by a Mongolian patron and executed by unidentified artists in a Chinese workshop sometime in the 18th century, it is a fascinating and remarkably thorough manual for seekers of higher consciousness. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org. (Johnson)Sculpture Center: ‘Araya Rasdjarmrearnsook’  (through March 30) A pre-eminent artist in Southeast Asia, this Thai video maker addresses topics like death, the insane, East-West cultural differences, the disenfranchisement of women and the rights of animals, often in provocatively discomfiting ways. In a set of three videos, she gives professorial lectures about death to sets of real human corpses. Many of her most recent works have to do with dogs. In them, she protests the abuse of dogs and hints at a holistic vision of people in tune with nature and the cosmos. 44-19 Purves Street, Long Island City, Queens, 718-361-1750, sculpture-center.org. (Johnson)Galleries: Uptown★ Jeff Koons: ‘Jim Beam — J.B. Turner Engine Six Individual Cars’ (through March 28) In 1986, Mr. Koons produced a series of cast stainless steel replicas of novelty liquor decanters made by Jim Beam. Among these was a set of seven model railroad cars on a single track, and within each car was a fifth of Jim Beam whiskey with a tax-stamped top. This beautiful time capsule of a show presents casts of the individual cars on separate tracks. Each is spotlighted on its own gray pedestal. Like reliquaries in a minimalist chapel, they invite hushed meditation on luxury and addiction. Craig F. Starr Gallery, 5 East 73rd Street, Manhattan, 212-570-1739, starr-art.com. (Johnson)★ Peter Saul: ‘From Pop to Punk’ (through April 18) This selection of paintings and drawings owned by Allan Frumkin (1927-2002), Mr. Saul’s longtime dealer (30 years), brings a new clarity to Mr. Saul’s early development — when he moved from oil to acrylic and from a garrulous, if lushly painted, variation on Pop Art to paintings that fuse the figurative, the abstract and the scathingly political with a force that has few equals. Venus Over Manhattan, 980 Madison Avenue, at 76th Street, 212-980-0700, venusovermanhattan.com. (Smith)Galleries: ChelseaBarry Gerson: ‘The Parting of the Clouds’ (through March 28) Barry Gerson was a well-known member of the generation of 1960s and ’70s experimental filmmakers. The films on view here were shot on rich 16-millimeter Ektachrome film, but only one is projected large scale, as a video, against the wall. Three others appear on small video monitors. Alongside these is a wall of “constructions” — basically collages —with images cut from National Geographic magazine and photographs made with the obsolete Nimslo 3-D camera. Like the films, the constructions pique your desire to see more of Mr. Gerson’s oeuvre. Thomas Erben Gallery, 526 West 26th Street, 212-645-8701, thomaserben.com. (Martha Schwendener)Subodh Gupta: ‘Seven Billion Light Years’ (through April 25) Like all highly successful global art, the work here is sleek, smart and familiar yet exotic; a local (in this case Indian) variation on well-worn international strategies of 1970s art, whether in sculpture, installation, film or painting. Liberal use is made of found objects that connote hard work and impoverished lives. What’s missing is anything beyond the generic, anything truly personal, as opposed to cavalier. Hauser & Wirth, 511 West 18th Street, 212-794-4970, hauserwirth.com. (Smith)★ ‘In the Studio: Paintings’  (through April 18) Organized by a veteran scholar and curator of modern art, this show roams across several centuries and between academic and advanced, well-known and rarely-seen. Full of gems and telling juxtapositions, it explores the studio as subject, beloved sanctuary, container for art and stand-in for the artist. Do not miss it. Gagosian Gallery, 522 West 21st Street, 212-741-1717, gagosian.com. (Smith)AdvertisementGalleries: Other‘The Gee’s Bend Tradition’ (through April 24) A show of 14 quilts by seven artists, all made since 1990, and an accompanying exhibition of photographs, demonstrates what makes the Gee’s Bend tradition so compelling. Unlike most quilts in the European-American tradition, which favored uniformity, harmony and precision, Gee’s Bend quilts, made by generations of African-American women, include wild, improvisatory elements: broken patterns, high color contrasts, asymmetry and syncopation. They came into being alongside gospel, blues and jazz. The photographs document how the quilts are historically linked to slavery, Depression-era politics and the Civil Rights Movement, and the rich landscape in which they germinated and thrived. Lehman College Art Gallery, Lehman College, 250 Bedford Park Boulevard West, the Bronx, 718-960-8731, lehman.edu/gallery. (Martha Schwendener)Out of Town★ National Museum of African Art: ‘Conversations: African and African American Artists in Dialogue’  (through early 2016) For its 50th anniversary, this museum has brilliantly thread together work from two sources: its own holdings in African material and the Camille O. and William H. Cosby Jr. collection of African-American art. The Cosby collection, weighted toward canonical figures like Romare Bearden and Charles White, will bring in the crowds, but it is the curators and museum itself, which is in a period of renaissance, that have made the show rise well above predictability. Smithsonian Institution, 950 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, 202-633-4600, africa.si.edu. (Cotter)Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts: ‘Peter Blume: Nature and Metamorphosis’ (through April 5) Though not well-known today, Blume (1906-92) was a famous American artist during the 1930s and ’40s. For many years his painting “The Eternal City” (1934-37) was one of the most memorable artworks displayed in the permanent collection galleries of the Museum of Modern Art. A weird, technically dazzling mix of Magic and Social Realism that envisioned Rome under the Fascist reign of Mussolini, it’s among the highlights of this exhibition of more than 150 works dating from 1924 to 1990. 128 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, 215-972-7600, pafa.org. (Johnson)Last ChanceClaudia Comte: ‘No Melon No Lemon’ (closes on Saturday) The American debut of a Swiss-born, Berlin-based artist mixes painting, sculpture and design into an environment that is an undeniably stylish visual delight, even if its references to modern precedents — Brancusi, Arp, Frank Stella and Daniel Buren as well as McDonald’s golden arches — are overly obvious. The easy command of materials, scale and proportion suggests that she has more up her sleeve. Gladstone Gallery, 530 West 21st Street, Chelsea, 212-206-7606, gladstonegallery.com. (Smith)★ Drawing Center: ‘Tomi Ungerer: All in One’ (closes on Sunday) This ambitious survey resurrects the French-born polymath “drawer” (his word) who made a big splash in New York in the late 1950s and ’60s before disappearing. But it skimps on his brilliant children’s books and overindulges on his rather ordinary erotica. Feast on his childhood renderings of Nazis, his acerbic social cartoons and the amazing animations of the children’s books. Savor the real thing in the gift shop. 35 Wooster Street, SoHo, 212-219-2166, drawingcenter.org. (Smith)★ Jewish Museum: ‘Helena Rubinstein: Beauty Is Power’ (closes on Sunday) The first museum show devoted to the life and art collection of the cosmetics magnate Helena Rubinstein is a master class in modernism-as-marketing — one that comes with a strong female perspective on 20th-century visual culture. It shows how Rubinstein adapted Cubism, Surrealism and other avant-garde art and design movements for her personal brand, highlighting new and different standards of beauty and exhorting women to control their images through makeup and grooming. Mixing biography, business, art, fashion and décor, it recreates rooms from Rubinstein’s salons and reassembles parts of her diverse collection, which included African, pre-Columbian and Oceanic artworks. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. (Karen Rosenberg)Museum of Modern Art: ‘The Paris of Toulouse-Lautrec: Prints and Posters’ (closes on Sunday) In his printed works, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec chronicled and publicized the music halls, theaters, circuses, operas and cafes of Paris with terrific verve, sly wit and surprising subtlety. This enthralling show presents approximately 100 examples drawn from the museum’s permanent collection. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Johnson)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C18 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Art.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.