MARCH 19, 2015
 Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera★ ‘Les Contes d’Hoffmann’ (Saturday) James Levine is now conducting the rest of the run of this revival of Bartlett Sher’s phantasmagoric 2009 production, which closes on Saturday. This Offenbach opera has long been a Levine specialty, and he leads an elegant and insightful performance. The tenor Matthew Polenzani makes a vocally and emotionally impassioned Hoffmann. Audrey Luna stands out for a dazzling turn as Olympia. Laurent Naouri brings a robust voice and consummate French style to the four villains. At 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)‘Kafka-Fragments’ and ‘Daphnis et Chloé’ (Friday through Sunday) In what looks like an enticing collaboration, the adventurous Cantata Profana ensemble joins the bold Heartbeat Opera group for a mini-festival. Gyorgy Kurtag’s wrenching, beautiful “Kafka-Fragments” for female vocalist (the mezzo-soprano Annie Rosen) and solo violin (Jacob Ashworth) alternates with a rare, and what promises to be wild, staging of Offenbach’s one-act operetta “Daphnis et Chloé.” “Kafka-Fragments”: Friday at 8 p.m. and Sunday at 2 p.m.; “Daphnis et Chloé”: Friday at 10 p.m.; Saturday at 3 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 3:30 p.m.; Sheen Center, 18 Bleecker Street, near Elizabeth Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, heartbeatopera.org. (Tommasini)‘Lucia di Lammermoor’  (Tuesday) For its revival of Donizetti’s moody masterpiece, the Metropolitan Opera has summoned a strong cast, led by the potent Russian coloratura soprano Albina Shagimuratova, the ardent tenor Joseph Calleja and the talented baritone Luca Salsi. Maurizio Benini conducts. (Through April 10.) At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)Advertisement★ ‘Manon’ (Saturday and Wednesday) This sensational revival of Massenet’s tragic love story features the fiery combination of Diana Damrau, singing the title role for the first time with peerless commitment, and Vittorio Grigolo, infectiously passionate. Emmanuel Villaume leads a performance that’s agile and fast-moving without sacrificing sumptuous lyricism, and the supporting cast is characterful and involving. (Through March 28.) At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)Advertisement★ Metropolitan Opera National Council Auditions Grand Finals (Sunday) Every year, opera lovers have a chance to hear the stars of the future during the Metropolitan Opera National Council Auditions Grand Finals concert. This year, nine young singers will each perform two arias with the Met Orchestra, conducted by Fabio Luisi. The soprano Angela Meade, a 2007 winner, will host the event and sing “Casta Diva” from Bellini’s “Norma.” At 3 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)Classical MusicAmerican Symphony Orchestra  (Thursday) Given Leon Botstein’s appetite for exploring uncharted territory the composers he presents here with the American Symphony Orchestra are almost shockingly familiar: Schubert, Bruckner and Dvorak. But the works are rarities and were never heard during the composers’ lifetimes: Dvorak’s Symphony No. 1, Bruckner’s student-day Symphony in F minor (No. 00) and the Overture to “Claudine von Villa Bella,” written by a teenage Schubert. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Argento Chamber Ensemble  (Thursday) This excellent contemporary group offers an alluring program with notable young soloists: Saeunn Thorsteinsdottir will perform Ligeti’s Cello Concerto; the clarinetist Carol McGonnell is the soloist in Giacinto Scelsi’s “Kya”; and the soprano Sharon Harms will sing Schoenberg’s arrangement of Mahler’s “Songs of a Wayfarer.” At 7:30 p.m., DiMenna Center for Classical Music, 450 West 37th Street, Manhattan, argentomusic.org. (Schweitzer)Inna Faliks (Friday) This noted Ukrainian-born pianist has chosen a demanding and interesting program for a Masterworks series recital at Bargemusic. She begins with the premiere of a Clarice Assad piece for speaking pianist. Then she plays Brahms’s overlooked Sonata No. 2, followed by a Clara Schumann Romance dedicated to Brahms, ending with Brahms’s formidable Sonata No. 3. At 8 p.m., Bargemusic, Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org. (Tommasini)George London Foundation Recital  (Sunday) This foundation, which nurtures exceptional young singers, presents two alumni of the 2010 competition in recital. The countertenor Anthony Roth Costanzo and the soprano Nadine Sierra will be accompanied by the pianist Bryan Wagorn in a program of Duparc, Liszt, Schubert, Turina, Pergolesi and Ned Rorem. At 4:30 p.m., Morgan Library & Museum, 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org. (Schweitzer)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Richard Goode and Friends  (Thursday) Collaboration is at the heart of this wonderful pianist’s career. Here he teams up with a group of rising stars in quintessential works by Debussy, Fauré and Ravel. Performers include the pianist Ieva Jokubaviciute, the violinist Itamar Zorman, the violist Kyle Armbrust and the cellist Brook Speltz. At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Johannes String Quartet  (Saturday) The esteemed Peoples’ Symphony Concerts presents this all-star quartet in an ambitious program that features Mendelssohn’s Quartet in F minor (Op. 80) and Esa-Pekka Salonen’s “Homunculus.” The violist John Dalley and the cellist Peter Wiley join for Brahms’s String Sextet No. 2. At 8 p.m., Washington Irving High School, Irving Place at 16th Street, Manhattan, 212-586-4680, pscny.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)David Kaplan (Sunday) The title of Schumann’s piano piece “Davidsbündlertänze” takes some explanation. This suite is a collection of wondrous dances playfully meant as the battle cries of Schumann’s contemporary circle, the David’s Club, against the forces of musical philistinism. The excellent Juilliard-trained pianist David Kaplan, presented by the Metropolis Ensemble, will play the New York premiere of “New Dances of the League of David,” which intersperses new dance works by a number of contemporary composers, in between Schumann’s originals. It should be fun. At 6 p.m., Le Poisson Rouge, 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich Village, 212-505-3474, lepoissonrouge.com. (Tommasini)AdvertisementKodo One Earth Tour: Mystery (Friday and Saturday) Kodo, the sensational Japanese drum ensemble, whose players practice a heritage of massed drumming that goes back centuries, comes to Brooklyn as part of “Kodo One Earth Tour: Mystery,” a new work. Expect the musicians to do some chanting and singing, and play other instruments now and then, along with their riveting drumming. At 7:30 p.m., Howard Gilman Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Tommasini)Nikolai Lugansky  (Tuesday) This excellent pianist plays Schubert’s Sonata in C minor (D. 958) and works by Tchaikovsky, whose “The Seasons” will be familiar to many. The other Tchaikovsky work on the program, Sonata in G, however, is rarely heard in performance. At 7:30 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Allen)★ New York Philharmonic  (Friday, Tuesday and Thursday) On Friday and Tuesday, Alan Gilbert leads the orchestra in Debussy, Strauss and Esa-Pekka Salonen, and the Philharmonic’s artist-in-association, Inon Barnatan, will join them for Ravel’s Piano Concerto. On Thursday (and continuing through March 28), Leila Josefowicz and Mr. Gilbert will perform the world premiere of John Adams’s new symphony for violin and orchestra, “Scheherazade.2.” Also on that program are Anatoly Lyadov’s “The Enchanted Lake” and Stravinsky’s “Petrushka.” Friday at 11 a.m., Tuesday and Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Allen)★ St. Louis Symphony  (Friday) Visits by the dynamic David Robertson and his superior ensemble are always a treat. Mr. Robertson — recently mentioned in a New York Times feature about possible candidates to replace Alan Gilbert at the end of his tenure at the New York Philharmonic — will lead a program featuring Debussy’s “Nocturnes,” Tchaikovsky’s Symphony No. 4 and Meredith Monk’s “Weave,” receiving its New York premiere, with the mezzo-soprano Katie Geissinger and the baritone Theo Bleckmann as soloists. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)Verdi’s ‘Requiem’  (Thursday) In his first collaboration with the Oratorio Society of New York and the Manhattan School of Music Symphony and Symphonic Chorus, Kent Tritle will present Verdi’s masterpiece at the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine. The soloists are Lori Guilbeau, Sara Murphy, Alex Richardson and Matthew Anchel. At 7:30 p.m., 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-316-7540, stjohndivine.org. (Allen)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C17 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.