MARCH 19, 2015
 Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Ailey II  (Friday through Sunday) Venturing south from its home on 55th Street, this hardworking ensemble, the second company of Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, is presenting its first independent season at the Joyce Theater. Two triple bills showcase the dancers’ technical prowess and seemingly boundless stamina, with high-energy works by Dwight Rhoden, Manuel Vignoulle and Amy Hall Garner (Program A); and Katarzyna Skarpetowska, Jennifer Archibald and the artistic director Troy Powell (Program B). Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Siobhan Burke)★ Armitage Gone!  (Wednesday through March 27) Dance isn’t the most obvious way to address climate change, but the inventive choreographer Karole Armitage takes an intriguing stab at it by setting her new work, “On the Nature of Things,” in the Milstein Hall of Ocean Life at the American Museum of Natural History. Ms. Armitage has also smartly recruited the renowned biologist Paul R. Ehrlich, who has composed, and will read, an original text to accompany the 30 dancers. At 8 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org. (Brian Schaefer)★ Ballet West  (Wednesday through March 29) This troupe has a national profile partly because of its participation in the reality TV show “Breaking Pointe,” which chronicled the personalities and backstage antics of this Salt Lake City company. For its Joyce Theater debut, the troupe will keep the drama onstage in New York premieres by Matthew Neenan and Nicolo Fonte as well as Val Caniparoli’s “The Lottery,” based on Shirley Jackson’s chilling short story about a violent ritual in a small town. Helen Pickett, resident choreographer of the Atlanta Ballet, contributes a world premiere. Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday and Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)AdvertisementMaya Ciarrocchi and Kris Grey  (Wednesday through March 28) As any university sociology professor will tell you, gender is a performance. The video artist Maya Ciarrocchi and the visual and performance artist Kris Grey bring that idea to the stage, making a performance of that performance in “Gender/Power (composition II).” The work, part of Gibney’s new Making Space series, includes an immersive installation and draws from the experiences of those who defy gender norms and challenge the relationship between power and sex. The installation opens at 4 p.m. daily, with performances at 6, 7 and 8 p.m. Gibney Dance Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Schaefer)AdvertisementRebecca Serrell Cyr  (Friday and Saturday) An arresting performer in the work of Donna Uchizono, RoseAnne Spradlin and many other choreographers, Ms. Cyr has lately been immersed in a project of her own. Her “Assemblage” pushes back against paring down, favoring accumulation over editing. Sundry objects and ideas jostle in a series of solos and duets, performed by Ms. Cyr, Aretha Aoki and guests. At 8 p.m., Jack, 505 1/2 Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Burke)★ ‘Dancers, Buildings and People in the Streets’ (through March 28) Ballet and contemporary dance sometime seem like estranged relatives, but with its latest platform, inspired by the dance critic Edwin Denby, Danspace Project collapses the space between them. The curator Claudia La Rocco, a poet and critic who contributes to The New York Times, paired artists from different choreographic traditions — those of Merce Cunningham, George Balanchine and Judson Dance Theater — and left them to their own devices. The next set of collaborations (on Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.) features the choreographers Jillian Peña, Troy Schumacher, Emily Coates and Yve Laris Cohen. Also this week (on Friday at 1:30 p.m.), Ms. Coates, who has danced with Yvonne Rainer and New York City Ballet, teaches Ms. Rainer’s seminal “Trio A.” Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)DiMauro Dance  (Saturday and Sunday) In the project “Metropolis,” Jessica DiMauro (of New York) and Ana Miranda (of Miami) take inspiration from their respective cities and regions. Ms. DiMauro’s “They Told Me With Their Hands” borrows from the gestures of pedestrians, while the Cuban-born Ms. Miranda weaves together Mississippi Delta blues with flamenco. They are joined by the New York choreographer Gierre J. Godley, who honors the African-American railroad workers of the early 1900s in “Gandy Dancer,” which was a slang term for these laborers. Saturday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Manhattan Movement & Arts Center, 248 West 60th Street, Manhattan, 212-787-1178, dimaurodance.com, manhattanmovement.com. (Schaefer)★ Flexn  (Wednesday through April 4) Flex, a dance style thought to have been born in Jamaica in the ’90s and raised in the clubs of Brooklyn, is defined by dislocated limbs, extreme contortions and stuttering steps reminiscent of animation. It is disconcerting and elegant, nightmarish and divine, and a fitting vessel to consider today’s volatile race relations through dance. This ambitious project by the director Peter Sellars and the flex pioneer Reggie Gray, known as Regg Roc, brings a crew of 20 flex dancers to the Park Avenue Armory’s cavernous hall. Wednesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org. (Schaefer)Generations of Gypsy Flamenco  (Friday) Some may consider a folkloric form like flamenco to be a single artistic expression, but, like language, dance has many regional accents and inflections. Here, three notable Gypsy dancers represent the Andalucía style of flamenco: the mesmerizing veteran Concha Vargas; the fleet-footed Pepe Torres; and the powerful Gema Moneo, part of a new generation that is keeping this tradition alive. They will be accompanied by the vocalist Esperanza Fernández and other musicians. At 8 p.m., Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, the-townhall-nyc.org. (Schaefer)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Juilliard Dances Repertory  (Wednesday through March 28) There’s nothing that makes an old work feel new again more than seeing it tackled by fresh, hungry minds. These talented Juilliard students bring to life Martha Graham’s 1946 abstract work “Dark Meadow” (with live music performed by fellow Juilliard students), staged by Terese Capucilli, who danced with the Graham company for 26 years. The students will also keep Merce Cunningham’s legacy alive with performances of his technologically innovative “Biped,” from 1999. Wednesday through Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, Lincoln Center, 155 West 65th Street, 212-769-7406, events.juilliard.edu. (Schaefer)National Dance Theater Company of Jamaica  (Saturday and Sunday) Jamaica gained independence from Britain in 1962, which was the same year that Rex Nettleford and Eddy Thomas founded this company as an act of nation building. For more than two decades, this troupe has regularly brought its vision and artistry to Brooklyn. On this tour, the company presents over a half-dozen works spanning a half-century, with several by Nettleford, who died in 2010. Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org. (Schaefer)Laura Pawel Dance  (Friday and Saturday) Ms. Pawel, who has been making dance for decades, is interested in those transient thoughts that form in the mind, only to suddenly vanish; her new work, “Flickers,” considers this phenomenon. The year-old “3 a.m.,” about that dreamlike time that’s neither here nor there, treads in similar intangible territory. Ms. Pawel’s style, which incorporates improvisational movement and music, is thematically fitting. Two works from 2013 round out the program. At 7 p.m., Chen Dance Center, 70 Mulberry Street, Chinatown, 212-349-0438, chendancecenter.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement★ Sally Silvers  (Friday through Sunday) She may not have the actual Mount Rushmore as a backdrop, but Ms. Silvers’s homage to Alfred Hitchcock, “Actual Size Plus,” includes a few notable winks to “North by Northwest.” The work, which closes this year’s 92Y Harkness Dance Festival, features film projections, snippets of text and live musical accompaniment, as well as a cameo each night. As part of the festival’s Stripped/Dressed format, Ms. Silvers will first break down the work before presenting it whole. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Schaefer)SoHa Dance  (Sunday) For those unfamiliar with New York neighborhood acronyms, SoHa stands for South Harlem, and it’s the home of Sarah Horne’s dance company. Ms. Horne, who grew up in St. Croix, has corralled a collective of fellow choreographers who call Harlem home. “Harlem Dances: Études and Duets,” as the evening is called, includes work by Antonio Brown, Shantelle C. Jackson, ModArts Dance Collective and Ms. Horne. At 5 p.m., Dixon Place, 161 Chrystie Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-0736, dixonplace.org. (Schaefer)★ Take Dance  (Thursday through March 28) While Paul Taylor’s company performs uptown, the former Paul Taylor dancer Takehiro Ueyama celebrates his 10-year anniversary as an independent choreographer by presenting his second evening-length work, “There and Here.” This meditation on life and afterlife is set to an improvisational score by the composer and sound artist Kato Hideki, and features a reunion of sorts with the fellow former Taylor dancers Amy Young and Orion Duckstein as well as the powerfully ethereal Miki Orihara. At 7:30 p.m., Michael Schimmel Center for the Arts, Pace University, 3 Spruce Street, between Park Row and Gold Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-346-1715, schimmel.pace.edu. (Schaefer)★ Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance  (through March 29) It’s never too late to reinvent yourself: After 60 years as the Paul Taylor Dance Company, the group has returned as Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance, a more inclusive moniker reflecting the addition of outside choreographers. This season includes Shen Wei, with his artful “Rite of Spring,” and the pioneering Doris Humphrey, represented by her 1938 “Passacaglia.” Adding to his tireless output, Mr. Taylor has also presented a new work, “Death and the Damsel.” Fridays at 8 p.m., Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m., Sundays at 2 p.m., and Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays at 7 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com. (Schaefer)Annie Wilson  (Thursday through March 28) Why does the performance of “sexiness” often look so ridiculous? This Philadelphia artist ponders this and other probing questions in a new work. With a debut in 2014, this self-described “burlesque-postmodern-dance-theater-bad-improv performance” claims a kinship with other artists from the City of Brotherly Love who take a raw, and decidedly more sisterly, look at female sexuality. At 8 p.m., Jack, 505 ½ Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Schaefer)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C18 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Dance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.