MARCH 19, 2015
For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.★ Ellen Allien  (Saturday) One of the most prominent D.J.-producers on the Berlin techno scene, Ms. Allien is a shrewd, accessible dance floor favorite who keeps her audience members’ pulses raised while she dips quickly into electroclash experimentation. Another testament to her fame: She has her own minimalist streetwear line. With DJ Qu and Lauren Ritter. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Stacey Anderson)★ Björk  (Sunday, Wednesday, March 28 and April 1) It is startling to hear Björk — an artist who specializes in mercurial, brilliant electro-symphonics and opaquely cerebral lyrics — expose her heart so thoroughly on her morose new album, “Vulnicura.” Yet when this Icelandic star poses the devastating question, “Did I love you too much?/Devotion bent me broken,” on the song “Black Lake” — over heavy, elegiac strings, warped voices and fractured synth production from the upstart talent Arca — she creates her finest art in a decade. Her sorrow is terrible and gorgeous. Sunday at 3 p.m., Kings Theater, 1027 Flatbush Avenue, near Tilden Avenue, Brooklyn, ticketmaster.com. Wednesday and April 1 at 8 p.m., March 28 at noon, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org. (Anderson)Action Bronson  (Tuesday and Wednesday) This professional chef-cum-rapper from Queens redirects his voracity toward the fleet rhyme composition of the Wu-Tang Clan and the foodie jargon (not to mention the irascibility) of Anthony Bourdain. His full-length 2011 debut, “Dr. Lecter,” shows where his heart is in the tracks “Brunch,” “Shiraz” and “Jerk Chicken.” He is touring in support of the album “Mr. Wonderful,” which will be released on Tuesday. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementNeil Diamond  (Thursday) This “Sweet Caroline” crooner’s easygoing humor has informed his career for the past 50-odd years, and he continues to be a youthful presence onstage. His most recent studio album, “Melody Road,” released last year, was a sunny, soft-rock ode to matrimony from this newly remarried artist. At 8 p.m., Barclays Center, 620 Atlantic Avenue, at Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, ticketmaster.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementFifth Harmony  (Monday) A girl group forged by the “X Factor” impresario Simon Cowell, Fifth Harmony has drawn many early comparisons to One Direction, which sprang from the same origins. The surefooted R&B, pop effervescence and satiny harmonies on “Reflection,” the group’s debut studio album, indicate a globe-trotting future success all its own. With Jacob Whitesides, Jasmine V and Mahogany LOX. At 7 p.m., Best Buy Theater, 1515 Broadway, at 44th Street, 888-929-7849, bestbuytheater.com. (Anderson)Brandon Flowers  (Tuesday) Before this erstwhile frontman of the Killers releases his second solo album, “The Desired Effect,” in May — which, from its short first trailers, suggests that Mr. Flowers, a longtime New Wave enthusiast, will also be indulging arena-rock predilections — he will perform this one-off gig at Webster Hall. On March 30, he will duet with Brian Wilson at the Fonda Theater in Los Angeles as part of “Brian Fest,” a celebration of Mr. Wilson’s music. With Donald Cumming. At 8 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)Ariana Grande  (Friday and Saturday) This young pop singer leapt from Nickelodeon into full, unfettered pop stardom last year with the release of her second album, “My Everything.” She deserved it after her white-knuckle job in 2013: opening for Justin Bieber. Expect her to flip her formidable ponytail through peppy, melismatic renditions of her Top 10 hits “Break Free,” “Problem” and “Love Me Harder.” At 7:30 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)★ Debbie Harry  (Fridays, Saturdays, and Tuesdays through Thursdays, through April 4) In the 1970s, when Ms. Harry and her band Blondie first trod CBGB’s sticky boards, she was the prototype of the glamorous punk: a woman full of righteous conviction who also radiated poise. Now, one year after the band celebrated its 40th anniversary and released the album “Ghosts of Download,” she takes to the regal Café Carlyle on the Upper East Side for a short residency. It’s a long way from the East Village, but a fitting place for a rock eminence. Fridays at 8:45 p.m. and 10:45 p.m.; Saturdays, and Tuesdays through Thursdays, at 8:45 p.m.; Café Carlyle, 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. (Anderson)Ms. Lauryn Hill  (Friday, Saturday and Wednesday) Ms. Hill seems to be warming to local showmanship; in recent years, she has had a handful of concerts at small clubs. Now she’ll perform a few acoustic sets at City Winery and Highline Ballroom, which may be more ideal settings for this talented singer and rapper: In his review of one of her outings last year, Jon Pareles lamented that she “was often buried in the mix of her band’s hyperactive funk.” Friday and Saturday at 9 p.m., Highline Ballroom, 431 West 16th Street, Chelsea, 212-414-5994, highlineballroom.com. Wednesday at 8 p.m., City Winery, 155 Varick Street, near Spring Street, South Village, 212-608-0555, citywinery.com. (Anderson)Hozier (Sunday) Something’s in the air in Ireland: two of its musical representatives have blatant religious fixations. The brooding singer Hozier, whose real name is Andrew Hozier-Byrne, broke into American radio and graced the stage of “Saturday Night Live” with his first single, “Take Me to Church,” a sultry, bracing appraisal of love and the hypocrisy of religion. The song shouldn’t be confused with his countrywoman Sinead O’Connor’s identically titled track, a yearning for redemptive love. With George Ezra. At 8 p.m., Hammerstein Ballroom, 311 West 34th Street, Manhattan, 800-745-3000, ticketmaster.com. (Anderson)★ Ibeyi (Wednesday) These 20-year-old French-Cuban twins are the daughters of Angá Díaz, a prominent percussionist in Cuba who performed with the Buena Vista Social Club. Their music is an ecstatic whirl of Yoruba chants, French and English purrs, sparse electronic beats, Cajón drums and a lot of preternatural tenacity. The duo’s self-titled debut album, which was recently released on XL, is a remarkable first outing. With Flo Morrissey. At 8:30 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tobias Jesso Jr.  (Thursday) Another member of the current ’70s-inflected folk-pop surge, along with Father John Misty and Patrick Watson, Mr. Jesso is capturing national attention fast for “Goon,” his debut solo album. On it, this Canadian singer-songwriter bemoans his lovelorn state over tastefully morose piano riffs, sounding like a perfectly sincere contemporary ringer for James Taylor. With Okay Kaya. At 6:30 p.m., Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, mercuryloungenyc.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementMarina & The Diamonds  (Thursday) Much like Time Magazine, which ceremoniously anointed You, the reader, as the Person of the Year in 2006, the Welsh singer-songwriter Marina Diamandis maintains that the Diamonds in her act are not the backing band but, instead, her fans. The discordant dance-pop of her 2012 album, “Electra Heart,” hit No. 1 in Britain; the follow-up, “Froot,” landed this month. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)Laura Marling  (Monday) This nu-folk singer-songwriter and 2011 Brit Award-winner for best female solo artist is an old, serene soul: her intricate guitar strums and flinty intonation meld contemporary influences with the hearth-warmed acoustics of Britain’s 1960s and ’70s folk revival. Her new album, “Short Movie,” will be released in Britain on the day of this show, and the following day in the States. At 8 p.m., Warsaw, 261 Driggs Avenue, at Eckford Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, 866-777-8932, warsawconcerts.com. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret (through April 4) The most anticipated event of cabaret’s high season is Debbie Harry’s already sold-out engagement at Café Carlyle, from Tuesday through April 4. On the heels of Buster Poindexter’s run there, it is proof positive that downtown has crashed the gates of uptown and that the punk-rock revolution, absorbed by the mainstream, now qualifies as rock nostalgia. Before that, Herb Alpert and Lani Hall are at the Café through Saturday with a mixture of light pop-jazz built around Mr. Alpert’s burbling trumpet and Ms. Hall’s sultry voice. (Friday at 8:45 p.m. and Saturday at 8:45 and 10:45 p.m., 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com.) At 54 Below, Melissa Manchester opens a three-evening engagement on Thursday at 7 p.m., and the unstoppable Ben Vereen revives his high-spirited show “Steppin’ Out,” running through Saturday at 7 p.m. (Stephen Holden)The Music of David Byrne and Talking Heads (Monday) The New Wave eccentrics of Talking Heads and their endlessly inventive frontman, David Byrne, will be celebrated in a series of lavish covers during this installment of the 11-years-strong concert series for music education programs. The shows in this series, founded by City Winery’s Michael Dorf, have been devoted to the music of Prince, Paul Simon and Joni Mitchell. This evening includes performances from the Roots, Bebel Gilberto, Alexis Krauss of Sleigh Bells, Steve Earle and others. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Anderson)★ Shakey Graves  (Thursday) Although he is occasionally given the artless “hobo folk” handle for his scraped howl and twangy guitar fingerpicking, the singer-songwriter Alejandro Rose-Garcia transcends that label with his lo-fi Americana. Performing under the name Shakey Graves, this musician and actor from Austin, Tex., is worldly but not jaded for his 20-something years, energetic yet minimally produced with many aching riffs. His most recent album, “And the War Came,” has freak-folk moments that beg for further exploration. With Nikki Lane. At 8 p.m., Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan, 212-777-6800, irvingplaza.com. (Anderson)Songhoy Blues  (Monday) The Malian desert blues band is making a snazzy debut in America this month with several shows in New York City. When it opened for Alabama Shakes at the Beacon Theater, the band was joined by one of the producers of its album, Nick Zinner of Yeah Yeah Yeahs. In praising the band in his review in The New York Times, Jon Pareles wrote, “Circling through their modal guitar lines and galloping along on their drumbeats, the songs were insistent and determined but also headed for the ecstatic.” At 7 p.m., Rockwood Music Hall, 196 Allen Street, between Stanton and Houston Streets, Lower East Side, 212-477-4155, rockwoodmusichall.com. (Anderson)Kate Tempest  (Tuesday and Wednesday) Over ripping electropop beats — and in a thick South London accent that conveys bleakness and hope — Ms. Tempest paints a brutal picture of the working-class grind on her sharp debut album, “Everybody Down.” After a breakout year in her native Britain, this poet, playwright and rapper is making inroads stateside; her play “Brand New Ancients,” which reinterpreted Greek gods as everyday Londoners, received rave reviews when it was staged at St. Ann’s Warehouse last winter. Tuesday at 6:30 p.m., Mercury Lounge, 217 East Houston Street, at Ludlow Street, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, mercuryloungenyc.com. Wednesday at 9 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, at Kent Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. (Anderson)Marques Toliver  (Thursday) Mr. Toliver, a classically trained violinist from Florida, has shifted his considerable gifts to the unusual hybrid of baroque R&B. In his hands, it is fascinating: He croons fitfully about spirituality over intricate string solos, joking between songs. This young talent released his lovely first full-length album, “Land of CanAan,” in 2013. His monthlong Rockwood Music Hall residency concludes on Thursday. At 10 p.m., Rockwood Music Hall, 196 Allen Street, Lower East Side, 212-477-4155, rockwoodmusichall.com. (Anderson)Tove Lo  (Wednesday) This young electropop singer has been called “the Swedish Kesha” for her party-hearty, debauched lyrics. Her debut album, “Queen of the Clouds,” is broken into three groups of tracks — “The Sex,” “The Love” and “The Pain” — and has some sharp hook writing, similar to her contributions to works by Icona Pop and Lea Michele. At 8 p.m., Highline Ballroom, 431 West 16th Street, Chelsea, 212-414-5994, highlineballroom.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementFrankie Valli and the Four Seasons  (Friday) A short trek up Broadway from West 52nd Street, where “Jersey Boys” continues to print money and delight tourists, Mr. Valli and his vocal group, the subjects of that peppy musical, perform in the flesh. Perhaps Mr. Valli, a powerful and charismatic falsetto crooner, will sing “Walk Like a Man” and “Big Girls Don’t Cry” exactly when his Great White Way counterpart does. Now that’s entertainment. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatrenyc.com. (Anderson)A pop music entry in the Listings pages on Friday about Ariana Grande, who performed at Madison Square Garden on Friday and Saturday nights, misidentified the network with which she was affiliated earlier in her career. She was a star with Nickelodeon, not with the Disney Channel.A version of this schedule appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C16 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Pop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.