By KEN JOHNSONMARCH 19, 2015
Painting used to be as much a craft as an art. That began to change in the late 19th and early 20th centuries as artists like van Gogh, Picasso and countless others shifted the focus from technical virtuosity to the expression of individual sensibility and intellect. Bravura skills with the brush, like those of Bouguereau and other academicians, became anathema for the early Modernists.Prejudice against craft persisted into the late 1960s, when there came a resurgence in realism, a way of painting that seemed to require considerable know-how if not traditional expertise to be done well. A subtrend was photorealism, which was practiced most compellingly by Robert Bechtle, Chuck Close and Richard Estes, who is the subject of an interesting but problematically organized exhibition at the Museum of Arts and Design.“Richard Estes: Painting New York City” is Mr. Estes’s first solo exhibition in a New York museum, and it’s the first exhibition devoted to a single painter at the Museum of Arts and Design. The core of the show, organized by the guest curator Patterson Sims, is a selection of 24 paintings of urban subjects like glass and chrome storefronts, movie theater marquees, cars and trucks, subways, the Brooklyn Bridge, views from the Staten Island Ferry and idyllic images of Central Park made between 1965 and 2015. As if some further justification for exhibiting paintings at this museum was needed, the show also includes didactic sections about the technique that goes into Mr. Estes painting and prints. Disappointingly, this aspect of the show doesn’t fully deliver what it promises. But the paintings are riveting to behold.Born in Chicago in 1932, Mr. Estes moved to New York in 1958. He’s lived here ever since, and most of his paintings have been of New York scenes. Based on his own photographs, which he cuts up and pieces together to create his compositions, they picture complex scenes in eye-dazzling sharp focus and in extreme detail. Viewed up close, the seamless illusions fall apart into myriad patches of colored paint; the magic partly is in how your eyes and mind flip between seeing the realism and seeing the abstraction.AdvertisementMr. Estes’s concern with the nature of seeing is made humorously explicit in “The Eye Man” (2014), an extraordinarily complicated image in which red scaffolding pipes crisscross in front of an optometrist’s store called the Eye Man. You have the sense of seeing more clearly and intensely than you ordinarily do; it’s nearly hallucinatory. There are paradoxes about time, too. While all that you see appears instantly and simultaneously present, it takes time to visually parse the whole picture. It also took a lot of time for Mr. Estes to construct it in paint, and his manifestly slow, patient and careful process of doing so may be vicariously calming for the contemplative viewer.AdvertisementThe exhibition’s earliest painting, “Seated Figures, Central Park” (circa 1965), a smudgy picture of people sitting on a park bench with an indistinct crowd beyond, shows Mr. Estes still in thrall to a 1950s-type of expressive humanism. It’s a startling change from that warm, moody picture to a photorealist work from 1967, “Horn and Hardart Automat,” a frontal assault of cool complexity. A set of tall storefront windows extends diagonally from the left into the picture, filling more than two-thirds of the whole rectangle. Reflections of tall apartment buildings, cars and trucks merge with the view of the restaurant’s interior, where a man sits pensively in profile, chin on hand.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Like the customers in Edward Hopper’s “Nighthawks” (1942), the man inside seems lonesome, adding an emotional dimension of ennui that runs throughout Mr. Estes’s oeuvre. The solitary diner is an allegorical figure, too, a modern Everyman trapped in layers of systematic artificiality.One of the show’s most poignant and beautiful paintings is “Bridal Accessories” (1975), which depicts the facade of a bridal shop lit up at night. With more than two dozen female mannequin heads modeling hats and veils in the front window, the image evokes a sense of longing for love and security in a city that often runs roughshod over human vulnerabilities.As for Mr. Estes’s process, Mr. Sims offers an informative discussion in the catalog, but the exhibition itself doesn’t delve deeply into all the steps that go into making his works. Vitrines display the photographic collages from which he works, but what happens between those and the finished paintings is left to your imagination.One room in the show explicates the technology of Mr. Estes’s silk-screen and woodblock prints, which closely resemble his paintings. But printmaking has never been his focus. He became involved in it only because he and his dealer (Allan Stone, at that time) realized in the early 1970s that producing prints would be a way to make his work more widely and cheaply available and thus generate more income. Moreover, as Mr. Sims writes in the catalog, production of Mr. Estes’s prints “is left almost entirely to highly skilled printmaking artisans and specialists.”It’s only in painting that the spirituality and morality of Mr. Estes’s art is fully embodied. It teaches us to slow down and pay more unprejudiced attention to all things great and small.“Richard Estes: Painting New York City” continues through Sept. 20 at the Museum of Arts and Design, 2 Columbus Circle; 212-299-7777, madmuseum.org. A version of this review appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C24 of the New York edition with the headline: Urban Landscape in Abstract Realism.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.