AdvertisementSupported byBy Alessandra StanleyAt first glance, “Bloodline” looks ominously like a poignant family drama: Members of a close-knit Southern clan gather at a gracious seaside retreat to celebrate their formidable but aging patriarch. There are anniversary cookouts and multigenerational beach volleyball, and it looks awful.But appearances, like children, can be deceiving.This Netflix series isn’t a sensitive portrait of the richness of family ties. “Bloodline” is a sneaky, dissembling film noir account of a sneaky, dissembling family. The Rayburns lie to one another. The show’s creators lie to viewers — or at least veil the truth. The story of a prodigal son’s return is enticingly sheathed in layers of duplicity, private demons and mistrust — almost as if Pat Conroy had collaborated on a screenplay with James M. Cain.Todd A. Kessler, Daniel Zelman and Glenn Kessler are the creators of “Bloodline,” and they are also the team that came up with “Damages.” That provenance is more of a giveaway than any of the clues in the first episode. But “Damages,” which began on FX in 2007, was a legal thriller.This first season, to be streamed in its entirety starting Friday, presents a more oblique kind of mystery, with murder only part of a larger puzzle of family resentment and suppressed grievances. Those unfold “Damages” style, in jagged, artfully sequenced fragments that withhold as much as they reveal.Glenn Close was the star of “Damages,” and that alone was a tip-off that her series was more sinister and complicated than the usual legal whodunit. As Patty Hewes, Ms. Close had a sunny smile so sinister it all but withered flowers and shattered glass.The setting in a Florida Keys hotel has a faint echo of the classic Humphrey Bogart movie “Key Largo,” but the stars of “Bloodline” don’t instantly project a sense of menace.Kyle Chandler (“Friday Night Lights”) is John Rayburn, a detective in the local sheriff’s office and the family anchor. Sam Shepard plays the gruff, hardworking father, Robert, known as Bob, who with his loving wife, Sally (Sissy Spacek), runs the family hotel business. Another son, Kevin, (Norbert Leo Butz) works at the hotel, and a daughter, Meg (Linda Cardellini), a lawyer, pitches in with legal work and other tasks.The Rayburns seem like an unusually companionable, affectionate and easygoing group. Of course, the Keys also seem dreamily balmy and serene. It’s paradise until the first tropical storm blackens the sky and drenches the landscape.There’s another son, Danny (Ben Mendelsohn), the eldest, and his return after some time away almost instantly darkens the mood. Danny is a classic ne’er-do-well, a flâneur who can’t hold a job and stay out of trouble with drugs, women or the law. John has always protected and looked out for his older brother, but even he is worried about Danny’s behavior and prospects. And he should be worried.“Bloodline” is cleverly constructed, but a lot of the mystery hinges on Danny. Mr. Mendelsohn (who made his name in the United States in the Australian crime drama “Animal Kingdom”) is suitably inscrutable — his character is a quicksilver manipulator who can seem benign one second and malevolent the next. His good looks are bleached out by bad behavior, and only his smile, wryly sweet but fleeting, restores his boyhood charm. At his best, Danny seems well-meaning and misunderstood; at his worst, he looks a little like a middle-aged Robert Durst.Danny wants to come back and help out with the family business, or says he does. Only his mother thinks that is likely or a good idea. But Danny is not the only scion with mixed motives and a murky agenda. It takes a while to see it, but all of the Rayburn children have secrets and buried wounds that are hinted at in blurry flashbacks.Television is offering so many drawn-out series that tantalize the viewer with half-truths and partial answers. “Broadchurch” on BBC America has fudged the guilt of an accused child killer to fill a second season. “Secrets and Lies” on ABC is a new elliptical thriller about the murder of a child. On A&E, “The Returned” doesn’t explain why dead people keep coming back to life.At the outset, “Bloodline” doesn’t even make clear if anyone has been murdered, let alone who might be missing. But it does establish that it may be well worth waiting to find out.BloodlineAvailable for streaming on Netflix.Produced by Sony Pictures Television in association with KZK Productions for Netflix. Todd A. Kessler, Daniel Zelman and Glenn Kessler, executive producers.WITH: Kyle Chandler (John Rayburn), Ben Mendelsohn (Danny Rayburn), Linda Cardellini (Meg Rayburn), Norbert Leo Butz (Kevin Rayburn), Jacinda Barrett (Diana Rayburn), Jamie McShane (Eric O’Bannon), Enrique Murciano (Marco Diaz), Sam Shepard (Robert Rayburn) and Sissy Spacek (Sally Raburn).Advertisement