AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel Graeber‘Boo at the Zoo: Mystery and Mischief’Whether they’re monsters or ghosts, most of the frights at Halloween celebrations are purely imaginary. But at the Bronx Zoo, a fearsome specter does hover over the proceedings, one that endangers lives and thwarts scientists, not just at this time but all year.Its name? The threat of extinction.That shadow lurks at “Boo at the Zoo,” an otherwise joyful festival whose 2015 theme is “Mystery and Mischief.” Every October weekend, it welcomes children with live music, crafts, trick-or-treat stations, a hay maze and a host of real creepy-crawly residents.“ ‘Boo at the Zoo’ is really about wildlife conservation and reinforcing its importance through the theme of this season,” said Judith Klein Frimer, the zoo’s director of public programming.One appropriately spooky reminder is the Extinct Animal Graveyard, above, punctuated by headstones bearing the names and images of various species and the dates they were last documented. Examples include the pig-footed bandicoot (1901), the passenger pigeon (1914) and the Tasmanian tiger (1933). “It helps our public to understand just how fragile nature is,” Ms. Frimer said.Even the pumpkin carving has a conservation message. This weekend artists from Pumpkin Sculpt USA will address “The Toad and Tarantula Mystery,” using their talents to illustrate the intriguingly symbiotic relationship between the narrow-mouthed toad and this type of spider. “They’ll be making marionettes out of gourds,” Ms. Frimer said.Children can also see the carvers’ handiwork in the Jack-O’-Lantern Illumination, a dark tunnel displaying more than a thousand pumpkins that have been transformed into brightly lit sculptures of wildlife.“Boo at the Zoo” will illuminate creatures in another way, too, by helping young visitors understand their behavior. Five Mystery Stations will offer materials to investigate a puzzle like “Which mammal was here?” The clues can be “anything from a bone to a skull to showing an animal track or scat,” Ms. Frimer said.The celebration’s mischievous elements include magic shows by David Levitan and a twice-daily costume parade led by Alice Farley Dance Theater. The zoo encourages children to join the puppet-and-mask procession, whose participants, according to Ms. Frimer, will include “a 20-foot-long royal python and a bigger-than-life lemur.” That’s a real walk on the wild side.(Saturdays and Sundays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., through Nov. 1, at Bronx River Parkway and Fordham Road, Fordham, 718-367-1010, bronxzoo.com/boo.)For Children‘Alice in Wonderland’ (Saturday and Sunday) Literally Alive Theater, which adapts books into children’s productions, has followed the White Rabbit to Greenwich Village, where it has revived this musical — using video projections and over 30 instruments — based on Alice’s adventures. Written by Michael Sgouros and Brenda Bell, the show is preceded by a workshop in which young theatergoers learn about Lewis Carroll’s work and make a story-related craft to take home. (Through Nov. 8.) Saturday at 11 a.m. and 3 p.m.; Sunday at 11 a.m.; workshop one hour before the performance. Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, 212-352-3101, literallyalive.com.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Continuing) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing Middle Eastern artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (around 1900) where young archaeologists can dress in costume and portray early-20th-century immigrants to Palestine. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘A Band of Angels’ (Sunday) New York City Children’s Theater used to be called Making Books Sing, and 10 years ago, it first produced this musical, based on a book whose subject was also singing: “A Band of Angels,” by Deborah Hopkinson. The book relates the history of the Fisk Jubilee Singers, established in 1871 at Fisk University in Nashville, one of the first educational institutions for freed slaves. Written by Myla Churchill and recommended for ages 8 and older, this adaptation follows Ella, a contemporary teenager, as she goes back in time and meets the Fisk singers. First revived last spring, the show is back for just two performances. At 3 and 7 p.m., Joe’s Pub, at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, nycchildrenstheater.org, joespub.com.‘Brooklyn Sewers: What’s Up Down There?’ (Through May 29) When it comes to subterranean infrastructure projects, New York City’s subway system seems to get all the attention. But a group of teenage curators at the Brooklyn Historical Society would like to introduce you to another underground marvel: Brooklyn’s sewer system, one of the city’s oldest and most extensive infrastructure projects. This exhibition explores engineering conundrums and courtroom battles and tells the story of the sewer system through photographs, drawings and maps. 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.‘Childish Games and Toys’ (Sunday) Grown-ups like playing with toys, too, and this concert will prove it. The musicians Phyllis Chen and Robert Dietz will present a program performed completely on toy pianos and music boxes. Offered in conjunction with the exhibition “Swedish Wooden Toys,” the event will include Ms. Chen’s piece “The Memorist,” which draws on Lewis Carroll, Humpty Dumpty and her own childhood. At 3 p.m., Bard Graduate Center, 38 West 86th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3011, bgc.bard.edu.Children’s Potions and Pumpkin Tea Parties (Saturday) If children haven’t received their invitations yet to study at Hogwarts, this may be the next-best thing. Gallow Green, the rooftop restaurant at the McKittrick Hotel, has revived this series, welcoming children ages 6 through 11 to learn all about herbal potions and plantings. An English tea — with pink lemonade for young guests — will be served, and each participant may bring a favorite stuffed animal or doll. (Each adult attending must be accompanied by at least one and no more than three children; each child should bring a recyclable bottle for concoctions.) (Also on Oct. 24.) At 10 a.m., 542 West 27th Street, Chelsea, 212-564-1662, events.mckittrickhotel.com/childrenspotionsandplanting. Reservations required.‘Connected Worlds’ (continuing) Human choices and actions have an impact on the world’s ecosystems, but people usually can’t see the effects as they happen. That isn’t true in this new permanent exhibition in the renovated Great Hall of the New York Hall of Science. Consisting of huge screens (one is 38 feet tall), the show depicts six interconnected environments with a shared water supply. With the help of technology that responds to gestures, “Connected Worlds” allows children to use simple motions to plant, harvest, cut trees, create clouds and make other changes in the projected landscapes — and see how the native flora and fauna fare. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org.Dancing Through College & Beyond (Sunday) There’s nothing frivolous about dancing through college — not when you get course credit for doing it. This free event, sponsored by Dancewave, features more than 40 college dance programs offering advice and information on the application process. For the first time, the fair will also include a chance to audition for more than 20 of the participating colleges, as well as a concluding showcase performance by dancers enrolled in several of the visiting programs. From 8:30 a.m. to 6 p.m., Harkness Dance Center, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, dancewave.org/connects.Kids Fest: Stages in the Square (Saturday) Children can both watch performances and perform themselves in this free celebration for ages 12 and under from the Madison Square Park Conservancy. Featuring three stages, the event will include entertainers like the bilingual balladeer Sonia De Los Santos, the pop group Joanie Leeds & the Nightlights, the magician the Amazing Max and the theater troupes the Story Pirates and Children’s Shakespeare Theater. BKBX Kids! will offer mime workshops, the Little Orchestra Society will teach music composition, and Adam Issadore, founder of the Path to Rhythm group drumming programs, will provide drums and instruct in percussion. From 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., rain or shine, Madison Square Park, 23rd Street, between Madison and Fifth Avenues, madisonsquarepark.org.Family Saturday at the French Institute Alliance Française (Saturday) Whether you think of it as Family Saturday or Samedi en Famille, this program offers fun, with no mastery of French required. And the day’s theme is one that easily translates across cultures: toys. The toy historian Dorothée Charles will offer two workshops: one at 11:30 a.m., for ages 3 through 6, in which little ones will make their own Playmobil creations, and one at 3:30 p.m., for ages 6 through 9, in which participants will play with classic favorites, like Barbie and Etch A Sketch. The day will also include a 1:30 p.m. screening of what you might call the French version of “Toy Story”: “Panique au Village” (“A Town Called Panic”), a 2009 film, in French with English subtitles, that follows three playthings — a cowboy, an Indian and a horse — on a wild adventure. Workshops are in Le Skyroom, 22 East 60th Street, Manhattan; the film is in Tinker Auditorium, Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan; 800-982-2787, fiaf.org.‘Fashion Academy, the Musical’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company’s latest show for children over 7 focuses on a middle-schooler, MacKenzie Williams, known as Mickey. When her colorful and completely original style doesn’t go over well at her new school, Fashion Academy of Brooklyn, she decides to make over not only her wardrobe, but also herself. Based on the book “Fashion Academy,” by the mother-daughter team of Sheryl Berk and Carrie Berk, this adaptation, by the elder Ms. Berk and Sabrina Chap, asks whether Mickey’s new persona, Kenzie, is really worth the sacrifice. (Through Oct. 31.) Saturdays and Sundays at 3:30 p.m., Marjorie S. Deane Little Theater, 10 West 64th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Flight School, the Musical’ (Saturday and Sunday) If you want to fly, and you’re a bird, you should be all set, right? Well, not if you happen to be a penguin. That’s the challenge confronting the little hero of this new musical from Vital Theater Company, adapted from “Flight School,” a picture book by Lita Judge. With a script by Cara Lustik, lyrics by Joshua H. Cohen and a score by David Mallamud, the show, recommended for ages 2 through 7, chronicles Penguin’s determination to remove the technical obstacles between him and the sky. (Through Oct. 31.) At 1 p.m., Marjorie S. Deane Little Theater, 10 West 64th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Anne Frank and the Remembering Tree’ (Saturday) The beauty of nature was largely invisible to Anne Frank and the others hiding in the Secret Annex in Amsterdam, but a horse chestnut tree grew outside its walls. Later, saplings from that tree were planted worldwide. In this program at the Anne Frank Center USA, Rabbi Sandy Eisenberg Sasso, author of the picture book “Anne Frank and the Remembering Tree,” which is told from the tree’s viewpoint, will give a reading and conduct an art workshop. Recommended for ages 8 and older, the event will also include a discussion with Michael Bornstein, one of the youngest survivors of the Holocaust. From 1:30 to 3 p.m., 44 Park Place, at Church Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-431-7993, annefrank.com. Space is limited, and reservations are advised.‘Cooking With Frida’ (Through Nov. 1) The New York Botanical Garden is honoring the Mexican artist Frida Kahlo (1907-1954) in its exhibition “Frida Kahlo: Art, Garden, Life,” and it offers programs to introduce its youngest visitors to this famous Latina. In this one, at the Ruth Rea Howell Family Garden, children can explore the raw ingredients of Mexican cuisine and enjoy cooking demonstrations inspired by Kahlo’s entertaining. This weekend, the Howell garden will also offer “Dig! Plant! Grow!: Goodnight, Garden!,” a program from 1:30 to 5:30 p.m. that will focus on getting the place ready for winter. Children will rake leaves, bury bulbs and learn how to save seeds. “Cooking With Frida” workshops are on Wednesdays, Saturdays and Sundays at 2 and 4 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org.‘Frolic!’ at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan (Through Dec. 31) You’re never too young to rock — and this space proves it. A new pop-up installation at the museum, “Frolic!” uses rock music and a themed décor to stimulate sensory play and learning in visitors ages 5 and under. In addition to a stage, a pretend ticket booth and ’70s-style props — including a Volkswagen mini-van to climb into — the 1,500-square-foot area has programs of workshops and live performances to help little ones get into the groove. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Fridays at 7 p.m.; Saturdays at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sundays at noon and 3 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.‘The Gruffalo’ (Saturday and Sunday) What happens when the fearsome creature you’ve invented to scare away your enemies turns out to be real? That’s the situation the mouse confronts in “The Gruffalo,” Julia Donaldson’s best-selling children’s picture book. In this revival of the theatrical adaptation for ages 4 through 7 by Tall Stories, a London theater company (the sets and costumes are new), young audiences help provide sound effects for the Gruffalo, the beast the mouse thought it had only imagined. (Through Oct. 25.) At 11 a.m. and 3 p.m. (The 3 p.m. show on Saturday will feature drop-in arts activities an hour before the performance; the 11 a.m. show on Sunday will feature a discussion afterward; the 3 p.m. show on Sunday is autism-friendly.) New Victory Theater, 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.‘Hansel and Gretel’s Halloween Adventure’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) This pair already know how to deal with a witch, and they have encounters with many more fantastical creatures in this puppet musical at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater. Geared to ages 3 through 9 (and appropriately tame), the show is a sequel to the theater’s original “Hansel and Gretel,” introducing characters like mermaids, cute monsters, charming vampires and valiant pirates. (Through Oct. 31.) Weekdays, except Mondays, at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an extra performance on Wednesdays (and on Halloween) at 2:30 p.m.; weekends at 1 p.m. (Some shows are sold out.) At 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts. Reservations required.Honey Weekend (Saturday and Sunday) The grounds of Wave Hill, the public garden in the Bronx, will be buzzing this weekend with bees the size of children. Not that the infestation will be at all scary — these bees really are children. “Be a Bee” is the theme of the family art project: From 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. on both days, young visitors will create wings, antennas and pollen cups, and romp through the grounds, playing kazoos, in a 12:30 p.m. parade. Related activities during the morning and afternoon will include watching honey extractions, tasting honey, trying on beekeeper gear and exploring an empty hive at a Hives and Honey Information Station. From 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, 718-549-3200, wavehill.org; grounds admission on Saturday is free until noon.‘The Hunger Games: The Exhibition’ (Through Jan. 3) What enterprising 12- or 13-year-old wouldn’t like to foment a little rebellion? Such a visitor can do so vicariously at this attraction at Discovery Times Square, stepping into the role of Katniss Everdeen, the teenage heroine of “The Hunger Games” and the ultimate leader of the resistance against her nation’s totalitarian government. Based on the Lionsgate film adaptations of Suzanne Collins’s novels, the show includes costumes and artifacts from the movies, as well as re-creations of Katniss’s journey and interactive, role-playing elements like a gamesmaker’s table and a chance to learn and practice stunt choreography. 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com, thehungergamesexhibition.com.‘If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home’ (Through Jan. 17) Maps present facts, but they can also engage the imagination. This new exhibition at the Children’s Museum of the Arts explores the intersection of cartography and art, showing work that expands upon, redefines or simply refers to maps. Among the eight artists represented are Matthew Cusik, who makes collages from map fragments; Joyce Kosloff, who layers images and textured paint onto maps; Loren Munk, who adds plaques of color and information to street maps; and Nikki Rosato, who subtracts from maps, cutting away all but roads and rivers. In the museum’s Cynthia C. Wainwright Gallery, 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org.Jazz for Kids (Sunday) Every Sunday during most of the school year, Jazz Standard presents not just jazz for kids, but also jazz by kids: The featured players at its Sunday brunches are the members of the Jazz Standard Youth Orchestra, a group of talented young people ages 11 to 18. In this free series (donations are requested for the Jazz Standard Discovery Program, an initiative that brings musical performances to city schools), beginning its 14th season this weekend, the musicians play new arrangements of big-band classics while listeners enjoy barbecue offerings purchased from a menu that includes children’s fare. (Through mid-May.) Doors open at 1 p.m.; shows are from 2 to 3 p.m.; 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan, 212-576-2232, discoverjazz.org/upcoming.‘Jean-Michel Cousteau’s Secret Ocean’ (Friday through Thursday) Ever encounter a goby or a blenny? How about a Christmas tree worm? These small marine species, often unnoticed and uncelebrated, are among the stars of this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History. Filmed by Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau, and Holly Lohuis, a marine biologist, the film captures 30 species that are among the tiniest to inhabit the seas. (Through Jan. 10.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.Kidz Bop Kids: ‘Make Some Noise’ (Sunday) What youthful, fresh-faced pop group has been known to outsell Pharrell Williams, Ariana Grande and Iggy Azalea? That’s Kidz Bop Kids, a quartet known for its family-friendly versions of current hits. (And some top tunes definitely don’t start out that way.) The group is bringing its “Make Some Noise!!” tour to the Gramercy Theater, where it promises a singalong, dance-along show. At 5 p.m., 127 East 23rd Street, Manhattan, 212-777-6800, livenation.com.‘LARD: Life’s a Real Dream’ (Saturday) This show about LARD, the concept, has nothing to do with lard, the substance. An acronym for “Life’s a Real Dream,” “LARD” is the title of a rollicking musical production starring Lard Dog, who also happens not to be a dog. The alter ego of the multimedia artist Steven Erdman, Lard is a gregarious out-of-this-world character who has flown in from the planet Belopio on a giant pretzel. He and his Band of Shy perform this hourlong entertainment, which includes cartoon graphics and a pretzel toss. (Through Jan. 2.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, houseoflard.com.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton, who recently stepped into the roles, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.Music in Motion (Saturday) That motion is the gentle rocking of a boat for this series of family neighborhood concerts presented by Bargemusic, the floating barge at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge. As always, the material — announced just before the performance — is chamber music, but these programs differ in important ways from the regular Bargemusic fare: With unreserved seating, they last only an hour, include a post-show question-and-answer session with the musicians and are free. (Through Nov. 28.) At 4 p.m. (doors open at 3:45), Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org.Music for Little Rockers (Sunday) Small children aren’t shy about rocking out — especially if you provide the right tunes. In this series from the Rock and Roll Playhouse, geared to music fans 7 and under, young participants will move, play and sing while listening to works from the classic-rock canon. Held most fall Sundays at Brooklyn Bowl (and on Saturdays at the Capitol Theater in Port Chester, N.Y.), the series will devote each hourlong workshop to a theme. This weekend it’s the 1970s. At 11 a.m., 61 Wythe Avenue, between 11th and 12th Streets, Williamsburg, 718-963-3369, therockandrollplayhouse.com.New York City Ballet Family Saturday: ‘A Ballet Journey From the Past to the Present’ (Saturday) Children who know New York City Ballet mainly for its “Nutcracker” performances can see other sides of the repertory in this series of hourlong workshops that introduce those 5 and older to classical dance. This program, to be hosted by the principal dancer Daniel Ulbricht, will be an exploration of ballet through the centuries, including excerpts from “Swan Lake” and from a contemporary interpretation of a Western classic. At 11 a.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com/publicprograms.‘NYC & Me: A Little Bite of the Big Apple’ (Through Jan. 18) There’s one place where little citizens can safely run loose on the streets of New York: the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. This new interactive 3,000-square-foot gallery is a city microcosm for small visitors, allowing them to pretend to be taxi drivers, bus drivers, construction workers, street performers and, most impressively, the mayor. Activities include directing traffic, erecting a skyscraper, “ice skating” in their socks and investigating urban tales on the steps of the New York Public Library. The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘One Wild Ride’ This would seem to be an apt title, since one of the stories in this hourlong show is about a subway car with extraordinary powers. But an even wilder ride may be provided by the young audience members themselves, who will be involved, along with the adult cast, in an adventure of their own choosing. The presenting company, BKBXKids!, is a division of Broken Box Mime Theater, and will do this production with a talking M.C. After each performance, the cast will also give a children’s workshop in mime. (Through Oct. 24.) Saturdays at 2 p.m., Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas, at Dominick Street, South Village, 866-811-4111, brokenboxmime.com.‘Peter Rabbit Tales’ (Saturday) The title character is a wiser and more mature fellow in this adaptation of Beatrix Potter’s books from the Enchantment Theater Company. Peter thinks his youthful folly is quite behind him when his cousin, Benjamin Bunny, enlists his help in finding Benjamin’s offspring, who have disappeared. But Jemima Puddle-duck, Squirrel Nutkin, Mrs. Tiggy-Winkle and other famous Potter characters urge Peter to get back in the saddle — or rather back in the garden — one last time in this puppet-and-masks musical, which opens the Family Theater Season at TriBeCa Performing Arts Center. At 1:30 p.m., Borough of Manhattan Community College, 199 Chambers Street, near Greenwich Street, 212-220-1460, tribecapac.org.‘Rock or Treat’ (Saturday) You’re heard of rocking around the clock — this Halloween show is all about rocking around the world. Developed by Funikijam, an organization devoted to early-childhood entertainment and education, “Rock or Treat” offers high-energy tunes and movement that are globally inspired for ages 3 through 10. The interactive 45-minute musical, not frightening despite its location — Times Scare — encourages children to come dressed for the holiday and participate in a costume parade. (Through Oct. 31.) Saturdays at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., Cabaret Theater, Times Scare, 669 Eighth Avenue, near 43rd Street, funikijam.com.‘Skeletons ... A Day of the Dead Bedtime Story’ (Saturday) According to Mexican tradition, the spirits of deceased loved ones are revived on the Day of the Dead, a holiday that is joyous rather than ghoulish. In this production from Teatro Sea, the Latino children’s theater, Jimmy is in mourning for his grandfather, who actually comes back to life for one night. Written by Richard Marino, the company’s managing director, “Skeletons” portrays the comical adventures that result when Grandpa and other departed relatives try to help Jimmy get on with his life. (Through Nov. 1.) At 3 p.m., Los Kabayitos Puppet and Children’s Theater, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org.‘Sleepy Hollow’ (Friday through Sunday) Ichabod Crane and the Headless Horseman are off and riding again in this musical revival from Be Bold! Productions. Inspired by Washington Irving’s “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow” and recommended for theatergoers older than 9, this show, by Michael Sgouros and Brenda Bell, focuses on the love triangle and the mystery inherent in Irving’s tale. It also explores a darkness beyond the story’s fearsome woods: that of the human heart. Fridays and Saturdays at 7 p.m. (no show on Oct. 31); Sundays at 2 p.m.; Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 866-811-4111, hollowthemusical.com.‘A Taste of Magic’ (Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. (Through Nov. 24.) At 8 p.m., Docks Oyster Bar & Seafood Grill, 633 Third Avenue, at 40th Street, Manhattan, atasteofmagicnyc.com.Teens Take the Met! (Friday) This isn’t a youthful sit-in, but it is a youthful art-in. In this twice-a-year program, the Metropolitan Museum of Art turns over its galleries — free of charge — for three hours to all teenage visitors with a middle school or high school ID. The plans, this time formulated with more than 55 cultural and youth organizations, include opportunities to make zines, compose digital music, take drama and dance workshops and conduct gallery talks, not to mention meet friends, eat snacks and join in a giant dance party. One special highlight: a youth performance of poetry inspired by representations of Africans in art. From 5 to 8 p.m., 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org.‘The Velveteen Rabbit’ (Saturday and Sunday) There’s a long fictional tradition of toys wanting, or trying, to become real, but few such tales are more poignant than Margery Williams Bianco’s story “The Velveteen Rabbit,” in which a beloved stuffed animal undergoes a magical transformation. Atlantic for Kids, the children’s theater division of the Atlantic Theater Company, is the latest troupe to adapt the book for the stage. Directed toward children 3 to 9, this musical version, by Cormac Bluestone and Anya Saffir, features many young alumni of the Atlantic Acting School. (Through Nov. 1.) Saturdays and Sundays at 10:30 a.m., Linda Gross Theater, 336 West 20th Street, Chelsea, 866-811-4111, atlantictheater.org.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Continuing) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.Advertisement