By MICHAEL COOPERMARCH 19, 2015
Since the violinist Aaron P. Dworkin founded the Sphinx Organization nearly two decades ago to encourage diversity in the stubbornly homogeneous field of classical music, he has held competitions and tours to showcase young black and Latino musicians, started educational programs and urged conservatories and orchestras to be more inclusive.Now Mr. Dworkin — who along the way won a MacArthur fellowship and was appointed to the National Council on the Arts — is stepping down as president of the organization to assume a different kind of role: dean of the University of Michigan’s School of Music, Theater and Dance, which on Thursday announced that he would take up the position in July.“Sphinx has, if you will, kind of been on the outside, almost by necessity, to be a catalyst — we are always the ones applying pressure and saying more needs to be done,” Mr. Dworkin, 44, said in a telephone interview. “But it’s easy for us to say to an orchestra that you need to have more diversity, you don’t have enough, and not necessarily be fully in the weeds of all of the facets they have to address. Now, of course, I’ll be in a role where I won’t have the luxury of speaking from the outside. I will have to really deliver, but in the totality of the role.”Mr. Dworkin said that while diversity and inclusion would be major priorities of his as dean, he would look at his mandate more broadly and thinking about how a performing arts school should train and prepare artists for a rapidly shifting cultural landscape.AdvertisementThe Sphinx Organization, based in Detroit, will continue its work, and has appointed Afa S. Dworkin, its executive and artistic director, as its next president. Ms. Dworkin, a violinist, is married to Mr. Dworkin, who noted that their professional relationship — she was the first Sphinx employee — predated their personal one, and that she was the architect of many of its initiatives.The changing of the guard at Sphinx offers an opportunity to assess the state of diversity at American orchestras, where there are still startlingly few black and Latino players in major ensembles and the pace of change is glacially slow.A survey by the League of American Orchestras found that only 2 percent of orchestra musicians were African-American and 2.5 percent were Latino during the 2011-12 season. (The United States Census Bureau identifies 13.2 percent of the nation’s population as black or African-American and 17.1 percent as Hispanic or Latino — and those percentages are much higher in many of the cities where major orchestras make their homes and try to attract audiences.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But as low as those numbers are, they represent some progress: Two decades ago a survey of a slightly smaller sample of orchestras found that only 1.6 percent of orchestra players were African-American and 1.5 percent were Latino.Advertisement“I am frustrated with the slower pace of change, but there is change and I’m encouraged by that,” Mr. Dworkin said.Mr. Dworkin was appointed on Thursday by Michigan’s board of regents to a five-year term as dean, and to a tenured professorship. It will be a homecoming of sorts for him: He holds a bachelor’s degree and master of fine arts degree in violin performance from the university, in Ann Arbor. The school recently began a project to create a definitive edition of Gershwin scores, and a recording it made of Milhaud’s “L’Orestie d’Eschyle” was nominated for a Grammy last year.At the Sphinx Organization, Mr. Dworkin’s initiatives helped raise the profiles of young minority musicians, encouraged young people from different backgrounds to consider classical music, and brought together black and Latino classical musicians.“When I founded the organization, people often said, ‘Well, there’s no diversity because there are no musicians of color out there who play at a qualified level,’ ” Mr. Dworkin recalled. “Thankfully, 18 years later, I hear that very little now. What I hear more is: ‘How do we connect with those musicians? How do we build that kind of bridge to our organization?’, things like that.”A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Changing of the Guard at Sphinx, a Diversity Advocate in Classical Music.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.