By DAVID ALLENMARCH 19, 2015
You might know that Yuja Wang is one of the best young pianists around. You’ve probably heard something about her fashion sense. Well, I can report that she’s a natural page turner, too.Digital pages, that is. Her quirkily brilliant performance of Gershwin’s Piano Concerto (1925) with the London Symphony Orchestra and Michael Tilson Thomas on Wednesday at Avery Fisher Hall rightfully drew a standing ovation. Afterward, there was an encore, a little piece built from electro-rocklike riffs. Amid rapid streams of notes, her hands nonchalantly shot up to swipe across the iPad she was reading from. (Easy!) The orchestra members laughed, clearly entranced.The encore? A work written for Ms. Wang called “You Come Here Often?” Its composer? A name surprising to many — one Michael Tilson Thomas. He’ll go far.Mr. Thomas in fact is an accomplished if rarely heard composer. As it happens, he and the London Symphony do come here often, just not in each other’s company, even though he has been the orchestra’s principal guest conductor since 1995 and was its principal conductor before that. He was most recently in New York with his San Francisco Symphony in November. The London Symphony was last here in October 2013. But they had not performed together in New York since 1992. For all the recent clamor over Simon Rattle, who will become the London Symphony’s music director in 2017, theirs is a partnership that continues to thrive.AdvertisementThey’re having fun, too — I haven’t seen an orchestra enjoy itself like this in some time. In the Gershwin, the strings dug into the score’s songful lines so eagerly that Ms. Wang was often overpowered, although at times they lacked the flexibility needed for the concerto’s Charleston, blues and ragtime beats.Ms. Wang often plays jazzy numbers as encores, and Gershwin suited her perfectly. With star turns from Philip Cobb’s sultry trumpet and Gareth Davies’s melancholy flute, she deliciously evoked a seedy, midnight bar in the second movement.AdvertisementThe concert opened with a painterly account of the “Four Sea Interludes” from Britten’s “Peter Grimes” (1945), but with the orchestra oddly tame in the “Storm.” There was nothing docile about Sibelius’s Second Symphony (1901-2), though, played after intermission. Much of the Sibelius heard at the moment is steely, frosty and concerned with structure more than overt emotionality. (Think of performances led by the conductors Osmo Vanska and Leif Segerstam.) But the London Symphony learned its Sibelius from Colin Davis, and the warm sound he instilled in this orchestra was the perfect springboard for Mr. Thomas’s superheated, wildly impulsive view of the piece. Fiercely dramatic and often bellicose, this was less a symphony than an epic.The London Symphony Orchestra continues on tour in cities in California and in Las Vegas and Seattle through April 1. A version of this review appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: How to Juggle an iPad and a Concert Piano.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.