By HOLLAND COTTERMARCH 19, 2015
Established in 2010 by Hunter College, the Artist’s Institute is a combination of exhibition gallery, historical laboratory and studio space dedicated to meditating on the work of one contemporary artist at a time for roughly one semester. Artists who’ve been in the spotlight — or under the microscope — have included Jo Baer, Jimmie Durham, Rosemarie Trockel and Haim Steinbach. Carolee Schneemann is the subject of attention this spring, and a richer one would be hard to find.Ms. Schneemann’s shaping influence on contemporary performance art and film are a matter of record, but the Artist’s Institute show, organized by Jenny Jaskey, returns to the start of her history in the late 1950s, when she was in art school. There were confusions. Cézanne was her hero, partly because the “anne” in his name had originally led her to think he was a woman. And because the school didn’t hire life models, she did nude portraits of her boyfriend and herself, which got her expelled. Three pictures from the ’50s — expressionistic, high-colored, joyous things — are on view, as are 1962 photographs by A. V. Sobolewski that show Ms. Schneemann, who has always considered herself primarily a painter, posing, her body smeared with chalk and grease, within assemblage environments.Her liberationist trajectory soon afterward produced classic group performances like the 1964 “Meat Joy,” as well as films that brought sensuality and politics, feminist and otherwise, together. Along the revolutionary route she encountered resistance; it wasn’t until the 1990s that she received something like a mainstream embrace. But she’s one of the greats, and Hunter knows it. Exactly how, under the hand of Ms. Jaskey, the director of the Artist’s Institute, the interpretive emphasis on Ms. Schneemann’s career will be shaped as the semester goes on remains to be seen. But the artist will certainly be part of the process, beginning on Friday at 7 p.m. when she gives a “performative lecture” at Hunter’s studio building, at 205 Hudson Street in TriBeCa.The Artist’s Institute 163 Eldridge StreetLower East Side Through March 29 A version of this review appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C26 of the New York edition with the headline: Carolee Schneemann: ‘Part One’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.