
Inside Art By                     
 GRAHAM BOWLEY and
 

 JUDITH H. DOBRZYNSKI
 
MARCH 19, 2015
Sotheby’s is teaming up with the rapper Drake in an exhibition of contemporary works by black American artists on sale at this auction house’s New York headquarters from April 28 to June 12.The hope is that Drake, whom Sotheby’s calls one of today’s “foremost cultural tastemakers,” will lend some of his aura to bolster its budding private sales business.Unlike some of his fellow rapper royalty, particularly Jay Z and Kanye West, Drake is not known as an art collector. But, according to a Drake spokeswoman, he “draws a lot of inspiration from visual artists.”Drake’s contribution is choosing music to preview some of the art, roughly 20 works by artists including Rashid Johnson, Nick Cave, Glenn Ligon, Kara Walker, Wangechi Mutu and Jean-Michel Basquiat.AdvertisementVisitors can experience his picks at listening stations in the Sotheby’s gallery.Sotheby’s, like other auction houses, views private direct sales away from the glare of the auction hall as a juicy new marketplace. They are attractive for those buyers and sellers who appreciate the discretion, want to avoid bidding wars, and prefer to shop and sell year round rather than wait for auctions.AdvertisementSotheby’s has built special exhibition spaces for private sales in London and New York under the brand S2. The business stumbled a bit last year, and with annual sales of $624 million, it provides only about a tenth of the company’s overall sales.(Christie’s has a similar program. It opened its 11,000-square-foot West Galleries in New York last year for auction previews and private sales and in May will show “Colombia Recounted: Contemporary Colombian Art.”)The idea for the Drake collaboration came through a personal connection within Sotheby’s contemporary art department, and he is not being paid, Sotheby’s said.BIG WIN FOR PHILLIPS This spring and summer, Phillips will sell about 140 paintings, sculptures and photographs from a private American collection, estimated to be worth about $35 million.It is the kind of consignment that might once have gone to its two bigger rivals, but that Phillips has vowed it would start winning under its new chief executive, Edward Dolman.While Phillips’s sales are still dwarfed by the multimillion-dollar bonanzas at Sotheby’s and Christie’s, the consignment is the first big single-owner collection won under Mr. Dolman’s leadership. If all goes as expected, it will also be the highest valued collection it has offered since Mercury Group, a Russian real estate and retail conglomerate, took over Phillips at the end of 2008. Highlights include Brice Marden’s “Elements (Hydra) 1999-2000/2001,” estimated at $8 million to $12 million; “Porch Crop” by Ed Ruscha, estimated at $2 million to $3 million; John Chamberlain sculptures; and Wolfgang Tillmans photographs.Most of the works will be sold at Phillips’s contemporary evening sale in New York on May 14, but some items will be available at a photography auction on April 1 and 2 in New York.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Allan Schwartzman, co-founder of Art Agency, Partners, an art advisory firm, helped build the private collection with its owners over more than 10 years.Advertisement“They were interested in art of their time,” he said of the collectors. “There is a lot of abstract work and work where the imaging is involved with the natural world.”Phillips put up a financial guarantee, backed by a third party, to win the consignment.Neither Phillips nor Art Agency, Partners will identify the owners, but a number of art world experts said they are the financier Laurence Lebowitz and his wife Naomi Aberly, a Democratic fund-raiser.NEW DIA TRUSTEESIn her new job as director, Jessica Morgan has only just begun her task of reviving the Dia Art Foundation, but she is already making a few changes. She is announcing four new trustees to Dia’s board: the Greek shipping magnate George Economou; Ra Hee Hong Lee, director general of South Korea’s Leeum Samsung Museum of Art; Irene Panagopoulos, a Greek businesswoman and collector; and George Condo, who becomes an artist trustee replacing Brice Marden (who becomes trustee emeritus).Ms. Morgan says their appointments reflect her wish to bring a broader international focus to Dia, which still has no exhibition space in New York City, though it hopes one day to have one. New programs at its Dia:Beacon outpost in upstate New York include the Walter De Maria installations “Equal Area Series” “Silver Meters” and “Gold Meters,” which open April 3. In June, visitors there will be able to see for the first time 45 Richard Serra models or maquettes for “Torqued Ellipses.”CRYSTAL BRIDGES ADDS ARTThe Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art in Bentonville, Ark., which has attracted nearly 1.6 million visitors since opening in 2011, has always had sparse holding in postwar art. But it has been steadily filling the gaps. And on Friday, the museum — financed largely by the Walmart heir Alice Walton — is to announce the addition of 16 works acquired in 2014, including an important “combine” by Robert Rauschenberg. Most will go on view this month in what Chad Alligood, a curator at the museum, called a “radical restructuring” of the postwar galleries that will provide a better narrative of the development of art in the second half of the 20th century.For example, Rauschenberg’s “The Tower,” a 1957 assemblage of tin cans, a broom, fabric, light bulbs and an umbrella, set in a wooden structure, will stand near a 1963 Rauschenberg painting. Once owned by the collectors Victor and Sally Ganz, “The Tower” went on the auction block at Christie’s in 2011, estimated at $12 million to $18 million, but failed to sell. Crystal Bridges bought the piece privately at an undisclosed price.To illustrate the bridge between Abstract Expressionism and color field painting created by Helen Frankenthaler, Crystal Bridges is hanging her “Seven Types of Ambiguity” from 1957, one of three paintings and two works on paper just purchased from the Helen Frankenthaler Foundation.Among other new works are Mark Tansey’s “Landscape” (1994), which sold last fall at Sotheby’s for $3.7 million (with buyer’s premium); Vija Celmins’s “Untitled (Ham Hock)” from 1964, which Mr. Alligood said captured “a moment in Pop Art that was once called ‘the new realism,’ ” and two gifts: Brice Marden’s “For Carl Andre” and Nancy Graves’s “Fayum-Re,” the latter from the New York collector Agnes Gund.The new works are estimated to be worth about $20 million, but the museum declined to comment. JUDITH H. DOBRZYNSKI A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C22 of the New York edition with the headline: Sales by Sotheby’s, Music by Drake.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »