AdvertisementSupported byArt in ReviewBy Martha SchwendenerThis is the second project in a trilogy by Alfredo Jaar exploring the power and politics of famous images. The first installation focused on a 1993 Pulitzer Prize-wining photograph of a starving child in Sudan; here Mr. Jaar has chosen the Dutch photographer Koen Wessing’s “Estelí, Nicaragua, September 1978” (1978), which shows two women at the moment they learn their father has been murdered.Mr. Jaar’s presentation opens not with Mr. Wessing’s famous photograph but with a video of Mr. Wessing describing how Nicaraguans led him around during the Sandinista uprising against the Somoza government, urging him to capture everything on film. You then enter a labyrinth lit by lightboxes displaying images from the same series and contact sheets, also taken by Mr. Wessing. The final room serves as a showy climax: the “Estelí” photograph is blown up and illuminated so the women become glowing silhouettes.This is the weakest part of the exhibition. But Mr. Jaar has set himself a difficult task: How do you amplify the effects of an image that is already as dramatic as a Baroque painting? (Or, as Mr. Wessing says in the video, Greek drama.) Equally at issue are the ethics and politics of photography. Do we have a right to witness such nakedly human moments? Susan Sontag, who wrote a lot about photography, felt images of this nature were exploitative and voyeuristic; more recently, Ariella Azoulay, author of “The Civil Contract of Photography,” argued that they initiate a “civil contract” between the photographic subjects and the viewer who might be compelled to help or intervene. (In his landmark book on photography, “Camera Lucida,” Roland Barthes even mentioned a photograph by Mr. Wessing, also taken in Nicaragua during this period, as emblematic of photojournalism, with its combination of banality and horror.)Mr. Jaar’s project falls somewhere in between. Bombastic and theatrical, it’s political in its image choice, but hackneyed in its delivery — and less effective than his first installation, which also focused on the photographer as much as his subjects. This project feels more like politics at a remove, however, and the overshadowing fact is that photography has changed. Atrocities of this magnitude are happening today, but they’re just as often captured by civilians with cellphones instead of auteurs of photojournalism, like Mr. Wessing.Galerie Lelong 528 West 26th Street, Chelsea Through March 28 Advertisement