By ALEC M. PRIESTERMARCH 21, 2015
9 P.M. (IFC) INGLOURIOUS BASTERDS (2009) This revisionist history by Quentin Tarantino takes place during World War II as Lt. Aldo Raine (Brad Pitt) leads a special unit of Jewish American soldiers, dedicated to scalping Nazis, on to a plot to kill Hitler. Shosanna Dreyfus (Mélanie Laurent) escapes the murder of her family by Col. Hans Landa (Christoph Waltz) and his men and runs a movie theater in Paris. When the Nazis choose her theater for the premiere of a propaganda film, Shosanna begins scheming. For more Tarantino, “Kill Bill: Vol. 2” plays at 8 on Showtime. The film follows Beatrix Kiddo (Uma Thurman) as she takes revenge on the Deadly Viper Assassination Squad. Mr. Tarantino’s “movies are about loss and betrayal, and ‘Kill Bill Vol. 2’ is a double-burger helping of those motifs,” Elvis Mitchell wrote in The New York Times. “It is rich, substantial and sustained, yet also greasy kids’ stuff.”10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY Kim Lawton examines religion’s role in the voting rights movement and the 50th anniversary of Bloody Sunday and the marches in Selma and Montgomery, Ala. Fred de Sam Lazaro profiles “Average Mohammed,” a Somali Muslim in Minneapolis making videos to counteract extremist recruitment. A Baha’i describes a 19-day fast leading up to the Baha’i New Year.Noon (13) RICHARD HEFFNER’S OPEN MIND What do society and the justice system owe prisoners exonerated of the crimes for which they were imprisoned? Maddy deLone, executive director of the Innocence Project, discusses reparations.9 P.M. (CUNY) MASQUERADES (2010) Lyes Salem directs, is a co-writer of and stars in this Algerian film. He plays Mounir, a gardener who aspires to upward mobility. He sees an opportunity in his nuisance of a narcoleptic sister, Rym (Sarah Reguieg), whom he can marry to “a real gentleman” to improve the family’s standing. Mounir fabricates a bridegroom for Rym (who secretly wishes to marry Mounir’s best friend). Meanwhile, the village awaits the wedding.Advertisement10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS PRESENTS: THE BIZARRE SAGA OF ROBERT DURST Interviews with the retired Detective Paul Coulter, the Los Angeles Times reporter Jack Leonard, the forensic psychiatrist Dr. Alexander S. Bardey, the New York magazine writer Lisa DePaulo and others shed light on the life and exploits of Robert A. Durst, of the New York real estate dynasty. Mr. Durst has most recently been profiled in the HBO mini-series “The Jinx,” which made headlines when the finale included what appeared to be a confession to the murders he has been suspected of committing. He was arrested last Saturday in New Orleans, the day before the “The Jinx” finale.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10:30 P.M. (MSG) THE MASK WITH HENRIK LUNDQVIST The New York Rangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist skates around Chelsea Piers with Michael J. Fox. They design a goalie mask and discuss playing hockey as children and what it’s like to raise kids in New York.10:45 P.M. (Comedy Central) HOT TUB TIME MACHINE (2010) Middle age has cast a pall over the lives of Adam (John Cusack), Lou (Rob Corddry) and Nick (Craig Robinson), three college friends. When Lou passes out drunk in his car and is hospitalized for carbon monoxide poisoning, Adam and Nick think he attempted suicide. They take Lou, along with Adam’s nephew Jacob (Clark Duke), to Kodiak Valley, a ski resort. When they spill an energy drink on the control panel of a hot tub, they are transported back to 1986. They are torn between reveling in their reclaimed prime and ensuring that nothing significant is altered. “Steve Pink, the director, and a trio of dementedly scholarly screenwriters (Josh Heald, Sean Anders and John Morris) load up every scene with more jokes than necessary — visual allusions, verbal flourishes and plain old fall-on-your-face slapstick — but their excess proves to be a canny strategy,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “The picture moves so quickly and crazily, swerving and skidding and doubling back for seconds, that minor lapses in wit are immediately overtaken by major (and therefore hilarious) lapses in taste.”AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowEMPIRE In this season finale, Cookie (Taraji P. Henson) plots a power grab. Hakeem (Bryshere Y. Gray) tries to make the best decision for his career. Lucious (Terrence Howard) has a secret that threatens his potential musical relationship with Jamal (Jussie Smollett). Guests include Snoop Dogg, Juicy J Jennifer Hudson and Patti LaBelle. (hulu.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 21, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.