By SIOBHAN BURKEMARCH 20, 2015
Is there anything more sentimental than a home video of a little kid dancing? What if you extracted only the motions and put them in a different body, on an empty stage? “Helga and the Three Sailors,” a richly detailed dance by Netta Yerushalmy, begins with an exercise in that vein. Alongside short, looping clips of herself as a child, Ms. Yerushalmy does again what she did back then, but with no emotional inflection. The physical facts of flailing in the living room or wobbling along a garden path, it turns out, make for compelling choreography.“Helga,” first presented last fall at Danspace Project, had a reprise on Tuesday at New York Live Arts, slightly altered for the setting but no less rigorously constructed. As part of the Joyce Theater’s offsite series, Joyce Unleashed, it shared a bill with Hillel Kogan’s hilarious parody of didactic art, “We Love Arabs.” (This year’s series has a Middle Eastern focus: Mr. Kogan lives in Tel Aviv; Ms. Yerushalmy grew up in Israel.)She has described “Helga” as a “(largely doomed) attempt to see the body as an abstract entity.” That impossible aim, starting with the childhood-movie challenge, yields imaginative movement for herself and three dancers (Amanda Kmett’Pendry, Sarah Lifson, Marc Crousillat) that cleverly contorts bodies and faces and dodges logical pathways: the musculoskeletal system rewired. Judith Berkson’s fitful score, with its cawing vocals and deep electronic tones, prevents any moment from getting too comfortable.Against the blank canvas of a white floor and partial backdrop (designed by Lenore Doxsee), Ms. Kmett’Pendry (in blue), Ms. Lifson (in red) and Mr. Crousillat (in brown) make bold imprints, as colors, as creatures, as shapes. Motionless at first, anchoring Ms. Yerushalmy’s increasingly feverish prologue, they take on a life of their own until only Ms. Lifson remains. She circumscribes the space with a tiptoeing shuffle and a rhythmic contraction in her upper spine, like the motor, or heartbeat, of the piece.Mr. Kogan is more interested in people as people. “Coexistence” is the metatheme of “We Love Arabs,” a piece about making a piece about a Jewish dancer and an Arab one healing cultural wounds. In a smart sendup of choreographic clichés and ethnic stereotyping, Mr. Kogan, as the self-aggrandizing creator, is trapped by the very misconceptions he supposedly wants to dispel.“They might think that you are the Jew and I am the Arab,” he says fretfully to the partner he recruits, Adi Boutrous, insisting that they “mark” each other (with a marker): a Star of David for him, a crescent for Mr. Boutrous, who, however, is Christian. In the end, having smothered their faces with hummus, a symbol of their common ground, they break pita with the audience.The Joyce Unleashed series continues through Saturday at New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. A version of this review appears in print on March 21, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Culture in Motion, and Hummus Too.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.