AdvertisementSupported byBy Elisabetta PovoledoPOMPEII, Italy — Despite its name, the Villa of the Mysteries, arguably the best-known monument at the archaeological site here buried by Vesuvian fury in A.D. 79, has something to reveal.Restorations completed earlier this year and presented Friday have disclosed the brilliant colors as they existed at the time of the eruption, as well as repair work that was done on some figures in ancient times, preservation officials said. An international team of experts used both traditional and high-tech methods to restore the mosaics and frescos and supporting structures in the villa during the two-year project.“This is the most ambitious restoration ever because it involved all the rooms,” said Massimo Osanna, the culture ministry official in charge of the site. Though Pompeii is one of the world’s most famous archaeological sites, drawing more than 2.5 million visitors annually, in recent years, the site has most often grabbed headlines when something went wrong, usually an incident involving the collapse of a wall after bad weather. The criticism has made Italian officials bristle, and the culture minister, Dario Franceschini, grumbled on Friday that since the world’s news media has been so quick to “shine a spotlight on Pompeii every time something negative happens,” he hoped the news media would be as enthusiastic in reporting the restoration of “a pearl.”Controversy has hounded the caretakers of one of the world’s largest open-air museums practically since it was first excavated in 1748. Exposure to the elements and the wear and tear tourists have proved to be serious challenges to safeguarding the vast site, not to mention the damage from the eruption, the occasional earthquake and the Allied bombing in 1943. And all too often restorers are called on to remedy the unintentional damage caused by their predecessors. In the 1960s, for example, “concrete was seen as the great save-all — it’s taken years to remove old restorations,” said Antonio Varone, a former director of the excavations at Pompeii.Critics add that the site has also been inadequately administered over the years. Earlier this month, for example, nearly six million euros ($6.5 million)was confiscated from a former director accused of mismanaging funds, a charge he denies. And last year, frescoes were detached from one ancient house, causing a fresh uproar. Three years ago, the public outcry over Pompeii’s state of health prompted the European Union to allocate nearly €80 million (about $86.5 million) for its preservation, topped off by Italy for a total of €105 million (or $113.5 million.) There’s a catch: the funds must be spent by the end of 2015, or be returned, and critics have accused Pompeii officials of dragging their heels.European Union officials have worked with local administrators here to develop a plan — signed in July — to speed up the process.“A strong acceleration of expenditure on the ground is necessary in the remainder of 2015,” Jakub Adamowicz, a spokesman for the European Union’s budget, transport and regional policy commissioner, Corina Cretu, said in an email.Officials in Pompeii said on Friday that a sizable portion of the funds had already been earmarked for projects, and they felt confident that they would be able to meet the year-end deadline. The cash infusion also covered 85 new jobs for archaeologists and engineers, and six-month apprenticeships for 150 budding archaeologists assigned to organize thousands of artifacts that have been in deposits for decades. Sidi Gorica, a recently graduated archaeologist at the University of Bologna said working at the site, even if only for a few months, was a dream come true. “It enriches you,” he said.The €900,000 (about $973,600) used for the restoration of the Villa of the Mysteries, came from the site’s internal budget.Restorers worked on the suburban dwelling built just outside one of Pompeii’s main gates in lots, so that it would never be entirely closed to the public, save for the last few months.Mosaics were restored one piece at a time, while frescoes were cleaned. Lasers were also used on the frescoes, in particular to remove layers of wax that had been applied since the 1930s, oxidizing over time to darken the colors. The restored palette is what Pompeiians saw when Vesuvius erupted, Mr. Osanna said, adding that the lasers also allowed restorers to determine that some figures had already been repaired in ancient times. “Problems of deterioration had begun before the eruption,” he said.Experts also used ultrasound, thermal imaging and radar to study the walls of the villa and gauge their level of deterioration. The results will be published in the coming months so that they can be consulted for future restorations.Though much is now known about the villa, the meaning of the individual scenes in the frescoes that give the site its name — portraying some two dozen life-size figures widely believed to depict an initiation rite into the cult of Dionysus, the god of wine — remains mysterious.“Tour guides always want to make it some kind of weird cult place; I don’t think it’s that,” said Mary Beard, professor of classics at Cambridge, who noted that the room was a public space, and so would have been seen by visitors. “It’s a fantastically bravura piece of art in an intellectual space,” where the artist was “thinking about how to represent some aspects” of a ritual that is not completely understood.“Let’s just say that one of the most fascinating things about the villa is that we don’t understand what these figures want to tell us,” Mr. Varone said.Cutting the ribbon at the Villa of the Mysteries, Mr. Franceschini proclaimed: “If you asked have we resolved all the problems, the answer is no; if you ask are you resolving them, then we can proudly say yes.”Advertisement