AdvertisementSupported byMusic ReviewBy David AllenSet the rumor machine to overdrive: Esa-Pekka Salonen appeared with the New York Philharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday. In a recent round table in The New York Times, he was several critics’ dream choice to replace the outgoing music director Alan Gilbert. On this occasion, Mr. Salonen wasn’t conducting, just taking a composer’s bow after Mr. Gilbert had led his thrilling work for large orchestra, “Nyx” (2010). But those who enjoy orchestral Kremlinology should note that, unusually, Mr. Gilbert insisted that Mr. Salonen help to pick out players for solo bows and then to jump onto the podium for more applause. The players joined in, animatedly.Symbolism? Consult your tea leaves.The basic question is whether Mr. Salonen, a former music director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic who is principal conductor of the Philharmonia Orchestra in London, is interested in the job. He left Los Angeles to focus on composing, and his recent works — primarily his Violin Concerto (2009) and “Karawane” (2014) — have been exquisite, if infrequent. New York audiences will hear more of them soon, as he becomes the Philharmonic’s composer in residence this fall.So this “Nyx” was an appetizer. Nyx, the goddess of night, was an elusive character in Greek mythology. “Nyx,” although not a description of her, has much the same quality. As Mr. Salonen said in a preconcert talk, he keeps his material static across this 20-minute piece but shines different lights on it. He shades ideas down to their silhouettes, then blazes them in fluorescent detail.Mr. Salonen revels in the aural possibilities of a full orchestra, and “Nyx” stomps around with teeming complexity. Arguably, it’s most evocative when most tender, as with the delicate flutters given to the piece’s protagonist, the principal clarinet (Anthony McGill), or in the way the thick string textures dissolve toward the end, as if awaking from a dream. Mr. Gilbert produced a fine, luscious performance: not as incisive as Mr. Salonen’s way with his own music, but viewing him through his influences, especially Ravel and Debussy. To that extent, this concert was cleverly programmed. Ravel’s Piano Concerto followed “Nyx,” with the Philharmonic’s artist in association, Inon Barnatan, making his subscription concert debut. Mr. Barnatan is a sublimely refined young pianist, and his Ravel was judicious, with a striking simplicity in the slow movement. After intermission, Debussy’s raunchy “Jeux” drew dusky playing but only stilted eroticism. The suite from Strauss’s “Der Rosenkavalier” — onto the end of which Mr. Gilbert intriguingly spliced the final pages of the opera — was heavy and lacking in spirit.The New York Philharmonic repeats this program at Long Island University’s Tilles Center for the Performing Arts on Saturday and again at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday; 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. Advertisement