AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil Drumming“ ‘Looking for a wannabe Broadway actor, broke, down on his luck, who lives in Harlem in a basement apartment,’ ” said Tituss Burgess, who was recently sitting in a cafe down the street from his former Harlem basement apartment. He was remembering the casting call for what would turn out to be the second lead on Netflix’s “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt.” It was basically him. Sure, Titus, the character on the show, lacked the additional “s” in his name. But, otherwise, the similarities — gay, black, fabulous — were undeniable. “I thought, ‘Is this a joke or am I about to get a job?’ ” Mr. Burgess said with a laugh.Even the discovery that the “Kimmy Schmidt” co-creator Tina Fey had written the role with him in mind did not lead Mr. Burgess to believe he would secure it. After years of toiling as an actor in New York, he knew better. “I had to audition just like everyone else,” he recalled, having received the character breakdown along with hundreds of his peers. “Several of my friends even called me wanting to see if I could coach them on it.” Mr. Burgess, 36, started out as a director of musicals in community theater in his hometown, Athens, Ga. A trained vocalist, he then worked in Florida as a Disney performer before moving to New York at 23. Before long, he was appearing in Broadway musicals like “Jersey Boys” and “Guys and Dolls.” The Tony Award winner Des McAnuff, who directed Mr. Burgess in both, said, “He has a gift for channeling his personality into any role.”“He doesn’t need to be a mimic,” he added. “He can find a role from, as they say, the inside out.”Despite some success on the New York stage, Mr. Burgess felt underused. “I was being made to park and bark,” he said. “No one ever wanted to see me do anything other than belt for Jesus.” Confident that he could be as funny and dramatic as any actor, he tried his hand at TV and was soon rewarded with a one-line part as a histrionic gay hairdresser on “30 Rock.” The role, as D’Fwan, stretched to four episodes, yet Mr. Burgess’s career idled after that. “I was on ‘Blue Bloods,’ ” he said of a bit part on the CBS drama. “Which I think got cut.”But his arc on “30 Rock” captured the imagination of Ms. Fey and Robert Carlock (who had worked together on that show and were teaming up again for “Kimmy Schmidt,” starring Ellie Kemper) as they were looking to fill this role. This resulted in Mr. Burgess’s auditioning to play a version of himself. According to Carol Kane, who also stars in the show, this is not as strange as it sounds. “I’ve been told several times, ‘Oh, I went on an audition for a Carol Kane type,’ ” said the veteran actress, referring to parts she was not even asked to audition for. “It’s an odd profession.” Equally strange is that, after snagging the role, Mr. Burgess is now defending his quasi-self against critics who denounce the show for stereotypical depictions of minorities, including that of the melodramatic, musical-theater-loving Titus. While Mr. Burgess allows that Titus may look all too familiar “on paper,” he maintains that “Kimmy Schmidt” does more than just exploit the character’s race, sexual orientation and class for mere laughs. In one episode, after getting a job dressing as a werewolf at a horror-themed restaurant, Titus has run-ins with a policeman and a cabdriver and discovers that he gets treated better in New York as an actual monster than as a black man. “If you watch what Titus, the gay, black character, has to go through and the issues that he is starting to face, those are real issues,” he said. (“Kimmy” has come under particular scrutiny for story lines involving Latinos, Asians and Native Americans, but Mr. Burgess believes those issues, too, have been “met with great sensitivity.”)Like Tracy Jordan (Tracy Morgan) from “30 Rock,” Titus on “Kimmy” has a type at his core but is too outsized, contradictory and fluid a character to be confined by an easy and recognizable set of traits. He is loyal and selfish, ambitious and lazy, talented and hackneyed. He is aware of his tenuous inclusion in mainstream society based on superficial parameters and yet craves more than anything to be a part of the most shallow aspect of the culture: contemporary fame. (See his ridiculous “Peeno Noir” video, already gone viral.) “If he could fit into a stereotype,” Ms. Kane said, “he would work more. I have a lot of actor friends who are mediocre who work all the time.” Mr. Burgess agrees, and with more earned hubris than his struggling namesake. “Titus is not just a one-dimensional queenie black man,” he said. “Anybody can do that. You don’t need Tituss to do that.”Advertisement