Season 5, Episode 15: “Try”Spoilers and rage issues lurk below.Updated, 1:04 a.m. |  On Sunday no major characters died on “The Walking Dead” but Rick did murder his reputation, as his affection for Jessie, his violent nature, and his distaste for Alexandria’s version of civilization conspired to finally push him over the edge.Last week, as the weasely Father Gabriel raved about the evil of the people who had protected him, Deanna seemed to treat him with the circumspection he deserved, but we all knew what was coming. News of her son Aiden’s death, in the company of the very people Gabriel cast as devils in angel’s clothes, seemed destined to unsettle the fragile detente between Teams Rick and Deanna.And so it did — on Sunday we found our heroes’ standing in Alexandria decidedly more tenuous, as the echoes of Gabriel’s warnings landed with fresh impact on a wounded mother’s psyche. Said warnings were bolstered by other factors, of course. For one, did we expect Nicholas to give an honest accounting of the events at the warehouse? We did not, and he didn’t disappoint.But it was Rick who really didn’t do himself or the group any favors. After leading with the kill option in his initial “what do we do about Pete?” meeting with Deanna (baby steps, Rick) he took things into his own hands soon after and, ultimately, took them crashing out of Jessie and Pete’s living room window. Pete was not the slouch one might have expected from a cowardly domestic abuser, giving the constable all he could handle as he tore at Rick’s face much like the walkers did to Noah last week. But Rick soon gained the upper hand and lapsed into the sort of dead-eyed kill-phoria that doesn’t usually end well for the other guy, only to relent under pressure from the horrified onlookers and a symbolic red balloon.A cooler Rick prevailed, for once, and for a second it seemed like he might defer to some approximation of the law and order he nominally represents. But no, soon enough he was waving a pistol around and berating the Alexandrians about their weakness. “You still don’t get it. None of you do,” he complained. You sit there and try to wish away the bad things in the world, he said, dithering and planning and just hoping that things like spousal abuse will take care of themselves.“We have to control who lives here!” he shouted.“That’s never been more clear than right now,” Deanna replied. (You walked right into that one, Rick.)All that was left was for Michonne, who spent the episode battling her own bloodthirsty demons, to knock Rick out and buy the group at least one more week in suburbia’s increasingly hostile confines. I’m not sure what comes next but I do know one thing: the next party at Deanna’s is going to be awk-ward, especially after Carol notices that her casserole is still sitting on the porch.What did you make of the Attack in the Cul De Sac? We all know that “How Damaged is Rick, Really?” is this show’s favorite parlor game. (“Somewhat Damaged,” being the answer, if you go by the title of the Nine Inch Nails song that opened the episode.) And I get that he’s motivated, in some order, by burgeoning love for Jessie, concern for his family and friends’ safety, and a bit of genuine violent derangement. But this meltdown felt a little drastic, right?To give Rick (and the writers) the benefit of the doubt: He’s not wrong. Last week’s episode drew a bright line between cowards like the Alexandrians and Father Gabriel and heroic figures like Abraham and Glenn. But the cowardice is less an isolated moral failing than a symptom of a broader refusal to accept reality. A refusal to teach themselves how to manage the world as it is now. Sasha is tormented, clearly, but when she tells Deanna, as she did a couple episodes ago, that “this isn’t real,” what she’s saying is the easy life of tidy homes and idle chitchat is over, which is something that the Alexandrians don’t seem to get. (Or want to accept, at least.) And this refusal to adapt, enabled by the veneer of safety provided by their little gated community, gets people killed in the real world. People like Noah, one of Rick’s charges. So he has a good reason to be outraged, especially when it becomes clear that Deanna’s people also ignore problems inside their wall, like Pete the abuser. But doesn’t Rick have to learn to adapt, too? Rick’s tempestuous fallibility is one of the show’s more interesting characteristics but it can also feel like a crutch — when in doubt, have Rick freak out. On Sunday I was with him up to the moment he brandished the gun. From then on it felt less like an organic act than a way to build things to a head for the finale. Perhaps Rick will get his emotions under control next week and save the day again. He’ll have 90 minutes to try to pull it off.A FEW THOUGHTS WHILE WE SHOP FOR A WALKER BLIND• Sasha is really committing to her P.T.S.D., recklessly hunting walkers for visceral kicks when she’s not sleeping with her assault rifle in the watchtower. You can’t shoot your feelings, Sasha.• Nicholas was revealed as the pilferer of the J gun, which was a letdown. For one thing, he’s just sort of a lame character — a one-note sniveler who seems to be hanging around just to give us something to hiss at. That said, I guess it’s theoretically possible that he’s in league with …• The “W” gang, whose latest butchery was discovered by Daryl and Aaron. Not sure which grisly tableaux I preferred. The confident, precise lines of cleanly quartered man offered an arresting counterpoint to the haphazard arrangement of his limbs. But there was a baroque boldness to the disemboweled woman, and in tying her up to be feasted upon, the creators incorporated into the work a bracing performative aspect. (Might as well embrace it.)• These “W” folks seem like no kind of fun, but if they turn their attention on Alexandria, they might be Rick’s best chance at being re-embraced, or at least tolerated, by Deanna and friends. I wondered a few weeks back if there wasn’t some outside threat motivating Deanna to bring in rough characters like Rick and Co. Might there still be some hope for their alliance in the form of a common enemy? Or might the Alexandrians finally pay dearly for their weakness and get slaughtered by some other group next week, who then becomes the Big Bad for next season? • What else struck you about Sunday’s episode? Is there any way Glenn doesn’t kill Nicholas at some point? Is there anything worse than bringing home your new girlfriend to find your dad beating up the town surgeon? Will Carol ever get her dish back, at least? Please weigh in on these or any other topics in the comments.