Season 4, Episode 10: “Home Birth”For a season that has been all about our heroines’ faltering steps toward growing up, it is fitting that the finale centered around a premature birth. Because if there is one thing our girls have learned, it is that life has a way of coming at you hard, whether you are ready or not. And there is no realer life moment, with all its possibility and transformational finality, than childbirth. The HBO comedy by Lena Dunham.With you to talk through this final episode of the fourth season of “Girls” are me, Lydia Polgreen, and Joe Coscarelli. Lydia: After weeks of watching this show’s girls debase themselves — and wallow in their immaturity — over and over again, this week gave each of them a chance to woman up, make a tough choice and move onward and hopefully upward in life. Shoshanna, aimless and unemployed after graduating from college, has her lean-in moment, choosing to take a job in Japan(!) even though she is falling for a hunky Harvard grad entrepreneur. The line of the episode definitely goes to Ray’s boss Hermie (Colin Quinn), who urges her to take it: “Be the walker, not the dog,” he says. Joe: Hermie’s aging white man CliffsNotes of Sheryl Sandberg’s book — “My wife left a copy out, I saw an attractive woman…” he explains — includes the “Lean In” paraphrase, “Don’t give the power to your partner. Grab a seat at the table,” which works as a nice theme for this episode. I’ve come to like the way “Girls” uses its minor characters as grounding for the starring space cadets.But while Hermie did have some pearls in this appearance, his opener with the hyperactive Shosh was a dud: “You’re making my migraine twerk?” Let’s put a moratorium on older people misusing twerk for laughs, please.Lydia: Later, Jessa, who had devolved this season into the most boorish and narcissistic version of herself, saves the baby of Caroline and Hannah’s neighbor Laird, and decides afterward that she should become a therapist.
During the baby drama, Marnie braves the stage alone after her fiancé and musical partner, Desi, deserts her, giving a legit performance that might yet convince my highly musically discriminating fellow recapper a glimmer of hope that she has some talent after all. Joe: Sorry, but no — just no. While I, too, got the vibe that this Marnie performance was supposed to be redeeming after a season’s worth of sub-She & Him acoustic duets, simply taking out the male harmonies didn’t swing me. But I did laugh — was I supposed to? — at the overly specific New York City lyrics about taking the “7:45 express” and a “fire out in Riverside.” I’m going to go ahead and assume it was a parody of the cheesy Lumineers: “Look at what it might have been if you (Ho!) took a bus to Chinatown/ (Hey!) I’d be standing on Canal (Ho!)/ And Bowery.” My apologies, Marnie — I’ll stop now.Lydia: Let it not be forgotten that “Ho Hey” cracked the top five on the Billboard Hot 100, not too shabby for a folky-country debut outing. Cheesy? Perhaps. Successful pop? Definitely. Marnie could do worse. But back to our girls. Rounding things out, Hannah finally, finally lets go of her ex-boyfriend Adam, turning down his heartfelt plea to get back together, definitively, for now, closing the books on that troubled romance. This was an immaculately constructed episode, directed by Lena Dunham and written by Dunham, her co-creator, Jenni Konner, and executive producer Judd Apatow. And in many ways it felt like a deeply conventional season-closer, tying up the major plot strands in a tidy bow. Other than the Adam’s cursing and his sister Caroline’s naked, very pregnant body on display, this episode could have been the finale of a (well-written) network show. Perhaps it was a little too tidy? Joe: I agree it was a bit too pat, but I applaud the show’s nontraditional choice to foreground characters that weren’t Hannah in the finale. (Although it was a little strange to have Caroline and Laird pop up to move the plot along, considering we only caught the briefest glimpse of them this season.) When the focus does shift back to our main character, it felt more poignant thanks to her hanging back for 20 or so minutes. As usual for this season, the best acting came in another genuinely moving exchange between Ms. Dunham and Mr. Driver. But while I’m pleased they didn’t “Mr. Big” the Adam and Hannah thing (at least not yet) — forcing together two characters who most likely weren’t meant to be — I’m not sure I love Fran, the kind teacher played by Jake Lacy, as Hannah’s relationship savior either. He’s presented here as the type of guy who asks permission to rub your back when you’re upset, basically reprising his role from Jenny Slate’s “Obvious Child.” But at least in that movie, we saw some edge from him during the initial drunken hook-up. On “Girls,” he’s been completely flat, so the flash-forward to he and Hannah as a happy couple six months later felt unearned. I look forward to learning more about him — beyond the fact that he owns an Ernest Hemingway T-shirt — next season. For all the leaning-in this episode, Hannah’s happily ever (for the moment) ending also raises questions about the show’s true nature that dates back to the Season 1. While “Girls” has been packaged and sold as something progressive and subversive — and it often can be, on issues of sex and gender — it often falls back on situation and rom-com tropes, including Jessa’s surprise wedding and Adam’s knight in shirtless armor routine, which closed out the first and second finales. It’s not that these characters don’t deserve any shred of happiness, however momentary, but Hannah and Fran holding hands in the snow could be called downright conservative as endings go. Judd Apatow movies have faced similar criticism, so one might chalk the neatness up to the Apatow effect, but I wouldn’t want to take any agency away from Ms. Dunham, whose aesthetic and worldview still feel like the driving force of this show. One character I won’t miss — assuming Marnie calls off the engagement after his no-show at the record label showcase (which featured a nice Spike Jonze cameo as the label boss) — is Desi. His beta-male face-off with Ray at the coffee shop was hilarious — “Are we solid? Simpatico?” Desi asks — but Ray pretty much killed his caricature of a rival once and for all by calling out his corniness (and eyeliner). Ray also adds, “Your musical sensibility is insufferable,” which is no news to anyone.Where Ray loses me is calling Marnie a “beautiful, fully formed woman — dazzling in her complexity, maddening in her mystery.” Are we talking about the same Marnie?Lydia: Marnie definitely seems like the character who has grown the least this season. If anything she has regressed. You have to wonder if Ray’s desire for her is simply sublimated out of the rejection he received from girls like Marnie all his life. With no cliffhangers or big emotions hanging fire, I wonder where “Girls” goes from here in Season 5. Will Shosh’s foray to Japan prove to be like Hannah’s Iowa adventure — extremely short-lived? (I’d sign on to watch a spinoff of Shosh in Tokyo any day.) Will Jessa prove to be capable of empathy after all? (I have my doubts.) Will Marnie make the big time? (I honestly don’t care.) Will Hannah get a full-time job as a teacher and settle down with Fran? (I’ll eat my boots if that romance lasts, and I have a feeling we haven’t seen the last of Hannah and Adam.) We’ll be waiting, and watching. In the meantime, thanks for playing along. An earlier version of this post omitted a writer of the episode. In addition to Jenni Konner and Judd Apatow, Lena Dunham also wrote it.