Season 6, Episode 16: “Red Meat”It was a night for hunters on “Red Meat,” Sunday night’s better-than-average episode of “The Good Wife.” Diane went on an actual hunting trip with her husband, Kurt, and bagged the country’s fourth-richest man as a potential Florrick Agos client. Alicia’s stalking of the states attorney’s office paid off in a last-minute victory, and she also quickly became a proficient shooter in the video game Halo. Poor Kalinda, on the other hand, turned out to the prey in the episode’s big twist.The episode started with an illustration of Alicia’s and her campaign manager Johnny’s different mind-sets. As they shared a ride on Election Day, Alicia asked, “We’re fine, right?,” presumably a reference to their own relationship. (Based on the evidence of last week’s episode, they had hooked up at least once in the waning days of the campaign.) A distracted Johnny nodded and said “Yes,” but he wasn’t talking about them, he was talking about her election chances. “It’ll come down to turnout,” he continued.Alicia then switched cars, leaving Johnny and joining her husband, Peter, in a foreshadowing of events to come. Things were tense — Peter was angry that Alicia had hung him out to dry in a speech to an African-American group. “I didn’t specifically call you a racist,” Alicia said, and Peter shot back, “Well, I see little comfort in that.”The balance of power between husband and wife, governor and candidate, was the main thread of Alicia’s story line; even the election result was subordinate to that theme. Peter sandbagged Alicia by telling a reporter early in the day that Alicia had the election wrapped up, a seemingly innocent bit of praise that would have the effect of reducing the turnout among her voters — Johnny’s nightmare. “He just slaughtered us,” the chronically gloomy Josh said.Alicia angrily confronted Peter about it. “I suddenly just realized,” she said, “you want to be the only winner in the family.” He seemed genuinely surprised by the idea that he didn’t want her to win. But it was clear that Alicia was to some degree right — six seasons of Peter’s anger and resentment (the side of the coin we don’t often see) were expressing themselves in a willingness to let Alicia lose. While Josh and Johnny argued about what to do, Marissa dragged Alicia and taught her how to play Halo, an Election Day gift from the resurgent Finn Polmar. As the day dragged on, Alicia became increasingly engrossed by and adept in online slaughter. When a player named CoolBeans6032 came to the rescue of Alicia (JusticeGirl) and Marissa, it turned out to be Finn, playing from his office. It seemed like the ultimate good guy might be poised for a return to Alicia’s romantic rotation, but when she suggested lunch, he confessed (or claimed) that he was seeing someone.Josh and Johnny’s idea — a robocall that would scare voters into turning out with the threat of increased parking-meter fees — was a dud, particularly when Peter refused to participate. (The best celebrity they could scare up to record the call was Melissa Fitzgerald, the actress who played C.J. Cregg’s assistant on “The West Wing.”)All seemed lost. But at the last minute Peter saved the day — either (a) because he realized Alicia was right about his motives and he wanted to make it up to her, or (b) because Eli made him realize that Alicia’s losing would be a political embarrassment to him. In either case, he delivered an impromptu speech that snarled traffic in downtown Chicago, the center of support for Alicia’s opponent, Frank Prady, just in time to swing things back in her favor. (A sly touch: Rob Johnson, a news anchor for the actual CBS station WBBM in Chicago, announcing that a projected winner in the state’s attorney race would be announced “after these messages,” to the groans of Alicia and Marissa. At which point “The Good Wife” cut to a commercial.)As news spread of Alicia’s victory, her phone rang with Peter’s caller ID, and she was clearly disappointed when the caller turned out to be Eli. At her victory party Johnny told Marissa he had come to like Chicago, and he and Alicia exchanged big smiles. But at that moment Peter walked in — still the husband, still the most important ally — and Alicia turned away. Johnny’s face went blank, and a moment later he was telling Marissa, “I’ve never been a guy to stay in one place.” An elevator door shutting in front of him closed the episode, and that would appear to be that, though neither he nor Finn can be counted out.Predictions requested on what Alicia’s imminent move to the state’s attorney’s office will mean for the show. While it presumably removes her completely from her firm’s cases, it of course means that she can now oppose Cary and Diane in court. Perhaps as a crusading prosecutor she’ll go after R.D., the big fish Diane appears to have landed. And of course she’ll have to worm her way around her legal affairs with the drug dealer Lemond Bishop.Briefly, the episode’s B and C plots: For the second week in a row Diane and Kurt got the most entertaining scenes, particularly the first glimpse of them together at the hunting retreat for moguls, where Diane was the lone Democrat. “So this is the top 1 percent of the top 1 percent of the top 1 percent?” Diane whispered, a little scornfully, to which the ever-cool Kurt replied: “We’re not going to talk like communists here, O.K.? We discussed this.” Diane’s disgust with her surroundings turned to excitement when she spotted a tech guy (estimated value: $25 billion) who was thought to be unhappy with his law firm. Cary and David Lee, kibitzing by phone, told her that the way to get the man’s ear was through his wife. Diane sweet-talked the wife at the spa, but — in the episode’s single best moment — discovered that she had made a crucial error: She’d been talking not to the billionaire’s wife but to his mistress.As with Alicia’s campaign, all seemed lost. But then Diane discovered that R.D. (Oliver Platt), Kurt’s folksy old buddy, was as rich as Croesus. And she’d already charmed him, unknowingly, by engaging in a spirited two-hour debate about abortion while sitting in a deer blind.Kalinda, meanwhile, watched the TV news about the election while doing her chauffeuring duties for Lemond’s son, Dylan. When the black S.U.V. she had spotted previously trailed her again, she called Lemond, and watched as his crew grabbed the two men in the car. The consequences of this frightening act were twofold. A parent saw the abduction and reported it to the school and Dylan was expelled, on the grounds that his presence was endangering other students. But when Lemond questioned the men from the S.U.V., it turned out they were following not Dylan but Kalinda — on the orders of everyone’s old nemesis, the assistant state’s attorney, Geneva Pine.Lemond’s final words to Kalinda were another twist — for Dylan’s sake, he had decided to retire from drug dealing, and he needed her to reach out to the new state’s attorney, Alicia Florrick, and ask her to get Geneva to drop the investigation into his business. For who knows how many consecutive episodes, our last image of Kalinda was of her standing in front of Lemond looking worried.Let us know your thoughts about “Red Meat” in the comments.