AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.afroFUTUREqu##r (through Sunday) The choreographer and scholar Thomas F. DeFrantz and the dance artist niv Acosta orchestrate this weekend of Afro-futurist performance, which explores what they call “utopian/dystopian visions of a queer Black tomorrow.” The participants include Grisha Coleman and Jaamil Olawale Kosoko, whose offerings on Friday segue into a post-show dance party. Saturday brings an eight-hour marathon featuring performances by the curators and other artists. A panel discussion on Sunday, served with brunch, addresses “black art, white venues and the new black presence in elite performance.” Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday from 2 to 10 p.m., Sunday at 11 a.m., Jack, 505 1/2; Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, 646-734-8985, jackny.org. (Siobhan Burke)★ American Ballet Theater  (Wednesday through Nov. 1) This troupe begins its fall season with a new work by Mark Morris, the company premiere of Frederick Ashton’s “Monotones I and II” and Twyla Tharp’s “Brahms-Haydn Variations,” all part of the fall gala on Wednesday. All but Mr. Morris’s well-mannered “After You” repeat on Thursday and next Friday, joined by a revival of Kurt Jooss’s 1932 antiwar ballet, “The Green Table.” Wednesday at 6:30 p.m., Thursday and next Friday at 7:30 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, abt.org. (Burke)The Bessie Awards (Monday) Named for the influential choreography teacher Bessie Schoenberg, the Bessies, or the New York Dance and Performance Awards, have evolved into a boisterous ceremony honoring a wide cross-section of talent. This year’s odd-couple hosts are the former New York City Ballet principal Jock Soto and the performance artist Carmelita Tropicana; the honorees include the postmodern trailblazer Steve Paxton, who will receive the award for Lifetime Achievement in Dance. His partner in art and life, Lisa Nelson, will perform, as will the electric Camille A. Brown and this year’s Outstanding Emerging Choreographer, Storyboard P. At 7:30 p.m., Apollo Theater, 253 West 125th Street, Harlem, 800-745-3000, apollotheater.com. (Burke)Monica Bill Barnes  (Wednesdays through Dec. 16) Karaoke night meets office party in “Happy Hour,” the latest concoction from Ms. Barnes and Anna Bass, best known these days as the dancers — alongside the radio personality Ira Glass — in the touring revue “Three Acts, Two Dancers, One Radio Host.” Their new weekly gig, in a Lower Manhattan dance studio, features the cheeky duo playing two guys playing their everyday selves, as Ms. Barnes continues her love affair with awkwardness, failure and physical comedy. The audience gets drinks, prizes and the chance to sing. At 6:30 p.m., Studio G, Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, 646-837-6809, monicabillbarnes.com. (Burke)H.T. Chen and Dancers  (through Sunday) The wife-and-husband team of Dian Dong and H.T. Chen spent three years researching and interviewing Chinese immigrants and their descendants for “South of Gold Mountain.” Performed by a multigenerational cast, the work sheds light on the racism and discrimination faced by 19th- and early 20th-century Chinese immigrants who settled in the American South, and celebrates their contribution to building the country’s infrastructure. Friday and Saturday at 7:30 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Brian Schaefer)Company SBB  (Thursday through Oct. 24) The choreographer Stefanie Batten Bland joins forces with the jazz ensemble Burnt Sugar the Arkestra Chamber to honor her father, Ed Bland, a contemporary jazz composer and filmmaker. Their collaboration, “Patient(ce) — a Physical Requiem,” features eight dancers from her Company SBB and a visual installation by Ms. Bland and her lighting designer, Alaric Hahn. At 7:30 p.m., with an additional performance on Oct. 24 at 2 p.m., Harlem Stage Gatehouse, 150 Convent Avenue, at 135th Street, Hamilton Heights, 212-281-9240, harlemstage.org. (Burke)★ Company XIV  (through Nov. 15) This flirtatious company, which combines ballet and contemporary dance with elements of baroque and burlesque, specializes in sexy, spicy, opulent interpretations of fairy-tale classics. This fall, the director and choreographer Austin McCormick introduces his take on “Cinderella,” which comes with a dash of opera and vaudeville. Because of titillating costumes and scenarios, and free-flowing libations, performances are for adults only. Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., Sundays at 5 p.m., Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-745-3000, companyxiv.com. (Schaefer)Moriah Evans  (through Saturday) In the previous iteration of her “Social Dance” project, Moriah Evans cleverly utilized a checkered floor as a grid to dictate the structure of her work. She describes the sequel, “Social Dance 9-12: Encounter,” performed this weekend at Danspace, as its “obverse mirror.” In this version, she zeros in on the act of looking as a fundamental component both of social dance and the relationship between audience and performer. At 8 p.m., St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Schaefer)★ Jon Kinzel (Wednesday through Oct. 31) Mr. Kinzel, a maker of gently convoluted dances, unveils a curiously titled new work for an intergenerational cast, “Cowhand Con Man.” A meditation on “physical endurance and psychic restlessness,” according to a news release, the piece draws on his almost 30-year history as a choreographer and improviser. Wednesdays through Saturdays at 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance: Agnes Varis Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Burke)★ José Limón Dance Company  (through Oct. 25) José Limón is a pillar of American modern dance, though perhaps the most unassuming of them. The work of the Mexican-born choreographer is celebrated for its proud nobility, palpable spirituality and high drama. Marking its 70th anniversary, the company that bears his name presents 15 works spanning three decades, from 1942 until Limón’s death in 1972. The works will be performed by companies and academies from around the United States, as well as South America, Europe and Asia. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Thursday and Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)‘Lincoln Center at the Movies: Great American Dance’  (Thursday) Grab some popcorn and settle in for “Revelations.” That Alvin Ailey classic comes to the big screen at about 600 theaters around the country, including three in New York City, as part of this new series. The prerecorded program also includes Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater in Wayne McGregor’s “Chroma,” Robert Battle’s “Takademe” and Ronald K. Brown’s uplifting “Grace,” showcasing the broad span of the company’s repertory. At 7 p.m., see fathomevents.com for theater locations. (Burke)★ New York City Ballet  (through Sunday) One weekend remains in the company’s fall run, with two more chances to see the season’s five new works. That colorful quintuple bill, under the heading “21st Century Choreographers,” gets a reprise on Friday and Saturday night. The closing program, on Sunday, is devoted to George Balanchine’s starkly dramatic “black and white” ballets, including “Concerto Barocco” and “The Four Temperaments.” Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, nycballet.com. (Burke)★ Okwui Okpokwasili (Wednesday through Oct. 24) Ms. Okpokwasili revives “Bronx Gothic,” an arresting solo about coming-of-age in the Bronx, haunted by the voices of her past (and present). Notes are passed and dreams recounted between the artist’s teenage self and her confidante; other messages are held in shuddering dances. At 7:30 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Burke)★ Silas Riener  (through Oct. 28) The solo is a special strand of dance DNA, and Silas Riener, a celebrated former member of the Merce Cunningham Dance Company, knows how to command a big space. His new solo performance, though, takes pace in more intimate environs, offering a welcome opportunity to observe his calm intensity and physical precision up close. The show, called “Blue Name,” is a compilation of short works made over the course of a year and a half. Wednesdays through Saturdays, as well as Oct. 26 and 27, at 8 p.m., Chocolate Factory Theater, 5-49 49th Avenue, Long Island City, chocolatefactorytheater.org, 718-482-7069. (Brian Schaefer)Chris Schlichting (Thursday through Oct. 24) Visiting from Minnesota, Mr. Schlichting offers the New York premiere of “Stripe Tease.” Created with the guitarist Jeremy Ylvisaker, his band Alpha Consumer and the visual artist Jennifer Davis, the work experiments with scale, teasing out tensions between the spectacular and the delicate. At 8 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Burke)‘Swango’ (Friday and Saturday) So that the title doesn’t confuse you, “Swango” carries the subtitle “The Theatrical Dance Experience.” This production is a revival of an Off Broadway show from 2005 in which the playwright Rupert Holmes, the tango choreographer Mariela Franganillo and the swing dance champion Robert Royston collaborated on a story of star-crossed lovers who represent their respective dance styles — a meet-cute between swing and tango. At 7:30 p.m., Schimmel Center for the Arts, Pace University, 3 Spruce Street, between Park Row and Gold Street, Lower Manhattan, 866-811-4111, schimmel.pace.edu. (Schaefer)‘Where Sculpture and Dance Meet: Minimalism from 1961 to 1979’  (through Oct. 31) This exhibition at Loretta Howard Gallery examines the interchange of ideas among choreographers and sculptors in the 1960s and ’70s. Sculptures by Ronald Bladen, Donald Judd, Robert Morris, Andy Warhol and Sol LeWitt share the space with videos of performances by Trisha Brown, Lucinda Childs, Merce Cunningham, Simone Forti and Yvonne Rainer. Tuesdays through Fridays from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. and Saturdays from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., 525-531 West 26th Street, Chelsea, 212-695-0164, lorettahoward.com. (Burke)Advertisement