AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck12:30 P.M. (13) IL BARBIERE DI SIVIGLIA Lawrence Brownlee sings the role of the love-struck Count Almaviva; Isabel Leonard is Rosina, the feisty doctor’s ward who has captured his heart; and Christopher Maltman, making a spectacular entrance atop a traveling barber shop pulled by admirers, is Figaro in this Metropolitan Opera revival of Rossini’s comic classic. The production, staged by Bartlett Sher, conducted by Michele Mariotti and presented here by “Great Performances at the Met,” “delivers a heady fizz,” Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim wrote in The New York Times. “And it has stars,” she added — among them, Mr. Brownlee, who made “a dashing Almaviva, singing with a focused, ardent tenor”; Ms. Leonard, “a pitch-perfect Rosina, cute but sharp-clawed”; and Mr. Maltman (above right, with Mr. Brownlee and Ms. Leonard), who “oozed sex appeal during his opening aria, ‘Largo al factotum,’ wearing a magnificent red Phrygian cap like a royal insignia.”10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY John O. Brennan, the C.I.A. director, addresses Iran’s nuclear program, the growing threat of the Islamic State and the ambitions of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.10:30 A.M. (NBC) MEET THE PRESS Gov. Jerry Brown of California talks about committing $1 billion to drought relief and his environmental advocacy.8 P.M. (CBS) MADAM SECRETARY After the attack in Iran, Elizabeth (Téa Leoni) finds her nerves fraying as she tries to prevent an environmental disaster in the Amazon and prepares for an appearance on “Face the Nation.” In “The Good Wife,” at 9, Peter (Chris Noth) jeopardizes the political future of Alicia (Julianna Margulies) when he gives an interview that could affect voter turnout. And in “Battle Creek,” at 10, Russ (Dean Winters) and Milt (Josh Duhamel) test their police dogs’ crime-solving skills.9 P.M. (HBO) GIRLS The season ends as Hannah (Lena Dunham), Adam (Adam Driver) and Jessa (Jemima Kirke) try to persuade Caroline (Gaby Hoffman) and Laird (Jon Glaser) to forget about giving birth at home. An unusual job opportunity forces Shoshanna (Zosia Mamet) to make a big decision. And Ray (Alex Karpovsky) lets Desi (Ebon Moss-Bachrach) have it after he and Marnie (Allison Williams) meet with a record executive. 9 P.M. (ABC) SECRETS AND LIES Ben (Ryan Phillippe, left) starts to suspect the Daly family of being involved in Tom Murphy’s death after discovering a significant piece of evidence while helping their autistic son.9 P.M. (Fox) THE LAST MAN ON EARTH Phil (Will Forte), Carol (Kristen Schaal) and Melissa (January Jones) ponder repopulating the planet.10:30 P.M. (Reelz) JEREMIAH JOHNSON (1972) An Army veteran, played by a scruffily golden Robert Redford, left, opts out of civilized society in the 1850s to live alone in the Colorado wilderness, where he unwittingly trespasses onto an Indian burial ground and loses his wife and adopted child to vengeance. Will Geer plays the trapper who teaches Johnson how to survive. Parts of this stark meditation on the American West were shot northeast of Provo, Utah, near the ski area that Mr. Redford eventually bought and named Sundance, after his character in “Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid.” “The quality of legend pervades Sydney Pollack’s ‘Jeremiah Johnson,’ ” Roger Greenspun wrote in The Times, and Mr. Redford’s part “must be very real to his own mind and feelings.” He added, “It is a very attractive role, and Redford plays it with a reticence and directness that also seem as much a part of the man as of the performance.”What’s Streaming Now GANGS OF WASSEYPUR (2015) Anurag Kashyap chronicles three generations in a family of gangsters grappling for control of a coal-mining town in India. This mob tale, shown in Hindi with English subtitles, “is a frequently spectacular achievement: five hours — and then some — of gliding camera moves, brutal action and dizzying revenge plotting, often set to a peppy pop music backbeat,” Ben Kenigsberg wrote in The Times. “The violence is graphic and the innuendo raunchy.” (fandor.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement