AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfePierre Boulez, the distinguished composer, conductor, pianist and theorist, turns 90 on Thursday. He’s peerlessly influential, yes — but how, exactly? Six musicians explored the different facets of that influence in interviews; their replies have been condensed and edited.AS A MUSIC WORLD TITANESA-PEKKA SALONEN, conductor and composer: Young people are attracted to black-and-white statements. At least I was. And Boulez was like a black-and-white statement machine. He said, “This is wrong, and this is right.” The statements Boulez made were kind of refreshingly categorical. Like the famous one from the ’50s: “If a composer has not experienced the necessity of dodecaphonic technique, he is useless.” That’s a good sentence because it tells you what is what. It takes the guessing out of the equation.ANTHONY CHEUNG, composer and pianist: I don’t immediately prostrate myself at his altar. It’s an ambivalent relationship. But as far as respect for him as a musician and what he’s done, I have infinite respect. He’s an enormous influence on how recent composers have dealt with instrumental groups.SALONEN I got to know him in the early ’80s when I worked quite a bit at IRCAM [an avant-garde music institute founded by Mr. Boulez] and was conducting his Ensemble InterContemporain. And it was the closest to Louis XIV I ever saw in my life. It was impressive and scary for a young person, but mostly impressive. I still think, if someone had to have that kind of power, why not him?AS A PIANO MASTERPIERRE-LAURENT AIMARD, pianist: The piano was his instrument, so he could experiment directly on it. In the “Notations,” we see a young composer, still a student, who composed a set of miniatures. And in many of them, we recognize what will become landmark gestures of Boulez, the basis of his language: violent lightenings illuminating the whole space of the instrument, permanently varied arpeggi, short unexpected gestures going in any direction.By the first piano sonata, it’s completely Boulez and only Boulez. It’s a short piece, compact, but profoundly intense and presenting a basic dialectic for Boulez’s music, between a very active music and a music that is more observing the life of the sounds. It’s probably one of his most free compositions. There are passages that sound as if they were almost improvised. There is a kind of lyrical abstraction there that is very personal.AS A CONDUCTORFRANZ WELSER-MÖST, music director of the Cleveland Orchestra, which Boulez first conducted in 1965: He has this unbelievable gift to convey something without showing it in his expression. The image of a conductor today is so much molded on Leonard Bernstein. Pierre is the total opposite, but nevertheless he gets these results that are not detached. They’re just very clean, very to the core of the music. Conducting is partly show business, but he never looked at it that way.SALONEN He always said that the form and the expression of most Western art music come from the harmony. If you don’t know the harmony well, you cannot understand, let alone convey, the sense of the form to anybody. On a practical level it means you have to go through every chord when you go through a score. It sounds obvious and trivial, but if you study, say, “Götterdämmerung” or “Elektra,” to get a clear idea of the harmonic structure takes a lot of time. There are no shortcuts. You have to learn what the principles of the harmony are, and then you can plan your so-called interpretation.WELSER-MÖST, on a memorable Boulez performance of Mahler’s Third Symphony: Some people give everything away in the first movement, and then you have to sit there for another hour. He didn’t. It was almost irritating at first. But later on, you understood why he was doing what he did, and in the end it was so much more moving. He made Mahler’s music sound pure.AS A COMPOSERMARC-ANDRÉ DALBAVIE, composer: I just studied conducting with Boulez, but it had an enormous influence on my writing. In the beginning it wasn’t clear, but progressively in the 1990s, I started to understand what he was teaching me. Around ’95 and ’96, I was writing my concerto for violin and I was living in Rome, so I had less contact with Pierre. The less contact I had, the more I realized his influence. If you know his piece “Mémoriale,” it revolves around this E-flat and you don’t know if it’s a tonality or a gravity center. This idea also became for me very strong. It was a sort of post-atonal moment.CHEUNG We often think of him in terms of his early 1950s experiments, these hands-off, cold, didactic serial works. What attracts me is not necessarily “Structures” or those really objective pieces, but when he broke out of that and started to explore the sensuality of sound more. The use of percussion in “Pli selon pli,” the “Improvisations sur Mallarmé,” the exotic, heightened resonance of that world, has been particularly influential for me. And the sensuality. I keep coming back to that word, and it’s not a word we associate with Boulez, but in “Répons” or “Dérive” he lets a line take its time to spiral out. He’s such a melodic composer, and we don’t give him credit for that.NICO MUHLY, composer: I love when his work started to get really decadent. If you read what he writes about “Incises” and “Sur incises,” it doesn’t make any sense, but to me they’re forgotten parts of Ravel’s “L’Enfant et les Sortileges” or “Mother Goose.” It goes back to that post-World’s Fair moment. His own music has a great amount of surface beauty that the people who followed him don’t necessarily have. That decadence. The Frenchness to it. You can feel the butter swirling in that pan. And when he conducts it, he teases out these luxurious textures.AS A PERPETUAL REVISERSALONEN The most important learning material or source for me has been to observe his never-ending revision of his older material. If you look at the two cantatas he wrote in the ’40s, “Le visage nuptial” and “Le soleil des eaux,” they were incredibly difficult to perform, and he revised them. Keeping the expression, but streamlining the orchestration and the rhythmic organization and all that, without losing anything but winning in playability and optimizing his notation with the experience he had as a conductor. From that process I’ve learned a lot.Also what I find fascinating is the enhancement and enlargement of form, like in “Notations,” for instance. The original piano pieces are brief and simple, and out of that material, he created these very elaborate, multifaceted orchestral pieces. I’ve been revising my old pieces and it’s very much the same kind of process.CHEUNG The quality and care of his work, the craft with which he writes, is something that everyone who cares about composition respects. The way he treats the work, the fact that he’s never satisfied, that he keeps trying to revise and expand his music. It’s all one work in progress.DALBAVIE I did a piece in the last part of the 2000s. I started with an oboe piece, then did it for oboe and ensemble, then made it an oboe concerto. And it’s really a homage to him, this piece that transforms over years. Boulez’s spirit is like this: It evolves, it’s unfinished.AS AN INSPIRATIONCHEUNG His tonal language doesn’t have much of a relationship with what I do, whereas his approach to time is much more influential for me. You can have stretches of his music that are just dealing with the duration of natural resonances of instruments — attacks and decays — so you have this music that feels like breathing. It’s unpredictable, but very natural.MUHLY When I write for orchestra, I take a lot of cues from his fast shifts. I’ve been thinking recently of flipping a switch to change texture and transition. Like in “Anthèmes,” his violin piece, with a single performer surrounded by electronics — it’s that holy grail of an automotive thing, changing on a dime.SALONEN I sat next to him a few years ago in Los Angeles when the L.A. Children’s Chorus sang a little song of mine, “Dona Nobis Pacem,” which is really simple and not Boulezian in any way at all. I was really scared. I was sitting next to Pierre Boulez, in my 50s, being really worried about what he might say and just sweating.Then the piece was over and he turns to me and says, “That was pretty!” Jesus, he said that! He said it was pretty! I just started laughing, and I said, “Pierre, I really felt like a teenager again.”Advertisement