By ROSLYN SULCASMARCH 18, 2015
OXFORDSHIRE, ENGLAND —  Thomas Cromwell was rolling a cigarette. Henry VIII was sitting on a chair amid a stretch of green lawn, eyes closed, face turned to the summer sunlight. A gaggle of ladies-in-waiting swept across the gardens. A courtier popped his head apologetically around the door of Broughton Castle. “Five minutes,” he said.Cromwell — in the shape of the actor Mark Rylance — laughed and picked up the soft black cap he had taken off during a break in filming. “Better put the hat back on,” he said.Mr. Rylance, perhaps Britain’s pre-eminent stage actor, wore the Cromwell hat for almost 17 weeks last summer while filming the television series “Wolf Hall,” an adaptation of Hilary Mantel’s two award-laden novels revolving around Thomas Cromwell — political wizard, right-hand man and fixer for Henry VIII — that will make its American debut on PBS’s “Masterpiece” on April 5.The six-part series, written by Peter Straughan and directed by Peter Kosminsky, stars Damian Lewis as Henry, Claire Foy as Anne Boleyn and other members of British acting royalty alongside Mr. Rylance. It opened to rapturous acclaim in January in Britain, drawing an average of 4.4 million viewers a week, making it the most popular television drama on BBC Two since ratings began in 2002.Advertisement“Event television, sumptuous, intelligent, and serious, meticulous in detail,” Sam Wollaston wrote in The Guardian.It’s part of a veritable “Wolf Hall” industry here. Ms. Mantel won the Booker Prize in 2009 for her first Cromwell novel, “Wolf Hall,” and then did it again in 2012 with a sequel, “Bring Up the Bodies,” resulting in huge book sales and a great deal of buzz when Mike Poulton adapted them for the Royal Shakespeare Company. The two productions, named after each book, have played to packed houses in Stratford-upon-Avon and the West End for the past year and — in an odd moment of Tudor takeover — will open on April 9 at the Winter Garden Theater on Broadway just a few days after the television series begins.Advertisement“I think what we are setting out to do is very different,” said Mr. Kosminsky, a veteran television director who worked with Mr. Rylance on the television drama “The Government Inspector” in 2005. “I think what Peter Straughan has tried to do is darker and more serious in its intent; he has gone for the political jugular.” Asked whether the show was an attempt to reassert British mastery of long-form television after the recent dominance of American series, Mr. Kosminsky laughed.“Not at all,” he said. “We all thought we were making a serious drama, which would play to devotees of the book. Nothing prepared us for the response that it has had. I certainly wasn’t expecting it to be a Trojan horse in the American drama market.”Mr. Kosminsky added that the series is nonetheless an important gambit for the BBC, whose royal charter is up for renewal and whose system of funding is being questioned ahead of a general election.“Here comes this series, based on two Booker Prize novels with magnificent actors and a substantial investment of time and money,” Mr. Kosminsky said. “The BBC is saying, this is the kind of thing only the BBC can do.” After the series was broadcast in Britain, there was exhaustive media coverage discussing everything from Tudor economics to fashion, and engendering a predictable amount of historical debate.“There’s an important distinction to make,” said Mr. Lewis, best known for playing Nicholas Brody in the series “Homeland.” Sitting on the lawn in full big-shouldered costume, looking every inch the handsome, charismatic and still-trim monarch he plays in the series, he added: “We are not telling Tudor history; we are creating ‘Wolf Hall’ from novels, which are already a rereading of Tudor history.”The apparently inexhaustible appetite for versions of Ms. Mantel’s story is partly the result of Britain’s perpetual fascination with the Tudor dynasty but is mostly testament to her vividly original reading of the period: Henry’s desperation for a male heir, the break with the Roman Catholic Church, the beginnings of Protestantism, the dissolution of the monasteries and the eventual execution of Anne, the point at which the second book ends. (Ms. Mantel is writing a third installment, “The Mirror and the Light,” which will chronicle the last four years of Cromwell’s life.)AdvertisementAll these events are mediated through the perspective and personality of Cromwell, usually depicted by historians as an unscrupulous and cruel power-monger, but here given a far more enigmatic profile as Ms. Mantel’s narrative follows his rise from blacksmith’s son to heights of power second only to the king. As Cromwell frees his master from his marriage to Catherine of Aragon so that he may marry Anne Boleyn, then orchestrates her downfall, he emerges as clever, witty and urbane, multilingual, inexhaustibly energetic and a master of the dog-eat-dog political chess game that is Henry’s court.“It’s an extraordinary job for me,” Mr. Rylance said after shooting multiple takes of a confrontation with an ailing Catherine of Aragon (Joanne Whalley). “There are about 70 or 80 scenes per episode, and I’m in most of them. The difficulty is that you are playing a character who never reveals what he is thinking. So you can’t compromise his expressionlessness, but you have to convey what might be going on for him.”Although the series has arrived after the plays, Colin Callender, a former president of HBO films whose production company Playground produced the series (with Company Pictures, “Masterpiece” and BBC Two), began negotiations to secure the rights in 2012. Mr. Callender said that as soon as he read the books, he envisaged a television production.“I thought that the way Hilary had reinvigorated the historical novel showed a way to blow the cobwebs from the historical TV drama,” Mr. Callender said in an interview before a February screening of the final episode at the BBC in London. “For audiences who are fascinated by complicated moral lines, characters like Tony Soprano or Kevin Spacey’s politician in “House of Cards,” there was something quite wonderful here.”To adapt the novels, Mr. Callender approached Mr. Straughan, who had been nominated for an Academy Award for the film adaptation of John Le Carré’s “Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy.” Mr. Straughan’s achievement in condensing the thousand-plus pages of the two Mantel novels into a six-hour production surpassed all expectations. “He has reduced it in the way a good maker of bourbon would,” Mr. Rylance said. “It’s certainly barrel strength.”Mr. Straughan said that early in the adaptation process he decided to structure the script around the idea of Cromwell’s revenge on those who brought about the downfall of his mentor, Cardinal Wolsey. “When you’re adapting something with this kind of scale, you are looking for a spine that will help you make decisions,” he said. “I felt instinctively that this would help to understand Cromwell, the long game he is playing, the concessions and moral compromises he must make. And then, when the field is clear, he is left in plain sight of the king, which becomes dangerous.”Ms. Mantel, he said, was “very open” to the idea. “The good writers understand that a slavish adaptation is going to make poor drama,” he said.In an interview after the BBC screening, Ms. Mantel (who was continuously interrupted by fans paying homage) said that she had been astounded when the first script arrived. “He seemed to have got inside my head and found exactly the right images,” she said. “I found it uncannily good.”So good, in fact, that the BBC greenlit the project on the basis of the first draft. (The broadcaster contributed the major part of the series’s roughly $15 million budget.)AdvertisementMr. Rylance, who has won three Tony Awards, has done relatively little film or television work and isn’t well-known to a broader audience. (That might change after “Wolf Hall” and two current film projects with Steven Spielberg — “The BFG” and “Bridge of Spies.”) But Mr. Callender and his fellow producers weren’t deterred. “Most actors can do one or two things at the same time; great actors can do several things at the same time; Mark Rylance can do hundreds of things at the same time,” he said. “He has one of those faces that can tell a thousand stories.”So sure was Mr. Callender that Mr. Rylance was the right choice that he persuaded the BBC to wait a year while the actor performed in repertory productions of “Twelfth Night” and “Richard III” that played in the West End and on Broadway.“It was very courteous of them,” Mr. Rylance said, adding that the choice of director had been crucial to him and that he had suggested Mr. Kosminsky, who has mostly directed films on political and social topics, but Mr. Rylance pointed out that “politics and the way political power is exercised” are precisely the subject of “Wolf Hall.”Mr. Kosminsky said he was attracted to Ms. Mantel’s interest in the changes in the Tudor era that now underpin modern society. “The start of the evangelical movement, the campaign to have an English Bible in each church, the beginnings of the English Civil Service, the limits of the absolute power of an absolute monarch and the beginnings of a representative parliament: Hilary confronted these issues head on rather than skirting around them as backdrop to a love affair,” he said.His approach to filming, he said, was to let Mr. Rylance’s Cromwell be the audience’s guide. “We had to find a way of showing this was Cromwell’s story and, sometimes, his interior story, without his voice, which we have in the books,” he said. “So the camera is really on Mark’s shoulder. You look at people with him, you see his memories and dreams as elements that build on this sense we are seeing this in real time.”The result is Tudor history as a form of contemporary theater rather than costume drama. “One of the great things about the books is that none of the characters know their future, and I wanted to convey that immediacy,” he said.Ms. Mantel said that she had been thrilled by the outcome. “Watching the final episode now, even though you know what is going to happen, I was still on the edge of my seat,” she said. “For the people in it, it’s not a historical drama, it’s their lives, still unfolding.”A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2015, on Page AR6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Dark ‘Wolf,’ Designed for Revenge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.