AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate ChinenKarin Krog sang a rueful song about disillusionment at Joe’s Pub on Wednesday night. It was “The Meaning of Love,” by the distinguished jazz pianist Steve Kuhn, her accompanist for the evening. “By and by, all my dreams will soon disappear,” she began, in a whispery tone. “I know not when; I know not why.” The ballad gradually eased from a rubato stir into waltz time, but the sentiment stayed irresolute, a little inscrutable, coolly resigned.Ms. Krog, a Norwegian jazz singer with more than 50 years of experience as a solo artist, knows how to inhabit an aura of enigmatic stillness. She also knows how to play against expectations. An eminence in her own country, she’s more of a blank in the United States: This was perhaps the most notable of her infrequent appearances in New York over the years, a showcase for two new albums that make a strong argument for her legacy.The more current of the two is “Break of Day” (Meanwhile), jointly credited to Mr. Kuhn. It’s an austere yet elegant duo album, aside from an occasional guest turn by the trumpeter Lew Soloff or the tenor saxophonist Eric Alexander. And it’s a fine document of the same trusting, intuitive rapport that Ms. Krog and Mr. Kuhn demonstrated in their set, with a cabaret refinement.The other, more consequential release is “Don’t Just Sing: A Karin Krog Anthology 1963-1999,” produced by Pat Thomas for Light in the Attic, the influential indie label. This selective tour of Ms. Krog’s recording career persuasively presents her as a fearless innovator, someone drawn early on to collagelike studio experiments and outré work with synthesizers.The compilation underscores how many important jazz musicians have appeared on Ms. Krog’s records — most famously, the expatriate American tenor saxophonist Dexter Gordon — but it also holds an appeal to those who might see her as a kind of post-psychedelic jazz-funk visionary. That impression might account for some of the interest in her work outside jazz circles, among the rare-groove crowd. (One of her versions of “The Meaning of Love” that doesn’t appear on the compilation was remixed by Matthew Herbert in 2002.)This set was softer than all of that, touched by an almost conservative decorum. “Break of Day in Molde,” featuring Ms. Krog’s lyrics to a Carla Bley melody, fell disappointingly flat, and there was mixed success in a handful of originals by the British saxophonist John Surman, Ms. Krog’s longtime partner. But a couple of old, rustic Norwegian folk songs, sung in an enchanting a cappella, captured a more impish side of Ms. Krog’s personality.And her performance of “Lazy Afternoon,” a signature tune, was a slow accumulation of masterstrokes: a beguiling incantation, breathy but controlled, with sliding pitch and shivery sustain. “If you hold my hand and sit real still,” she murmured and then calmly froze — waiting, apparently, for the rumble of the No. 6 train to subside beneath the club. Finally she continued, languorously stretching out the last word: “You can hear the grass as it growwws.”Advertisement