By ALEC M. PRIESTERMARCH 23, 2015
10:15 P.M. (IFC) THE BIG LEBOWSKI (1998) Jeffrey Lebowski, known as the Dude (Jeff Bridges, above, from left, with John Goodman and Steve Buscemi), is an unemployed bowling enthusiast who smokes a lot of weed. His tranquil daze is interrupted when he comes home to two goons demanding the money he owes them and urinating on his beloved rug. The goons turn out to have the Dude confused with the millionaire Jeffrey Lebowski (David Huddleston), who sends the Dude on a wild-goose chase. Ethan and Joel Coen wrote and directed this convoluted classic, which features bowling chatter, German nihilists, self-kidnapping and Creedence Clearwater Revival. Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times: “The film, which begins with a tumbleweed rolling from desert to Malibu, is narrated a bit needlessly by a mythic cowboy type (Sam Elliott) whose final assessment of the Dude’s tale goes like this: ‘It was a purty good story, don’t you think? Made me laugh to beat the band. Parts, anyway.’ Exactly right.”8 P.M. (CBS) 2 BROKE GIRLS Max (Kat Dennings) and Caroline (Beth Behrs) are missing Nancy, their cat. A businessman surprises the girls when he returns Nancy, who has a surprise of her own.8 P.M. (TCM) TCM MEMORIAL TRIBUTE: ALBERT MAYSLES Turner Classic Movies honors Mr. Maysles, the documentarian, who died on March 5 at 88. The lineup — a series of collaborations with his brother, David, among others — includes “Grey Gardens” (1975), a portrait of Edith Beale, right, and her mother, relatives of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis who lived as recluses in a deteriorating mansion, at 8; “Salesman” (1968), about four door-to-door Bible salesmen, at 10; “Gimme Shelter” (1970), which captured the controversial 1969 Rolling Stones concert at the Altamont Speedway, outside San Francisco, where the Hells Angels oversaw security and four people were killed, including one stabbed to death on camera, at 11:45; and “Meet Marlon Brando” (1965), a short in which the filmmakers try to interview Brando about his movie “Morituri,” at 1:30 a.m.8 P.M. (NBC) THE VOICE Nate Ruess, left, of Fun., helps the coaches Adam Levine, Christina Aguilera, Pharrell Williams and Blake Shelton prepare singers for the knockout rounds.Advertisement8 P.M (13, 49) ANTIQUES ROADSHOW The show travels to Bismarck, N.D., where the artifacts include a 1778 letter written by George Washington at Valley Forge; a Santa Claus oil painting by Haddon Sundblom, who created the Coca-Cola Santa advertisements in the 1930s; and two Irish dragoon swallowtail guidons used in the Civil War’s Battle of Nashville. Mark L. Walberg, the host, and the appraiser Ted Trotta view Plains Indian ledger drawings at the State Historical Society of North Dakota.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.8 P.M. (Fox) THE FOLLOWING The F.B.I. must search for a missing person, which interrupts an important trial. Ryan (Kevin Bacon) uses an old enemy to fight a new one. Mark (Sam Underwood), Kyle (Hunter Parrish) and Daisy (Ruth Kearney) plot against Ryan. The F.B.I. is helped by a tip about a secret location.Advertisement8 P.M. (Discovery Family) DINOSAURS: THE UNTOLD STORY This series — part of the channel’s monthlong Dino Madness programming block — answers questions about the evolutionary history, appearance, behavior and parenting skills of dinosaurs, examining here the survival mechanisms of orphaned dinosaurs and the importance of group cooperation. At 9, a second episode investigates the end of the dinosaurs’ reign and the nurturing side of Tyrannosaurus rex.10 P.M. (13); 11 P.M. (49) LITTLE WHITE LIE At 18 Lacey Schwartz, who grew up in a Jewish household in Woodstock, N.Y., believing she was white, discovered that her father was black. Her documentary, presented here by “Independent Lens,” explores the subtleties of race in America. “With Ms. Schwartz narrating, the camera travels to a funeral, girlfriend gab sessions and even her therapy appointments,” Felicia R. Lee wrote in The Times. “At each stop, in raw conversations with family and friends, Ms. Schwartz asks over and over, how and why did she pass as white?”What’s Streaming NowBLOODLINE All 13 episodes of this new Netflix original series are available for streaming. Four close adult siblings are tested by the return of their estranged brother. Featuring Sissy Spacek, Linda Cardellini, Sam Shepard, Kyle Chandler, Ben Mendelsohn, Chloë Sevigny and others. (netflix.com) ALEC M. PRIESTERA version of this schedule appears in print on March 23, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.