By MIKE HALEMARCH 22, 2015
As the college basketball scores poured in over the weekend, another contest — more sparsely but no less passionately followed — took place on HBO on Sunday night. It was Team Kevin versus Team Richie. Who would emerge happier from the season finale of “Looking”: fans of Kevin, the new, perhaps too perfect boyfriend of the show’s mercurial hero, Patrick, or fans of Richie, Patrick’s moody, soulful ex?Behind that question — which was, of course, left unsettled — lay a larger one. Would HBO, having renewed its other Sunday-night comedies, “Girls” and “Togetherness,” two months ago, come to its senses and announce a third-season pickup of “Looking,” the best of the bunch?In the channel’s defense, Sunday’s episode demonstrated why that might not be a slam-dunk decision. The show’s virtues are considerable, but there are times when they seem to come hand-in-hand with its defects — when intelligent romance and rueful humor shade over into slightly tedious melodrama.“Looking,” the story of three gay friends seeking love in San Francisco, exercises a frankness about aspects of their lives — sex, drugs, enemas, Halloween costumes — that some television viewers might find challenging. But what’s more noticeable is how TV-traditional, even old-fashioned, it can feel. It’s been compared in various ways to other HBO shows like “Girls” and “Sex and the City” but a truer analogue, in tone at least, would be the early-1990s PBS series “Armistead Maupin’s Tales of the City.”AdvertisementDespite the sex scenes (not as frequent as you may have heard) and the provocative language, “Looking” isn’t in any way sensationalistic. Most of us can’t judge the authenticity of its depiction of gay life in San Francisco, but the show’s greatest strength is that it feels real — its characters talk and act like real people, and their decisions, good or bad, are nearly always believable, a tribute to the writers (including Michael Lannan, Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa and Andrew Haigh) and the generally fine cast.AdvertisementPatrick, a lovable, well-intentioned but supremely annoying stew of neediness and narcissism, easily could have been an off-putting cartoon, but he’s been a recognizably human and touching character as played by Jonathan Groff. The central story line of Season 2 was his on-off-on relationship with his boss, Kevin (Russell Tovey). Their progress from clandestine affair to openly living together was carefully drawn and authentic.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Real isn’t always the same as interesting, however, and there was something a little too careful about the portrayal of the Patrick-Kevin relationship. It always made sense, but it didn’t always, or even often, generate much feeling (except for a few “aw” moments, like Kevin’s Episode 7 appearance on Patrick’s doorstep to announce that he’d left his boyfriend). That tinge of dullness carried through into the cleverly constructed finale, which was almost entirely a Patrick-and-Kevin show, with Patrick discovering that the man he’d just moved in with was still on the hookup app Grindr.Luckily, just about every other relationship in the show continues to have the life and humor that the central one lacks. The best and most touching moments in the finale were between the 40-something best friends Dom (Murray Bartlett) and Doris (the wonderful Lauren Weedman), as age, resentment and anxiety forced them to redefine their relationship. And the show was buoyed throughout the season by the new, unlikely romance between Agustin (Frankie J. Alvarez) and his flamboyant, noble, H.I.V.-positive bear, Eddie (Daniel Franzese, in a breakout performance).“Looking” is nominally about sex and romance, but like so many good television comedies, it’s really about friendship — between gay Dom and straight Doris (the love that truly dare not speak its name), between the seeming opposites Agustin and Eddie (a friendship that grows into something more) and among Dom, Agustin and Patrick, who are always there for one another in spirit if not when it comes to running errands or paying the rent.The best episodes of the second season (which was an improvement on the first) were built around this: The three buddies in a silent morning communion in the woods; Dom and Agustin rescuing Patrick when he delivered a drunken aria of recrimination and jealousy at his own Halloween party; Patrick and Dom road-tripping with Doris to Modesto for her father’s funeral. Fans of the show have been publicly petitioning HBO to renew it because of its positive, no-holds-barred depiction of gay life and sexuality. An even better reason would be that it regularly provides those moments of joy.A version of this review appears in print on March 23, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Authentic Characters Seeking Sex and Romance, and a Future on HBO.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.