AdvertisementSupported byBy Zachary WoolfeTwo potential New York Philharmonic music directors were in town last week. Esa-Pekka Salonen was with the Philharmonic itself, not conducting but taking a composer’s bow after the orchestra played his “Nyx” (2010) under Alan Gilbert. And David Robertson, a serious contender when Mr. Gilbert was chosen in 2007 and now once again a candidate, brought his St. Louis Symphony, sounding superb, to Carnegie Hall on Friday evening.Here recent music was also on offer, with Meredith Monk’s “Weave” (2010) for two voices, chamber orchestra and chorus receiving its New York premiere. Starting about a decade ago, Ms. Monk, who this year holds the Debs Composer’s Chair at Carnegie and is celebrating 50 years since the start of her professional career, began experimenting with combining her innovative extended vocal techniques with conventional instrumental forces. “Weave” followed her first foray into orchestral writing, “Possible Sky” (2003).Placed amid the ensemble, the two solo singers in the 22-minute “Weave” — here Theo Bleckmann and Katie Geissinger, both long associated with Ms. Monk — begin with a lilting, overlapping wordless melody with metallic tinges, as if their lines were gently frying. Then the chorus entered, soft and calm yet changeable, like clouds moving past one another.The theme of overlapping voices extended to the orchestra, which creates a lulling motif that evokes water dripping. There is an intriguing passage in which Ms. Geissinger punctuates dark-hued strings with light, breathy yelps. The work’s ending has a tenderness that recalls Copland.In general, “Weaves” has the meditative, unruffled mood of Ms. Monk’s best work without its intensity or kaleidoscopic idiosyncrasy. Mr. Bleckmann keeps returning to a cloying solo on a Middle Eastern-sounding scale. And even given a sensitive performance from the ensemble and a certain amount of variety in the writing — the piano and percussion take the lead at one point, perking things up — the work genially meanders.Mr. Robertson thoughtfully paired “Weave” with Debussy’s “Nocturnes,” which in the late 19th century anticipated Ms. Monk’s use of voices as abstract instruments, capable of expression without the use of text. The St. Louis Symphony Chorus brought filmy subtlety to the hovering vocal mist of the third section, “Sirènes.”Throughout the Debussy — and throughout the concert — the orchestra reveled in warm, luxurious yet sharply alert sound. The rustle of the cellos in the first “Nocturne” registered less as tone than as an atmospheric disturbance. In the second section, a march seems to emerge from the distance, a technical challenge that the brass played with finesse.After intermission, Mr. Robertson led a ferociously focused performance of Tchaikovsky’s Fourth Symphony, the phrasing taut but natural as breathing. The finale walked a knife-edge between paranoia and celebration: Without stinting depth of tone, the orchestra made shrill hysteria seem perpetually around the corner.Advertisement