OCT. 15, 2015
Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera★ ‘Il Trovatore’  (Saturday) For the return of David McVicar’s grimly effective 2009 production of Verdi’s “Il Trovatore” the Metropolitan Opera has lined up an exceptional cast. Anna Netrebko gives one of her best Met performances as Leonora, singing with sumptuous sound and emotional intensity. The excellent, youthful tenor Yonghoon Lee makes an exciting Manrico; the powerhouse mezzo-soprano Dolora Zajick is haunting as the gypsy Azucena. The Ukrainian baritone Vitaliy Bilyy has taken over the role of Count di Luna from Dmitri Hvorostovsky. Marco Armiliato conducts. At 8 p.m.; Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)★ ‘Otello’ (Saturday) There were tentative stretches during the performance of Verdi’s “Otello” in the new Bartlett Sher production that opened the Metropolitan Opera’s season. Still, this atmospheric and intriguing production should gain its footing. Otello is presented as trapped in the quagmire of his own perceptions, wondering whom and what to believe. The set is an eerie matrix of sliding, translucent walls that suggest outdoor squares one moment, an intimate bedroom the next. The tenor Aleksandrs Antonenko brings a virile voice to the punishing title role, but sometimes seems dramatically uncertain. The baritone Zeljko Lucic makes a suave, sly Iago. The production could not have a better Desdemona than the luminous soprano Sonya Yoncheva. The brilliant conductor Yannick Nézet-Séguin leads a close-to-great performance. Give him, and the production, more time. The Saturday matinee will be broadcast in HD to international movie theaters. At 1 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)‘Rigoletto’ (Tuesday) The Rat Pack “Rigoletto” is back; that is, the Metropolitan Opera’s 2013 production of Verdi’s great opera, which zaps the setting from 16th-century Mantua to 1960s Las Vegas. The Duke becomes a Sinatra-like headliner; Rigoletto is a kind of grim hanger-on. The Tony Award-winning director Michael Mayer’s production, whatever one’s take, certainly conveys casino life in all its gaudy glory. George Gagnidze is Rigoletto; Stephen Costello, the Duke; Olga Peretyatko, Gilda; and Pablo Heras-Casado conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)Advertisement★ ‘Tannhäuser’  (Monday) It was hard for James Levine’s admirers not to be concerned when he withdrew from conducting the Metropolitan Opera’s upcoming new production of Berg’s “Lulu” so that he could concentrate his energies on the revival of Wagner’s “Tannhäuser.” But on opening night, despite his ongoing health troubles, he conducted this work with the requisite stamina and deep insight, drawing glowing, unforced playing from the orchestra, even with occasional stretches when the energy seemed to lag and the music-making lost some focus. The strong cast is headed by the clarion-voiced tenor Johan Botha, who may not have much dramatic presence but sings the punishing role with verve, power and beauty. Michelle DeYoung as Venus and Eva-Maria Westbroek as Elisabeth also give impassioned performances. And the great baritone Peter Mattei is magnificent as Wolfram. Otto Schenk’s very traditional production, which has its merits, has been gone from the house since 2004. At 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)Advertisement‘Tosca’  (Friday, Wednesday) One of the most controversial productions of the Peter Gelb era, Luc Bondy’s “Tosca,” returns to the stage for a run that lasts through Dec. 1. Of the series’ four Toscas, first up is the Ukrainian soprano Oksana Dyka, opposite the Cavaradossi of Roberto Aronica and the Scarpia of Roberto Frontali. Plácido Domingo conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (David Allen)‘Turandot’ (Thursday) Lise Lindstrom, the exciting American soprano, is the next ice princess to crown the Met’s revival of Franco Zeffirelli’s spectacular and problematic 1987 production. Marcelo Álvarez remains a firm Calàf, Leah Crocetto is a new Liù, and James Morris continues as Timur. Paolo Carignani leads the orchestra and massed chorus with taste. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Allen)Classical Music★ New York Philharmonic (Friday, Wednesday, Thursday) The Philharmonic continues its run of annual, for-one-night-only solo vehicles on Friday at 8 p.m., with Maurizio Pollini playing the work that made him famous in the early 1960s, Chopin’s Piano Concerto No. 1. On Wednesday and Thursday at 7:30 p.m., the superb Semyon Bychkov leads Detlev Glanert’s “Brahms-Fantasie” as a preface to, well, Brahms, in the form of the Symphony No. 1 and the Double Concerto. Lisa Batiashvili and Gautier Capuçon will make for luxury soloists. David Geffen Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Allen)American Symphony Orchestra  (Friday) Leon Botstein’s relentlessly inventive orchestra brings a distinctly varied program to Carnegie Hall, led by a new orchestration of Nico Muhly’s “Seeing is Believing,” with Tracy Silverman on the electric violin. Sophia Burgos is the soprano for Henri Dutilleux’s “Correspondances,” and the orchestra also plays Gunther Schuller’s “7 Studies on Themes of Paul Klee” and Strauss’s “Also Sprach Zarathustra.” At 8 p.m., Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Allen)★ Maya Beiser  (Friday and Saturday) As omnivorous in her musical tastes as she is curious about spiritual traditions, this fearless cellist presents a program titled “All Vows,” which tests the boundaries between the sacred and profane. The program includes works by Glenn Kotche and Michael Gordon; Ms. Beiser’s interpretations of classic rock; and Mohammed Fairouz’s “Kol Nidrei.” At 7:30 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)★ Boston Symphony Orchestra  (Tuesday through Thursday) Andris Nelsons, who became music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra last season, returns to Carnegie Hall with three alluring programs that will showcase his mettle in a wide range of repertory. On Tuesday, he conducts Brahms’s Symphony No. 2, Sebastian Currier’s “Divisions” and Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No. 3, with Lars Vogt as soloist. On Wednesday, he leads Christine Goerke in the title role of a concert performance of Strauss’s “Elektra.” And on Thursday, Russian works are in the spotlight, with Prokofiev’s “Alexander Nevsky” and Rachmaninoff’s “Symphonic Dances.” At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center  (Sunday and Tuesday) The society opens its fall season with an appealing (if unadventurous) program, featuring Haydn’s Trio in A major (Hob. XV:18), Mendelssohn’s Sextet in D (Op. 110) and Schumann’s Piano Quintet in E-flat. Musicians include the pianists Michael Brown and Wu Han, the violinist Ani Kavafian and the cellist Nicholas Canellakis. At 5 p.m. on Sunday and 7:30 p.m. on Tuesday, Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, chambermusicsociety.org, 212-875-5788. (Schweitzer)Dorian Baroque  (Saturday) The rarely seen piccolo cello comes out of retirement as the cellist Elinor Frey joins this period-instrument ensemble in a program of music by Scarlatti and lesser-known contemporaries including Leonardo Leo and Carlo Lonati. At 8 p.m., Church of the Epiphany, 1393 York Avenue, at 74th Street, dorianbaroque.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)AdvertisementKirill Gerstein  (Tuesday) The pianist Kirill Gerstein, the rare musician who is equally dexterous in both jazz and classical genres, is the soloist in the 92nd Street Y’s fall season opening concert. Mr. Gerstein will join the jazz band Vince Giordano and the Nighthawks for an all-Gershwin program conducted by Maurice Peress that includes arrangements of “Rhapsody in Blue,” the Piano Concerto in F and the Overture to “Strike Up the Band.” At 7:30 p.m., Kaufmann Concert Hall, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Schweitzer)★ Matt Haimovitz  (Thursday through Oct. 24) This adventurous cellist, a musical pioneer who has brought classical music into alternate spaces for over a decade, offers spontaneous performances of the Bach suites at different sites at the Columbia University campus (which will be announced on the Miller Theater’s Facebook page or @MillerTheatre). On Thursday he will perform the third, fourth and fifth suites alongside works by Vijay Iyer, Mohammed Fairouz and Roberto Sierra. (He offers the other Bach suites on Saturday.) At 8 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (Schweitzer)The Knights  (Saturday) This orchestral collective, known for its high-energy performances, explores music inspired by animals and other unpredictable creatures in its performance of an arrangement of Stockhausen’s “Leo” from “Tierkreis” and one of Sufjan Stevens’s Suite from “Run Rabbit Run”; Stravinsky’s Suite from “The Soldier’s Tale”; and Giovanni Sollima’s “Federico II” from “Viaggio in Italia.” At 8 p.m., BRIC House Ballroom, 647 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, 718-683-5600, bricartsmedia.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ SONiC Festival  (Friday and Saturday) This adventurous festival of new sounds spreads its wings wide across the city with a presentation on Friday at Brookfield Place in Battery Park City by the American Composers Orchestra playing globally sourced compositions, and two performances Saturday at National Sawdust in Brooklyn. The early set there features the vocal ensemble Roomful of Teeth performing music by Anna Clyne, Missy Mazzoli and others while the composer Paola Prestini and the cellist Jeffrey Zeigler headline a late-night show of music and video art. Full details are at sonicfestival.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)White Light Festival (through Nov. 22) A typically varied week at the White Light Festival sees the end of Mark Padmore’s Schubert traversal, with the fortepianist Kristian Bezuidenhout, on Saturday at Alice Tully Hall. The Irish group the Gloaming mixes folk, jazz and contemporary classical in a set on Friday at Symphony Space, and on Tuesday and Wednesday Katarina Livljanic leads the ensembles Dialogos and Kantaduri in “Heretical Angels,” a staged exploration of Balkan rites — Christian and pagan — at Union Theological Seminary’s James Memorial Chapel in Morningside Heights. At 7:30 p.m., 212-721-6500, whitelightfestival.org. (Allen)★ ‘Refuse the Hour’  (Thursday through Oct. 25) The South African artist William Kentridge explores the theme of temporality in this multimedia chamber opera, with his own libretto and a score by Philip Miller, a frequent collaborator. Mr. Kentridge stars in his own production, leading a discourse about procrastination and other timely matters amid a visual and audio backdrop of oversized, unsynchronized ticking metronomes, dancers, video projections and singers using megaphones. At 7:30 p.m., BAM Harvey Theater, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene; 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schweitzer)Nate Wooley  (Tuesday through Oct. 25) This multitasking jazz trumpeter brings his full versatility to a residency that brings together major players like Tim Berne and Battle Pieces (on Tuesday) and offers first hearings on Wednesday of new works for soprano, trumpet and cello quartet, as well as for solo trumpet and phonetic mechanics. The Stone, Avenue C and Second Street, East Village, thestonenyc.com. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page C19 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Classical.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.