AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertPaul Taylor’s American Modern Dance, a puzzling project on paper, is proving so in performance as well. As this new venture for the Paul Taylor Dance Company, one that expands to include works by other choreographers, continued into its second week at the David H. Koch Theater, the salient contrast remained that of previous years: Taylor versus Taylor.This season, for example, is notable for the return, after an absence of about 30 years, of one of Mr. Taylor’s greatest collaborators, the visual artist Alex Katz. Thursday’s program was all Katz, with “Sea Lark,” which had its debut last week, followed by “Last Look” (1985) and “Diggity” (1978). All were enhanced by Mr. Katz’s sets and costumes, yet the enduring strength of the older works only emphasized the flimsiness of the new one. “Sea Lark” is what it says it is, and that’s all that it is. The pleasingly bright flatness of Mr. Katz’s designs offers no resistance to the bland people cavorting with a sailboat in blithe disregard of any tonal changes in the music, selections from Poulenc’s “Les Biches.” Compare that with “Diggity.” Mr. Katz’s charming set, a stage strewn with free-standing profiles of dogs, gets applause as soon as the curtain goes up. But it is also an obstacle course, which adds some tension to a dance that is a lark. With its drill-team aspects, the women walking on the men’s backs or being rotated like hot dogs on a spit, “Diggity” could almost be a beach party in an Annette Funicello flick, yet it’s much more complex than “Sea Lark,” and the central duet is shaded with somber poetry. The slanted interaction between Mr. Taylor’s choreography and Mr. Katz’s set colors the joy with mystery. The music for “Diggity” and “Last Look” is by Donald York, another collaborator from the old days who is back this season. Mr. York has been conducting the Orchestra of St. Luke’s — live music is yet one more old friend returning after an extended leave. Under his baton, his score for “Diggity” (which sounds like a pastiche of Leonard Bernstein — Bernstein doing Latin, Bernstein doing Copland) was vivid, as was his moaning, doom-laden score for “Last Look.”“Last Look” is one of the darkest of Mr. Taylor’s horror shows. It is a twitching, flailing nightmare of narcissism, and Mr. Katz’s set of mirrors deepens the chill by reflecting it at angles oblique and acute. Both “Last Look” and this season’s other premiere, “Death and the Damsel,” include something like gang rape, but how much richer and stranger the older work is. On Wednesday, “Death” had acquired a different ending from the coy one it had for its debut the previous week — the vampirish horde that might be the protagonist’s past or her bad dream now unambiguously swallows her at the finish — but it still felt underdone, a mash-up of remembered moral fables from 1930s movies and the vampire melodramas on TV today.The live music for Wednesday’s program was erratic in quality. “Aureole” (1962), a tender classic set to Handel, drooped. But the incisive playing of Bohuslav Martinu’s “Cello Sonato No. 2” brought drama to “Death,” and “Cloven Kingdom” (1976), which I was hearing live for the first time, was a revelation. In the past, I have found the work’s exposure of the animality beneath society’s surface to be humdrum, yet the cross-fading and jump cuts between Corelli and the percussive modernism of Henry Cowell and Malloy Miller (as glinting, exposed and cutting as the pieces of mirror in the work’s costumes) awakened me to the piece’s power. On Friday, the orchestra took the night off. Recorded music is essential to “Company B” (1991), which derives its period poignancy and humor by working with and against Andrews Sisters singles. And it would be hard to replicate the Gidon Kremer recordings of Astor Piazzolla for “Piazzolla Caldera,” which utilizes the tango idiom not quite as successfully as “Company B” does 1940s steps. Fazil Say’s one-man piano recording of Stravinsky’s “Rite of Spring” is also distinctive. It is the work danced to it, Shen Wei’s “Rite of Spring,” performed by Mr. Shen’s own company on Friday night, that seems unjustified. It has merits and even intriguing borrowings from Mr. Taylor’s language, yet I can’t imagine anyone, especially anyone in Mr. Taylor’s audience, preferring it to Mr. Taylor’s far superior “Rite of Spring” — called “Sacre du Printemps (The Rehearsal).” Mr. Taylor is wily, and choices that appear ill-considered or lazy sometimes conceal jokes. Other times, appearances don’t deceive. Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance’s season runs through Sunday at the David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com. Advertisement