By MIKE HALEMARCH 22, 2015
Yahoo’s attempt to make its video offerings more televisionlike — which is to say more like Netflix, Amazon and Hulu — began last week with the premiere of the sixth season of “Community,” a show that had been canceled by NBC. But a better test comes on Monday, when it will post all eight episodes of “Sin City Saints,” an original half-hour comedy, at Yahoo Screen.“Saints,” the first scripted series from Mandalay Sports Media, throws together young-male-viewer bait — sports, Las Vegas, Silicon Valley, Malin Akerman — in a comedy less coherent than the halftime scoreboard video at an N.B.A. game.The title is also the name of the Vegas-based pro-basketball team at the center of the story. (It’s part of an unnamed, presumably N.B.A.-like league.) Owned by a young, arrogant tech billionaire (Andrew Santino) — a type nearly as familiar on TV these days as handsome doctors and troubled detectives — the Saints are on a winning streak until their star player is flattened by a golf cart supposedly driven by the team’s mascot.From this opening disaster, a disjointed and not particularly funny series of events ensues, including the arrival of a grim league executive (Ms. Akerman) to help clean up the mess. Plot points and jokes feel as if they came from index cards grabbed at random — the former star now running a burger joint, the young Asian stats geek (Justin Chon) accidentally promoted to deputy general manager, the rehabbing player in love with a woman he hasn’t met yet who may not exist or may not be a woman.Several supporting actors hold your attention when they’re around, including Ryan Cartwright as the league executive’s assistant and Brendan Jennings as the unjustly accused mascot. The former N.B.A. player Rick Fox is amusing as a onetime all-star who’s now the team’s highly self-satisfied general manager. But Ms. Akerman, fighting a truly hideous hairdo, and Mr. Santino can’t make the squabbling main characters interesting or sympathetic.An analyst recently told Variety that Yahoo needed a video portfolio that was “at least B+ programming.” “Community” is an A, but “Sin City Saints” pulls the average well below the B+ threshold.Sin City SaintsAvailable for streaming on Yahoo Screen.Produced by Mandalay Sports Media. Bryan Gordon, Chris Case and Mike Tollin, executive producers.WITH: Andrew Santino (Jake Tullus), Malin Akerman (Dusty Halford), Tom Arnold (Kevin Freeman), Keith Powers (LaDarius Pope), Justin Chon (Byron Summers), B. K. Cannon (Melissa Stanton), Rick Fox (Sam Johnson), Ryan Cartwright (Wade Leatherbee) and Brendan Jennings (Andy the Mascot).A version of this review appears in print on March 23, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Shooting for Laughs on and Off the Court.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.