AdvertisementSupported byBy Choe Sang-Hun and Michael CooperSEOUL, South Korea — When the respected Seoul Philharmonic Orchestra announced this month that it was canceling its United States tour set for April, it cited fiscal woes. Left unsaid were the lurid allegations of sexual harassment and financial improprieties that have rocked the orchestra recently, culminating in a police raid of its offices here.The infighting is threatening to slow the progress that the orchestra has made since Myung-whun Chung, who has conducted many of the world’s major ensembles and is a towering cultural figure here, became its music director in 2005. Since then, as he has remade the orchestra, attendance has risen, international tours have been well reviewed and a contract with Deutsche Grammophon has allowed it to release a number of recordings.The first casualty of the chaos was a tour that was supposed to take it to Los Angeles; San Francisco; Seattle; Ann Arbor, Mich.; and Chicago in April. The orchestra said in a statement that a significant cut in tour funding from the City of Seoul had forced it to cancel. Mr. Chung said in a statement that he was “deeply saddened” by the decision. But the backstage troubles of the orchestra, whose appearance last year in London at the BBC Proms won praise, go back much further. They burst into public view in December, when an anonymous statement claiming to be from orchestra employees was sent to news organizations and called for the resignation of the president of the orchestra, Park Hyun-jung, claiming that she had abused women on the staff with insults, sometimes sexist, since she joined the organization in 2013.Ms. Park defended herself, saying that while she might have used some rough language, she had simply been trying to jolt staff members out of complacency. She in turn raised questions about how public money was being spent by the orchestra, and charged that she had been the victim of a plot by Mr. Chung — saying that he saw her efforts to reform the organization as a challenge to his leadership and the perks he enjoyed. Mr. Chung later said that he had spoken with city officials in Seoul about Ms. Park’s conduct at the orchestra. “My position is simple,” he was quoted as saying in December. “It’s a human rights violation.”Ms. Park resigned from the orchestra at the end of December. But officials in Seoul also began looking at Mr. Chung’s pay and perks, and in January city auditors raised questions about air travel that some of his relatives had taken, and about whether his outside appearances, including with the Vienna State Opera, had disrupted the Seoul Philharmonic’s schedule. Mr. Chung comes from South Korea’s best-known musical family. He rose to prominence while playing in a trio with his sisters — the violinist Kyung-wha Chung and the cellist Myung-wha Chung — before embarking on an international conducting career. He has been paid more than $1 million a year by the orchestra, and defended himself and his pay at a news conference in January. He criticized city officials for failing to build a new concert hall for the orchestra and for cutting its budget, and warned that he would not agree to renew his contract at the Seoul Philharmonic unless it receives more resources.“In the old days, people didn’t attend Seoul Philharmonic performances even if they were given free tickets,” he said at the news conference. “Now, those who invite foreign orchestras complain to me that they can’t do business because of the Seoul Philharmonic.” He declined a request for an interview. Orchestra officials would not comment publicly on the recent events, citing pending investigations.“At the heart of this scandal is the clash of two gigantic egos,” said Lee Yong-il, a former conductor and an honorary chairman of the Korean Society for Music Education. “Chung thinks he is a world-class conductor and Park thinks she is an expert in management. This was a scandal waiting to happen because the two obviously did not respect each other.”The battles have made headlines in South Korea. An editorial at the liberal Hankyoreh newspaper recently decried the “mud-pit fight” at the orchestra, while the conservative Chosun Ilbo newspaper warned in an editorial that the squabbling would alienate audiences.The scandal took a new turn this month when the police raided the orchestra’s offices here and confiscated computer equipment, cellphones and a fax machine. The authorities were apparently investigating a claim by Ms. Park that the whistle-blowers at the orchestra had defamed her. (Defamation is a criminal offense in South Korea.)A few days later the orchestra said that the American tour was being canceled because the Seoul Metropolitan Council would not allocate the money needed for the tour and corporate sponsors were not stepping in to help.Recently, members of the orchestra issued a statement supporting Mr. Chung. They said the controversy had “spun out of control” and was damaging the ensemble’s hard-won international reputation, and accused critics of Mr. Chung and the orchestra of politicizing the scandal with damaging results.“An orchestra, which is a cultural and artistic entity, should not be interpreted or used with political and economic logic,” they said in the statement. “We hold deep trust in Maestro Chung’s musical capabilities and leadership in helping the Seoul Philharmonic win international recognition, as well as his contribution to the orchestra as its musical director.”Choe Sang-Hun reported from Seoul and Michael Cooper from New York.Advertisement