AdvertisementSupported byBy Anthony TommasiniIn a 2009 interview, Plácido Domingo said that he could not imagine retiring from opera with a series of farewell performances and public celebrations. The time to stop will just come to him when it’s right, he explained. “I think it will be one evening,” he said, “after a performance, to say, ‘That’s it.’ ”It may be the moment for Mr. Domingo to heed his own words. On Friday night, Mr. Domingo, 74, among the most gloried tenors of all time, seemingly determined to keep his career going, sang another baritone role: Don Carlo, the king of Spain, in the Metropolitan Opera’s revival of Verdi’s “Ernani,” an early work. It’s not hard to understand one reason Mr. Domingo finds it impossible to retire from the stage: He still has devoted fans. On Friday he drew bravos for his arias. During curtain calls, as Mr. Domingo bowed and waved, a sea of mobile phones in the house captured the moment on video. But his voice is now quite compromised and his performance showed it. He pulled off the role. There were flashes of the Domingo vocal charisma we remember from his decades of magnificent singing. But he seemed to be pushing his voice and sometimes barked lines, especially stretches of dramatic recitative. He also tended to cut off the ends of phrases, as if giving the vocal line one final push. Despite traces of the dark Domingo colorings, richness and power, his voice mostly sounded leathery. I missed a hallmark of Mr. Domingo’s glory days: smooth, legato phrasing. He often seemed preoccupied with the technique of singing, so much so that his performance could be musically careless. During solo flights, he sometimes rushed a line and other times became bogged down dispatching an embellishment, resulting in his veering off track from the orchestra, even with James Levine, a conductor who can follow anyone, in the pit. Mr. Domingo is one of the most comprehensively skilled musicians in the field of opera. Does it not bother him to be fudging?His biography in the program accurately identified him as a tenor and conductor at the Met. But, the problem was, Mr. Domingo indeed sounded like a tenor singing in a lower range, not a true Verdi baritone. A proper Verdi cast must include the contrasting voice types the composer specified in order to activate the drama. Ernani is an ardent, romantic tenor. The character is actually Don Juan of Aragon, whose father has died at the hands of the king. Having lost his land and wealth, Don Juan has become a bandit, known as Ernani, and leads a group of outlaws in rebellion. The youthful Italian tenor Francesco Meli brought a warm, healthy and sizable voice to the role, singing with tenderness and vigor and looking suitably dashing. Ernani loves Elvira, the niece of Silva, a Spanish grandee, who is forcing her to marry him. But Elvira has fallen for Ernani. To complicate matters, Don Carlo also loves Elvira and intends to have her.The soprano Angela Meade, who sang Elvira when “Ernani” was last at the Met in 2012, again brought plush sound, unforced power and sumptuous beauty to the role. She may have lacked a little fire, but it was wonderful to hear such a fresh, exciting voice in this music. Elvira is fought over by Don Carlo and Ernani, an emotional triangle Verdi parallels with a vocal one between a soprano, a tenor and a baritone. But here, Ms. Meade traded phrases with a young tenor and an old one, which altered the intended character of the music.As Silva, the bass Dmitry Belosselskiy sang with sturdy sound and earnest dignity. Mr. Levine, who conducted the 1983 premiere of this starkly traditional Pier Luigi Samaritani production, drew vigorous, lean Verdi playing from the great Met orchestra, marred only by moments of troubled coordination with Mr. Domingo.Throughout his career, Mr. Domingo has taken big risks, often against advice, and proved he knew best — for example, his move into the Wagner tenor repertory. For me and for many, he was a Siegmund and a Parsifal for the ages. In 2010, Mr. Domingo realized a lifelong fantasy and sang the title role of Verdi’s “Simon Boccanegra” at the Met. (He had introduced it in Berlin in 2009.) Here was a great tenor asking audiences for indulgence so that he could share his take on a classic Verdi baritone role. Mr. Domingo’s deeply felt, formidably sung performance was embraced by his countless fans.But no one imagined it would lead to his remaking himself in his 70s as a baritone. Mr. Domingo risks tarnishing the glow from an illustrious career.“Ernani” runs through April 11 at the Metropolitan Opera House; 212-362-6000, metopera.org. Advertisement