AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon CaramanicaThe first time Ariana Grande cried on Friday night at Madison Square Garden was a little before the halfway mark of her show.It was just after she performed “The Way,” her jaunty 2013 debut single and the song that initiated her rescue from purgatory as a Nickelodeon actress. Sitting at the top of the stairs onstage, surrounded by her dancers, she was thanking the sold-out crowd, which was screaming more than listening, which only made her cry more.Ms. Grande was probably ruminating on the fact that, had a few things gone a bit differently, she might still be trapped inside Cat Valentine, her old Nickelodeon character, far from stages like this. As recently as nine months ago, new episodes of her show “Sam & Cat” were running, but even then, Ms. Grande was determinedly stomping all over that part of her life.And now she is a pop princess, unfettered by old images and obligations. She did it with a combination of exceptional voice, exceptional pluck and an exceptional sense of which hole in the marketplace she could exploit. Her music, as heard on two impressive albums — “Yours Truly” from 2013, and last year’s “My Everything” (both on Republic) — uses the framework of sultry 1990s R&B and applies a sweet, demure sheen to it.Ms. Grande turned 21 this year, but thanks to her prior career, and to her not-quite-risqué sound, much of her fan base is young. At Friday’s show an overwhelming part of the crowd was made of up of mothers accompanying gaggles of girls, underscoring the tension between Ms. Grande’s mature subject matter and the tender ears absorbing it.So Ms. Grande played up her coyness during this stop of her Honeymoon Tour, and also her voice. She opened with “Bang Bang,” firing high-speed melisma bullets, which were accompanied by fireworks and lasers. Like many great singers, Ms. Grande likes to remind listeners that her voice is a weapon. That’s especially true on slower songs like “Love Me Harder” and “Tattooed Heart,” on which Ms. Grande showed off her full vocal dexterity.Ms. Grande has found her greatest success with carefree anthems that allow her vocals to roam wild, like the pop-house anthem “Break Free” and the sassy, swinging “Problem.” She’s also made smart collaborations with rappers, who can get away with saying things she can’t. Here, they were displayed on a huge video screen behind her: Childish Gambino on “Break Your Heart Right Back,” Iggy Azalea on “Problem” and Big Sean on two songs, “Best Mistake” and “Right There.” (Big Sean is also her boyfriend; notably, she didn’t perform “Almost Is Never Enough,” a sterling duet with Nathan Sykes, a rumored ex.) One collaborator who did not appear in this fashion was the Weeknd, whose half of “Love Me Harder” was excised, perhaps for its blatant raunch.Ms. Grande isn’t quite established enough to have a bulletproof set list for a show this size — sprinkled amid the hits were duds like “Pink Champagne” and “All My Love.” But she made up for the lulls with a finely honed sense of grandeur. She wears aggressively cut outfits that sparkle and shine, as if from a fashion-forward figure skating competition. At one point she floated out over the audience on a cloud; at another, she rode an ornate chandelier to the stage. Midshow, the screen showed some black-and-white scenes of Ms. Grande primping in a mirror that recalled Madonna’s “Truth or Dare.” And throughout the night, the cat ears worn by thousands of girls in the audience — $40 a pop — lit up in time with the music.Amid all this, though, Ms. Grande is still on a quest to be taken seriously as a musician, and that’s not without missteps. Often in interviews, she pledges her devotion to the oddball British singer and pop experimentalist Imogen Heap.Ms. Heap helped develop a product called the Mi.Mu Glove, which allows the wearer to manipulate music via hand gesture. She recently gave one to Ms. Grande, who included it in her show on “Why Try,” the night’s one unmitigated disaster, obscuring her voice and disrupting her performance. (After the show, there was a post on the official Mi.Mu Twitter account that seemed to acknowledge at least some of the difficulties: “Gutted @ArianaGrande’s left glove didn’t play nice tonight and kept turning the harmonies minor! We’ll fix it tomorrow, Ari! #bleedingedge”.)That didn’t spur tears from Ms. Grande, though they did return a couple of songs later, on “My Everything.” Seated atop a white piano, Ms. Grande looked at ease until the words of the song began escaping her.These tears felt slightly different than the prior ones — maybe because she was flubbing the song, and maybe because, just before, her grandfather’s voice had been playing over the arena’s speakers, imploring her, “Don’t let them challenge you, don’t let them intimidate you.” (He died last year.) But Ms. Grande did not come this far to be undone by some slippery words. After her piano player gave her some gestural encouragement, she wiped away the tears, opened up her mouth wide, and sang loudly enough to block out all the bad memories.Advertisement