Season 6, Episode 10: “Trust”Spoilers for this week’s episode of  “Justified” follow.I am still in the first stage of grief: denial. I am not ready to accept that Boyd Crowder could be dead. This is the final season of this show and there’s no way that they’d off the main bad guy with several episodes left to go … right?Did any of you see that coming? I didn’t and that was because this was an episode full of meticulous misdirection. That final scene sneaked right up on us.Raylan once again schemes to get the criminals in the right place doing the wrong thing so he can catch them committing a felony and arrest them or, more likely, shoot them. He plants doubts in Avery Markham’s mind about whether Markham can trust his fiancée, Katherine Hale. He suggests Markham call her and say that he is moving the $10 million from the pizza parlor safe to Charlotte, N.C. If she passes on the information to Boyd, Raylan gets Boyd, which is what Markham wants. If she doesn’t, Markham will know he can trust her, Raylan explains.Markham takes the bait and calls. Then Katherine takes the bait. And so it begins. Markham misdirects her. She tells Wynn Duffy, the informant to the marshals, who tells Boyd. Markham, Duffy explains, “figures you figure the money is headed to Lexington,” the opposite direction. Boyd does figure that, and figures he’ll misdirect Duffy and tell him he’ll hit it as the money heads south toward Charlotte. Duffy dutifully tells the marshals.So the marshals watch that route, where of course there is no money. Boyd misdirects his own men. Instead, he kidnaps Hale and ransoms her for the money. Oddly it works. Markham gives up the money to get back Hale. Why? We were led to believe he didn’t trust her. Why not let Boyd kill her and then keep the money? Is he really that in love? His mood seems to shift when Boyd’s parting words indicate that he and Hale were planning to rip him off because she suspected Markham of murdering her husband. “So what happens now?” she asks him. “Are you going to kill me?” He just smiles. We never find out because there is one more twist.Boyd should have been misdirecting Ava Crowder, his fiancée, who has also been informing to the marshals. She has the car and fake passports that will allow the two of them to escape Harlan County and start a new, wealthy life.We are also led to believe that Ava, once again, has turned on Boyd. Boyd loses his temper with her, again revealing he is capable of hurting or killing her. But there is some rare honesty in this episode too. She tells Raylan that Boyd isn’t going south to get the money. He tells her that the prosecutor intends to send her back to prison. So you have to figure she started hatching Plan B at that point if she wasn’t already.She takes Raylan to Boyd and the money, and in the most shocking moment of the episode, the season, and maybe the series, shoots Boyd in the chest at close range. But she doesn’t shoot Raylan. And he doesn’t either as she gets into the pickup truck with $10 million. “I’m going to come after you,” he tells her. “I know,” she says. What a love story.Several other things remain unresolved in this episode.There is Boon, the psycho Billy the Kid character who works for Markham. This guy is really scary. And he seems obsessed with hats. “You are everything I’d hoped for, right down to the hat,” Boon told Raylan last week.This week he starts in on hats again, whether they are symbols of the Old West. “You’re asking if we’re some keepers of some kind of flame?” Raylan replies. “I guess my main take is that I believe you are overestimating how much you and I have in common.” Boon’s reply drips with menace: “All right then, that gives me something to think on.”Later Boon intimidates the counterman at the diner and a young woman studying there. He thinks the guy’s hipster hat pegs him as an easy mark and he isn’t wrong. In a tension-racked scene, he offers to buy the guy’s hat and then takes it, only to leave it and start menacing the young woman.Another loose end is Wynn Duffy, left handcuffed to the table in his RV and Mikey, his driver, with the information he is the informant who got Katherine’s husband imprisoned and killed. If she isn’t dead, that could be dangerous information.Still unresolved are the whereabouts of Uncle Zachariah. There are too many mentions of him to believe he is trapped or dead in the mine. But with Boyd dead, what purpose would he now serve? If Boyd is dead, that is. More misdirection.The show drink. The old lady was drinking a single malt Scotch before Boon killed her. But the real drink was in an early scene. How does Boyd nurse the pain of being only a few feet from $10 million and failing to grasp it, and of having escaped death with only a few seconds to spare?Apparently with a bottle of Elmer T. Lee bourbon. It’s another brand from the Buffalo Trace distillery. (In case you are wondering about all these Buffalo Trace products, the distillery gave the producers empty bottles as props.) It’s a single-barrel whiskey, fairly expensive and generally hard to find. It would make a fine final drink.