AdvertisementSupported byBy Alec M. Priester12:30 P.M. (AMC) AMERICAN GANGSTER (2007) Ridley Scott directs this Oscar-nominated crime drama set in the 1970s. Frank Lucas (Denzel Washington) is a gangster in Harlem who finds that he can get the best heroin cheap from Southeast Asia, smuggled to the United States in the coffins of American soldiers sent from Vietnam. He calls the heroin Blue Magic and takes over the market. Richie Roberts (Russell Crowe) is an obnoxiously honest New Jersey detective. When his partner (John Ortiz) dies from an overdose of Blue Magic, Richie is asked to lead a drug trafficking task force. A corrupt New York detective named Trupo (Josh Brolin) bridges the gap between the two lead characters. “You can almost feel Mr. Scott trying to coax the material away from its generic trappings toward something rarefied, something like Francis Ford Coppola’s 1972 definitive American story, ‘The Godfather,’ ” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “He comes closest to that goal with the suggestion that the lethal pursuit of the American dream is not restricted to one or two families — the Corleones, say, or the Sopranos — but located in a network of warring tribes that help to obscure the larger war of all against all.”7 P.M. (FX) THE AVENGERS (2012) In this film written and directed by Joss Whedon, Loki (Tom Hiddleston) makes a deal with aliens: If he gives them the Tesseract, a mythically powerful energy source, they will give him an army with which to rule Earth. Nick Fury (Samuel L. Jackson) leads S.H.I.E.L.D., the agency that oversees the Avengers, the superhero team made up of Iron Man (Robert Downey Jr.), Captain America (Chris Evans), the Hulk (Mark Ruffalo), Thor (Chris Hemsworth), Black Widow (Scarlett Johansson) and Hawkeye (Jeremy Renner). When Loki does as villains do and begins wreaking havoc on New York City, the Avengers must put aside their differences and save the world. “This movie revels in the individuality of its mighty, mythical characters, pinpointing insecurities that are amplified by superhuman power and catching sparks that fly when big, rough-edged egos (and alter egos) collide,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “The best scenes are not the overblown, skull-assaulting action sequences — which add remarkably little that will be fresh or surprising to devotees of the “Transformers” franchise — but the moments in between, when the assembled heroes have the opportunity to brag, banter, flirt and bicker.”8 P.M. (CW) THE FLASH The Flash, Barry Allen (Grant Gustin), discovers that the temperature villains Captain Cold and Heat Wave are back in Central City. Based on the DC Comics character formerly portrayed by John Wesley Shipp, who plays Allen’s father in this update.9 P.M. (CW) IZOMBIE Liv (Rose McIver) is a medical student adjusting to her new life as a zombie. This puts her in a position to glimpse flashes of dead people’s memories when she eats their brains. She uses this uncommon talent to assist Ravi (Rahul Kohli) and Clive (Malcolm Goodwin) in investigating the death of a painter. The painter’s brain turns out to be an aphrodisiac.9 P.M. (BBC America) FROZEN PLANET David Attenborough narrates this nature series about the polar regions. This episode depicts summertime: musk oxen try to save a calf from Arctic wolves, penguins struggle with the heat, killer whales hunt a minke whale for hours and polar bear cubs learn to swim.10 P.M. (FX) JUSTIFIED Timothy Olyphant plays Raylan Givens, the fictional United States marshal created by Elmore Leonard in his novel “Pronto.” In this episode Boyd Crowder (Walton Goggins) tries to take money from Avery Markham (Sam Elliott).10 P.M. (CBS) PERSON OF INTEREST John Reese (Jim Caviezel) has to protect a reckless bounty hunter. Harold Finch (Michael Emerson) follows through on the plot he hatched in Hong Kong.10:30 (HGTV) HOUSE HUNTERS INTERNATIONAL Prospective buyers set a budget and work with a real estate agent to find a home abroad. In this episode a couple with a $240,000 budget looks for places in the Turks and Caicos. Conflict sets in when it is revealed that they have different motives for the purchase.What’s Streaming NowMAD MEN This AMC series’s final episodes will be broadcast starting on April 5. The first half of Season 7 is available for streaming now on Netflix. (netflix.com)Advertisement