AdvertisementSupported byBy Siobhan BurkeWhat to keep, and what to throw away? That question can come up in any creative process, but in “Assemblage,” Rebecca Serrell Cyr essentially waves it aside. Why not keep everything? According to press notes about the work, which had its premiere at Jack in Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, on Thursday, Ms. Cyr made “a radical decision not to edit anything out.”That “anything” encompasses a sprawling inventory of objects — pompoms, tennis rackets, tinsel, carrots, a rubber snake, a bubble machine, the list goes on — and, more evanescently, artistic influences. Ms. Cyr is best known as a Bessie Award-winning dancer in the work of other choreographers, including Anna Sperber, RoseAnne Spradlin and Donna Uchizono. “Assemblage” is a reckoning with all the aesthetics that can inhabit the same body, a wild sifting-through of kinesthetic information. But while some of that information is familiar, especially the prevalence of kitsch, Ms. Cyr, joined by the fantastic dancers Alex Escalante, Aretha Aoki and Eleanor Hullihan, conjures her own kind of magic: euphoric, funny, searching, personal. Even not editing requires editing, and one moment tumbles into the next as if there was no other way.Upon arriving, each audience member receives an LED flashlight. The only light source, these illuminate tinfoil-covered walls (a decorative feature of Jack that suits “Assemblage”), a dollhouse, a dancer on a shiny mat (Mr. Escalante) and an unidentifiable heap where, we’ll soon discover, Ms. Aoki is hiding. The piece begins as Ms. Cyr instructs us to shut off our lights and plop them into metal buckets.Ms. Cyr dances first with Mr. Escalante — a duet with spurts of fog, dream-sequence music (Ravel), push-ups, situps and other sporty ephemera — and then with Ms. Aoki, hastily changing from bright warm-up clothes into a long dark skirt and black nylon mask. Ms. Aoki wears the same, as they mirror and clash with each other in a Bacchanalian rite. Coffee cups, branches and golden sheaths leave the picture as quickly as they enter. Sweeping away the debris, Ms. Cyr makes way for Ms. Hullihan, and for the voice of Bob Ross in an episode of “The Joy of Painting.” At once prescriptive and permissive — paint like this, but make it your own — it’s an apt backdrop for Ms. Hullihan’s conflicted solo. She arrives in pristine classical poses, then lets them wither; careens between jazzy crescendos and curling in on herself.“Assemblage” ends with a woman’s voice reading a fake (and not entirely favorable) review of the work. Ms. Cyr, in pursuit of her own voice, also creates her own record.Advertisement