AdvertisementSupported byNew MusicBy Jon CaramanicaAnother week, another highly touted Los Angeles rap dissenter. When the spotlight landed on Earl Sweatshirt a couple of years ago, it seared him. A member of the Odd Future band of scallywags and skate rats, he’d been shipped off by his mother just before the mania surrounding the crew peaked. He returned a star, but a newbie on the inside. That’s made for unexpected twists in his music making. He has emerged not as the shock-theater maestro of his earliest releases, but as an eloquent sketchbook rapper, who works impressionistic and quick. As was clear from his first album, “Doris,” and even more so this follow-up, he’s not preoccupied with delivering highly polished finished product, but instead is devoted to creating, and delivering, in real time. So when Earl Sweatshirt is struggling, so goes the music. “I Don’t Like ____, I Don’t Go Outside” is worrisomely dark in places, a chronicle of the collapse of a relationship, the death of his grandmother, and persistent difficulties in acclimating to fame. On this album, loved ones are disappearing, replaced by fans “who you can’t get mad at when they want a pound and pic/’Cause they the reason that the traffic on the browser quick/And they the reason that the paper in your trouser’s thick.” His sense of isolation also manifests itself in his demeanor in relation to his creativity. The album is wholly self-produced (under the alias randomblackdude), apart from one song, full of slouchy, lethargic beats with a hard-slap undercurrent. At 10 songs that span barely 30 minutes, this album is so terse it makes Nas’s “Illmatic” seem like “Infinite Jest.” And often it can feel as if Earl Sweatshirt is rapping his dense syllabic tumbles with his back facing the microphone, which is perplexing, since few rappers love the sound of sticky syllables as much as he does. It’s possible he’s bored. The guests here, including Wiki (of Ratking) and Vince Staples, suggest an alliance of underdog overachievers working in their own atmosphere. Maybe that’s what Earl Sweatshirt wants — a turn out of the spotlight. He’s the rare artist whose work makes you question whether submitting to the machine of the music business is worth the price. “I’m only happy when it’s static in the air ’cause the fair weather fake to me,” he raps on “Off Top,” “Living in the scope, hairs crossed like adjacent streets.” Advertisement