By BEN RATLIFFMARCH 23, 2015
About six years ago, Liturgy, a young band from Brooklyn, figured out a good counterintuitive response to black metal, a restricted, cultish kind of music that isn’t traditionally open to responses of any kind. It did so first through music alone. Liturgy used that subgenre’s basic musical identifying marks — its hyperactive, unsyncopated blast-beat drumming and its staccato guitar lines — but opened up the rhythms and harmonies to let in what black metal generally disallowed: tempo-warping improvisation, major keys, occasionally some nonscreamed singing. It was in the differences that you could smell the wood smoke of an original group sound.And then it did so through context and argument. In his interviews and writings, Hunter Hunt-Hendrix — Liturgy’s singer and songwriter and one of its guitarists — rejected the common black-metal rhetoric of decay, doom and negative certainty in favor of the opposite: building, liberation and positive indecision. He wrote a manifesto about “transcendental black metal,” which he read aloud at an academic symposium and which was excerpted in a journal of poststructural philosophy. (For all of this he was called pretentious, as if black-metal bands of the early-’90s Norwegian period, with corpse-paint and bullet-belts and inverted crosses, hadn’t ever known pretension.) In any case, Liturgy’s music, and the predictable response to it, seemed based on what it was not — how it stood apart from what it sounded like.“The Ark Work,” Liturgy’s third album, should signify the point at which the band can be heard for what it is. It still uses some black-metal rhythm and guitar sound, but it’s hungry for other musical languages, devouring them and putting them to work, sometimes inorganically or academically: Gregorian chant, art rock, hip-hop, symphonic fanfares, and the mid-’90s electronic-music strategy of freezing and skidding beats.If the earlier records played with the notion of black metal’s authenticity, this one plays with authenticity in general. In songs like “Kel Valhaal,” it arrives at those symphonic sounds through MIDI synthesizers, inuring you to the music’s fakeness. Then suddenly the flip side reveals itself: You hear real strings and brass, real glockenspiels and real bagpipes. That’s a great effect.There are some hazardous stretches. Mr. Hunt-Hendrix is a feckless, floppy-voiced singer, and either for reasons of safety or rigor he often sticks to a single tone organized into rhythmic phrasing. The monotony can become crazy-making. And sometimes these songs become facile and grandiose: A good portion of the song “Quetzalcoatl” rests on ascending-and-descending, contrary-motion harmonies almost identical to those from the end of the Beatles’ “I Am the Walrus.”But the band knows its virtues and works them hard: density, repetition, development, perversity, integration, catharsis.LITURGY“The Ark Work”(Thrill Jockey)A version of this review appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: ‘The Ark Work’ Is Liturgy’s Third Album.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.