By NATE CHINENMARCH 23, 2015
“Love seems to be some kind of trickery,” Laura Marling sings about halfway through “Short Movie,” her intensely searching new album. “Some great thing to which I am a mystery.” She’s strumming an electric guitar against a rock beat, sounding steely and incredulous, unsure about a few things but not, in the end, about herself.Ms. Marling, 25, finds room for a lot of these cleareyed pronouncements on the album, a wary reflection on restlessness and solitude. Because of what she represents — the most heralded British folk singer of her generation, a singer-songwriter with the command of craft to match her ambitions — it can be jarring when she changes the texture of her music this way, though the bigger issue is her change in perspective.Her previous album, “Once I Was an Eagle,” from 2013, was a billowing fury of romantic exasperation. The songs on “Short Movie” are less expansive and more plain-spoken, but hardly simpler in their implications. Written during a period of self-discovery for Ms. Marling in and around Los Angeles, they can suggest the wry outsiderness of Joan Didion as often as the probing interiorness of Joni Mitchell.“Well, is it still O.K. that I don’t know how to be alone?” Ms. Marling asks at the start of “False Hope,” one of several songs with driving rock dimensions. On a ballad called “I Feel Your Love,” she makes its title phrase feel less like a comfort than a suffocating restriction: “I need to find someone who really wants to be mine,” she declares. And “Strange” is a withering address to an adulterous older man, with verses delivered in a Bob Dylanesque speak-song, and a chorus revealing its mixed emotions.Ms. Marling sings with lean, responsive accompaniment: cello, violin, keyboards, bass and drums. (She produced the album in London with her drummer, Matt Ingram, and his fellow engineer Dan Cox.) The fundamentals of her style are unchanged: the austere beauty of her singing; the grace and propulsion of her fingerpicking; the drones that underscore both Indian ragas and pensive British folk.And for all the philosophical uncertainty in her lyrics, Ms. Marling strikes a disarmingly unguarded note on “Divine,” singing about a moment that could be sensual or musical, or both: “I feel in my fingers that I’m one with something divine.”LAURA MARLING“Short Movie”(Ribbon Music)A version of this review appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: On Laura Marling’s ‘Short Movie,’ Songs of Restlessness and Solitude.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.