AdvertisementSupported byBy Siobhan BurkeAbout halfway through “Heroes,” a duet by the Israeli choreographers Yossi Berg and Oded Graf, one of the dancers breaks into song. His emphatic rendition of “Happy Together” by the Turtles — “I think about you night and day!” he squawks — doesn’t appear to register with his partner. They seem more desperate and alone.Togetherness remains out of reach during “Heroes,” which came to New York Live Arts on Friday as part the Joyce Theater’s offsite series for small-scale work, Joyce Unleashed. (This year’s edition, which also included Netta Yerushalmy and Hillel Kogan, was focused on artists with ties to Tel Aviv.) Mr. Berg and Mr. Graf began collaborating in 2005, and with this project, their first, they set out to explore a familiar theme: “our need for intimacy and communication in an alienated world.” Much as they try to connect, their efforts go awry.And so, too, does the trajectory of the two-part work. Though their partnership, at first, seems alluringly strange, a code worth unraveling, it plateaus in the second half, when they return after a pause and dance to David Bowie songs, including “Heroes.” The dance begins with Mr. Graf encircled by light on an unadorned stage, going through a chain of disaffected motions. He embraces an invisible figure, drops to his knees and outstretches his arms. Mr. Berg looks on from the shadows. The sense of danger here morphs into something sillier, more deranged. To Ohad Fishof’s whirring soundscape, reminiscent of an airplane taking off, the men manipulate their own bodies as if torn between clashing agendas: One arm rises up, the other slaps it down; hands thrust a pelvis forward against its will. Their antics, while athletic, tend toward the antiheroic. Mr. Graf drops his cargo pants to reveal bright red briefs. Mr. Berg plays air guitar and makes antlers with his hands, flashing sheepish smiles at the audience. The humor grows increasingly hollow.They avoid touching, saving physical contact for the rowdier Part 2, a kind of hapless chase that shows off their dexterity as dance partners. When they end on the floor side by side, panting, they’ve gone somewhere together but haven’t taken us with them.Advertisement