AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleTo say that Kathy Baker and Stephen Tobolowsky steal the new Comedy Central series “Big Time in Hollywood, FL” isn’t quite right, because it suggests an element of surprise — that there was anything else about this occasionally amusing trifle that might have stood in their way.Ms. Baker and Mr. Tobolowsky play an exaggerated version of the concerned suburban parents familiar from decades of films and shows about confused youths and the menacing criminals who prey on them, dating to Ann Doran and Jim Backus in “Rebel Without a Cause.” The joke in this case is that the youths are movie-obsessed 30-something brothers (Alex Anfanger and Lenny Jacobson), who have wasted their lives (and their parents’ money) shooting their own ludicrously bad versions of genre films. “Big Time,” which makes its premiere as Comedy Central’s first serialized, scripted comedy on Wednesday, is the latest project to squeeze through the porous boundary between the Internet and television. The show’s creators, Mr. Anfanger and Dan Schimpf, were online talents, responsible for “Next Time on Lonny” on Maker.tv. For “Big Time,” they’ve come up with a fairly ingenious structure in which the brothers’ anger over being kicked out of the house sets off a crazy chain of events involving the police, a washed-up actor (Ben Stiller, who is also an executive producer), a seedy private eye (Michael Madsen) and Cuba Gooding Jr., who gives a performance of minor brilliance as a thug version of himself.Ingenious isn’t the same as funny or well directed, however, and “Big Time” is mostly a chore and a bore, except when a veteran like Mr. Gooding or Ms. Baker is on screen, or especially when the amazing, unfailingly funny Mr. Tobolowsky is making the most of a line like, “I did not diddle that boy.” The biggest problem is that while Mr. Anfanger and Mr. Schimpf have at least a modicum of writing talent, Mr. Anfanger, who takes up the most screen time, is an amateurish and uninteresting performer. The next step in their evolution should be to cast an entire show with real actors.Big Time in Hollywood, FLComedy Central, Wednesday nights at 10:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 9:30, Central time.Produced by Red Hour and Brillstein Entertainment Partners. Created by Alex Anfanger and Dan Schimpf; Mr. Anfanger, Mr. Schimpf, Ben Stiller, Debbie Liebling, Stuart Cornfeld, Mike Rosenstein, Lee Kernis and Brian Stern executive producers; Adam Londy and Tara Schuster, executives in charge of production for Comedy Central.WITH: Alex Anfanger (Jack), Lenny Jacobson (Ben), Cuba Gooding Jr. (Cuba Gooding Jr.), Kathy Baker (Diana), Stephen Tobolowsky (Alan), Jon Bass (Del), Keith David (Malloy) and Marcus Giamatti (Detective Jim Zdorkin).Advertisement