By ALASTAIR MACAULAYMARCH 23, 2015
The art of flamenco has changed and changed again; and nothing has changed it more than the annual circuit of festivals, which usually present flamenco that’s over-choreographed, overproduced and often over-innovative. The “Generations of Gypsy Flamenco” concert at the Town Hall on Friday night, a world premiere that went on to San Francisco on Sunday, was a deliberate turn away from that.There were no sensational lighting effects. The three main dancers — Gema Moneo (youngest), Pepe Torres and Concha Vargas (senior) — were not trying for beauty or fashion prizes. It was fun to see how many combs flew out of Ms. Moneo’s hair, the center-front strands of Mr. Torres’s hair were loose, and both Ms. Moneo and Ms. Vargas displayed generously curved figures. It was remarkable the degree to which all three seemed to be saying, “Don’t watch me — watch my dancing,” and what was evident was an intense sense of rhythmic play.Best of all was the music. The contributions of the guitarists José Gálvez and El Perla and the singers Luis Moneo and José Valencia were vital through most of the evening. The high point of the program was when a fourth star, the singer Esperanza Fernández, sat and sang Cantes with El Perla’s accompaniment. The meeting of these two musicians was a great event: The fascinating density of his playing and the phenomenal length of her phrases made a great impression; both were brilliant in both quiet contemplation and insistent urgency.All the dancing avoided metric predictability. Though it was virtuoso, it also avoided any big bravura effects — no showy foot-trills, no sustained accelerations or decelerations while maintaining a single figure. Rhythm came in very rapid, intricate clusters. No number was a prolonged exercise in suspense. Endings often arrived with unexpected suddenness.The two women performed as if allowing the audience to witness their response to music; the enthusiastic way Ms. Vargas entered for her big Romance by warmly greeting her musicians was especially striking. Only Mr. Torres — his main event was a Soleá — primarily addressed the audience, and even then his manner was calmly concentrated without flamboyance. Ms. Moneo and Ms. Vargas were more ardent personalities, darkly gleeful: Ms. Moneo’s Bulerías por Soleá was full of merry explosions; Ms. Vargas’s Romance brimmed over with an unusual blend of passion and self-amusement.While I joined the eager applause, my reaction also included surprise — I never knew where the rhythmic structure of each number was going. Though I’ve watched flamenco for 35 years, this concert made me feel I was a newcomer to the genre, with much to learn. That’s a good feeling. May these dancers and Ms. Fernández return to New York soon.A dance review on Tuesday about “Generations of Gypsy Flamenco,” at the Town Hall in Manhattan, misspelled the surname of a guitarist who performed. He is José Gálvez, not Gálves.A version of this review appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Flamenco With Play and Passion, Not Flash.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.