AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasOn Friday night at the 92nd Street Y, the choreographer Sally Silvers pulled back the curtain — “ ‘Wizard of Oz’ style,” as she put it — to show how Alfred Hitchcock helped her make a dance.In the talking-demonstration portion of the program, part of the Harkness Dance Festival, which wrapped up over the weekend, she revealed the framework for “Actual Size Plus,” composed of 25 sections inspired by scenes from the films “The Birds” and “North by Northwest.” The festival’s Stripped/Dressed format requires choreographers to divulge something about their working process in the first half followed by a complete performance in the second. Ms. Silvers did more — she began choreographing a new section.To see a snippet from “The Birds” followed by the corresponding dance sequence was a fun trip through Ms. Silvers’s imagination: how she translates spatial design into movement, structure into choreography and specific motifs — like Hitchcock’s stylized use of the hands — into a jagged puzzle of scenes. They rub against one another, heightening romance, anxiety, uncertainty.With an agile sense of the absurd, Ms. Silvers explores tension with a cast that includes Alicia Ohs, Carolyn Hall and Luke Miller. But it’s the lead couple who lend the dance its grandeur: The joke is that Dylan Crossman, suave and persuasive, and Melissa Toogood, superlative as ever while evoking the cool sensibility of a Hitchcock blonde, are anything but actual size. Onstage, they are larger than life.Along with cameos by Ms. Silvers and the choreographer John Jasperse — each performance includes a different guest — “Actual Size Plus” features Michael Schumacher’s score and Bruce Andrews’s sound design and text, which flitters from cinematic melodies and crackling noises to spoken phrases like “roller coaster with consequences.”Ursula Scherrer’s video projections weren’t shown to advantage against the black curtain at the back of the stage, but the intimate moments between Mr. Crossman and Ms. Toogood were less corny here than at Roulette, where “Actual Size” was first shown last fall. As Ms. Toogood’s white-painted fingernails — perhaps a vestige of the white gloves of Hitchcock’s era — traced the outline of Mr. Crossman’s neck and ear, the effect was ghoulish. Yet choreographic details overload the piece as it wears on, and Ms. Silvers’s method of mirroring Hitchcock’s scenic development to her dancers, literal or not, can be just as debilitating as clever.Her own odd appearances — she’s almost like tumbleweed blowing across the stage — provide relief from her severe choreographic system. “What you see is what you don’t get,” Mr. Andrews says, and that feels right. As a technical feat, “Actual Size” is full of pleasures; the baffling part, given the Hitchcock, is its scarcity of suspense.Advertisement