AdvertisementSupported byBy Deborah JowittWatching Emily Coates’s “Incarnations (Sketches for a Longer Work),” part of the third performance event in Danspace Project’s Platform 2015, you may wonder if your brain is turning to jelly. Ms. Coates’s embodiment of ideas about corporality and physics in relation to Isaac Newton’s Laws of Motion and the Higgs field challenges the nonscientific among us. At one point, Ms. Coates, a gorgeous redheaded, pregnant former dancer with the New York City Ballet performs Apollo’s solo from George Balanchine’s 1928 ballet of that name, while her co-performer, the Yale physicist Sarah Demers, rapidly describes Ms. Coates’s moves in terms of space, force, mass, acceleration, etc.In this playful but utterly serious work, Ms. Demers also writes formulas on a whiteboard and explains them verbally. Occasionally, Ms. Coates asks her to continue while circling the board, the air then becoming her only writing surface. In the fascinating ending, gestures derived from the ones made by a physicist over the course of a lecture generate an eerie, almost spiritual passage across the space by Ms. Coates, glowing in the blue world of Carol Mullins’s lighting.Platform 2015, organized by Claudia La Rocco, a freelance critic for The New York Times, pairs artists from different dance worlds and asks them to collaborate. The program on which Ms. Coates’s work appears opens with a piece created by Troy Schumacher, a choreographer and a dancer in New York City Ballet, and Jillian Peña, a postmodern dancemaker who is passionate about ballet. In it, the former City Ballet dancer Kaitlin Gilliland and Cassie Mey (essentially a modern dancer) perform modest, attractively designed ballet steps. Despite their differences, these two sleek women can move in immaculate unison.After Ms. Peña and Mr. Schumacher discuss the history of their close collaboration and their own processes in an overly long and halting dialogue, and after Ms. Mey and Ms. Gilliland dance again, the choreographers signal the moves each created by raising a hand. Interestingly, the steps you might have attributed to one of them often turn out to have been designed by the other.For this event, Ms. Coates was paired with the choreographer Yve Laris Cohen, whose works usually involve ordeals and free-standing sets. The two elected to work separately, yet somehow to “speak” across space and time. For Mr. Laris Cohen’s first performance (which will differ each night), he and Michael Mahalchick lugged four-by-eight pallets, one by one, through the church’s open door and placed them in rows. The audience trickled out the door as the temperature dropped, and it became evident that these panels would be assembled to form a sprung floor. Not just any floor: D’anser (listed as a performer) is the surface that City Ballet tours with; the silver-haired, black-clad Perry Silvey, who designed the platform with Ronald Bates, aligned the panels with two handsome mallets. On the second and third nights, then, Ms. Coates’s piece is to be performed on the floor (by then covered in marley) on which, as a young member of that ballet company, she once danced.The critic Edwin Denby, whom Platform 2015 honors, cast wise and loving eyes on both George Balanchine and the downtown rebels of Judson Dance Theater, to whom building a platform might have counted as a dance.Advertisement