By NATE CHINENMARCH 23, 2015
Several years ago the pianist and composer Myra Melford formed the Snowy Egret quintet, its title inspired by a dream. The music for the group was a response to something more literary: “Memory of Fire,” the three-volume history of the Americas by Eduardo Galeano.The music is part of a multimedia piece, “Language of Dreams,” to be performed not only by the ensemble but also by a Butoh dancer, a video artist and a vocalist. Her extremely fine new album, “Snowy Egret,” is pared down to the strictly musical aspects of the piece, but leaves no sense of incompletion.Ms. Melford has a winning track record with chamberlike five-piece bands: a pair of former ones, Be Bread and the Same River, Twice, are responsible for some of her finest work during the past 20 years. Snowy Egret includes the cornetist Ron Miles, the guitarist Liberty Ellman, the bass guitarist Stomu Takeishi and the drummer Tyshawn Sorey — serious-minded players with a feel for elasticity of form. (Snowy Egret appears on Saturday as part of Ms. Melford’s residency at the Stone, which will also feature reunited versions of those previous groups, along with some duos and trios.)The compositions on the album touch on brooding elegy (“Night of Sorrow”), carnivalesque rhythm (“The Strawberry”) and focused abstraction (“The Kitchen”), with an internal bustle that ends up serving Ms. Melford’s larger designs. She sometimes runs the risk of too closely emulating one of her gurus, Henry Threadgill, with whom Mr. Ellman and Mr. Takeishi have worked steadily in recent years. One track, “Little Pockets/Everybody Pays Taxes,” might well be a straightforward homage.But Ms. Melford’s calmly investigative style at the piano, and the way she coordinates the moving parts in this music, feel girded in singularity. On “Ching Ching/For Love of Fruit,” she plays melodica in a kind of lyrical tango with Mr. Miles, against a sinuous groove. The song rings of familiarity and mystique, rumination and seduction, keeping all possibilities close at hand.MYRA MELFORD“Snowy Egret”(Yellowbird/Enja)A version of this review appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: Myra Melford’s ‘Snowy Egret’ Taps Into Dreams.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.