By NATE CHINENOCT. 15, 2015
The John Scofield Quartet concluded its original run at a time that now feels both remote and weirdly familiar. A movie called “Jurassic Park” was dominating the box office. Janet Jackson released an album that entered the album chart at No. 1. There was talk in the news about Islamic terrorism, a refugee crisis in Europe and the fight over gun control legislation. A Clinton was settling into the White House. (Perhaps we’re getting ahead of ourselves.)It was 1993, in any case, when the guitarist John Scofield disbanded his group with Joe Lovano on tenor saxophone, Dennis Irwin on bass and Bill Stewart on drums — a nimble, slangy cohort with a mainstream profile and a stealth-exploratory style.The official reunion came about just recently, by way of Mr. Scofield’s new album, “Past Present” (Impulse!/Universal Music Classics), and a tour that landed at the Blue Note this week, with a close approximation of the old personnel. (Mr. Irwin died in 2008, making some substitutions necessary; Larry Grenadier fills in on the album, and Ben Street is the bassist on tour.)Mr. Scofield composed a book of new tunes for “Past Present,” in a style that rings familiar without courting nostalgia. During Wednesday’s first set, the title track landed with the force and clarity of a manifesto, often setting up Mr. Scofield and Mr. Lovano for hair-trigger repartee.AdvertisementThey share a dialect of gruff eloquence, rooted as much in rhythm and blues as in the lessons of John Coltrane and Ornette Coleman. Born in Ohio in the early ’50s, a year apart almost to the day, they also share a generational and cultural perspective, along with a level of prominence.AdvertisementOn tour they’re billed as joint bandleaders, which doesn’t feel like a concession: The set opened with “Cymbalism,” a piece by Mr. Lovano that pushed the group toward heavy combustion. Another of his tunes, “Ettenro,” flirted with free-form tempo, in the spirit of its namesake. (Try spelling the title backward.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Scofield’s tunes filled out the rest of the set, hitting several of his trademarks as a composer. “Museum” had a wistful melody with a springlike drift; “Hangover” was a beautifully delicate waltz. And on “Chap Dance,” the band carved up and devoured the standard chord progression known as “rhythm changes,” making it feel like a new hurdle to clear.Throughout the set Mr. Stewart was a dynamo, rumbling and thrashing with a sly but clear consideration of form. There was grit in his rapport with Mr. Scofield, who retains his fondness for crunchy dissonance and rubbery lines. The band’s ideal dynamic is a form of cooperative conflict; that’s truer now than it was the first time around, and truer live than on record.As if to prove the point, the closer was “Chariots,” a lone dispatch from the old repertory, built around a swampy second-line groove. Mr. Scofield hardened the bite in his tone, jostling with Mr. Lovano’s fluttery phrasing. The tune sounded unmistakably like a product of this band, at this moment; whatever fond history it called to mind was the icing on the cake.The John Scofield-Joe Lovano Quartet continues through Sunday at the Blue Note; Manhattan; 212-475-8592, bluenote­.net.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.