Season 3, Episode 9: “Do Mail Robots Dream of Electric Sheep?”Дорогие товарищи,насколько вы доверчивые, по-вашему?
(Dear Comrades, how trusting would you say you are?)“I trusted you. I trusted you.”When Philip utters these words to Gabriel over another touchy game of Scrabble (which is curdled by a drop of Gabriel’s calibrated condescension) he gives voice to the throughline of this hour.This episode took a step back while also managing to cover vast territory and going deep within the characters. The season’s broader scope was revealed with that step back, and we saw more clearly some of the strings tugging at these characters.Yet this week didn’t lack for smaller details either, right down to the visual and aural echoes – someone is called a “pill,” Elizabeth shakes out the pills rattlingly onto the desk, Stan chugs aspirin from the bottle, making a similar sound. There are neat little brackets of dialogue around some scenes as well.Take the Martha and “Clark” reunion, for example, their first night together since everything fell apart over the discovery of the bugged pen in Agent Gaad’s office and the revelation that the internal investigator of the security lapse isn’t Clark, the person she thought it was all this time.(A digression: Alison Wright turned in another stunning performance. She has exhibited admirable discipline since Season 1, filling out Martha within the character’s limitations and perhaps beyond them. And now she is breaking out the full range of her talents, and enjoying it as much as we are.)When Clark opens the door, Martha, eyes beaming adoration and empathy, is tending a simmering marinara. She is dressed like the perfect housewife in her fluffy vintage sweater with the bouncy pompoms. The phone rings on this warm, domestic scene, and she goes all Lauren Bacall on us, delegating sauce duty to Clark:“You know how to stir, don’t you?” It’s Children’s Services on the phone regarding the fostering program. Martha politely turns them down after her dramatic campaign to persuade Clark that they must have children, telling the agency the timing just isn’t right. As Clark practically holds his jaw in place to keep it from hitting the floor, she goes on to tell him, solemnly if elliptically, that she knows adding a child to the family would be impractical, and that she understands. She really understands. We can assume she means that in the larger sense.“To turning the page,” Martha says, raising her glass of red wine. (Rewind here: Turning Paige? No, that’s not what she said, but a nice near miss that will register in the subconscious if nowhere else.)Mangia, sweetie.Bromance and Brewskis. Stan and Oleg, those two knuckleheads, are together again, knocking back a few in the car and reminiscing about their night in Zinaida’s hotel room. Their scheme was almost too amateurish to believe, and even their cooperation strained credibility. But without the interlude of Oleg in Russian-hood drag, threatening Zinaida in the darkened room, while Stan paced outside like a room service waiter, there would have been no relief from the tension in this tightly coiled episode.Will Zinaida do as the unknown intruder asks, and publicly eat her words about Russia and Afghanistan? Did the lady get her BLT or not? Didn’t Oleg seem to enjoy playing dress-up and having an opportunity to clock Stan when he burst into the hotel room?Clever Hans.Elizabeth shifts gears a few times when it comes to Hans. In an early scene, she tells him it’s all over for him because of a slip-up in the operation to kill the South African operative Venter last week. Hans, pumped after an assignment that he initiated (sort of) ended well (depending on your idea of success), can’t believe he is being decommissioned for allowing himself to be seen by his fellow student and archenemy Todd after the killing. He can barely contain his disappointment. Plus he would do anything for the cause, and for Elizabeth. She knows that, and she is exploiting it.His idea of reparation for his mistake is ill conceived and, as he says later, “messy.” By shooting Todd in the eye in the deep stacks of a library, Hans only succeeds in enraging him and can shoot no more because of a gun malfunction (or some basic mistake?). At that point, there is only one choice for silencing the roaring, bleeding, cyclopic enemy: killing him with his bare hands. When Hans reports this to Elizabeth, she seems to reappraise him coolly instead of with the more obvious response to a bad boy: a smack in the face.This does not compute.That there is an elephant in the room needs to be discussed: the Mail Robot, the catalyst for action, the presence that bore the damage of Agent Gaad’s furious kicking in the last episode and maybe now is becoming the Trojan Horse of the F.B.I.’s revenge. Or was that exchange of glances between Agents Gaad and Aderholt something completely different?What do we make of the Philip K. Dick reference of this episode’s title? Does it have a deeper significance, or is it another little red herring to occupy the Kremlinologists out there?Sugar in their eyes.While Philip works to plant another listening device, this time in the mail robot, which is at the shop, Elizabeth, with the help of the veteran actress Lois Smith as Betty, plays out the most revelatory scene of the episode. But not before they exchange a few snappish words over Martha.Standing watch for Philip in what, for want of a better description, I’ll call the robot repair shop, Elizabeth tiptoes off to investigate a noise and comes across an elderly woman working at a desk in an upstairs office. They fall into conversation. The woman is oddly trusting, wanting to talk and share although Elizabeth threatens her early in their chat. Something strikes Elizabeth about this serene person who likes to do the bookkeeping at night because she feels closer to her departed husband.This time it’s Philip who shows no hint of warmth toward an innocent victim when Elizabeth obliquely pleads the woman’s case. “She picked a bad time” is all he says.The two women have an oddly tender talk, even as Betty understands that she will not survive the conversation. Elizabeth seems so matter-of-fact as she pours out the pills that Betty tacitly understands she must take. Her own prescription medicine for a heart problem.Were you devastated by the dialogue with the slightly dotty Betty that unleashed, if not a confession from Elizabeth, at least a rare moment of frankness?Betty tells a story and asks some questions. She talks about marrying her husband a second time after he ran off with her best friend/nemesis who then died. The second time, Betty said: “We no longer had sugar in our eyes. None of that Why-can’t-you-BE-the person-I want-instead-of-the person-you-are stuff.”Dutifully beginning to swallow the pills one by one, laboriously, with effortful swallows, Betty asks: “Are you married? Do you have children?”Elizabeth answers truthfully, and Betty is nonplussed. “And this is what you do?”“Sometimes,” Elizabeth says.“By yourself?”“With my husband.”“Why?”“To make the world a better place.”When Betty begins to glimpse the end, she asks Elizabeth if her husband, Gil, has sent her. Elizabeth reassures her that she’s right. Is he with Helen, the ex-wife? No, he is not, Elizabeth says emphatically. And yes, he has told Elizabeth that his widow is afraid of pain. Tears are flowing over Elizabeth’s sculpted cheeks. What is it that has touched her? Is she regretting taking the life of this harmless woman? Is she crying for her own mother? After all, we never got to hear the last tape Gabriel gave Elizabeth. Presumably it was another message from her dying mother, who has already essentially said goodbye. Will the tape surface again in a later episode?Questions. 
Are we missing Kimmy yet? What does it mean when a man like Gabriel, deliberating between Scrabble moves, says he loves you, as he did to Philip? Who is Gabriel, really, and what role did he play in Philip and Elizabeth’s past that he can make a declaration like that?Comments on the comments.You said it, JN from Hoosierland. The cracks indeed appeared in Elizabeth’s glossy titanium armor when she decreed that Todd should be spared and that Gabriel should pull some strings for Mischa, her … well, stepson.And what a tremendous idea, kmgx25! Staging a fake death of Clark would be quite a coup, and as tradecraft it would solve multiple problems. But to keep it from being too pat, it would need a twist, no? Perhaps a fast-forward several weeks to Martha, still in her somber widow’s wear, back in the F.B.I.  ladies’ room stall with an early-model home pregnancy test? Not enough? O.K., how about triplets?One of the most delicious ingredients of recapping is your comments, especially the projections of where the story might go and your charting of the action against the backdrop of history. You have already suggested enough clever ideas to inspire a spinoff, or three or four. Keep it coming. До следующей недели, товарищи, не позволяйте никому украсть ваше сердце.
(Until next week, Comrades, don’t let anyone steal your heart.)