Season 2, Episode 4Detective Inspector Alec Hardy wakes up drenched in sweat, gasping for air, and for good reason. Overnight, “Broadchurch” has turned into soap.Sex! Tabloids! Old spouses! Death threats! Cancer announcements! This baby’s got it all. After dawdling a bit, the show’s creator, Chris Chibnall, suddenly puts his foot on the accelerator. This double-barreled storyline, filmed in both Broadchurch and Sandbrook, forsakes nuance for good old-fashioned heart-pounding intrigue. While the four central investigators of the story — Hardy, Ellie Miller, Sharon Bishop and Jocelyn Knight — try to plant their feet, they find the ground shifting underneath them. They’re surrounded by minor characters gone rogue. Ellie’s sister, Lucy Stevens, decides to milk her five minutes of fame in the courtroom by changing her eyewitness account of the night of Danny’s murder. Sharon is sure that Jocelyn has planted Lucy as a late tactical maneuver, but Jocelyn is equally baffled and accepts this gift with a guilty shrug. Her son, Olly, has begun his own quest for attention by rambling around on a Nate the Great sleuthing adventure. Hardy and Lee Ashworth are equally infuriated by his digging; they try to swat him away but find he’s quicker on his feet than they imagined. It’s much harder for these two men to play chess against each other when the pieces develop minds of their own. Meanwhile, Lee and Claire Ashworth are back together. That was fast — all it took was Hardy being the humorless grump that he is, and some takeout food, for Claire to abandon the status quo and jump back into Lee’s arms. They lie in the dark, bodies glowing, co-conspirators once again, making Hardy and Ellie’s so-awkward-together-it’s-endearing routine look utterly punchless. “Will you tie me up this time?” Claire asks. New reveals are presented in all sorts of ways — some in real time, supported by ominous string music; some during trial, putting us in the exact same position as the weary lawyers and jurors; and some in Hardy’s flashbacks. These flashbacks stand out for how different they are in style and pacing: bleary, drenched and filmed very much like Leonardo DiCaprio’s character from “Inception” washing up on the shores of limbo. These ethereal scenes give us more insight into Hardy’s teeming, tragic mind and the way he clings to the past. We learn that Hardy was the one to find Pippa Gillespie’s shriveled body in the water — and that he slept with Claire, in what looked like a field of blinding light.Given how hazy and emotionally weighted these memories are, maybe it’s not so surprising to also learn that Hardy absolutely butchered the Sandbrook case. We knew last season that he lost a significant piece of evidence, but now we find he failed to discover the truths of the Gillespies’ marriage, ignored suspects and burned the bridge to his wife and daughter (nicely played with heart and disdain by Lucy Cohu and Hannah Rae). The episode only builds suspicion around Hardy: If he missed so much in the Sandbrook case, are there monumental things he doesn’t know about Broadchurch as well?And what’s the deal with Susan Wright? Her return to the town is straight out of a horror movie: the teenager Tom Miller sitting in a dark caravan in front of a flickering screen; the jiggering of the door handle; the silent emerging of her black dog. She brings along plenty of baggage from offstage left: She has cancer, apparently, and nine months to live. And she promptly turns on her alleged son Nige, accusing him of the murder of Danny. I’m not sure if the show needed her brute-force personality again, but if they’re looking for tweetable moments, they certainly succeeded. And if that weren’t enough, the writers throw in one final menace: Ricky Gillespie, the father of one of the murdered Sandbrook girls. Ricky accosts Hardy while he eats dinner with his family, gives Hardy’s daughter a leering once-over (okay, thrice-over), and demands that he leave town, or else. Intentionally or not, Ricky looks and acts like the bizarro Mark Latimer, the husband of Beth’s nightmares: haggard, hulking, hypersexual, threatening in grunts and growls. With all these angry, instinctive man-children around, is another murder in store? Will Susan and Nige work out their Luke-and-Darth-Vader moment? Who will Claire sleep with next? And for the love of God, will any meaning be drawn from these damn bluebells? Find out on next week’s episode of “Broadchurch: Empire Across the Atlantic.” Stray Observations:“Look at us, Thelma and Louise! You can be Susan Sarandon,” Ellie says to Alec — that sounds about right.Jocelyn draws her motivation from the boxer Willie Pep. Weird reference, but it kind of works here — especially because her schlubby junior, Ben, makes a perfect cornerman.Vince the dog is back! He’s superchill, as always, and always hits his marks. Great casting call by Chibnall. Hardy on journalists: “You think you’re just saving the world. You just make it harder to live in.” Ouch!