Two years ago, the Metropolitan Museum of Art sold off a painting believed to be of Peter Paul Rubens’ daughter after deciding it was by a follower of Rubens, not by the artist himself. But now the Rubenshuis, a museum in Antwerp devoted to works by the Flemish artist, has decided the painting really was created by the old master.  The Antwerp museum will display the painting, “Portrait of a Young Girl, Possibly Clara Serena Rubens,” in an exhibition, “Rubens in Private: The Master Portrays his Family,” beginning later this month.The work was deaccessioned in 2013 by the Met and sold with 15 others to bolster its acquisition fund, The Art Newspaper reported. Given a high estimate of $30,000 by the auction house, it sold that year at Sotheby’s for $626,500. Ben van Beneden, the director of the Rubenshuis, vouches for its authenticity, as does Katelijne Van der Stighelen, another Rubens expert. But The Art Newspaper said another Rubens specialist, David Jaffe, is doubtful the painting is a true Rubens.  The Met released a statement defending its decision to sell the work. “The attribution of the picture has been debated in the past and will continue to be discussed,” the Met said. “Given the strength of our holdings in this area, we stand by the decision to deaccession the work.”This is not the first time the painting has been considered authentic – it was downgraded by the Rubens expert Julius Held in 1959. And it is just the latest example of reattribution in the tricky, and often contentious, field of identifying just who created an artwork. In January, Sotheby’s fetched $5.2 million for an oil sketch by the English landscape painter John Constable, 1,000 times more than the $5,200 Christies sold it for just 18 months earlier, when it was considered the work of a follower of the artist. While Anne Lyles, a Constable expert and former curator at Tate Britain, deemed the painting, “Salisbury Cathedral From the Meadows,” to be an authentic Constable, Christie’s and at least one other Constable expert argued otherwise.A version of this article appears in print on 03/26/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Painting Sold by Met Is Said to Be by Rubens.