If the tween in your life seems extra surly today or the Snapchat servers melt down, it might be because of a disturbance in the One Direction universe: The British boy band announced today on Facebook that Zayn Malik, one of its five members and perhaps the most recognizable after Harry Styles, has left the group.Mr. Malik, known as the “Bradford bad boy” for his hometown and tattoos, left One Direction’s “On the Road Again” world tour last week, citing “stress” amid tabloid rumors about his love life.But on Wednesday, the group made the separation final. “I am leaving because I want to be a normal 22-year-old who is able to relax and have some private time out of the spotlight,” Mr. Malik said in a statement.The rest of One Direction vowed to continue its tour as a four-piece, and promised its fifth album for later this year.Simon Cowell, the former “American Idol” host, helped to mastermind 1D (as they are known to their shrieking die-hards) on the 2010 season of “The X-Factor” in Britain. Each of the group’s first four albums debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200, including last year’s “Four,” which sold 387,000 copies in the United States in its first week.The full statement from the group’s Facebook page is below:  After five incredible years Zayn Malik has decided to leave One Direction. Niall, Harry, Liam and Louis will continue as a four-piece and look forward to the forthcoming concerts of their world tour and recording their fifth album, due to be released later this year.Zayn says: “My life with One Direction has been more than I could ever have imagined. But, after five years, I feel like it is now the right time for me to leave the band. I’d like to apologise to the fans if I’ve let anyone down, but I have to do what feels right in my heart. I am leaving because I want to be a normal 22-year-old who is able to relax and have some private time out of the spotlight. I know I have four friends for life in Louis, Liam, Harry and Niall. I know they will continue to be the best band in the world.”One Direction say: “We’re really sad to see Zayn go, but we totally respect his decision and send him all our love for the future. The past five years have been beyond amazing, we’ve gone through so much together, so we will always be friends. The four of us will now continue. We’re looking forward to recording the new album and seeing all the fans on the next stage of the world tour.”Simon Cowell says: “I would like to say thank you to Zayn for everything he has done for One Direction. Since I first met Zayn in 2010, I have grown very, very fond – and immensely proud – of him. I have seen him grow in confidence and I am truly sorry to see him leave. As for One Direction, fans can rest assured that Niall, Liam, Harry and Louis are hugely excited about the future of the band.”A version of this article appears in print on 03/26/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: One Fewer Boy: Zayn Malik Quits One Direction.