By MIKE HALEOCT. 15, 2015
You hate to resort to the news release, but some television shows are so inexplicable that you’ll take any clue you can get to what the creators had in mind. According to NBC’s synopsis of its new comedy “Truth Be Told,” we’re watching four “wildly outspoken” people who can talk honestly about anything, having “the kind of conversations people have with their real friends.”Do your white real friends argue that they should be allowed to use a word offensive to their black real friends as long as they don’t pronounce the R? Didn’t think so. Does your real friend claim that the hostess in the Chinese restaurant is faking her accent and then say that she’s “Uncle Tom-yumming it”? Hope not. If he does, you should tell him that tom yum soup isn’t Chinese.It’s fall premiere season, and there’s more TV than ever. Here’s a quick survey of what’s new out there.Created by DJ Nash (“Growing Up Fisher”), “Truth Be Told,” which debuts on Friday, is a next-door-neighbors sitcom of surpassing banality — the first episode’s major plot points include paranoia over an old boyfriend and panic over a hot babysitter — wrapped in a rubbery skin of supposedly provocative banter, mostly about race but occasionally about vaginas. (Nearly the first words spoken by the actress playing the very young daughter of one of the couples are “on my vagina.”)Just one TV season after “black-ish,” “Jane the Virgin” and “Fresh Off the Boat” jolted the largely monochrome network-sitcom world, “Truth Be Told” ignores the lesson of those shows — that good comedy can come from anywhere as long as it’s based on characters and storytelling — and reduces the conversation about diversity to an endless string of uncomfortable gags.The cast that’s victimized by this includes Mark-Paul Gosselaar and Vanessa Lachey as the white-Asian couple (college professor and lawyer) and Tone Bell and Bresha Webb as the much cooler black couple (stand-up comedian and doctor). Mr. Gosselaar’s Mitch is a worrier whose awkwardness about race and sex is the catalyst for many of the jokes, and he is saddled with the worst bits. At one point he frets that having both a wife and a babysitter with “ethnically ambiguous” features will make it seem as if he has a fetish. If you were his real friend, you’d tell him that he has bigger things to worry about.A version of this review appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page C14 of the New York edition with the headline: Extending the Diversity Conversation With Uncomfortable Gags  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.