By KATHRYN SHATTUCKMARCH 25, 2015
5 P.M. (Flix) TENDER MERCIES (1983) Robert Duvall, in an Oscar-winning role, plays a down-on-his-luck rambler trying to rebuild his life while staying at a ramshackle Texas motel whose proprietor, Rosa Lee (Tess Harper), he just can’t quit. Only after tying the knot with her guest does Rosa Lee learn that he used to be Mac Sledge, a country singer who drank his career to death. This drama — directed by Bruce Beresford and written by Horton Foote, who won an Oscar for best screenplay — follows Mac’s relationships with his ex-wife (Betty Buckley), his daughter (Ellen Barkin), his new bride and her son, “weaving them into a sadly contemporary vision of family life and heading toward a final note of affirmation,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times. “This is a small, lovely and somewhat overloaded film about small-town life, loneliness, country music, marriage, divorce and parental love, and it deals with all of these things in equal measure. Still, the absence of a single, sharply dramatic story line is a relatively small price to pay for the plainness and clarity with which these other issues are defined.”2:30 P.M. (Starz Cinema) ADAPTATION (2002) The director Spike Jonze and the writer Charlie Kaufman (along with his imaginary twin, Donald, who is also credited with the screenplay) journey into metafiction in this movie about the two Kaufmans (Nicolas Cage, in both roles) and Susan Orlean (Meryl Streep), a writer for The New Yorker whose book “The Orchid Thief” inspired the film. Chris Cooper won an Oscar for best supporting actor for his role as an orchid obsessive; Mr. Cage and Ms. Streep also received nominations. “ ‘Adaptation’ is, most obviously, a movie about itself, as gleefully self-referential an exercise in auto-deconstruction as you could wish,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.9 P.M. (NBC) LAW & ORDER: SVU The future brother-in-law of Detective Carisi (Peter Scanavino) accuses his parole officer (Molly Price) of rape.9 P.M. (ABC) MODERN FAMILY Claire (Julie Bowen) does some spring cleaning. Phil (Ty Burrell) worries about not being a spring chicken. And Haley (Sarah Hyland) tries to get Alex (Ariel Winter) to loosen up on spring break. In “black-ish,” at 9:30, Dre (Anthony Anderson) injures himself playing basketball on the eve of his 40th birthday.Advertisement9 P.M. (HBO2) IT’S ME, HILARY: THE MAN WHO DREW ELOISE Her hair was in perpetual disarray, her stomach hung over her skirt and the things that came out of her mouth weren’t always very nice. But Eloise, that 6-year-old imp running amok at the Plaza Hotel, inspired the fantasies of many a child and more than a few adults — not least Lena Dunham of “Girls” renown, who had Eloise tattooed on her back at 17. In this documentary directed by Matt Wolf, Ms. Dunham asks the illustrator Hilary Knight about his relationship with Kay Thompson, the flamboyant author of the “Eloise” books, and the falling out that led to a custody battle over their creation. Mr. Knight, now 88, was 29 when he signed away his right to draw Eloise on his own, and he struggled to secure his legacy severed from what Maurice Sendak called “that brazen, loose-limbed, delicious little girl monster” with her rawther British nanny, her dog, Weenie, and her turtle, Skipperdee.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.10 P.M. (Ovation) AMERICAN CANVAS In Miami, Dave Holmes tours Art Basel, Little Havana and Vizcaya and tries flamenco.Advertisement10 P.M. (BBC America) BROADCHURCH Ellie (Olivia Coleman) tries to manage her sister; Hardy (David Tennant) confronts his demons.10 P.M. (Lifetime) LITTLE WOMEN: NY Friends with dwarfism try to take Manhattan.10 P.M. (ABC) NASHVILLE: ON THE RECORD 2 Reba McEntire, Deana Carter and “Nashville” cast members including Clare Bowen and Will Chase perform songs from the show and give interviews at the Grand Ole Opry.What’s Streaming NowRECTIFY New episodes of this Sundance series about a Georgia man (Aden Young), exonerated for the rape and murder of his girlfriend after spending 19 years on death row, have been added. (netflix.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 25, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Wednesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.