By ALASTAIR MACAULAYMARCH 24, 2015
FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — Richard Alston’s one-act “Carmen,” recently performed by Miami City Ballet at the Broward Center here, is the best “Carmen” ballet I’ve seen. That is less a compliment than it sounds: Most “Carmen” ballets are clunkily melodramatic and choreographically dismal.This one, made for the Scottish Ballet in 2009, has its faults and problems, too. It uses Rodion Shchedrin’s arch arrangement of Bizet’s highlights (including two numbers from “L’Arlésienne”), for strings and percussion; and it follows the basic gist of the Shchedrin ballet (originally choreographed by Alberto Alonso) in retelling “Carmen” as a tale about four people — Carmen, her rival lovers José and Escamillo, and a female Fate figure (who here is scaled down into the Fortuneteller). Its virtues, though, both make it rare among “Carmen” ballets and add to your knowledge of Miami City Ballet’s excellent dancers.The title role proves a handsome vehicle for Patricia or Jeanette Delgado, depending on which performance you see. (I watched performances on Saturday and Sunday.) These sisters, this company’s most winning dancers, epitomize its elegant sunniness. Though they share dark hair and eyes, memorably large dimples and effortless personal allure, their interpretations differ: Jeanette (the shorter) is the more fiery and explosive Carmen, Patricia the more fascinatingly dignified. Even when you’ve seen thousands of pirouettes, Jeanette’s multiple turns on point (arms raised “en couronne” and wonderfully arched) are especially heart-catching, while Patricia’s supererect posture and the turns of her head raise the “Carmen” temperature.The finest choreography, however, is for the men, notably Corporal Don José and Escamillo, the Toreador. As soon as José (Jovani Furlan or Chase Swatosh) enters, to a highly syncopated version of his “Dragons d’Alcala” tune, the music’s metric play stimulates Mr. Alston’s gift for rhythm; José pounces keenly onto one beat and hovers in a momentary balance on another.AdvertisementIn the Toreador music, Escamillo (Renato Penteado or Renan Cerdeiro) powerfully hits another beat as he crests the air at the apex of a jump. Little changes of footwork smartly catch passing meters in the music in ways that bring them vividly to the surface of your mind as you watch and listen. A pity that the Habanera prompts Mr. Alston to nothing so fine for the heroine.There is one vivid dance for the women, but the best step goes to Carmen’s friends Frasquita and Mercedes before Carmen and others join their number. Still this is, understandably, the audience hit of a strong triple bill. Peter Mumford has designed a handsome fixed set with windows and doorways that are transformed by his lighting changes; Antony McDonald’s costumes provide attractive evocations of Spain.AdvertisementThe fateful Fortuneteller, forever morbidly flourishing a fan-shaped deck of cards, is a bore; and Mr. Alston, like many “Carmen” choreographers, makes the mistake of dividing the heroine between the opposite poles of love and death. As her words continually make clear, Carmen’s priority is freedom, of which the freedom to pick and discard lovers is only part, but Mr. Alston’s protagonist focuses on little else than the men in her life. At the end, calmly giving José the knife, she offers her body as its target. Though Bizet’s heroine actually says “Strike me then — or let me pass!,” this more fatalistic reading is arresting.There are haunting phrases in the duets he gives her. In one — piercingly danced by Patricia Delgado with the bright, pale-blond Mr. Swatosh — José, to the music of his flower song, lifts her in a turning arc around his body; as she alights, he, still holding her waist, leans forward, one leg extended in arabesque — the whole line of his body replete with yearning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although there was considerable brouhaha three years ago when Edward Villella left as artistic director of this company, which he had founded, what is remarkable is the group’s stylistic continuity. Many of Mr. Villella’s dancers remain; a fractional reduction in blaze is compensated by a marked increase of bloom. George Balanchine remains its core choreographer, and no living choreographer has played a more vital contribution than Twyla Tharp. The company also has a connection to Justin Peck, whose latest premiere, “Heatscape,” opens with the company this weekend in West Palm Beach.This program began with Balanchine’s “Allegro Brillante” (1956); its centerpiece was Ms. Tharp’s “Sweet Fields” (1996) — unlike each other and unlike “Carmen” in ways that compellingly showed how varied ballet, and this company, can be. And both showed, not least at corps level, the sheer glow of this company’s dancers.Balanchine described “Allegro” as “everything I knew about the classical ballet — in 13 minutes.” Among its features, I single out the way Balanchine’s pas de deux give extensive sequences of unaccompanied dance to the ballerina, so that her returns to her partner become matters of choice and drama. Tricia Albertson’s account of the taxing ballerina role in “Allegro Brillante” showed too much strain, but Patricia Delgado’s (Saturday evening) demonstrated the remarkable luster this ballerina has attained. Rainer Krenstetter (partnering Ms. Albertson) and Mr. Cerdeiro (with Ms. Delgado) were models of alert chivalry.“Sweet Fields,” a study in devotional moods set to taped hymns from William Billings, the Shaker tradition and Sacred Harp, is also a marvelous formal construction. The returns of its dance motifs and its range of geometries deepen its fascination. Above all, “Sweet Fields” establishes a gloriously American style, outgoing, informal, composed, committed and free.Miami City Ballet’s next program opens in West Palm Beach, Fla., on Friday; miamicityballet.org.A version of this review appears in print on March 25, 2015, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: All the Gypsy Wants Is Total Freedom.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.