AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen HoldenThe time is long past since the jazz singer Jane Monheit could be described as a musical prodigy. Endowed with a voice of phenomenal beauty and flexibility, Ms. Monheit was hailed as potentially the next big thing in jazz more than 15 years ago, but with caveats. A formidable vocal technician, she often seemed disconnected from her material, content to make a gorgeous sound and execute tricky vocal improvisations that frequently came across as empty displays of virtuosity.Everything has changed. Ms. Monheit, who will turn 38 on Nov. 3, has grown up, filled in the blanks and evolved into an intensely emotional interpreter of standards. Her new show at Birdland is a tribute to Ella Fitzgerald’s songbook albums that includes many of the same standards sung in a style only distantly related to Fitzgerald. In a swinging up-tempo mode, Ms. Monheit’s diction is curt and emphatic. She doesn’t draw out syllables or construct a smooth narrative line. On Wednesday, the songs were punched up with various Latin rhythms by her band: Michael Kanan on piano, Neal Miner on bass, Ricky Montalbano on drums and Daniel Sadownick on percussion.When she sang ballads, a different musical personality emerged, and Ms. Monheit unveiled a moaning cry that has become a vocal signature. The Harold Arlen-Ted Koehler ballad “Ill Wind” felt like a humid gust poisoning her soul. As she sang it, her face contorted into a mask of dread and misery. Cole Porter’s “Ev’ry Time We Say Goodbye” was sung very slowly and with such a conviction that tears welled in her eyes. “Bewitched, Bothered and Bewildered” had the dramatic heft of theatrical monologue. A medley of Billy Strayhorn’s “Chelsea Bridge” and Duke Ellington’s “In a Sentimental Mood” had the depth of a vocal tone poem whose words mattered less than the primal wail that conveyed feelings beyond words.Ms. Monheit has a giggly sense of humor. The sensual component of Porter’s “All of You” was wittily exaggerated so that lyrics once considered suggestive became a celebration of voluptuous enjoyment.­Jane Monheit performs through Saturday at Birdland, Manhattan; 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz­.com.Advertisement