AdvertisementSupported byBy Alessandra Stanley“Can’t act. Slightly bald. Also dances.”That’s what a studio executive supposedly wrote about Fred Astaire after an early screen test. And even if apocryphal, that famous line is something to keep in mind while watching James Corden’s debut on Monday as the new host of “The Late Late Show” on CBS.Sometimes star power isn’t obvious.Mr. Corden’s was not evident even after a monologue, an elaborately produced video with cameos by Jay Leno, Shia LaBeouf, Arnold Schwarzenegger and Meryl Streep; an interview with Mila Kunis; and an antic bit alongside Tom Hanks.Mr. Corden, a portly British performer, was energetic, amiable and cheerfully self-assured, but not particularly special. So it’s still not clear why CBS chose him to replace Craig Ferguson — and, soon enough, to follow Stephen Colbert’s show, which will replace David Letterman’s this fall.Most of Monday night’s show was devoted to addressing that question, not by providing an answer but by making a pre-emptive joke about it.The star-studded video skit posited that CBS had chosen its new host in a Willy Wonka-esque lottery, slipping the winning ticket for the job inside a chocolate bar. Comedians like Chris Rock and Joel McHale unwrap bars and pretend to be crestfallen to find no ticket. The piece also alluded to complaints that networks pick only white males for these kinds of jobs: Chelsea Handler, whose late-night talk show on E! ended last year and who would have been a likely candidate, buys the golden ticket-holding candy bar at a newsstand but then drops it as she goes to put it in her purse — Mr. Corden comes along and scoops it up.In his opening monologue, Mr. Corden made fun of his obscurity. “I know what you’re thinking,” he told the audience. “ ‘Oh look: Andy Richter’s got his own show.’ ” He does look a little like Mr. Richter, and like Mr. Richter, who is Conan O’Brien’s talk show sidekick, Mr. Corden seems suited to playing second fiddle.His conversations with Ms. Kunis and Mr. Hanks were pleasant, but not particularly witty or outré. He did challenge Ms. Kunis for being coy about whether she is married to Ashton Kutcher, the father of her child; he wouldn’t accept her “maybe” as an answer and grabbed her hand to show a ring.He also did an amusing skit with Mr. Hanks, a quick-change montage of scenes from Mr. Hanks’s most famous movies that allowed Mr. Corden to wear a blond wig to impersonate Meg Ryan. (Cross-dressing is in the British comedy Bill of Rights.)CBS recruited some very talented writers and producers to back Mr. Corden, as well as Reggie Watts, the musician-comedian (late of “Comedy Bang Bang”) who is his bandleader and announcer. At the close of the show, Mr. Corden sang a solo ditty, perhaps to signal to viewers that besides appearing in the movie “Into the Woods,” he is also a Tony-winning Broadway performer for his role in “One Man, Two Guvnors.”Mr. Corden’s first night was fine and it’s to be expected that he will improve in the next weeks. But it only deepened one of the more enduring mysteries of late-night television. There is no good explanation for why top executives at the major networks would bet on a little-known British performer who resembles every other white male talk show host already on the air rather than take a chance on a more familiar, more charismatic star who, by just being female or non-Caucasian, breaks the mold.When he took over “The Late Late Show” 10 years ago, Mr. Ferguson wasn’t well known to American audiences, either. His ratings suggest that his appeal had limits, but it was apparent right off the bat: In stand-ups, Mr. Ferguson delivered off-the-wall, multivoiced stream-of-consciousness riffs that made him seem almost like a Scottish Robin Williams.Mr. Corden’s look and accent make him seem a little like Ricky Gervais, but he has none of that comedian’s cruel and wickedly provocative humor. As he has in interviews promoting his new venture, Mr. Corden speaks fondly of his wife and children, and makes rather banal Carson-era jokes about Los Angeles traffic and Hollywood vanity. On Monday, he said that since arriving in Hollywood, his mother had taken to eating kale and planned to have her breasts done.Perhaps mystery is the point: Maybe CBS hopes that by keeping Mr. Corden’s charm elusive, viewers will continue tuning in to learn more. “Believe me, however shocked you are that I am doing this job,” Mr. Corden said, “you will never be as shocked as I am.”Advertisement