As cast changes go, this one was close to inevitable: On June 9, Jason Alexander will succeed Larry David as Norman Drexel in “Fish in the Dark,” and extend the show’s run at the Cort Theater through July 19.Mr. David, whose dark comedy about a dysfunctional family dealing with death has played to sold-out houses, despite tepid reviews, will leave the cast as planned on June 7.“I’ve enjoyed it, but as my mother used to say, ‘Enough is enough,’” Mr. David said on Thursday, explaining his reasons for leaving. “I am sure the cast will be relieved to be working with a professional.”Mr. Alexander won a Tony award as best leading actor in a musical for “Jerome Robbins’ Broadway” in 1989.The part of Norman Drexel was written with Mr. Alexander in mind, Mr. David said, but the play’s producer, Scott Rudin, persuaded Mr. David to give it a try.To take the role, Mr. Alexander had to withdraw from another project, the Jerry Sterner play “Other People’s Money,” which the Bay Street Theater in Sag Harbor, N.Y., is presenting in the summer. “They understood,” he said on Thursday, speaking from Los Angeles. “This was something I was obligated to do because of my relationship with Larry.”It is close. Mr. Alexander became a household name playing Mr. David’s alter ego, George Costanza, on the television series “Seinfeld,” and appeared from time to time on Mr. David’s HBO series “Curb Your Enthusiasm,” playing himself — or was it a version of himself filtered through Mr. David? This time around, he takes on another David avatar.“The character is not George Costanza,” said Mr. Alexander. “It’s not like I can just put that slipper back on. It doesn’t frighten me, but it’s not a slam-dunk.”More daunting, he said, is the unusual nature of the show. “It has become an event, something larger than itself,” he said. “Is it a good event without Larry David? I guess we’ll see.”A version of this article appears in print on 03/27/2015, on page C2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Jason Alexander to Star in u2018Fish in the Darku2019.