AdvertisementSupported byBy Alec M. Priester8 P.M. (Spike) OCEAN’S THIRTEEN (2007) After Reuben Tishkoff (Elliott Gould) has a heart attack when his business partner Willy Bank (Al Pacino) pulls a fast one on him, Danny Ocean (George Clooney) gets the gang back together for a revenge plot. The gang includes characters played by Brad Pitt, Matt Damon, Don Cheadle, Casey Affleck, Scott Caan, Bernie Mac and others. They use gadgets and seduction to carry out their convoluted plan in this third film in a series directed by Steven Soderbergh. “Part of what makes the ‘Ocean’s’ films, even the self-indulgent second installment, so enjoyable is that they’re not only about Mr. Soderbergh’s obsessive aesthetic investment in every single shot, but they’re also about him trying to make the audience love his images every bit as much as he does,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “Playing inside the box and out, he has learned to go against the grain while also going with the flow. In ‘Ocean’s Thirteen’ he proves that in spades by using color like Kandinsky and hanging a funny mustache on Mr. Clooney’s luscious mug, having become a genius of the system he so often resists.”8 P.M. (Fox) BONES Emily Deschanel plays the forensic anthropologist Dr. Temperance Brennan, who works at the Jeffersonian Institute and often helps in homicide investigations. In this episode, Avalon Harmonia (Cyndi Lauper) is a psychic who helps the Jeffersonian team investigate the puzzling death of another psychic found rotting inside a tree trunk.8:30 P.M. (ABC Family) DIRTY DANCING (1987) Frances Houseman (Jennifer Grey), better known as Baby, and her family go on a trip in the early 1960s to a resort in the Catskills, where she meets Johnny Castle (Patrick Swayze), the hotel’s dance instructor. When Baby ventures to the private staff residences one evening, she discovers that the employees secretly dance in a way that would shock and offend most of the hotel’s mild-mannered guests. After Johnny’s dance partner becomes scandalously indisposed, Baby takes her place, igniting a romance that challenges social mores and her father’s liberalism. The dancing “has a drive and a pulse that give the film real excitement,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times.9 P.M. (TruTV) IMPRACTICAL JOKERS This hourlong special follows the titular jokers (Joe Gatto, Sal Vulcano, Brian Quinn and James Murray) as they cross the United States in a tour bus, performing 16 shows in 16 days.9 P.M. (NBC) THE BLACKLIST Tom Keen (Ryan Eggold) returns to Washington, where new enemies await. Meanwhile, the task force focuses on a scientist who conducts immortality experiments on disabled abductees. On “The Slap,” at 10 p.m., Rosie (Melissa George) tries to bolster her case against Harry (Zachary Quinto), who slapped her son. Her husband, Gary (Thomas Sadoski), is put off by her prosecutorial zeal. Thanasis (Michael Nouri) disputes her testimony, only to be met with damning evidence. “ ‘The Slap’ connects, but it’s not a harsh blow,” Alessandra Stanley wrote in The Times. “It’s more of a bracing surprise.”10 P.M. (ABC) AMERICAN CRIME Emotions overpower the victims’ families when new information comes to light, giving Carter (Elvis Nolasco) a bail hearing. Carter’s sister imposes rules on him. Tony (Johnny Ortiz) is released into the care of his father, Alonzo (Benito Martinez).11:30 P.M (Comedy Central) THE NIGHTLY SHOW WITH LARRY WILMORE The actor, comedian and author Larry Wilmore hosts this late-night show, which offers humorous takes on recent news. Scheduled guests include the political commentator and economist Robert B. Reich, the comedian and actor JB Smoove (“Curb Your Enthusiasm,” “Pootie Tang”) and the actor Regina King (“The Big Bang Theory,” “The Boondocks”).What’s Streaming Now WHAT LIVES INSIDE Robert Stromberg (“Maleficent”) directs this collaboration with Dell and Intel, which takes place in four episodes to be released weekly. Colin Hanks plays Taylor, who discovers a creative fantasy world invented by his father (J. K. Simmons) that helps Taylor’s soul-searching in the wake of his dad’s death. (hulu.com)Advertisement