AdvertisementSupported byBy Deborah JowittWhen does a rehearsal become a performance? In one of the last events on Danspace Project’s two-month Platform 2015 at St. Mark’s Church, the choreographer Pam Tanowitz created “a dance in a day (a dance adrift in the cosmos).” Spectators could come and go between 1 and 7:30 p.m. to watch Ms. Tanowitz, the composer-musician Dan Siegler and six dancers make a piece.Claudia La Rocco, a freelance critic for The New York Times, organized Platform 2015 partly as a dialogue between ballet and the postmodern dance that ignited in the 1960s. Accordingly, on Monday, Ms. Tanowitz engaged with four dancers she hadn’t worked with before. Devin Alberda, Jenelle Manzi, Russell Janzen and Gretchen Smith are members of New York City Ballet. Two others, Dylan Crossman and Melissa Toogood spent years in Merce Cunningham’s company and have worked with Ms. Tanowitz for eight years.The dissimilarities are not immense. Ms. Tanowitz, a ballet lover who was trained in Cunningham technique, choreographs clean-lined, foot-active dancing that twists classicism while respecting it. But her approach to form argues strenuously with convention. Around 2 p.m., onlookers lounging on the church’s carpeted platforms could note differences among the dancers. Initially, Ms. Manzi and Ms. Smith planted their feet in ballet’s fourth position a foot’s length apart; Ms. Toogood created a veritable gulf between her feet. Mr. Crossman, between the City Ballet women, said he was not adept at the limp-wristed gestures that accompany what could be a spiky allusion to Balanchine. (Ms. Tanowitz told him that was O.K.)Ms. Tanowitz, equipped with a portable microphone, had asked each performer to contribute a short sequence. Ms. Toogood, Mr. Alberda and Mr. Janzen taught one another what they had come up with, and strung them together. Ms. Tanowitz, meanwhile, worked on a solo with Ms. Smith that had her flashing her long legs around. Mr. Crossman taught material to Ms. Manzi. Mr. Siegler, with his laptop and other equipment, tried out sounds.Anyone leaving and returning a little before the second “showing” of the day, at 7, could notice how magically the three-part counterpoint that Ms. Tanowitz engineered earlier had developed. Now dancers in one group invaded the space of another group, or spattered out individual takes on the material, or slipped into unison by means of wisely aimed and timed leaps. Ms. Toogood and Mr. Janzen no longer performed a brief duet side by side; they angled themselves so that their limbs intersected.Ms. Tanowitz, disheveled and tiring, hit a temporary wall but soldiered on, tinkering with the choreography. At 7:30, the third showing began. Mr. Siegler’s music offered atmosphere and rhythmic intensity. The terrific — and terrifically game — dancers gave every move the shape and timing it merited: not capital-P-performing, just calmly working. In the six and a half hours of this new and unfamiliar collaboration, they and Ms. Tanowitz produced, before our eyes, over seven intricately designed minutes of dancing. Process itself had become a fascinating product.Platform 2015 continues through Saturday at Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village; 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. Advertisement