By JOHN MARKOFFMARCH 25, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  In December 1968, the computer scientist Douglas Engelbart sat on a stage here and introduced the world to modern computing. He brought together for the first time a mouse, word processing, multimedia communication and networking to demonstrate interactive computing before an audience of a thousand leading computer scientists. His presentation would become known as the Demo.It was the moment at which computing went from being viewed merely as a tool for calculating to being seen as a digital medium for expression in its own right. On April 1, the composers Ben Neill and Mikel Rouse will perform their new musical theater work based on the Demo at the Bing Concert Hall at Stanford University.Mr. Rouse will play Dr. Engelbart, who on that day appeared at this city’s Brooks Hall in front of a keyboard that was flanked by a mouse and another control device known as a key-chord set. He wore a headset, and at his back was a 20-foot-high video screen displaying the output on his desktop monitor. The system was connected via a wireless link to programmers and hardware engineers 30 miles south in Menlo Park, who watched the demonstration in real time thanks to a video camera run by the Whole Earth Catalog publisher Stewart Brand.The presentation electrified the computing world, which was then still based on hidden mainframe computers laboriously programmed with decks of key punch cards. Chuck Thacker, a young computer engineer at the time who witnessed the event, would later say that Dr. Engelbart sat onstage “dealing lightning with both hands.”AdvertisementIn their recreation, Mr. Rouse will be joined by his collaborator and trumpeter, Mr. Neill, who will play William English, an electrical engineer who worked with Mr. Engelbart throughout his career and designed and built much of the technology that Dr. Engelbart conceived. (Dr. Engelbart died in 2013.)At the original event Mr. English actually sat at the back of the auditorium controlling the giant display and related computer gear. In the modern musical version his character will be viewed onstage posed at an angle to Mr. Rouse.Both musicians have been identified with a musical style known as “totalism,” which they pioneered in the 1980s and 1990s as part of a reaction to Minimalism. The approach offers more rhythmic complexity, often with several tempos audible simultaneously.AdvertisementMr. Neill, who in the past has worked with the electronic music pioneer Robert Moog, will perform with a “mutantrumpet,” a hybrid electroacoustic instrument he invented that effectively combines three trumpets and a trombone. Mr. Rouse will use the mouse, keyboard and key-chord set to control images and music during the event. The work includes live vocals, electronic music and “computer-based voice processing,” according to a description by the composers.Mr. Rouse will appear onstage, as Dr. Engelbart did, in a white dress shirt and dark tie, and the performance will make extensive use of the video from the original presentation.“This was one of the first uses of video in an interactive presentation format,” he said. “That was why we wanted to be able to utilize the original demo footage and go backwards and forwards with it.”In addition to the two composers, a half-dozen singers will perform the libretto, drawn from the computer text that Dr. Engelbart displayed on the auditorium screen to illustrate the power of his new computing system.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The singers represent the people in Menlo Park,” Mr. Rouse said. “They’re revealed very slowly, but when Engelbart says, ‘Let’s go to Menlo Park, come in, Menlo Park,’ then you see the singers more clearly behind the screen.”While Mr. Rouse and Mr. Neill have been friends and colleagues for decades, “The Demo” is their first major collaboration. They began working on the project while Mr. Rouse was a visiting research artist at the eDream Institute at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign in 2012.In addition to paying tribute to the impact of the Engelbart demonstration, the current “Demo” reflects a parallel posed by the original: the search for an audience. Dr. Engelbart had been developing his ideas for more than half a decade when Robert Taylor, at the time the director of the Information Processing Techniques Office at the Pentagon’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (now known as Darpa) encouraged him to show his research to the public.Mr. English, who with his wife, Roberta, had assisted in putting together The Whole Earth Catalog, in turn approached Mr. Brand to consult on the design of the presentation. Before the catalog, Mr. Brand had created a multimedia show called “America Needs Indians.” And in 1966 he helped organize the Trips Festival, a musical happening that was instrumental in establishing the San Francisco music scene.Mr. Neill stumbled across video footage of the Engelbart demonstration while exploring the early history of the Internet.Advertisement“The fact that Engelbart’s lab was a meeting point of counterculture and NASA/defense industry was another thing that made the idea of doing a piece around it so compelling,” he said in an interview.The demonstration served as an inspiration for a group of young computer scientists who would go on to build the future of computing, including Alan Kay, a graduate student at the University of Utah at the time. Although ill with a high fever, he flew to San Francisco for the event.Mr. Kay, who would later help design the Alto, a prototype of the modern personal computer, at Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Center, said the Engelbart event was a source of his own Dynabook idea. The Dynabook was a prototype of a tablet-style computer used to explore the idea that computing was a medium in its own right. A number of Dr. Engelbart’s researchers, including Mr. English, would leave his laboratory at the Stanford Research Institute in the early 1970s to further develop modern computing technologies. Later, those ideas would be commercialized by Apple and Microsoft.Mr. Kay recalled that Dr. Engelbart’s early research helped him understand that in the future computers would not just be useful but also be actually like music-makers. He is often noted as saying, “A computer is simply an instrument whose music is ideas.”“The Demo” will be performed on April 1 and 2 at the Bing Concert Hall at Stanford University; live.stanford.edu/calendar/april-2015/demo. A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Recreating the Dawn of the Digital Age.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.