By ALASTAIR MACAULAYMARCH 25, 2015
Since its premiere in 1988, Mark Morris’s full-length dance staging of Handel’s oratorio “L’Allegro, il Penseroso ed il Moderato” has provoked two widespread reactions. One: How blessed we are to live in an age in which such miraculous beauty is made! Two: When will this be filmed and made available to a wider public?That question now finds its answer in a new television film directed by Vincent Bataillon. Recorded last year at Madrid’s Teatro Real, it will be broadcast on Friday on PBS as part of “Great Performances,” with an introduction by Mikhail Baryshnikov and interviews with Mr. Morris, some members of the Mark Morris Dance Group and his music director, Colin Fowler.An excerpt from the PBS “Great Performances” recording of the Mark Morris Dance Group staging of Handel’s oratorio “L’Allegro, il Penseroso ed il Moderato.”More even than many other pieces by Mr. Morris, “L’Allegro” is a subtle philosophical essay, a study of contrasting ways of living and thinking. This dualism derives from Milton’s fraternal-twin poems about lives of action and contemplation, “L’Allegro” and “Il Penseroso.” (Handel’s librettist Charles Jennens arranged sections from Milton’s poems in alternation while adding his own Moderato, part of which — for the heavenly “As steals the morn” — is adapted from Shakespeare’s “The Tempest.”)Often the choreography is remarkably pictorial: we see meadows, hills, a lark, a nightingale, a hunt, a shepherd shocking girls with his tales — a delectable wealth of recognizable incident. And equally often we switch into realms of pure form, as if addressing larger truths.AdvertisementMr. Bataillon’s camera does a felicitous job of catching the kinetic energy of Mr. Morris’s dances. A jumping entrance out of the wings, a spinning exit back into them, the sudden arrival of a full ensemble to flood the stage — these are just some of the moments that catch the breath here as it is caught in the theater. Some of the sensuous color spectrum of Adrienne Lobel’s sets and Christine van Loon’s costumes seem yet more wonderful in this recording.Occasionally the camera goes aloft, as when it gives a full view of 24 dancers in four vertical rows, passing motifs along like messages. Elsewhere there are perfect though brief close-ups to highlight specific choreographic features, though in general the camera attends to the full stage picture.AdvertisementThe camera also feasts on this work’s occasional but haunting use of stillness — an exemplification of the Penseroso life of contemplation. In one group number, dancers fill the stage only to stand motionless, looking upward, their backs to us, like an informal church congregation, while the organ plays; the effect is ideal.Twenty-six years after I gasped at my first sight of the walking Penseroso “Come, but keep thy wonted state” dance, I gasp again. Here the stage becomes four separate horizontal corridors — itself a magical effect. Each corridor is lighted differently; each is peopled by a seemingly endless stream of lone walking dancers, all in the same contemplative gait with downcast eyes. Amid this studious but monastic cityscape, one man and one woman stand and gaze at each other across the distance. Their eyes are locked on each other; their spreading arms and bobbing heels bespeak their new ecstasy. It’s as if they’re in different realms yet have fallen in love at first sight across the world.On film this looks like cinematic trickery; it’s worth stressing that it really happens this way in live performance. So do many other marvels of invention; Mr. Morris’s larder of choreographic resources here seems endless.I love, for example, his several uses of peripheral space. At the Allegro words “At my window, bid good morrow,” there are endearing glimpses of dancers peering briefly out of the wings as if to look for the lark they hear. More startling, in the opening dance of Part 2, are the ways the supporting dancers briefly enter and exit, traveling in arcs parallel to those of the dancer whose solo is the central main action here. They’re like tantalizing glimpses of parallel universes.Jane Glover, with long experience in this Morris work, conducts with pulse, grace and line. The communicative clarity of the tenor James Gilchrist is striking. My chief reservation is that the diction of the two sopranos, Sarah-Jane Brandon and Elizabeth Watts, is not lucid enough; even so, their phrasing registers keenly.There are same-sex and gender-reversal effects here that are the more wonderful for being understated. It’s scarcely a big deal that the scene that shows us a male Orpheus then gives him a male Eurydice; if you look carefully, you can even see a man lie down (as women have earlier on) and mime giving birth. I speak of “L’Allegro” with the same wonder that I felt when it was new, but this is also an often-funny and naughty piece. The rush of energy on which it closes reminds us that it is among the most life-affirming dance works ever made. Yes, our age is indeed blessed by such a composition.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Transfiguration, Captured on Film.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.