By NEIL GENZLINGERMARCH 25, 2015
Perhaps your children are still obsessed with that danged “Frozen” movie, with its inescapable anthem and its spun-off books, ice-skating show and video games. If so, sit them down in front of “Harvey Beaks,” an animated Nickelodeon series that begins on Sunday night. It’s important for them to know that life isn’t really a gorgeous-looking, tuneful, tidily plotted Disney movie. It’s sloppy and incongruous, and its messages and meanings frequently require excavation.The title character is a bird who hangs out with Fee and her twin brother, Foo, in a forest where the laws of nature apply only intermittently. Harvey is relatively well behaved, certainly more so than his two pals, whose manners, language and decision-making are all less than ideal.In the introductory episode, being broadcast Saturday night as a sneak peak after the Kids’ Choice Awards, Fee and Foo’s behavior has gotten them barred from swimming in an inviting lake by the dragonlike spirit living there. But whenever they defy the ban and go into the water, they are rewarded: The spirit spits them back onshore in a geyser that’s more fun to ride than anything in a water park. That setup alone should give youngsters plenty to think about. The line between punishment and reward, it seems, is not always neat and clean.The real conundrum, though, is Harvey’s: He, too, wants a geyser ride, but to get one he will have to misbehave so that he gets barred from the lake as well. The possible misdeeds and their implications give Harvey a headful of things to ponder.The series, created by C.H. Greenblatt, may not have the slick animation or big budget of a Disney movie, but it has a quirky sensibility that is refreshing.Harvey BeaksSunday evenings at 7, Nickelodeon.Created by C.H. Greenblatt. Produced by Joann Estoesta. Derek Evanick and Diana Lafyatis, supervising directors. Dani Michaeli, staff editor.A version of this review appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Careening Into Life’s Complexities.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.