By JASON ZINOMANMARCH 25, 2015
“Big Time in Hollywood, FL,” a hyperactive new series about deluded brothers with moviemaking dreams, is packed with startling twists — sudden murders, unlikely romance and even a Cuba Gooding Jr. performance that reminds you why he won an Academy Award. But the biggest surprise may be that it’s a comedy in which every episode ends not with a joke but a cliffhanger.As a serialized show with a mountain of plot, “Big Time” (which started on Wednesday) represents a departure for Comedy Central, a channel built on sketch shows, topical comedy and episodic animation. It’s part of a growing trend toward narrative ambition in television comedy that raises the question: Is there a trade-off between story and laughs?Plot has always mattered in comedy, of course, but not as much as jokes. In his influential screenwriting guide “Story,” Robert McKee argues that comedy, unlike drama, “allows the writer to halt narrative drive” with scenes that serve no purpose other than getting laughs. In television, sitcoms have traditionally relied on thin narratives stretched over seasons (Will Sam and Diane get together on “Cheers”? Will Jim and Pam on “The Office”?) that make it easy to follow the story from week to week.“Producers knew that episodes in syndication would be scrambled and shown completely out of order, so each one needed a self-contained story,” explained the veteran comedy writer Max Pross, who has worked on “Seinfeld” and “The Simpsons.”AdvertisementWith the rise of DVDs and streaming sources, audiences are consuming shows differently. They binge-watch and read recaps. And television conventions have loosened. HBO series like “The Comeback” and “Girls” have fleshed-out character arcs, and the fourth season of “Arrested Development,” released online all at once by Netflix, featured complex plotting with shifts of perspective that would have been hard to imagine a decade ago.AdvertisementThe rise of single-camera shows like those has also allowed for more filmic structure. Most of the great sitcoms of the 20th century were set in living rooms and workplaces, and they moved around sparingly. But the two most promising new comedies this season (“Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt” on Netflix and “The Last Man on Earth” on Fox) have a cinematic sense of place and far more fantastical premises.As the technological landscape has changed, so have the aesthetic possibilities. Kent Alterman, president for content production and original programming at Comedy Central, said he had been looking for a serialized comedy for years, even though he considered it a risk, not just because viewers starting to watch in the middle of the season could be lost. “There was a common wisdom about comedies that you needed a certain number of jokes per minute,” he said by telephone. That notion has less currency today, even though the calling card of comedy remains jokes.Making a plot-heavy comedy can come at a price. Elizabeth Meriwether, the show runner for “New Girl” (Fox), one of the most consistently well-written comedies on television, said she tried to create more involved narrative arcs last season, but the experience made her realize that simpler stories worked better for this show.“We stopped thinking what was the funniest thing and instead started worrying more about how to get one character from one point to another,” she said, adding there could be a tension between a complex plot and quantity of jokes. “Some jokes,” she said, “require characters to step outside of the story and comment on what’s happening.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Building on this point about whether to prioritize punch lines, Mr. Alterman said about the creators of “Big Time”: “We had to absolve them of that need for jokes, which can force characters to say things that they wouldn’t normally say.”Ms. Meriwether, who was a playwright before she began writing for television, said experimenting with more extensive arcs also raised deeper questions about what comedy fans wanted. “I tried to get the character to change to a slightly different place than where they were when the show started,” she said. “And the audience hated it. It’s an interesting question: Do audiences want comedy characters to change? Do they want them to go on a journey?”It’s worth noting that single-camera comedies often draw smaller audiences than more conventional episodic fare like “The Big Bang Theory.” In any case, the challenge is different on a network show that must produce many more episodes (and deal with commercial breaks), but Ms. Meriwether is suggesting that fans gravitate toward comedy and drama for different reasons. At the same time, those boundaries are blurring.“Louie” on FX has always had a melancholy streak, but as it has created longer arcs, it has veered further away from comedy. Despite focusing on the finest comic creation from “Breaking Bad” — the lawyer Saul Goodman — “Better Call Saul” (AMC) has seemed even more seriously dramatic than the show that inspired it might have suggested, notwithstanding the occasional talking toilet.AdvertisementMore often than at any time in the past, television comedy, particularly the non-network kind, is willing to sacrifice laughs in pursuit of more varied pleasures. It’s part of what makes it such an unpredictable and exciting time for this genre. “Big Time” doesn’t aim for the nuance or emotional wallop of “The Comeback,” but it does set itself a difficult challenge: being as suspenseful as it is funny.It’s a worthy goal; the tension of high suspense can be a great setup to a joke, and it often is in “Big Time.” In dream sequences and crosscutting story lines involving gangland murders, procedural machinations and bumbling small-time film directing, the show doesn’t always nail the balance of action and comedy.Its central joke is the incongruity of a heightened mob and crime story juxtaposed with a mundane narrative of suburban parents ordering their grown kids to leave home. At times, plot mechanics overwhelm the comedy, and characters are forced into exposition-filled monologues. (“In the last week, I’ve gotten a man killed, lied to the police, tried to flee the country,” and on and on.)At its best, “Big Time” works like a parody and love letter to shows like “Breaking Bad,” whose ingenious last-second escapes were always a little absurd and ripe for ridicule. “Big Time” makes this point more overtly. By the end of the fourth episode, two brothers (along with Mr. Gooding) break into a suburban house, hold a family hostage while being trailed by a detective hired by their mother and by a team of drug traffickers with machine guns. There aren’t many jokes, but it’s a nicely staged sequence in which barreling action becomes joyfully preposterous farce.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: More Plot Than Jokes. Can These Be Sitcoms?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.