AdvertisementSupported byBy the NumbersBy Stephen HeymanThis month, the Angus Reid Institute, one of Canada’s leading polling companies, published a survey that asked Canadians a series of nuanced questions about their national culture. But a surprisingly sizable minority of Canadians — 24 percent — said the country had no unique culture to begin with. In French-speaking Quebec, an even larger chunk of respondents — 37 percent — said this idea of “Canadian culture” didn’t really exist. “That’s a significant and notable finding,” said Shachi Kurl, a vice president at Angus Reid, who helped coordinate the representative survey of 1,525 Canadians across the country. Ms. Kurl said she and her colleagues decided to study the perception of Canadian culture after a particularly difficult few years for one of its main disseminators, the Canadian Broadcast Corporation. In the past two years, the CBC has lost the rights to broadcast hockey — as much a sport as a cultural touchstone in Canada — and has faced layoffs, job cuts and a major sexual harassment scandal that resulted in the firing of the popular radio host Jian Ghomeshi.Despite all this, 80 percent of those surveyed reported a favorable impression of the CBC. The respondents also seemed to value government regulations designed to insulate homegrown music and television from international, particularly American, competition. Almost half of those surveyed (47 percent) said without bodies like the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission — which ensures that a certain percentage of content on radio and TV stations is locally produced — Canadian culture would be “completely swallowed up by American and foreign culture.”Will Straw, the director of the McGill Institute for the Study of Canada at McGill University in Montreal, said this sense of cultural insecurity was nothing new. “For a long time people have felt that there’s kind of an empty center to English Canadian culture that needs to be filled by the government,” he said. He noted attempts by academics and critics to define certain quintessential aspects of Canadian culture. “People look at Neil Young or The Band and say there’s a sound that’s Canadian, like the sound of the wind blowing across the prairie. But the truth is most Canadians are urbanized, most Canadians live within 100 miles of the U.S. border and we tend to like the same things as Americans for more or less the same reasons.”Nevertheless, Mr. Straw said, being Canadian is based on more than just the consumption of local culture. “We think that what makes us distinct is our temperament and our values and certain little things — like Tim Hortons doughnuts,” he said. “It doesn’t translate into our movie stars necessarily being Canadian or what we entertain ourselves with being Canadian. There we pick and choose from the rest of the world.” Advertisement