By MATT WOLFMARCH 25, 2015
LONDON — You won’t be long into the brief and brutal evening that is the new Mike Bartlett play “Game” before you realize that the goings-on aren’t much fun. Within minutes of the audience’s filing into different sections of the reconfigured Almeida Theater, an arresting conceit develops into an admonitory vision of the near future.Indeed, one doesn’t have to have watched “Big Brother” or any of its reality TV progeny to understand the set-up: The audience surveys the glassed-off playing space and listens via headphones as the innocent-seeming Carly (Jodie McNee) and Ashley (Mike Noble) size up the antiseptic new surroundings that is now their home. The thematic kicker of the play, which is running through April 4, is that others are also keeping voyeuristic tabs. These onlookers weave their way in and among the Almeida public and are encouraged by the entrepreneurial John (Daniel Cerqueira) to fire at the central pair with tranquilizer darts or the like — all in the spirit of sport.With enough encouragement and financial incentive, the ad-hoc marksmen could be any one of us — or so the play presumably is saying — except that they have to pay for the privilege of taking potshots: a video game come very much to life. At the same time, their “victims,” so to speak, have agreed to so many hours a day as target practice in return for the relief of finding a place to live. The “game” turns dramatically less playful as time passes and the couple’s young son adds a further human prospect to the mix.You depart the theater after 55 minutes (no intermission) pondering a piece that resonates with an age in which we are regularly invited to bear witness to cruelty, whether online or elsewhere. If the prevailing emotion left by the play is one of disgust, or worse, Mr. Bartlett and his savvy director, Sacha Wares, would no doubt counter that they are only reflecting via art what is everywhere present in life. In London in particular, the script resonates with a public for whom getting on the “property ladder” is increasingly presented as a matter of life or death — even if it doesn’t usually come at such potentially lethal cost. After seeing “Game,” that same citizenry may be tempted to live with their parents forever.Advertisement“Have we been under surveillance?” asks the male half of a couple in a second play on much the same topic as “Game.” Philip Ridley’s “Radiant Vermin,” at the Soho Theater through April 12, may have every bit as much on its mind as Mr. Bartlett’s cautionary fable, but its approach is playful and larky. David Mercatali’s adroit production also feels like a theatrical game, albeit a hugely pointed one.That’s not just because the two terrific leading performers, Gemma Whelan and Sean Michael Verey, toward the end of the play recreate with dizzying speed an entire garden party — hosts, guests and all — in a joint tour de force. As if taking a leaf from the telling surname of the characters, Swift, Mr. Ridley casts a sidelong glance at contemporary mores with a satiric finesse worthy of his vaunted former countryman Jonathan Swift.AdvertisementThe idea here is that the 20-something Jill and Ollie are one day offered a reprieve from their dreary domestic environs — some dodgy Russian drug dealers as neighbors, for starters — in the shape of a newly built, three-bedroom house that they can have free.The catch? Their dream home isn’t finished and requires all manner of building work, from wiring onward. So when the local homeless population comes to call, society’s dispossessed get pressed into service in ways that probably should be left unreported, since the power of the fleet 90-minute performance relies upon an element of surprise. Suffice it to say that Mr. Ridley has a field day setting the apparent sunniness of his young lovers against their escalating misdeeds in a play that — as with Mr. Bartlett’s — questions whether we are our brother’s keeper or his destroyer.In keeping with the unusual title — how often are vermin described as “radiant”? — Mr. Ridley locates rapture where least expected so as to throw us off the kind of purposefully alarmist trail favored by the likes of “Game.” I’ve never previously encountered an onstage paean to the escalators at Selfridges, the British department store, and it’s rather startling to note the ease with which the disparate likes of Jean-Paul Sartre and Mary Poppins get referenced. (The Madonna song “Material Girl” is heard as the audience members take their seats, as if to set out the agenda for the play more bluntly.)The knockabout style of the piece breaks the fourth wall, implicating us by association in the fantasy-turned-nightmare that the play describes. To that end, Ms. Whelan and Mr. Verey make for supremely winning company-turned-cohorts. They are ably joined by Amanda Daniels in two contrasting roles: as the agent of benefaction who makes the dream home possible and as a hapless neighbor who succumbs to Mr. Ridley’s cheerful vision of hell.There’s scant cheer — not to mention engagement — to be found in the touring production of “Antigone” that has alighted through Saturday at the Barbican Theater as the second stop on a circuit that began last month in Luxembourg and reaches the United States in the fall, after a summer hiatus. So leaden is this account of a time-honored tragedy that one can hardly believe it originates from the same director, Ivo van Hove, whose ongoing revival of Arthur Miller’s “A View from the Bridge” ranks among the London highlights of recent years.A nanosecond of the earlier production’s dynamism might enliven these latest proceedings. Working from a rather jarring translation from the Canadian poet Anne Carson, Mr. van Hove’s “Antigone” features a stripped-back, abstract set in the same minimalist style brought to bear on the Miller play, but without the energy required to fire up the current staging’s savage debate between the personal and the political.AdvertisementJuliette Binoche plays Sophocles’ eponymous heroine, who insists upon a proper burial for her rebel brother, Polyneices (he has been killed in civil warfare by his own brother, Eteocles). Ms. Binoche, the Oscar-winning actress, brings a ravaged beauty to a role that she inflects by seeming to raise her voice at random intervals, notwithstanding the demands of the text. The rest of the cast more or less follow suit, all of them stronger on paper than they are allowed to be in this performance — the estimable Finbar Lynch and Kathryn Pogson, in particular.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Whereas the same play at the National Theater in 2012 spoke to a society that needed to confront how it chose to commemorate the dead, Mr. van Hove’s attempt to be timeless actually speaks to no time at all. You emerge not dazed and enlightened but glad to get out.Game.  Directed by Sacha Wares. Almeida Theater. Through April 4.Radiant Vermin.  Directed by David Mercatali.Soho Theater. Through April 12.Antigone.  Directed by Ivo van Hove. Barbican Theater. Through March 28.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.