By SAM ROBERTSMARCH 22, 2015
Howard H. Guttenplan, who took what began as an antipoverty program on the Lower East Side of Manhattan and transformed it into a leading workshop and showcase for experimental filmmakers, including Andy Warhol, died on Feb. 23 at his home in Manhattan. He was 80.His death, from complications of pancreatic cancer, was announced by the Millennium Film Workshop, where he was the executive director from 1971 until he retired in 2011.Mr. Guttenplan, who struggled to keep the nonprofit organization afloat, said its goal was to offer “very personal films by individuals working without large crews or budgets with the same kind of independence as a painter or a poet,” and to “appeal to film artists as well as audiences.”Peter Kingsbury, the Millennium’s current director, said the workshop made its equipment available, as a loan or at low cost, to Warhol and Jean-Luc Godard as well as a long list of fledging experimental filmmakers, including James Benning, Bruce Conner, Todd Haynes, Yvonne Rainer, Carolee Schneemann and Michael Snow.AdvertisementMany mounted one-person shows as part of the workshop’s Personal Cinema Series and had premieres of their films there. The organization also publishes The Millennium Film Journal.Amy Taubin, a critic for Artforum and other publications, wrote in an email that Mr. Guttenplan’s legacy “is in the hundreds of films and videos that were made thanks to cheap access to Millennium’s equipment, and in the thousands of viewers who were inspired by nearly 40 years of experimental movie screenings, always with the makers in attendance.”Mr. Guttenplan, a photographer and graphic artist, also made his own films, “shooting in stride” diary travelogues, many of which he created while expanding the workshop’s exhibition program by recruiting avant-garde filmmakers in the United States and abroad.“He could be cranky and perhaps overly meticulous at times, but it was out of a genuine love of film outside the mainstream,” said Keith Sanborn, a lecturer in visual arts at Princeton University. “Howard’s legacy is both artistic, as a contributor to the genre more famously practiced by Jonas Mekas and Warren Sonbert, and as a contributor to the field, as someone who made it possible for filmmakers to make and show their work and actually get paid a modest fee for a screening.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As a testament to Mr. Guttenplan’s creative if often demanding eye, the Museum of Modern Art said it planned to acquire the workshop’s archives.“Independent film is alive and well, in no small part due to the existence of the Millennium,” said Bruce Meisler, a friend of Mr. Guttenplan’s and a fellow photographer.AdvertisementHoward Herman Guttenplan was born in Brooklyn on April 6, 1934, to Henry and Shirley Guttenplan. He was interested in film early on, and recalled going to Manhattan to see “underground films” that he had read about in The Village Voice.He graduated from Abraham Lincoln High School, attended Cooper Union and served in the Navy during the Korean War. No immediate family members survive.Mr. Guttenplan joined the workshop in 1967, two years after it was founded by St. Marks Church-in-the-Bowery and the New School as part of a federal antipoverty program. Ken Jacobs, a filmmaker, was the first director and remains on the board of the organization, which moved to the East Williamsburg section of Brooklyn in 2013.Alister Sanderson wrote of Mr. Guttenplan’s films, in the notes of the Pasadena Film Forum in 1977, that his art combined two childhood passions, collecting and sports.“In his graphic work, much involved with collage and object-finding, only the first of these could be fulfilled; but in film he could fulfill both in an exhilarating movement through space in search of materials,” Mr. Sanderson wrote. “And the movement, registered in celluloid, could itself become a collected object.”A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page A20 of the New York edition with the headline: Howard Guttenplan, 80, Art-Film Innovator, Dies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.