By ALASTAIR MACAULAYOCT. 15, 2015
CHICAGO — In the American premiere of John Neumeier’s “Sylvia,” the dancers of the Joffrey Ballet look chic, handsome and sophisticated. To a degree rare in American ballet, all the performers onstage know how to use their eyes, how to present and to angle their faces and torsos, and how to hold upper and lower bodies as if they were juxtaposing two separate thoughts.Mr. Neumeier’s “Sylvia,” set to Léo Delibes’s marvelously colorful and fragrant three-act 1876 score and originally choreographed for the Paris Opera Ballet in 1997, is disagreeable in style and content. Yet the worldly self-possession with which these Joffrey dancers deliver it becomes its chief meaning, as if to say: “We are disillusioned, undoubtedly — cynical, perhaps — but inelegant? Never!”Though he was born in Wisconsin (in 1942) and studied ballet here in Chicago, Mr. Neumeier’s dance career has been in Europe since the early 1960s, and since at least the 1970s he has been a leading exponent of the anti-musical, literary trends that have pervaded the ballet of postwar Continental Europe. The leading companies of France, Denmark and Germany have danced his work for decades; he has directed the Hamburg Ballet since 1973. He has made far fewer inroads into the repertories of American companies, though just now he’s back, with “Sylvia” here at the Joffrey and his “Third Symphony of Gustav Mahler” (1975) next week at Boston Ballet.The “Sylvia” program includes two pages of notes from the choreographer, in addition to the full-page synopsis in which the ballet is subtitled “Three Choreographic Poems on a Mystic Theme.” Mr. Neumeier does not tell the story Delibes had in mind for “Sylvia”; he calls that “twee” and “outmoded.”AdvertisementInstead, he tells us he prefers the Torquato Tasso pastoral drama on which the “Sylvia” scenario was based. “It is therefore normal to keep a certain distance from the music and rid the work of its ‘operetta’ elements, which have seduced certain choreographers,” he writes. Normal? He takes the “Sylvia” story in the opposite direction from what Delibes had in mind.AdvertisementThe composer’s heroine, a devotee of the goddess Diana, is a chaste huntress who, when hit by Eros’ arrow, falls in love with the shepherd Aminta in Act I. After she has been abducted by Orion, she playfully plies him with alcohol and dances as part of her resistance to his advances in Act II. Eros saves her and, in Act III, restores her to Aminta. Diana emerges from her temple to kill the angry Orion, but is outraged that Sylvia has forsaken her vows of chastity. Eros, however, gets Diana to relent by reminding her that even she has nursed a tenderness for the sleeping Endymion. All ends happily.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The shock of Mr. Neumeier’s staging is the wiseguy degree to which he stands outside his music. In his narrative, Diana punishes Sylvia for falling for Aminta but then hypocritically has a prolonged erotic duet (a slow waltz interpolated from Delibes’s “La Source”) with the handsome somnambulist Endymion. Eros takes on Orion’s form to seduce Sylvia, successfully. In the most depressing episode, Sylvia willingly lets him — and many other men too — sport with her.Years later she and Aminta, both now with gray hair, meet again. Their rediscovered love is brief; Sylvia’s husband, the dullest-looking man in the show, leads her away. Diana, after cavorting with both Eros and Endymion, is left to prowl alone as the curtain falls.The spirit and dynamics of Mr. Neumeier’s dances are pointedly detached from those of Delibes. (Characters are already moving across the apron of the stage as the orchestra is warming up and the audience entering.) Where the score gives us a flowing legato melody, Mr. Neumeier gives us moves that are abrupt and sharply accentuated. In the work of musical choreographers, whether a jump uses the main beat to take off, to reach its apex or to arrive is a crucial element of style; jumps here make no musical point at all.The most sparkling orchestral segment is the Act III pizzicato dance, usually a solo for Sylvia. (The bouncy meter cries out for brilliant pointwork, with pauses, lingerings and accelerations that are a gift to a ballerina who can play with her music.) Mr. Neumeier makes it into a slow recognition scene for the middle-aged Sylvia and Aminta.The music is played very beautifully by the Chicago Philharmonic Orchestra. April Daly (Sylvia), Yoshihisa Arai (Aminta), Victoria Jaiani (Diana), Temur Suluashvili (Eros/Orion) and Fabrice Calmels (Endymion) all perfectly reproduce the polished personas of Paris Opera dancers. I find no fault at all in the performance, but why is it happening here at all? Mr. Neumeier’s stage work has neither sensitivity to music nor largeness of spirit.­“Sylvia” continues through Oct. 25 at the Auditorium Theater, Chicago; joffrey.org.A version of this review appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page C12 of the New York edition with the headline: Story of Gods and Magic Is Brought Down to Earth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.