Gustavo Dudamel has extended his contract as music director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic through the 2021-22 season, the orchestra announced on Friday.In the game of musical chairs that some of the world’s top orchestras and conductors are currently playing, Mr. Dudamel’s extension on the West Coast could have repercussions on both sides of the Atlantic. It removes him from consideration at the New York Philharmonic, which is seeking a new music director to succeed Alan Gilbert when he steps down in 2017.And it appears to make it less likely that Mr. Dudamel will get one of the most sought-after jobs in classical music: chief conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic. The Berlin Philharmonic plans to meet on May 11 to elect a successor to Simon Rattle, who is leaving the orchestra in 2018 and becoming music director of the London Symphony Orchestra.The Berlin orchestra is seen as being torn between choosing a young, dynamic conductor or a more seasoned veteran. Mr. Dudamel, 34, is perhaps the most famous example of the new breed; another rising star, Yannick Nézet-Séguin, recently extended his contract with the Philadelphia Orchestra through the 2021-22 season as well. Their contract extensions make their prospects in Berlin appear dimmer, if not necessarily out of the question. While it is not uncommon for jet-age conductors to simultaneously lead orchestras in the United States and Europe, an orchestra of Berlin’s caliber may want a certain level of commitment from its leader.Mr. Dudamel is the most famous graduate of El Sistema, Venezuela’s music education program, and he continued to be the music director of the Simón Bolívar Symphony Orchestra of Venezuela. In Los Angeles he has worked on a number of educational projects influenced by El Sistema, especially Youth Orchestra L.A., which is known as Yola.In addition to extending Mr. Dudamel’s contract another three seasons, the Los Angeles Philharmonic announced that it would add “artistic director” to his title of music director.Mr. Dudamel, who was touring with the Los Angeles Philharmonic in Tokyo when the contract extension was announced, praised the orchestra’s musicianship, educational programs, enviable homes in Walt Disney Concert Hall and the Hollywood Bowl, and leadership, saying in a statement that “we have an unparalleled situation in the world of classical music today.”A version of this article appears in print on 03/28/2015, on page C4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Dudamel Extends Los Angeles Contract.