Art of Brazil Until 1900
The São Paulo Museum of Art.
Through June 6.In 1636, the artist Frans Post traveled with a Dutch expedition to Brazil. This exhibition takes Post’s early landscape paintings of the country as a starting point, tracing the evolution of Brazilian painting from his lifetime until 1900. Landscapes, portraits and still lifes by Brazilian painters including Victor Meirelles, Almeida Júnior and Belmiro de Almeida feature in the display, which focuses in large part on the country’s evolving relationship with European art styles. In April, the museum will open another show that picks up where this one leaves off — with 20th-century Brazilian art. Opening
Pompidou Center Málaga.This “Pop-Up” Pompidou, which will stay open for the next five years, will show works from the Paris museum’s collection alongside touring shows and a string of movie, dance and performance programs. Artists in the satellite’s collection include Francis Bacon, Frida Kahlo, and Pablo Picasso, who was born in Málaga. (Read Raphael Minder’s article on the museum opening.) Salzburg Easter Festival
Grosses Festspielhaus.
Through April 6.The popular German tenor Jonas Kaufmann will sing in three shows here — a performance of Verdi’s “Messa da Requiem” and the operas “Cavalleria rusticana,” and “Pagliacci.” Other highlights in the classical lineup include a performance of Shostakovich’s 10th Symphony led by Daniele Gatti and “Miss Death Meets Mr. Shostakovich,” a work that combines music by the composer with extracts from texts by his literary contemporaries.Xu Zhen Solo Exhibition
Long Museum West Bund.
Through May 24.This exhibition brings together more than 100 artworks by the provocative Shanghai-based artist Xu Zhen (born 1977). Mr. Xu’s past pieces include the creation of a fake Chinese supermarket filled with entirely empty packages and a film in which he claimed to show himself scaling Mount Everest and chopping a chunk from its peak. In this display — a series of monumental new works — life-size, classical Greek- or Roman-style statues sprout full-size East-Asian-style statues from their heads. The show marks the one-year anniversary of this museum’s West Bund branch, which is dedicated to art ranging from Chinese classical to contemporary.Shirin Neshat: The Home of My Eyes
YARAT Contemporary Art Center.
Through June 23.This new contemporary art space opened its doors on Monday with a solo show dedicated to the Iranian-born artist Shirin Neshat, who rose to prominence in the 1990s with “Women of Allah,” a photo series featuring women in veils with Arabic poetry scrawled across their skin. This exhibition includes a new series of black-and-white images of Azerbaijanis by Ms. Neshat, as well as earlier video installations. The museum is also showing “Making Histories: The YARAT Collection,” an exhibition curated by Suad Garayeva of works by artists from in and around the Caucasus.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Istanbul Film Festival
Various venues.
April 4-19.“The Golden Era,” Ann Hui’s biopic of the Chinese writer Xiao Hong; a new adaptation of Thomas Hardy’s “Far From the Madding Crowd”; and the Istanbul-set ghost story “Yearning” are among the films competing for this year’s international film prize. The festival is holding a range of events alongside the competition, including screenings from rising Turkish filmmakers like Mahur Ozmen and Ertan Velimatti Alagoz. “Midnight Madness,” the festival’s late-night horror screening section, will feature the cult hit “It Follows,” about a curse passed on through sexual encounters. Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty
The Victoria and Albert Museum.
Through Aug. 2.The London-born designer Alexander McQueen (1969-2010) turned high fashion on its head beginning in the late 1990s with his macabre, theatrical outfits and runway shows that verged into performance art (one featured a model being sprayed by paint machines). This exhibition brings together a wide array of his outfits as well as several of his forays into other genres, like a short film made with the model Kate Moss. A smaller version of the exhibition appeared at the Metropolitan Museum in New York in 2011.Chagall: Love and Life
Chiostro del Bramante.
Through July 26.The artist Marc Chagall’s doting relationship with his wife, Bella, his complex rapport with his Jewish identity, and his evolving formal practices are all explored in this exhibition, which features artworks from the Israel Museum in Jerusalem. The show displays more than 140 works, including drawings, paintings and etchings, and delves into his evolving lithographic methods. Meanwhile, another major Chagall retrospective is running through June at the Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium in Brussels. Rusalka
Opéra Bastille.
April 3-26.Antonin Dvorak’s dark take on “The Little Mermaid” fairy tale was first performed in Prague in 1901. This production, by the Canadian director Robert Carsen, had its premiere in Paris in 2002. Svetlana Aksenova plays the title role in the opening performances, and Larissa Diadkova plays the witch whom she enlists to make her human so that she can win her handsome prince. The sleek sets and costumes are by the designer Michael Levine. 