Joan Miró: Wall, Frieze, Mural; Joan Miró
Kunsthaus Zurich; Galerie Gmurzynska.
Through Jan. 24; through Jan. 30.Two exhibitions dedicated to the minimalist Spanish artist Joan Miró (1893-1983) are running simultaneously in Zurich. At the Kunsthaus, “Wall, Frieze, Mural,” includes works from across the artist’s career, with a particular focus on his large-scale murals and installation pieces — the show centers around “Birds Taking Flight,” a 1971-72 mural that is part of the museum’s collection. Galerie Gmurzynska, meanwhile, has brought together about 20 works, focused largely on Miró’s early output.Bienal de Curitiba
Various venues.
Oct. 3.-Dec. 16.Works by the Argentine artist Julio Le Parc, who makes elaborate light sculptures, will appear at the Museu Oscar Niemeyer for this biennial event. The theme this year is “Light of the world,” and other artists whose work will be presented include Carlo Bernardini, Jeongmoon Choi and Helga Griffiths, whose “Identity Analysis” features 4,000 test tubes full of glowing liquid. (The exhibitions take place at a number of venues around the city.)Next Doors: Contemporary Art in Japan and Korea
National Art Center.
Through Oct. 12.Twelve contemporary artists from Japan and South Korea are participating in this exhibition, with each artist having a room. They include Yang Junguk, who creates motorized sculptures that cast shadows across the exhibition space; Shimon Minamikawa, who melds painting and collage; and Kohei Kobayashi’s large-scale installations. The exhibition will travel to the National Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art in Gwacheon, South Korea.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Valery Gergiev Final Concerts. London Symphony Orchestra 
Various venues.
Oct. 9-25.Valery Gergiev of Russia ends his tenure as lead conductor of the London Symphony Orchestra this fall with three concerts in the city interwoven with a mini world tour. His last London performances will be “The Firebird” and “The Rite of Spring” by Stravinsky and work by Bartok (Oct. 9 to 18). He will perform with the orchestra in Vienna, Luxembourg and Paris, and close out his tenure with the symphony with three concerts at Lincoln Center in New York and the New Jersey Performing Arts Center in Newark from Oct. 23 to 25. The conductor will continue to hold the role of director at the Mariinsky Theater in St. Petersburg after leaving London.Vasco da Gama
Deutsche Oper Berlin.
Oct. 4-24.Giacomo Meyerbeer was never completely satisfied with his opera “L’Africaine,” which opened shortly after his death in 1864. The piece received little fanfare and few subsequent productions. A reworked version of the opera — “Vasco da Gama,” named after the Portuguese explorer at the heart of the story — opened in Chemnitz, Germany, in 2013. A new production of that version is showing at the Deutsche Oper now, directed by Vera Nemirova. The production marks the beginning of a Meyerbeer cycle at the opera house, where new productions of “The Huguenots” and “The Prophet” will be staged over the next two years.Rain Room
Yuz Museum.
Through Dec. 31.For this massive installation, created by the London-based art collective rAndom International, viewers enter a cavernous room where water pours from the ceiling; wherever they walk the water stops falling. The exhibition attracted enormous crowds when it opened at the Barbican in London and then played at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. The version in Shanghai is larger than those installations.Rome. Emperor Constantine’s Dream
De Nieuwe Kerk.
Through Feb. 7.In the fourth century A.D., Emperor Constantine imposed sweeping reforms across Rome, transforming the pagan empire into a Christian one. This exhibition explores that transformation through archaeological objects, investigating the ways in which Rome’s landscape evolved as Constantine remade the empire. Works on view include paintings, statues and frescoes. “The Good Shepherd” from the Vatican collections is showing. The fourth-century statue was likely interpreted by pagan citizens as a secular symbol and by Christian citizens as a depiction of Christ.Melbourne Festival
Various venues.
Oct. 8-25.“Desdemona,” the novelist Toni Morrison’s theatrical answer to Shakespeare’s “Othello”; “Last Work,” the newest piece by the Israeli Batsheva Dance Company; and “1984,” a stage adaptation of George Orwell’s novel, will appear in this festival, a wide-ranging, international affair. Other performances in the lineup include a show by the singer Laura Marling, a performance by the London Haydn Quartet and a concert by the Swedish D.J. known as The Field. The festival opens with “Tanderrum,” an outdoor performance led by aboriginal spiritual leaders in Federation Square.