
Antiques By                     
EVE M. KAHN

OCT. 15, 2015
The Philadelphia Museum of Art is reassembling, restoring and scrutinizing parlor furniture that scandalized some Philadelphians when it was new.The suite of gilded chairs, tables and couches was produced in 1808 for the Philadelphia drawing rooms of the merchant William Waln and his wife, Mary Wilcocks Waln, who made fortunes partly in the Chinese opium trade. On the neo-Classical pieces, designed by the British émigré architect Benjamin Henry Latrobe, a fellow British immigrant, the artist George Bridport, painted petals and griffins. Bridport also painted murals of scenes from “The Iliad” and “The Odyssey” for the Waln interiors.The Walns used their home to flaunt wealth and cosmopolitan tastes. “It’s all about social theater,” said Alexandra Alevizatos Kirtley, the museum’s associate curator of American decorative arts.William Waln was a lapsed Quaker, and his wife was Episcopalian. His stern Quaker father, Nicholas, predicted that the couple’s extravagance would bankrupt them. He was right. In the 1820s, the house was sold, and it was razed two decades later.AdvertisementNext year the Waln suite will be the subject of a show at the museum, “Classical Splendor: Painted Furniture for a Grand Philadelphia House.” The conservator Peggy Olley has restored Bridport’s varied shades of gilding and marbling. The seats have been reupholstered in gold silk, fringed and tasseled in red and gold; the textiles were partly based on wisps of original thread found inside the frames.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The show and its catalog will cover the tragic fates of the Waln commission’s patrons and artisans. By the time the couple went bankrupt, the British had burned the White House, destroying its furnishings designed by Latrobe and Bridport. Latrobe had died of yellow fever in New Orleans. Bridport had died in Cuba at the age 35 of a pulmonary ailment, and his family dispersed his library of volumes about literature, art, architecture, music and pulmonary ailments.AdvertisementWaln furniture has ended up in other American institutions, including the High Museum of Art in Atlanta, the St. Louis Art Museum, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Chipstone Foundation in Milwaukee, the National Gallery of Art and the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston.A handful of Bridport’s other works and Latrobe’s houses survive. Bridport had a brother, Hugh, a prolific painter of miniature portraits, and Mrs. Kirtley said that she hoped to uncover a portrait of George Bridport someday. No images of him are known to survive.“I just imagine him as suave — a real dandy,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page C29 of the New York edition with the headline: Furniture to Flaunt.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »