By ALEC M. PRIESTERMARCH 27, 2015
12 A.M. (Comedy Central) PINEAPPLE EXPRESS (2008) Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg (“Superbad”) wrote this comic stoner caper directed by David Gordon Green. Mr. Rogen stars as Dale Denton, a process server who loves to smoke weed to escape the tedium of his life. He witnesses a murder while smoking a joint of rare marijuana and throws it out the window of his car in a rush to flee the scene. He goes to see his dealer, Saul (James Franco), and they become paranoid that the killer (Gary Cole) will be able to identify him as the witness because of the distinct pot he had been carrying. Off they run, without confirming that they are being pursued. Danny McBride plays an eccentric, backstabbing, midlevel drug dealer, and Rosie Perez portrays a crooked cop conspiring with the murderer. And a strain of pot is named “Spanish trampoline.” Writing about the film in The New York Times, Manohla Dargis said, “In the tradition of Cheech and Chong, Abbott and Costello, Hope and Crosby, Ricky and Lucy, Martin and Lewis, Rowan and Martin, Smothers and Smothers, Sanford and son, Spicoli and Hand, Bert and Ernie, Riggs and Murtaugh, cops and robbers, dumb and dumber, right brain and left, peanut butter and jelly, bong hit, roach clip and Snoop Doggy Dogg comes ‘Pineapple Express,’ a stoner comedy that partakes of a gentle indie vibe before hitting the hard stuff for a major Shane Black-style blowup and meltdown.”6 P.M. (TNT) LIMITLESS (2011) Eddie Morra (Bradley Cooper) is a dejected novelist with writer’s block. His girlfriend (Abbie Cornish) dumps him, and his landlord harangues him about late rent. He encounters his ex-brother-in-law, Vernon (Johnny Whitworth), who takes him for a drink and gives him a prototype brain drug after hearing his woes. After taking the drug, Eddie miraculously writes a book and cleans his apartment. Vernon turns up dead, and Eddie takes a stash of the pills. The pills seem too good to be true — because they are. Now Eddie must maintain his productivity without letting the drug ruin him. The film is an adaptation of the novel “The Dark Fields” by Alan Glynn. “The dream of a pharmaceutical solution to literary paralysis provides a wisp of a real-world premise for ‘Limitless,’ an energetic, enjoyably preposterous compound — it’s a paranoid thriller blended with pseudo-neuro-science fiction and catalyzed by a jolting dose of satire — directed by Neil Burger,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.7 P.M. (VH1) GOODFELLAS (1990) As a kid growing up in East New York, Brooklyn, in the 1950s, Henry Hill (Ray Liotta) aspires to be a gangster. But his exploits, and those of his friends, increase in severity, the mob operations growing more lurid and reckless. Henry’s wife, Karen (Lorraine Bracco), is wary of his life in crime but goes along with it. Martin Scorsese directed this classic, also starring Joe Pesci and Robert De Niro. “There is flash also in some of Mr. Scorsese’s directorial choices, including freeze frames, fast-cutting and the occasional long tracking shot,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times. “ ‘Goodfellas’ doesn’t end,” he said. “It crashes, with Henry, into the sobriety of the straight world. It disturbs, and even makes one think.”9 P.M. (Syfy) 12 MONKEYS James Cole (Aaron Stanford) travels back in time to 1987 Tokyo in a last-ditch effort to reverse humanity’s near-eradication by preventing the Army of the 12 Monkeys from releasing a deadly virus.Advertisement10 P.M. (Animal Planet) INSANE POOLS: OFF THE DEEP END The pool designer Lucas Congdon transforms properties with elaborate constructions for holding water. In this episode, he builds a Caribbean-style saltwater pool but cannot abide his clients’ choice of green rocks.11 P.M. (HBO) VICE Cocaine use is skyrocketing in Europe. Ben Anderson examines the avenues through which the drug is trafficked to Europe from Venezuela, the Caribbean, West Africa and the Middle East. In a second segment, Gianna Toboni travels to India to investigate the booming surrogacy industry and the consequences of outsourcing pregnancy for a discount.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowDEAD RISING: WATCHTOWER Jesse Metcalfe plays Chase Carter, a reporter who finds himself in a quarantined war zone full of zombies. He joins up with a few non-zombies, including Frank West (Rob Riggle), in an effort to survive in this adaptation of the popular Capcom video game. Zach Lipovsky directs this film, written and produced by Tim Carter. (crackle.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page C19 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.