By NEIL GENZLINGERMARCH 26, 2015
If you’re a devotee of a particular religion, you probably don’t want the story on which its whole belief system rests told by someone facing challenges to his credibility. But that’s not even the main problem with “Killing Jesus,” which has its premiere Sunday on the National Geographic Channel and is based on a book by Martin Dugard and the embattled Bill O’Reilly. The main problem is that this three-hour affair is unrelentingly drab. The program dramatizes the life of Jesus, culminating, of course, in his crucifixion. Mr. O’Reilly and Mr. Dugard turned the tale into a best seller in 2013 with “Killing Jesus: A History,” part of a franchise that has also seen them kill Presidents Abraham Lincoln and John F. Kennedy and Gen. George S. Patton.Lately, Mr. O’Reilly has been fending off accusations that he has exaggerated his experiences covering the war in the Falklands in 1982. The “Killing Jesus” book, too, had its detractors, who claimed it contained inaccuracies and was shallow and slanted. But at least the book, which was written in a breathless, ticktock style, tried to have a pulse. The television adaptation turns what an earlier film called “The Greatest Story Ever Told” into one of the snoozier stories ever told.Haaz Sleiman doesn’t make much of an impression as Jesus and certainly doesn’t come across as a man who would inspire a world-changing movement. The book tried to put Jesus’ story in the broader context of the politics and practices of the day, but here the account is largely pared down to the biblical rendition, with Jesus casting out a demon, preventing the stoning of a woman accused of adultery and delivering the touchstone teachings that all Christians know by heart.The power of these messages is somehow lost here. The story has been adapted for screens large and small so often at this point that any new effort has to make clear why it needed to be made and what it’s bringing to the task that we haven’t seen before. This one never does.AdvertisementIt is telling that in a program about Jesus, the most interesting character might be Pontius Pilate (Stephen Moyer), the Roman prefect. Much of the power politics on display here involves his being pressured by the religious leaders of Judea to arrest and execute Jesus, a fight he wants no part of. After the “cast the first stone” incident, the priests fail to convince him that Jesus somehow broke the law, so instead one tries to get him worked up about the fact that Jesus has also been stirring people up about taxes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If I were to crucify every Jew who rails against our taxes,” he responds, “I would have to level the cedars of Lebanon for wood. His crime must be an attack against our emperor, our rule.”AdvertisementAside from Pilate’s scenes, the machinations nudging Jesus toward the cross aren’t developed well enough to be absorbing, and neither are characters like Judas (Joe Doyle), whose stories ought to be rich in psychological drama. There is, however, a sort of game offered for those in the mood: find Kelsey Grammer. He may be the best-known actor in the large cast, but unless you know who he’s playing (King Herod), you may have trouble recognizing him under all the hair.Mr. Grammer’s get-up is symbolic of the problem with this three-hour movie: It’s a costume pageant devoid both of the reverence that has made some previous film versions work and of the intrigue that might provide a secular “Game of Thrones”-like appeal. More effort went into the jewelry and headwear than into the storytelling.Some consumers of this type of fare seem most interested in Jesus’ suffering, and those people, at least, won’t be disappointed. There is graphic bloodshed and anguish when the time comes. For many Christians, though, Easter is about the resurrection, and about hope. This rendition of the story stays true to its title. Once Jesus is killed, the proceedings wrap up quickly, with only a glimmer of the part of the story that ought to be the whole point.Killing JesusNational Geographic Channel, Sunday night at 8Directed by Christopher Menaul. Written by Walon Green. Produced by Scott Free Productions. Bill O’Reilly, Mr. Green, Mary Lisio, Heather Moran, Charlie Parsons, Ridley Scott, Teri Weinberg and David W. Zucker, executive producers.WITH: Haaz Sleiman (Jesus), Stephen Moyer (Pontius Pilate), Kelsey Grammer (King Herod), Rufus Sewell (Caiaphas), Joe Doyle (Judas) and John Rhys- Davies (Annas).A version of this review appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Biblical Tale, Softer on Its Politics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.