By NATE CHINENMARCH 26, 2015
One misperception about the jazz avant-garde is that it’s essentially reactive, a single-minded pushback against conventions of form. Whatever lump of truth or slander you might find in that idea, Trio 3, which plays at the Village Vanguard this week, provides scant supporting evidence for it.An alliance of eminent composer-improvisers now in their 70s — the alto saxophonist Oliver Lake, the bassist Reggie Workman and the drummer Andrew Cyrille — Trio 3 belongs squarely to the jazz avant-garde, both in process and pedigree. But there was no rebellious undercurrent in the group’s first set on Wednesday night, which moved briskly through its allotted hour, propelled by cooperative forces.Trio 3 has been a going concern since the late 1980s, though the bonds between its members go back further. There are meaningful differences in their individual profiles: between, say, Mr. Workman, who played the Vanguard with John Coltrane in 1961, and Mr. Lake, who hadn’t worked there before this week. But the bigger point is the intensity of focus behind the band’s interplay, along with an absolute commitment to the moment.The group’s last five albums, on the Intakt label, have featured guest pianists, including Geri Allen, Jason Moran and — on the excellent “Wiring,” released last year — Vijay Iyer. It would have made some sense to revisit that augmented format here. But the decision to go pianoless was the right one, emphasizing on the trio’s sinewy core.AdvertisementBeyond the opener, a song by the pianist Curtis Clark titled “Amreen,” every piece was an original. They presented a range of dynamic possibilities, from the jaunty march cadence of “Valley Sketch” to the refined free-form combustion of “Flow.” Mr. Lake composed both of those tunes, and stamped each with a commanding solo, his gusty, pungent sound almost becoming a presence in the room.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Lake also wrote “The Tap Dancer,” a solo feature for Mr. Cyrille, who played it almost entirely on brushes, with an elegant severity that called Max Roach to mind. Another piece inspired by human movement, Mr. Cyrille’s “Girls Dancing,” spilled forth in a polyrhythmic rumble of toms, a captivating evocation of Congolese drumming.Elsewhere in the set there were stretches of sparseness that felt willfully provisional: no need to resolve that gesture or fill that space. Mr. Workman took on much of the responsibility in that regard, sometimes churning out chordal double stops and sometimes skewing terse. The scale of his output felt endlessly connected to what was happening on the bandstand, which isn’t to say he followed the others’ lead.AdvertisementHis composition in the set was “Synapse II,” which appears on “Wiring,” and serves as a pocket illustration of what Trio 3 does best. Opening with a group detonation, and ending with an abrupt snap, it was free jazz as rigorous discourse, and a direct response to nothing beyond its own brimming potential.Trio 3 performs through Sunday at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, West Village; 212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com. We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.