By JOSHUA BARONEMARCH 26, 2015
Around TownMuseums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and other diseases? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out diseases. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.BRIC and the Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Mapping Brooklyn’ (through Sept. 6) This exhibition features artworks that incorporate themes of mapping and cartography in historical maps. The artists here are exploring the ways maps represent the practical and metaphoric aspects of life. The show is on view at BRIC House through May 3. Tuesdays through Saturdays from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Sundays to 6 p.m., 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. The show will also be at the Brooklyn Historical Society through Sept. 6. Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5 p.m., 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Grolier Club: ‘Aldus Manutius: A Legacy More Lasting Than Bronze’ (through April 25) To celebrate the quincentennial of Aldus Manutius’s death, the Grolier Club has assembled over 130 rare books, called Aldines, from that scholar-printer’s Italian Renaissance press. The exhibition explores the ways in which, to this day, Manutius influences how we preserve and disseminate knowledge. As Jennifer Schuessler wrote in The New York Times, “Anyone who has ever sat in a cafe, or in the bath, with a paperback owes a debt to Aldus and the small, cleanly designed editions of the secular classics.” 47 East 60th Street, Manhattan, 212-838-6690, grolierclub.org; free.Metropolitan Museum of Art: Erratica: ‘La Celestina’ (through Sunday) This site-specific video opera is a “Rashomon”-like story in which characters tell their own versions of a tragic Spanish tale, “La Celestina,” published more than 500 years ago. The installation, with video projections and multichannel audio, blends Spanish polyphonic vocal music with Judeo-Spanish, Arabic and Andalusian folk music. Daily, during museum hours, in the Vélez Blanco Patio at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org.AdvertisementMorgan Library & Museum: ‘Lincoln Speaks: Words That Transformed a Nation’ (through June 7) This exhibition, which is presented thematically and chronologically, homes in on Abraham Lincoln’s leadership and its relationship to language. In his exhibition review for The New York Times, Neil Genzlinger wrote: “For Lincoln admirers, simply being in the same room with so many artifacts he touched will be a delight. And if they give the exhibition the time it requires, they will certainly come away with a fuller appreciation of the man.” 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.AdvertisementMuseum of the Moving Image: ‘Matthew Weiner’s “Mad Men” ’ (through June 14) As one of the most critically acclaimed TV shows in recent years nears its finale, “Mad Men” gets the exhibition treatment in this look at the series’s creative process. On display are large-scale sets, such as Don Draper’s office, as well as costumes, art and research material used by the show’s staff. Viewers should expect not only a look behind the scenes of the show, but also, like “Mad Men” itself, a peek into the era it depicts. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.New-York Historical Society: ‘Audubon’s Aviary: The Final Flight (Part III of the Complete Flock)’ (through May 10) The third installment of “Audubon’s Aviary: The Complete Flock” comprises nearly 130 plates from the watercolors in John James Audubon’s “The Birds of America” collection, engraved by Robert Havell Jr. The exhibition, as William Grimes wrote in an article for The New York Times, “underlines the natural wealth of the American land, and Audubon’s remarkable talent for producing art as varied as his subject matter.” 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Chinese American: Exclusion/Inclusion’ (through April 19) In his review for The New York Times, Edward Rothstein called this show a “vigorous and imaginative new exhibition,” that includes a look at “how Chinese-American identity came to be, how immigration and discrimination were followed by recrimination and conflict, and how, finally, a people’s trials give way to celebration.” Tuesday through Thursday and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Friday until 8 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Transit Museum Grand Central Terminal Gallery Annex: ‘New York’s Transportation Landmarks’ (through Nov. 1) It’s been 50 years since New York passed its Landmarks Law, which covers over 30,000 buildings and structures around the city. To celebrate the anniversary, the New York Transit Museum has created an exhibition that explores the history of development, use and even rescue of these landmarks. More information: 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum.New York Transit Museum: ‘Spanning the Narrows: The Verrazano Bridge at 50’ (through next fall) Photographs, maps, drawings, models and other archival materials related to the construction of the bridge (including correspondence from Robert Moses, who oversaw the project) are part of this exhibition commemorating its 50th anniversary. Tuesdays through Fridays from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-694-1600, mta.info/mta/museum.Red Bull Studios: ‘Alone Together’  (through April 12) The artist Ryder Ripps has created a site-specific work that acts as sculpture and performance. It’s a system that covers two floors: Below are six performers whose computer activity is sent above to a collective, frenzied display. Visitors to the exhibition play the part of voyeurs. Mr. Ripps’s idea is that the Internet creates a paradox in which the more connected we are, the more physically withdrawn we become. Thursdays through Sundays from noon to 7 p.m., 220 West 18th Street, Chelsea, redbullstudios.com/newyork; free.Arturo Vega: ‘American Treasure’ (Sunday through April 25) Howl! Happening, a new gallery and performance space in the East Village, presents an exhibition with paintings by Arturo Vega, a Mexican-born artist who worked in New York from 1971 until his death in 2013. Many of his paintings depict open palms holding a silver dollar — what exactly that means is open to interpretation. Howl! Happening, 6 East First Street, howlarts.org. EventsAdvertisement‘Bascove/Bridges: Transporting the Metropolis’ (through July 12) This exhibition features more than 30 paintings and drawings of city bridges by the artist Anne Bascove, including the Brooklyn Bridge, the Outerbridge Crossing and the George Washington Bridge. Thursdays through Sundays from 1 to 5 p.m.; also by appointment; Noble Maritime Collection, Snug Harbor Cultural Center and Botanical Garden, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, Staten Island, 718-447-6490, noblemaritime.org.‘Elle l’Adore’ (Tuesday) The Focus on French Cinema Festival shows the film “Elle l’Adore,” the French actress Jeanne Herry’s directorial debut that explores fame and fandom. The 4 p.m. screening will include a wine reception immediately following the film. There will be an additional screening at 7:30 p.m. that features a Q. and A. with Ms. Herry. Florence Gould Hall, French Institute Alliance Française, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, fiaf.org.‘The Goonies’ (Friday) St. Paul’s Chapel, the tiny church in the shadow of One World Trade Center, doubles as a cinema for its latest Neighborhood Movie Night. This time, the church will be screening “The Goonies,” the 1985 quotable comedy about teenagers in Oregon who fall into a hunt for a pirate ship’s lost treasure. At 7 p.m., Broadway at Fulton Street, Lower Manhattan.Luna Park Opening Day (Sunday) Luna Park, the Coney Island amusement park, opens to the public for the 2015 season. In keeping with tradition, the season will begin with an egg-cream christening of the Cyclone, the 88-year-old roller coaster. At noon, Luna Park, 1000 Surf Avenue, 718-373-5862, lunaparknyc.com.U.S.A. Memory Championship (Sunday) Are you familiar with a memory palace? You can see one in action at the 18th annual U.S.A. Memory Championship, where the only tools are in the mental athletes’ heads. Events include rapid memorization tests of names and faces, decks of cards and poetry. From 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., St. Vartan Armenian Cathedral’s Conference Center, 630 Second Avenue, near East 35th Street, usamemorychampionship.com; free.Spoken WordJoel Agee and Ron Cephas Jones (Monday) The writer and translator Joel Agee discusses his new translation of the ancient Greek tragedy “Prometheus Bound,” by Aeschylus, with Ron Cephas Jones, who starred in the Getty Villa production of the play. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dan Barber  (Wednesday) Abigail Pogrebin, an author and former “60 Minutes” producer, interviews Dan Barber, a chef and farmer known for his restaurants Blue Hill (in Greenwich Village) and Blue Hill at Stone Barns upstate. Mr. Barber will discuss his book, “The Third Plate: Field Notes on the Future of Food.” At 7:30 p.m., JCC in Manhattan, 334 Amsterdam Avenue, at 76th Street, 646-504-5708, jccmanhattan.org.T.C. Boyle (Wednesday) The New York Public Library’s Books at Noon series continues with Mr. Boyle, who will read from his new work, “The Harder They Come.” The novelist and short story writer is a winner of the PEN/Faulkner Award, and this latest work is his 25th book. At noon, Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, New York Public Library, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman.Intelligence Squared (Tuesday) Up for a debate? Here’s a topic: Does the president have a constitutional right to wage a long-term military campaign against the Islamic State? Intelligence Squared brings together two people to argue that yes, the president does, as well as two to say he doesn’t. On Team Yes we have Gene Healy, a vice president at the Cato Institute, and Deborah Pearlstein, a professor at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law. On Team No, Philip Bobbitt, a professor at Columbia Law School, and Jake Sullivan, a lecturer at Yale Law School. At 6:45 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, intelligencesquaredus.org.AdvertisementStephen Kotkin and Slavoj Zizek (Tuesday) Stephen Kotkin, a Princeton University historian and expert on Joseph Stalin, discusses the Soviet Dictator with Slavoj Zizek, a Marxist philosopher. The talk is the latest installment in the New York Public Library’s Live from the NYPL series. At 7 p.m., Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, New York Public Library, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/locations/schwarzman.‘Please Excuse This Poem’ (Wednesday) National Poetry Month begins with a showcase from the editors of “Please Excuse This Poem: 100 New Poets for the Next Generation,” Brett Fletcher Lauer and Lynn Melnick. Other guests include the poets Mark Bibbins, Dorothea Lasky, Alex Dimitrov, Ada Limon and Camille Rankine. At 7 p.m., Strand Book Store, 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com.Race and the City (through April 4) The Park Avenue Armory presents a series of discussions about race to complement the issues explored in its dance performance “FLEXN.” The long list of participants includes journalists, police officials, community leaders and representatives from correctional facilities. Nightly at 7, 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org.‘Selected Shorts: April Foolery!’ (Wednesday) Matthew Love hosts a live recording of “Selected Shorts,” the radio program from WNYC and Public Radio International. The show brings together voices from film, theater and comedy to read short fiction both classic and contemporary. This time around the guests include Sigourney Weaver, Colin Quinn and Jon Glaser. At 7:30 p.m., Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org.Tenement Talks: ‘The Search for General Tso’ (Wednesday) Chinese food, as we know it, is American food — at least according to Jennifer 8. Lee, who has written for The New York Times. She traveled to China to trace the origins of the ubiquitous Chinese restaurant dish General Tso’s chicken. She discusses the results with Sewell Chan, an opinion editor at The Times. At 6:30 p.m., Tenement Museum, 103 Orchard Street, at Delancey Street,Lower East Side, 877-975-3786, tenement.org; free.Walking ToursFlatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.The Ghosts of Grand Central (Saturdays) This tour offers shelter from the cold, though discovering the ghosts of Grand Central Terminal may bring a different sort of chill. There will be history of the Vanderbilts, as well as August Belmont, Franklin Roosevelt and his dog, Fala. The tour meets west of the M.T.A. information booth under the four-faced clock in the station’s Grand Concourse. (Through April 25.) At 7:30 p.m., 646-493-7092, ghostsofny.com.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.AdvertisementLower East Side Gallery Tour (Saturday) This art tour makes seven stops at galleries whose works include digital animations of cityscapes, as well as abstract paintings that combine video stills, spray paint and radio signals. One of the artists, Ori Carino, will speak with visitors at his exhibition. The tour meets at 196 Bowery, at Spring Street, at 1 p.m.; 212-946-1548, nygallerytours.com.Opening the Way: A Women’s History Walk (Sunday) This tour covers the history of Manhattan and the influence women — writers, abolitionists and suffragists from a broad range of time periods — had in its development. The tour, which makes 21 stops, is presented by Women’s eNews. It was researched by Betsy Wade, a former editor at The New York Times, and the historian James Boylan. Registration is required. At 11 a.m., 6 Barclay Street, near Broadway, Lower Manhattan, 212-244-1720, womensenews.org/openingtheway; free.Pre-Passover Jewish Lower East Side Tour (Sunday) Big Onion Walking Tours uses Passover as an occasion to explore the Lower East Side’s 150-plus-year Jewish history. Stops include the Eldridge Street Synagogue, as well as the Jewish Daily Forward and sites associated with names like Jacob Riis, Abraham Cahan and Lillian Wald. The tour meets at noon at the southwest corner of Delancey and Essex Streets. 888-606-9255, bigonion.com.A Taste of Jewish New York (Sundays) Participants in this tour will get an insider’s look at Borough Park, Brooklyn, by learning about the customs of its Hasidic residents. There will also be the chance to try a range of food. This tour includes a stop at a lively shopping area, as well as at a matzo bakery — with free samples, of course. The tour meets at 9:45 p.m. at Fort Hamilton Parkway and 44th Street; 718-339-2302, timelinetouring.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org. JOSHUA BARONEInformation on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes9.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes9.com9/events.A version of this schedule appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page C31 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.