By LAUREL GRAEBERMARCH 26, 2015
‘Matzo Madness!’Passover leads to thoughts of Moses and matzo. And, in at least one place, marshmallows.That’s the Museum at Eldridge Street, where on Sunday children will use those sweet treats to stand for something bitter: one of the 10 plagues God is said to have visited upon the ancient Egyptians for refusing to release the Jewish people from bondage.“We’re making cows for the plague of cattle disease,” said Judy Greenspan, education director at the museum, whose program “Matzo Madness!” is recommended for visitors ages 4 through 11 and their families. With marshmallows for heads, ears and bodies, and pretzel sticks for legs, the miniature beasts will be anchored on frosted graham crackers. Children will use markers with edible ink — it’s kosher — to draw faces.“I’m curious as to whether they’ll put the cows with their legs down or up in the air,” she said, “since it was, after all, a plague.” Participants can also turn brown paper bags into hand puppets evoking other scourges, like frogs and locusts.AdvertisementBut while the program will have fun with biblical lore, it will also emphasize that Passover, which begins next Friday at sundown, is a serious holiday. The eight-day observance celebrates the Jews’ escape from slavery in Egypt, while the museum itself, within the historic 1887 Eldridge Street Synagogue on the Lower East Side, commemorates a different exodus.Advertisement“The sea didn’t part again, but two and a half million Jews crossed another ocean, also looking for a promised land,” Ms. Greenspan said, referring to the wave of Jewish immigration to the United States from Eastern Europe in the 1880s and early 1900s. Children can discover this history at “Matzo Madness!,” part of the museum’s family series Preservation Detectives.In this case, little sleuths will follow clues leading them to objects and images within the museum — stained-glass patterns, a Star of David — and to smiling paper matzo cartoons they can collect. Along the way, they’ll assemble a narrative of what it felt like to be Jewish in New York generations ago.While some do the scavenger hunt, others can play Passover bingo and make cloth matzo covers. The author Evelyn Rothstein will share tales about her immigrant ancestors. And since freedom is something to sing about, Ora Fruchter, of the troupe Yellow Sneaker Puppets, will lead the museum’s first holiday singalong. That tradition promises to be almost as sweet as marshmallow cows.(From 11 a.m. to 1 p.m., 12 Eldridge Street, between Canal and Division Streets, 212-219-0302, eldridgestreet.org/visit/family. Reservations required.) LAUREL GRAEBERFor Children ‘The Adventures of Harold and the Purple Crayon’ (Sunday) Harold never has any trouble visiting the amazing places in his imagination: His ticket is his crayon, which brings them to life as soon as he draws them. Enchantment Theater Company of Philadelphia has adapted Crockett Johnson’s picture books about Harold into a musical for ages 5 and older. The production, part of the Target Family Fun series at Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, uses life-size puppets, magic, music and masks. At 2 p.m., Walt Whitman Theater, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, Brooklyn, 718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.Baby Loves Disco  (Sunday) Mommy and Daddy often love disco, too, and they can enjoy these afternoon dance parties — with bona fide D.J.s and nostalgic hits — along with their offspring. (The target age range is 6 months to 7 years.) Unlike clubs, these disco gatherings often feature diaper-changing stations, and unlike playgrounds, they usually have snacks and open bars for adults. This one, at Le Poisson Rouge, offers the usual bubble machines and shakers, as well as dancing. From noon to 3 p.m., 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich Village, babylovesdisco.com.Advertisement‘The Bully’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company has revived this ever-topical musical, by John Gregor and David L. Williams, which refreshingly avoids the trap of bullying its own audiences with heavy moralizing. Instead, the many pitfalls of the typical middle school relationship of victimizer and victim are revealed through wit, humor and a killer of a sly twist. (Through April 26.) At 3:30 p.m., McGinn-Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor; 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘Camp Kappawanna’ (Saturday and Sunday) If the spring equinox is here, can summer camp be far behind? This new musical from Atlantic for Kids, the children’s division of the Atlantic Theater Company, focuses on a 12-year old, Jennifer Jenkins, who is facing the challenge of leaving home for the first time. With music and lyrics by Lisa Loeb, Michelle Lewis and Dan Petty, and a book by Cusi Cram and Peter Hirsch, it features lots of singing, and not just around the campfire. (Through April 12.) At 10:30 a.m., Linda Gross Theater, 336 West 20th Street, Chelsea; 866-811-4111, atlantictheater.org.‘Catch Me!’ (Saturday and Sunday) Flip FabriQue is the French Canadian troupe performing this circus show at the New Victory Theater, and you’d better believe that its members do a lot of catching: They fly through the air as acrobats, aerialists and athletes. They also literally bounce off the walls: One of their signature acts combines a vertical surface and a trampoline. (Through April 19; some shows are sold out.) At noon and 5 p.m., 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.‘Fancy Nancy the Musical’  (Saturday and Sunday) One of the arts’ youngest divas has returned to the McGinn/Cazale Theater. This musical from Vital Theater Company focuses on a little girl who wants everything to be fancy — especially herself. Based on the book series written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, the production explores the predicament that ensues when Nancy finds out that she hasn’t been cast as the glamorous mermaid she’d hoped to be in the coming dance show. With a book by Susan DiLallo, a score by Danny Abosch, and lyrics by both, the musical humorously follows Nancy’s attempts to cope with a most unfancy role: that of a tree. (Through April 5.) At 1:30 p.m., 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.Freedom Art Jam (Sunday) What better way to celebrate liberty than to draw and dance? Freedom is the theme of this Passover celebration at the Jewish Museum, whose boogie aspects will be a Baby Loves Disco dance party (noon to 1:30 p.m.) and a concert by the Macaroons (2 p.m.), with songs about Moses and matzo. Art activities will include depicting Passover scenes on circles of watercolor paper, making storybooks centered on matzo and contributing to a huge collage in the form of a Seder plate. Noon to 4 p.m., 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Thursday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com.Hands-On Nano Demos (Saturday) Forget about thinking big; this free event is all about thinking small, as Sony Wonder Technology Lab offers experiments and workshops exploring the properties, structures and materials involved in nanotechnology. Recommended for ages 6 and older, these demonstrations are enhanced by the lab’s permanent exhibit on nanotechnology’s applications in fields like medicine, transportation and fashion. From 1 to 3 p.m., 550 Madison Avenue, at 56th Street, Manhattan, 212-833-8100, sonywondertechlab.com.‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one sprouts indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which has revived Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and noon, with an additional performance on Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays at 1 p.m. (Some shows are sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park; 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.Advertisement‘Kid M.D.’ (Saturday) It’s never too early to prepare for medical school, especially when you can have fun doing it. In this new program from Discovery Times Square, geared to children 8 and older, aspiring physicians will be given lab coats and stethoscopes before taking part in workshops within the “Body Worlds: Pulse” exhibition. Sloka Iyengar, a neuroscientist, will lead the activities, which will explore the sensory system, the brain, the heart, the lungs and the bones. The investigation ends with a mini-graduation. At 10:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m., 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan; 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com/kidmd.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton; 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.‘My Superhero, Roberto Clemente’  (Saturday) Roberto Clemente (1934-72) may not have had superpowers, but he was certainly a hero, both on and off the baseball field. Battling discrimination throughout his sports career, he became the first Latino athlete inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame, and was killed in the crash of a plane he had chartered to deliver aid to earthquake victims in Nicaragua. This bilingual children’s musical from Teatro SEA, written by Manuel Antonio Morán and Alejandro Zuleta, focuses on a boy named Bobby, who, with his friends, discovers Clemente’s legacy. (Also on April 4.) At 3 p.m., Los Kabayitos Puppet and Children’s Theater, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org.‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday and Sunday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through May 10.) Saturday at 1 p.m., Sunday at noon, 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, rapunzarellawhite.bpt.me.‘Shaping the Lowline With the Young Designers Program’ (Friday through Sunday) You know about the Highline; now comes the Lowline. This project, a planned underground park on the Lower East Side, has solicited ideas from area students through its Young Designers Program, an after-school initiative. This free exhibition at the Mark Miller Gallery, which closes on Sunday, includes 3-D models of the new park, along with written explanations and photos. It also offers interactive exhibits at which visitors can deliver their own suggestions and feedback. Noon to 6 p.m., 92 Orchard Street, near Broome Street, Lower East Side, 212-253-9479, thelowline.org/exhibit.‘Step Into: Passover’ (Sunday) And help the Jews step out of Egypt in this festival presented by the Hannah Senesh Community Day School and the Jewish Community House of Bensonhurst. The highlights include a model matzo bakery, holiday crafts, a dramatization of Passover history by the troupe Play Me a Story and a performance of Timbalooloo, the clarinetist Oran Etkin’s preschool music program. From 9 a.m. to noon, Hannah Senesh, 342 Smith Street, between First and Second Places, Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn, 718-858-8663, hannahsenesh.org.Stupendous Model Seder with ShirLaLa (Sunday) No, that’s not Sha Na Na or Shalala. ShirLaLa is the band of the children’s performer Shira Kline, who is coming to the Museum of Jewish Heritage with a Seder — the ritual meal that begins the Passover holiday — and an interactive concert about the Jews’ exodus from Egypt and journey to freedom. Intended for children 3 to 10, the event will include interactive storytelling. At 2 p.m., 36 Battery Place, at First Place, Lower Manhattan, 646-437-4202, mjhnyc.org.AdvertisementA Taste of Magic (Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. (Also on April 4 at Gossip Bar and Restaurant.) At 8 p.m., Dock’s Oyster Bar, 633 Third Avenue, near 41st Street, Manhattan, atasteofmagicnyc.com.‘Theatresports’ (Sunday) It may involve actors, but it’s still a competitive event: The members of Freestyle Repertory Theater, an improv troupe, are once again thinking fast on their feet. They break into two teams and perform skits based on suggestions from the audience. Children will not only vote to determine the contest’s winner, but also participate onstage. At noon, Gallery Players Theater, 199 14th Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-595-0547, Ext. 6, galleryplayers.com.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘Tunes With Tina’ (Sunday) That’s Tina deVaron, a jazz musician and singer, whose musical brunch for young people at the Measure Lounge at Langham Place, Fifth Avenue, a hotel in Midtown Manhattan, has returned. Ms. deVaron, who often sings show tunes for children, also improvises and gears her performances to the audience. On selected Sundays throughout the season, she will be accompanied by Broadway performers. Singing along is encouraged. (Through May 31.) At noon, 400 Fifth Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-695-4005, measurenyc.com.UniverSoul Circus (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Don’t expect hurdy-gurdy tunes at this big-top event. Emphasizing African-American contributions to circus arts, UniverSoul performs its acts to hip-hop, R&B, soul and gospel. This year’s show also presents performances from around the world, including Cuba, China, Ecuador and Ethiopia. Among the acts are flying trapeze artists, acrobats, Caribbean dancers and clowns. (Through April 5.) Weekdays at 10:30 a.m. and 7:30 p.m.; Saturdays at noon and 4 and 7:30 p.m.; Sundays at 12:30, 3:30 and 6:30 p.m., 149th Street and Exterior Street, Mott Haven, the Bronx, 800-345-7000, ticketmaster.com; universoulcircus.com.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Sunday through Wednesday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. This Sunday, at 1, 1:45 and 2:30 p.m., the museum will also feature the Matzo Bakery, a program in which children can grind wheat into flour and roll and bake their own matzos in preparation for Passover. Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; to 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; closed this Thursday; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.‘Washeteria’ (Friday through Sunday, and Wednesday and Thursday) In “The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe,” children reached the enchanted realm of Narnia through a portal in a piece of furniture; where do you suppose a magical washing machine might lead? Young theatergoers can find out in one of the two 25-minute cycles in “Washeteria.” This site-specific play, SoHo Rep’s first production for families, takes place in a vacant Brooklyn storefront that’s been transformed by Louisa Thompson, the show’s creator and designer, into a wild realm intended to wash clothes and spin the imagination. Recommended for ages 7 and older, the play, now in previews, will open officially on Sunday. (Through April 5.) Friday, Wednesday and Thursday at 3:30 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 11 a.m. and 4 p.m.; 321 Broadway, near Rodney Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 212-352-3101, sohorep.org.‘Why Is This Hunt Different?’ Passover Family Workshop (Sunday) This scavenger hunt is different from all other scavenger hunts (well, a lot of them) because the young participants will be seeking words, not objects. This program at Yeshiva University Museum, for ages 5 and older, will ask children to find the Hebrew words on surfaces in the exhibition “Modeling the Synagogue: From Dura to Touro,” which features scale models of synagogues worldwide, and on the pieces in the show “Shabbat: Inside and Out.” They’ll also prepare for Passover by designing and decorating cloth matzo covers. From 11 a.m. to 1 p.m., 15 West 16th Street, Flatiron district, 212-868-4444, yumuseum.org, smarttix.com. Reservations are required.‘Young Moses’ (Sunday) By the time he received the Ten Commandments, Moses was a pretty settled and serious guy, but what was he like as an adolescent? This ever so slightly irreverent production from the Poppy Seed Players imagines him as a youth with an identity crisis, and his sister, Miriam, as a musician who plays timbrel in an ensemble known as the All-Slave Orchestra. And then there’s that hardhearted pharaoh. They all help depict the Passover story in this musical for ages 4 through 10. At 11 a.m., Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, kaufmanmusiccenter.org/mch. LAUREL GRAEBERA version of this schedule appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page C31 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.