AdvertisementSupported byAntiquesBy Eve M. KahnSt. Charles Borromeo Seminary, which hosted Pope Francis a few weeks ago, is downsizing its art and book collections while shrinking its campus in Wynnewood, Pa., near Philadelphia.Last month, in an Americana sale, Swann Auction Galleries in New York dispersed two-dozen volumes from the school, which was founded in 1832. An account of maneuvers carried out in the French and Indian War, written in the 1750s by an officer named George Washington, brought $45,000.On Oct. 27, Swann will offer about 250 volumes from the seminary. The auction lots (with estimates starting at a few hundred dollars each) spotlight the wide-ranging interests of the faculty members. In addition to world religions, the topics include honeybees, plant names, medieval Norwegian conquerors, ancient Roman food, Danish explorers in Arab lands, Persian explorers in China, French fireworks, Egyptian geography and Italian coin collections. The text languages include Icelandic, Breton, Slavonic, Maltese, Armenian, Kurdish, Coptic, Persian, Syriac, Tibetan, Sanskrit and Burmese.Cait Kokolus, vice president for information services and assessment at the seminary, said that much of the provenance trail of the books “is lost in the fog of the past.” Only a few previous owners can be traced. A vellum Bible published in 1477 (estimated at $10,000 to $15,000) has a bookplate from a Bavarian monastery. A volume by the Greek poet Hesiod ($800 to $1,200) was given to Theodore H. Williamson, a star senior at the University of Pennsylvania who drowned in 1864, a year after graduation.The seminary is selling part of its property and planning renovations. While pruning its collections, it has been offering portraits of staff members by Thomas Eakins in private sales through Christie’s. The school consigned its painting of St. Peter’s Basilica  in Rome by Colin Campbell Cooper to a May sale at Bonhams in New York (estimated at $20,000 to $30,000). It did not sell, and since then, Ms. Kokolus said, “it’s come home.”Advertisement