AdvertisementSupported by For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.Alt-J  (Monday) After nabbing the Barclaycard Mercury Prize in 2012 for “An Awesome Wave,” a chilled and esoteric debut record, these British choral art-rockers returned last fall with “This Is All Yours.” Opaque and fanciful — and achingly earnest throughout — the album has a song (“Hunger of the Pine”) that samples Miley Cyrus’s “4x4” and evokes a pop mysticism befitting a band that takes its name from the mathematical symbol for change. It headlines its highest-profile American show to date. At 8 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, ticketmaster.com. (Stacey Anderson)★ Björk  (Saturday and Wednesday) It is startling to hear Björk — an artist who specializes in mercurial, brilliant electro-symphonics and opaquely cerebral lyrics — expose her heart so thoroughly on her morose new album, “Vulnicura.” Yet when this Icelandic star poses the devastating question “Did I love you too much?/Devotion bent me broken,” on the song “Black Lake” — over heavy, elegiac strings; warped voices; and fractured synth production from the upstart talent Arca — she creates her finest art in a decade. Her sorrow is terrible and gorgeous. Saturday at noon, Wednesday at 8 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org. (Anderson)Action Bronson  (Saturday) This professional chef-cum-rapper from Queens redirects his voracity toward the fleet rhyme composition of the Wu-Tang Clan and the foodie jargon (not to mention the irascibility) of Anthony Bourdain. His full-length 2011 debut, “Dr. Lecter,” shows where his heart is in the tracks “Brunch,” “Shiraz” and “Jerk Chicken.” He is touring in support of the newly released album “Mr. Wonderful.” At 2 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. (Anderson)Deerhoof  (Saturday) These dexterous noise-rockers from San Francisco balance the vocalist Satomi Matsuzaki’s flouncy singsong trills with brittle shards of guitar and bass-heavy underpinnings. They remain quite accessible, though: Their 2004 concept album, “Milk Man,” was adapted into a ballet and performed by elementary school students in Maine. The band will most likely be unaided by child dancers during this show, which will draw from its new record, “La Isla Bonita.” With Zula and others. At 7:45 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)Hanni El Khatib  (Monday) “Moonlight,” the third album by this Los Angeles-based singer-songwriter, bears the clean, mainstream blues-rock thumbprint of the Black Keys — courtesy of that band’s frontman, Dan Auerbach, who produced it — but it also preserves the wonderfully nasal vocals and spiraling psychedelic energy of past efforts. Mr. El Khatib remains an irreverent, lascivious presence; seemingly every other line he drawls is a swaggering double entendre. With Black Pistol Fire and Savants. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)Shakey Graves  (Friday) Although he is occasionally given the artless “hobo folk” handle for his scraped howl and twangy guitar fingerpicking, the singer-songwriter Alejandro Rose-Garcia transcends that label with his lo-fi Americana. Performing under the name Shakey Graves, this musician and actor from Austin, Tex., is worldly but not jaded for his 20-something years, and energetic yet minimally produced, with many aching riffs. His most recent album, “And the War Came,” has freak-folk moments that beg for further exploration. At 8 p.m., Warsaw, 261 Driggs Avenue, at Eckford Street, Greenpoint, Brooklyn, 866-777-8932, warsawconcerts.com. (Anderson)‘Hands On Live With Patti Smith and Jesse Smith’  (Friday) Patti Smith, the punk vanguard, is channeling her social activism spirit in a new direction. At Le Poisson Rouge, she and her daughter, Jesse, will join forces to raise funds for a new naturopathy clinic in the Catskill Mountains. At 7 p.m., Le Poisson Rouge, 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich Village, 212-505-3474, lepoissonrouge.com. (Anderson)★ Debbie Harry  (Fridays, Saturdays, and Tuesdays through Thursdays, through April 4) In the 1970s, when Ms. Harry and her band Blondie first trod CBGB’s sticky boards, she was the prototype of the glamorous punk: a woman full of righteous conviction who also radiated poise. Now, one year after the band celebrated its 40th anniversary and released the album “Ghosts of Download,” she’s taken to the regal Café Carlyle on the Upper East Side for a short residency. It’s a long way from the East Village, but a fitting place for a rock eminence. Fridays at 8:45 p.m. and 10:45 p.m.; Saturdays, and Tuesdays through Thursdays, at 8:45 p.m.; Café Carlyle, 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. (Anderson)Houndmouth  (Tuesday and Wednesday) Often pigeonholed in the Americana camp of photogenically scruffy roots-rockers, this quartet from New Albany, Ind., blends wider influences: hard-stomping rock, keening country-folk and angst-ridden blues. Its latest album, “Little Neon Limelight,” even nods a bit to metal in the percussion, courtesy of the drummer Shane Cody’s past life in such an ensemble; it also pares down to a striking minimalism on the track “For No One,” in which the singer Matt Myers ponders taking psychotropic drugs, sailing the world and, not least, falling in love. With Parker Millsap. Tuesday at 9 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. Wednesday at 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Anderson)Tobias Jesso Jr.  (Friday) Another member of the current ’70s-inflected folk-pop surge, along with Father John Misty and Patrick Watson, Mr. Jesso is capturing national attention fast for “Goon,” his debut solo album. On it, this Canadian singer-songwriter bemoans his lovelorn state over simple, crushing piano riffs, sounding like a perfectly sincere, contemporary ringer for James Taylor. With Okay Kaya. At 8 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, babysallright.com. (Anderson)Kind of Like Spitting  (Wednesday) This brittle, underrated indie-rock troupe from Portland, Ore., has regrouped under the frontman Ben Barnett, and it’s a moderately different lineup from the farsighted one that first split in the mid-2000s. Even if another covers album springs forth from its resurrection, fans of mindful lo-fi folk will be fortunate; its 2005 collection, “Learn: The Songs of Phil Ochs,” was terrific. The album “It’s Always Nice to See You,” its first record of original material in nine years, was released in February. With the City on Film, Lee Corey Oswald and Living Room. At 8 p.m., The Studio at Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)Miranda Lambert  (Saturday) Of all the pistol-packing ladies in country music, Miranda Lambert has the most audacious lyrics and the most unapologetic charisma. Her Grammy-winning ballad, “The House That Built Me,” paved the way for her most pop-rock turn yet, “Four the Record,” of 2011, which flashed her acerbic wit. The equally hilarious and hyper-confident “Platinum,” her fifth album, was released last year and won the Grammy Award for Best Country Album. At 7:30 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)Barry Manilow  (Friday) Mr. Manilow, one of the most successful, complacent adult-contemporary artists of the 1970s, is in a collaborative spirit. Last year, he released “My Dream Duets,” a dubious endeavor that wedged his vocals into harmony with such dearly departed folks as Marilyn Monroe, Whitney Houston and Frankie Lymon. At 7:30 p.m., Nassau Coliseum, Uniondale, on Long Island, 800-745-3000, ticketmaster.com. (Anderson)Milky Chance  (Saturday, Tuesday and Wednesday) In the random dice throw of genres that comprises today’s international pop scene, no one has yet combined reggae and electronica as successfully as Milky Chance, a charming duo from Kassel, Germany. The men, in their early 20s, released a debut album, “Sadnecessary,” that’s a beatnik spread of fingerpicked guitars and jazz-influenced synth pulses; the serene lead single, “Stolen Dance,” made the pair overnight stars in Europe, not least because of a bombastic cover by Imagine Dragons. With James Hersey. Saturday at 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. Tuesday and Wednesday at 9 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret (through April 4) The most anticipated event of cabaret’s high season is Debbie Harry’s already sold-out engagement at Café Carlyle, through April 4. On the heels of Buster Poindexter’s run there, it is proof positive that downtown has crashed the gates of uptown and that the punk-rock revolution, absorbed by the mainstream, now qualifies as rock nostalgia. (Friday at 8:45 p.m., and Saturday at 8:45 and 10:45 p.m., 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com.) At 54 Below, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, Melissa Manchester finishes her run on Friday and Saturday at 7 p.m. (Stephen Holden)Jon Spencer Blues Explosion  (Friday and Saturday) For this cheekily named group of alternative-rock aggressors, the blues are mostly alluded to. After breaking through in 1993 with the 1970s-style riffing on the album “Extra Width,” the band took an extended hiatus for much of the last decade. “Meat & Bone,” released in 2012, showed no waning of its sweaty enthusiasm. The group is currently on a tour of the five boroughs of New York City to support its 10th album, “Freedom Tower — No Wave Dance Party 2015,” which was just released. Friday at 9 p.m., the Point, 940 Garrison Avenue, at Manida Street, Hunts Point, the Bronx, thepoint.org. Saturday at 9 p.m., Singlecut Brewery, 19-33 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, singlecutbeer.com; free. (Anderson)Telmary  (Friday and Saturday) A Cuban rapper-poet who currently resides in Toronto, Telmary Diaz has a malleable flow that can be rapid-fire or languid, often within the same verse. Her smoky style recalls Proyecto Uno, the merengue-rap progenitors, and the jazzy backing rhythms mirror thoughtful, socially incisive lyrics. Her album “A Diario,” released about eight years ago, remains popular in Spanish-language rap circles; she performs as part of the Cuban Culture Festival New York. At 9 p.m., BAMcafé, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Anderson)They Might Be Giants  (Sunday) These Brooklyn-born eccentrics of the highest order — they represented Keep Williamsburg Weird decades ago with the 1990s singles “Istanbul (Not Constantinople)” and “Snail Shell.” They released their 16th studio album, “Nanobots,” in 2013 — after which, fittingly, they gave a lively and heartfelt closing performance at the Celebrate Brooklyn! festival. For their residency at the Music Hall of Williamsburg, they will play the last Sunday of each month through May. At 8 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)Advertisement