MARCH 26, 2015
 Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ Armitage Gone! (Friday) Dance isn’t the most obvious way to address climate change, but the inventive choreographer Karole Armitage takes an intriguing stab at it by setting her new work, “On the Nature of Things,” in the Milstein Hall of Ocean Life at the American Museum of Natural History. Ms. Armitage has also smartly recruited the renowned biologist Paul R. Ehrlich, who has composed, and will read, an original text to accompany the 30 dancers. At 8 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org. (Brian Schaefer)★ Ballet West  (Friday through Sunday) This troupe has a national profile partly because of its participation in the reality TV show “Breaking Pointe,” which chronicled the personalities and backstage antics of this Salt Lake City company. For its Joyce Theater debut, the troupe will keep the drama onstage in New York premieres by Matthew Neenan and Nicolo Fonte as well as Val Caniparoli’s “The Lottery,” based on Shirley Jackson’s chilling short story about a violent ritual in a small town. Helen Pickett, resident choreographer of the Atlanta Ballet, contributes a world premiere. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m., 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)Maya Ciarrocchi and Kris Grey  (Friday and Saturday) As any university sociology professor will tell you, gender is a performance. The video artist Maya Ciarrocchi and the visual and performance artist Kris Grey bring that idea to the stage, making a performance of that performance in “Gender/Power (composition II).” The work, part of Gibney’s new Making Space series, includes an immersive installation and draws from the experiences of those who defy gender norms and challenge the relationship between power and sex. The installation opens at 4 p.m. daily, with performances at 6, 7 and 8 p.m. Gibney Dance Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement‘Blondell Cummings — Point of Reference’  (Friday) Performance and discussion are equal parts of this Fridays at Noon series event at the 92nd Street Y. The choreographer Edisa Weeks will present “Manufacturing Consent,” a work with varied sources, including the writings of Noam Chomsky and Yvonne Rainer’s 1962 dance “Three Seascapes.” Ms. Cummings, a choreographer and arts activist, will lead a discussion with guests from the neighboring disciplines of anthropology, philosophy, religion and dance criticism, exploring the ways personal history shapes perception. Panelists include Tracy Austin, Victoria Phillips and Eyal Press. At noon, 1395 Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org. (Siobhan Burke)Advertisement★ ‘Dancers, Buildings and People in the Streets’ (Saturday) Danspace Project’s Platform 2015, which takes its title phrase from the dance critic Edwin Denby, has been all about tearing down walls, specifically those between classical ballet and contemporary dance. Its curator, Claudia La Rocco, a poet and critic who contributes to The New York Times, has paired artists from these different disciplines in performances throughout the project. It ends, fittingly, with a program from the series Conversations Without Walls, featuring a discussion between platform participants and guests. The panelists will include Siobhan Burke, a critic who also contributes to The Times; the scholar and writer Adrienne Edwards; the ballet dancer David Hallberg; and the dancer and choreographer Yvonne Rainer. At 2 p.m., Danspace Project, St. Mark’s Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village, 866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org. (Laurel Graeber)★ Flexn  (through April 4) Flex, a dance style thought to have been born in Jamaica in the ’90s and raised in the clubs of Brooklyn, is defined by dislocated limbs, extreme contortions and stuttering steps reminiscent of animation. It is disconcerting and elegant, nightmarish and divine, and a fitting vessel to consider today’s volatile race relations. This ambitious project by the director Peter Sellars and the flex pioneer Reggie Gray, known as Regg Roc, brings a crew of 20 flex dancers to the Park Avenue Armory’s cavernous hall. Wednesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.; 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org. (Schaefer)★ Liz Gerring Dance Company  (Tuesday through Thursday) Ms. Gerring’s evening-length “Glacier” has a certain chill, but her lucid choreography for eight skilled dancers, interwoven with Michael J. Schumacher’s score, can also be electric. The music, her starting point, began as a catalog of environmental sounds collected at Glacier Lake, near Boulder, Colo. “Glacier” reflects both the serenity and vitality of that setting. Well received at its 2013 premiere at Peak Performances, the hourlong work gets a reprise at the Joyce Theater. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m.; Thursday at 8 p.m.; 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Burke)Gotham Chamber Opera and the Martha Graham Dance Company  (Friday through Sunday) Hosted by the Metropolitan Museum of Art, these estimable ensembles team up to present “The Tempest Songbook,” a re-envisioning of Shakespeare’s “The Tempest” by the Italian director and choreographer Luca Veggetti. Mr. Veggetti sets movement for singers and dancers to Purcell’s 1695 music for the play, paired with Kaija Saariaho’s 2004 composition for period instruments, soprano and baritone. Friday and Saturday at 7 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.; Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Burke)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Juilliard Dances Repertory  (Friday and Saturday) There’s nothing that makes an old work feel new again more than seeing it tackled by fresh, hungry minds. These talented Juilliard students bring to life Martha Graham’s 1946 abstract work “Dark Meadow” (with live music performed by fellow Juilliard students), staged by Terese Capucilli, who danced with the Graham company for 26 years. The students will also keep Merce Cunningham’s legacy alive with performances of his technologically innovative “Biped,” from 1999. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Peter Jay Sharp Theater, 155 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center, 212-769-7406, events.juilliard.edu. (Schaefer)Gelsey Kirkland Ballet (Friday and Saturday) The legacy of Marius Petipa lives on most ubiquitously in classic full-length ballets like “Swan Lake” and “The Sleeping Beauty.” Displaying a lighter side of that 19th-century Russian ballet master, Ms. Kirkland’s adept preprofessional company, made up of 29 students from her school in Lower Manhattan, perform two of his shorter, more comedic works, “Harlequinade” and “Cavalry Halt.” The program aligns with Ms. Kirkland’s fervent educational mission, “to foster a rebirth of dramatic storytelling in ballet.” At 8 p.m., Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org. (Burke)★ Rashaun Mitchell (Wednesday through April 4) Mr. Mitchell unveils a new work, “Light Years,” turning his astute imagination toward notions of infinitude. How much information can one body hold? What if the boundaries it knows, in time and space, fall away? Populating this universe will be the excellent dancers Hiroki Ichinose, Cori Kresge, Silas Riener and Melissa Toogood, most of whom were Mr. Mitchell’s colleagues in the Merce Cunningham Dance Company. At 7:30 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Burke)Ani Taj and the Dance Cartel  (Friday and Saturday) As orchestrators of flash mobs, performance parties and other choreographic revelry, Ms. Taj and her cohort are committed to making dance for a far-reaching, fun-loving audience. As part of Studio Series, a platform for works in progress at New York Live Arts, they offer a preview of their latest endeavor, “Wet Clutch,” a celebration of Hollywood heroines that’s intended for public spaces. A discussion with the artists follows the showing. At 6 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Burke)Advertisement★ Take Dance  (Friday and Saturday) While Paul Taylor’s company performs uptown, the former Paul Taylor dancer Takehiro Ueyama celebrates his 10-year anniversary as an independent choreographer by presenting his second evening-length work, “There and Here.” This meditation on life and afterlife is set to an improvisational score by the composer and sound artist Kato Hideki, and features a reunion of sorts with the fellow former Taylor dancers Amy Young and Orion Duckstein, as well as the powerfully ethereal Miki Orihara. At 7:30 p.m., Schimmel Center for the Arts, Pace University, 3 Spruce Street, between Park Row and Gold Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-346-1715, schimmel.pace.edu. (Schaefer)★ Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance  (Friday through Sunday) It’s never too late to reinvent yourself: After 60 years as the Paul Taylor Dance Company, the group has returned as Paul Taylor’s American Modern Dance, a more inclusive moniker reflecting the addition of outside choreographers. This season includes Shen Wei, with his artful “Rite of Spring,” and the pioneering Doris Humphrey, represented by her 1938 “Passacaglia.” Adding to his tireless output, Mr. Taylor has also presented a new work, “Death and the Damsel.” Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com. (Schaefer)Annie Wilson  (Friday and Saturday) Why does the performance of “sexiness” often look so ridiculous? This Philadelphia artist ponders this and other probing questions in a new work. Having debuted in 2014, this “burlesque-postmodern-dance-theater-bad-improv performance,” as Ms. Wilson describes it, claims a kinship with work by other artists from the City of Brotherly Love who take a raw, and decidedly more sisterly, look at female sexuality. At 8 p.m., Jack, 505 1/2 Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Schaefer)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page C18 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Dance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.