AdvertisementSupported by Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera★ ‘Don Carlo’ (Monday and Thursday) The Metropolitan Opera assembles a powerhouse cast in this revival of Nicholas Hytner’s lurid but taut production of Verdi’s masterpiece. Yannick Nézet-Séguin marshals forces that include Barbara Frittoli as Elisabeth de Valois, Ekaterina Gubanova as Eboli, and Yonghoon Lee in the title role. Dmitri Hvorostovsky sings Rodrigo, and Ferruccio Furlanetto returns to one of his signature roles as Philip II. At 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)‘Ernani’ (Tuesday) Plácido Domingo, seemingly determined to prolong his career, has taken on another baritone role: Don Carlo, in the Metropolitan Opera’s revival of Verdi’s “Ernani.” This once-glorious tenor’s many fans cheered him on opening night, but his singing these days is compromised, his sound leathery. He was also notably careless in execution. There were still flashes of the great Domingo vocal charisma. But Verdi had a baritone in mind for this music. The rest of the cast is excellent, especially the sumptuous soprano Angela Meade as Elvira, and the youthful Italian tenor Francesco Meli in the title role. James Levine, a great Verdian, conducts. At 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)★ Les Délices  (Saturday) This Cleveland-based early-music ensemble brings a fascinating program, entitled “Myths & Allegories,” to Miller Theater. Selections from Jean-Féry Rebel’s opera “Ulysse” form the evening’s core, with other works from François Chauvon, Thomas-Louis Bourgeois and Elisabeth Jacquet de la Guerre. At 8 p.m., Miller Theater, Broadway and 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-7799, millertheatre.com. (David Allen)‘Lucia di Lammermoor’  (Saturday and Wednesday) The ardent tenor Joseph Calleja is the strongest element in the Metropolitan Opera’s bland revival of Donizetti’s moody masterpiece. The potent Russian coloratura soprano Albina Shagimuratova has accuracy but little passion. The baritone Luca Salsi sings her brother, Enrico, and Maurizio Benini conducts. Saturday at 12 p.m. and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)★ ‘Manon’ (Saturday) The temperature rises nearly to boiling every time Diana Damrau and Vittorio Grigolo are onstage together in the Metropolitan Opera’s sensational revival of Massenet’s tragedy, conducted with lithe lyricism by Emmanuel Villaume. The supporting cast, including the bass-baritone Nicolas Testé, the tenor Christophe Mortagne and the baritone Russell Braun, is excellent, and Laurent Pelly’s well-traveled production, set in the Belle Époque, has held up well. This is the final performance. At 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)★ ‘The Tempest Songbook’  (Friday through Sunday) Gotham Chamber Opera presents a bold pairing of works inspired by Shakespeare’s visionary play — a 1695 score attributed to Purcell, and Kaija Saariaho’s 2004 “Tempest Songbook” for soprano, baritone and period-instrument ensemble — in its first staged performance. Performers include the soprano Jennifer Zetlan, the bass-baritone Thomas Richards and dancers from the Martha Graham Dance Company. The choreographer Luca Veggetti directs; Neal Goren conducts. Friday and Saturday at 7 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Classical MusicChamber Music Society of Lincoln Center  (Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday) The violinist James Ehnes makes his debut with the Society in a program on Sunday and Tuesday featuring Mozart’s Sonata in A for Violin and Piano (K. 526); Mendelssohn’s Quartet in C minor for Piano, Violin, Viola, and Cello; and Brahms’s Sextet No. 1 in B flat for Two Violins, Two Violas and Two Cellos. On Thursday, in a New Music in the Kaplan Penthouse program, Mr. Ehnes joins colleagues, including the pianist Gilles Vonsattel, for music by Jörg Widmann, Derek Bermel, Aaron Jay Kernis and Leon Kirchner. Sunday at 5 p.m., Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Alice Tully Hall; Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Kaplan Penthouse, 165 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org. (Vivien Schweitzer)Cygnus  (Thursday) This innovative ensemble of plucked strings, bowed strings and woodwinds presents Allen Shawn’s settings of poems by Hagiwara Sakutaro, as well as pieces by Benjamin Boretz, Liza Sobel, Shoko Suzuki and Damon Ferrante. At 7:30 p.m., Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org. (Schweitzer)‘In the Fiddler’s House’  (Tuesday) The tireless star violinist Itzhak Perlman headlines the centennial gala of the National Yiddish Theater Folksbiene in a musical extravaganza that features stars from the klezmer scene and special guests alongside the Klezmer Conservatory Band. At 7.30 p.m. Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Alexi Kenney (Tuesday) Concert Artists Guild, which has a long history of fostering the careers of emerging artists, presents a recital by Alexi Kenney, a prizewinning young California violinist, with Renana Gutman, a pianist. His program includes pieces by Schumann, Enescu and Westhoff, and a premiere by Shawn Jaeger. Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall. 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Tommasini)★ Lukas Ligeti  (Tuesday through Thursday) This eclectic percussionist and composer, whose work draws on influences including jazz, electronica and African music, arrives at the Stone for a six-day residency (through Sunday) in various configurations. At 8 and 10 p.m., the Stone, Avenue C and Second Street, East Village, thestonenyc.com. (Woolfe)★ New York Philharmonic  (Friday and Saturday) Just one program at the Philharmonic this week. John Adams’s “Scheherazade.2,” a “dramatic symphony” written for the violinist Leila Josefowicz, receives its world premiere performances alongside Liadov’s “The Enchanted Lake” and Stravinsky’s “Petrushka.” Alan Gilbert conducts. At 8 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Allen)Murray Perahia  (Wednesday) This eminent pianist returns to Carnegie Hall for a program featuring Bach’s French Suite No. 6; Haydn’s Sonata in A flat (Hob. XVI: 46); Beethoven’s Piano Sonata No. 26 (“Les Adieux”); Franck’s Prelude, Chorale and Fugue (Op. 21); and Chopin’s Scherzo No. 1. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)‘Seven Words’ (Thursday) Haydn’s hourlong meditation on the Crucifixion, “Seven Last Words of Christ on the Cross,” returns to the Metropolitan Museum in an ambitious multimedia production, with video design by Ofri Cnaani, and the intense Attacca Quartet performing its own arrangement of Haydn’s music, based on the oratorio. At 7 p.m., Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 212-570-3949, metmuseum.org. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)Dawn Upshaw  (Sunday) As part of the Peoples’ Symphony Concerts series, which presents first-rate artists at wallet-friendly prices, the soprano Dawn Upshaw, accompanied by the pianist Gilbert Kalish, sings a program of works by Schubert, Bartok, Ives, Ravel and William Bolcom. At 2 p.m., the Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, 212-586-4680, pscny.org. (Schweitzer)David Witten (Sunday) The American pianist David Witten, currently the coordinator of keyboard studies at Montclair State University in New Jersey, has long been curious about overlooked piano repertory, including works by the progressive Italian composer Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco, who died in California in 1968. He will perform some of these rediscoveries at SubCulture, along with pieces by the Russian-born composer and pianist Alexander Tcherepnin and by Alexander’s father, Nikolai Tcherepnin. He also plays some Debussy preludes. Sunday at 7:30 p.m., SubCulture, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 212-533-5470, subculturenewyork.com. (Tommasini)Advertisement