
Antiques By                     
EVE M. KAHN

MARCH 26, 2015
Nineteenth-century Rome teemed with American sculptors, competing for tourist and expat commissions. Customers wanted realistic portraits of themselves, carved from stone, as well as statues of literary figures, politicians, gods and goddesses. By the mid-20th century, however, the works were considered so fusty that some descendants of original owners simply destroyed them.Curators at the Walters Art Museum and the Maryland Institute College of Art in Baltimore have gathered some surviving items from a family’s collection for an exhibition, “Rinehart’s Studio: Rough Stone to Living Marble,” that opens on Sunday. In the 1860s and ’70s, William Henry Rinehart, a Maryland native, created numerous busts from his Rome workshop that depicted the Walters family. The artworks and some artifacts from Rinehart’s studio have landed in Baltimore institutions, including the Walters, the Maryland Institute College and Johns Hopkins University.No one knows why the Walters family became so enamored of the sculptor’s busts, and Rinehart, who died in 1874, at 49, left little to explain his methods and aspirations.But curators say that he was a largely self-taught son of a farmer who also quarried marble. His rivals in Rome were mostly New England intellectuals, including Harriet Hosmer and William Wetmore Story. The expats socialized, even while they gossiped and tried to undermine one another’s reputations.Advertisement“This was a cutthroat business in Rome,” Jenny Carson, the Maryland Institute College’s curator, said. “There was so much back-stabbing, and partying in the beer garden at the same time.”Rinehart and his employees rendered delicate fabric layers and wisps of hair from stone. And their patrons sometimes waited years for their likenesses. Jo Briggs, an assistant curator at the Walters, pointed out that Rinehart stamped out standard designs to meet demand: “Different sizes to suit your pocketbook, to suit your house.”His works also show up as cemetery monuments. The new exhibition contains a pristine marble sculpture of two intertwined, sleeping children; a weathered version of the same piece marks five graves from the 1850s and ’60s at Green Mount Cemetery in Baltimore for the infant and toddler children of Hugh Sisson, a local marble magnate.AdvertisementOn Wednesday, Christie’s in New York sold two white marble busts of women carved by Rinehart’s competitors in Italy, including the African-American sculptor Edmonia Lewis, at prices from $18,750 to $27,500 each. A new book, “A Sisterhood of Sculptors: American Artists in Nineteenth-Century Rome” (Penn State University Press), by the art historian Melissa Dabakis, is devoted to Lewis and other female rivals. And an exhibition of works by the expat crowd, “American Neoclassic Sculpture,” is at the Boston Athenaeum through May 17.CLUNKY OLD TECHNOLOGYIt’s not high tech, but old tech — clunky keyboards and low-resolution monitors — that could encourage visitor participation at “The Interface Experience: Forty Years of Personal Computing,” which opens on April 3 at the Bard Graduate Center: Decorative Arts, Design History, Material Culture in Manhattan.“I wanted to create a tactile experience, something that was really physical,” said the main curator, Kimon Keramidas. He added, “Hopefully it’ll be noisy in here.” Dr. Keramidas bought the equipment on eBay, paying at most a few hundred dollars for each item, whether the products were made by still-thriving companies like Apple or the dinosaurs that designed PalmPilots, Commodores and Minitel terminals. Dr. Keramidas is displaying deeply flawed accessories, too, including translucent power cords that slowly degrade and become sticky dust magnets.The exhibition’s accompanying book (distributed by the University of Chicago Press) describes passé devices that had initially drawn praise from technology reviewers who “readily declared religious experiences and feelings of love.” But an unreliable Tandy model called the TRS-80, Dr. Keramidas writes, “was unfortunate enough to earn the moniker ‘Trash-80.’ ”Past owners of the machines on view kept repairing and upgrading them. Dr. Keramidas’s team cleaned them while preserving patina.“These devices are really modified and altered a lot,” he said. He turned on a Commodore, and horizontal distortion lines dripped down the monitor. “I’ve just learned to embrace that,” he said.Vintage computers in pristine condition can now bring six-figure prices. In October, at a Bonhams auction in New York, the Henry Ford museum in Dearborn, Mich., paid $905,000 for a 1976 Apple 1 motherboard, which the catalog reported had “no apparent modifications performed.”A DISTORTED LOOK EAST Early photographers in Asia posed their subjects and edited their negatives in ways that conformed to their preconceptions of what peasants, priests, noblemen, villages and ruins should look like.That distortion is now the focus of several shows.Through Thursday, at the Aperture Gallery in Manhattan, “The Chinese Photobook” displays an Austrian photographer’s portraits, taken in the early 1900s, of Chinese female prostitutes posed as nude Buddhas on pedestals.AdvertisementThrough May 25, a retrospective at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, “Captain Linnaeus Tripe: Photographer of India and Burma, 1852-1860,” reveals how Tripe pigmented negatives to prune trees, invent clouds and add ripples to lakes that reflected temple spires. (A show of Tripe prints also runs through April 24 at the Hans P. Kraus Jr. gallery in Manhattan; prices start around $10,000 each.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“No other photographers from this early period transformed their negatives so diligently, effectively, and extensively as Tripe,” the historian Roger Taylor writes in the Met catalog (from Prestel).Europeans’ sometimes caricatured photos of 19th-century Japanese men and women are on view until April 26 at the Ethnography Museum in Neuchâtel, Switzerland. A related book, “The Journey of ‘A Good Type’: From Artistry to Ethnography in Early Japanese Photographs” (Harvard University Press), by the anthropologist David Odo, is due this summer.Martin Parr, a British photographer and photography collector, owns many of the works in the Aperture Gallery show. (He served as curator with the Dutch collaborative WassinkLundgren.) Mr. Parr explained in an interview that he liked the ways photographers in China fictionalized what they saw. He said he planned to keep his holdings together at a British museum, but that he had not chosen which one.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page C28 of the New York edition with the headline: Carving Out a Career in European Stone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »