
Friday File By                     
 MARY JO MURPHY
 
MARCH 26, 2015
111 YEARS AGORide the Cyclone or see a sword swallower when Coney Island opens for the season this weekend. Thrills, chills and sideshows are still to be found by the Brooklyn seashore.But you won’t find boxing horses, bear jockeys, an Incubator Building populated with premature babies or a teahouse with 40 geisha girls as servers.That was the Coney of a bygone era.The Coney of 1904, to be exact, when Dreamland opened along with adjoining Luna Park, which had been rebuilt after burning the year before. “New Coney Dazzles Its Record Multitude” read the headline in The New York Times on May 15 for an article reporting that “a quarter of a million men and women got a glimpse of a swaying, rocking, glittering magic city by the sea” on opening day.“Picturesque Luna Park, with its added acres of new attractions, and the much-talked-about Dreamland presented a bewildering mixture of men, animals, and things that words can scarcely describe,” the article said. “They had been gathered from every corner of the globe, and represented about everything that nature and science have ever produced.”AdvertisementOne of those productions was Dwarf City. “Storekeepers, policemen, firemen, musicians, wagon drivers and others who live there are all dwarfs,” the article reported, though it failed to differentiate between dwarfs and midgets. “They have a Liliputian Fire Department, with little fire engines, a miniature livery stable, a midget theatre, midget circus, diminutive horses, bantam chickens and everything else that would go to make up a midget city, even to its midget Chinese laundrymen. Although everything there is on the smallest possible scale, it is perhaps one of the biggest features of the regenerated Coney Island.”AdvertisementA re-creation of the imperial court in British Delhi, complete with an imported Indian population, was another attraction, a “gorgeous spectacle of India” that was “duplicated on a scale never before attempted,” an article in The Times reported shortly before the opening. The article described it this way: “A herd of sixty elephants — including the largest elephant in captivity — forty camels, three hundred native Hindus, one hundred horsemen, and five hundred foot soldiers go into the procession. The village in which these Hindus live is a sight in itself for American eyes. These curious people from the Orient bring their local customs with them. They are on Coney Island, but by no means of it. They have their own cooks and their own priest. The management had to bring tons of food specially for them. It was all written in the contract. Curry, rice, and Bombay duck have been brought from India to feed them. More of it is on the way here. ‘One off the iron and a schooner,’ Coney Island’s standard of a snack luncheon, does not appeal to the fastidious Hindu.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pyrophiles were apparently a sought-after audience — Dreamland and Luna Park featured competing fire attractions. In Luna Park, “there is a large arena in which the spectators may watch a whole city block burn down, with thrilling rescues from factory windows, real fire engines, and that sort of thing.” In Dreamland, “it will be a large city hotel that crumbles beneath the flames, with all the exciting incidents that attend such a conflagration.”The first months of the new Coney were not without dangers to parkgoers and performers alike, and a number of incidents were reported. Under the headline “Modern Barbarity,” one letter writer to The Times took issue:“How long is this reckless jeopardizing of life to be tolerated? How long are women and men to be allowed to enter the dens of wild beasts at the imminent risk of being torn to pieces?”The letter, signed “Singapura,” from Brooklyn, continued, “The tendency seems to be toward hair-raising and nerve-thrilling risks, resulting in horrors that, with a better and kindlier public sentiment, would surely be eliminated from the programmes of even the most advanced caterers at the thrill factories of our amusement centres.”Ah, but they were not eliminated. Not then, at any rate. To quote F. Scott Fitzgerald’s Jay Gatsby several years later, “Let’s go to Coney Island, old sport.” MARY JO MURPHYA version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page C30 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »