AdvertisementSupported byArt in ReviewBy Holland CotterThe micro-survey of Lynn Hershman Leeson’s art at the new Bridget Donahue Gallery is a tip-of-the-iceberg event with the potential force of a stealth explosive. Ms. Hershman Leeson began her career in the San Francisco Bay Area in the culturally roiling early 1960s. Like many young artists then, she identified as a painter, but one with multimedia extensions and futuristic ambitions. Almost from the start she was also working in sculpture that had a cyborglike dimension. The small assemblage in the show called “Breathing Machine II” (1968/2011), consisting of a wax face obscured by a wig, butterflies and feathers, sighs and coughs when you draw near.Before Cindy Sherman was creating fictional histories for the camera, Ms. Hershman Leeson was living one, that of an alter ego named Roberta Breitmore, a 30-something divorced woman with an apartment of her own, a therapist and a troubled past. For several years in the mid-1970s, Ms. Hershman Leeson, wearing a wig and dark glasses, actually was Breitmore, at least part-time, and hired a private detective to tail her and photograph her daily movements. Several of those pictures are in the show, analog forecasters of the digital surveillance and identity theft that have since become ubiquitous.Ms. Hershman Leeson continues to use art as an advance warning system in new work, developed with scientists, that focuses on, and participates in, the phenomenon of genetic manipulation. The show’s most recent piece is an installation of wallpaper made from images of hybrid animals, plants, and human limbs created through DNA manipulation, regenerative medicine and 3-D bio-printing. It looks great in the gallery, and like much of this artist’s work, it takes both ethics and aesthetics in ungraspable directions.Ms. Hershman Leeson’s multitasking ambition includes filmmaking: Her 2010 “!Women Art Revolution,” the best documentary on the early feminist art movement, will be screened at the gallery on Friday night. The big question is why we haven’t seen more of her in New York. A major Hershman Leeson retrospective is on view at ZKM/Center for Art and Media in Karlsruhe, Germany, and will travel in Europe, but no American dates have been set. Aren’t our museums supposed to tell us where we’ve been and where we’re going? Someone here should grab that prophetic show now.Bridget Donahue Gallery 99 Bowery, second floor,Lower East Side Through April 5Advertisement