By ZACHARY WOOLFEOCT. 15, 2015
When we think back on the New York career of Marian Anderson, the great African-American contralto, we tend to boil it down to a single date: Jan. 7, 1955, when she became the first black singer to perform on the Metropolitan Opera’s stage. But by then, she had already appeared 10 times with the New York Philharmonic, in repertory that included Mahler’s “Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen,” the spiritual “Every Time I Feel the Spirit” and Gounod’s “Ave Maria,” an arrangement of a Bach prelude.Those works were among the selections at David Geffen Hall on Wednesday, when the Philharmonic presented “In Their Footsteps,” a tribute to Anderson, Betty Allen, George Shirley and William Warfield — trailblazing singers with deep ties to the orchestra — organized by the bass-baritone Eric Owens, the Philharmonic’s artist in residence this season, and conducted by Thomas Wilkins.A highlight of the touching event, dotted with heartfelt filmed testimonials, was the Philharmonic’s belated first performance of selections from Scott Joplin’s opera “Treemonisha.” The orchestra was crisp in the ragtime-inflected overture; the soprano Laquita Mitchell’s dark-hued tone didn’t prevent her from floating in the gently flowing narrative “The Sacred Tree”; and the tenor Russell Thomas brought his heroic, burnished sound to the impassioned lecture “Wrong Is Never Right” (and, later, to “Ingemisco,” from Verdi’s Requiem).In a Mahler song and the spiritual “On Ma Journey Now,” the mezzo-soprano Deborah Nansteel had a decorous presence and an emotive vibrato. Janai Brugger sang “Ave Maria” and “My God Is So High” with a creamy light soprano. The Dorothy Maynor Singers of the Harlem School for the Arts, which Allen led after her retirement from opera in the late 1970s, combined sweetly in “Every Time I Feel the Spirit.” Mr. Owens sounded rich and rolling in two numbers from “Porgy and Bess” — “I Got Plenty O’ Nuttin’ ” and, with Ms. Mitchell, “Bess, You Is My Woman Now” — and “Ol’ Man River.”The artists came together at the end for “Simple Gifts,” from Copland’s “Old American Songs,” recorded nobly by Warfield. A stirring finale, but it was difficult not to notice that Mr. Wilkins and the five soloists — not to mention the chorus — far outnumbered the single African-American musician currently in the orchestra. By coincidence, also on Wednesday evening, Carnegie Hall was hosting a performance by the Sphinx Virtuosi, the flagship ensemble of the Sphinx Organization, devoted to promoting what is still an elusive racial diversity in classical music.The celebration at Geffen Hall rightly drew attention to the Philharmonic’s long history of collaborations with black artists. But the struggle for equality in the field continues.A version of this review appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page C11 of the New York edition with the headline: Lending Their Voices  to Honor the Trailblazers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.