By KEN JOHNSONMARCH 26, 2015
“Scenes for a New Heritage: Contemporary Art From the Collection” is an unusually optimistic-sounding title for the Museum of Modern Art’s latest installation of works from its permanent collection. Filling the second-floor contemporary galleries, the show features videos, installations, sculptures, drawings, prints and photographs produced by more than 30 artists during the past three decades.It’s an uneven selection, but leaving artistic quality aside, it inadvertently raises a large and intriguing question: At a time when contemporary art seems to be spinning its wheels and, like the world at large, going nowhere in particular, what could a new heritage be? What sort of future might art have? (The show was organized by four MoMA curators: Quentin Bajac and Eva Respini, both from the photography department; Ana Janevski, from media and performance art; and Sarah Suzuki, from drawings and prints; with Katerina Stathopoulou, a curatorial assistant from photography.)The exhibition’s title is taken from a series of low-budget videos projected within a framework of cobbled-together pieces of Sheetrock by the Croatian artist David Maljkovic, each called “Scene for a New Heritage.” Set 50 or so years from now, the series starts with cars comically wrapped in shiny metal foil to make them appear futuristic, driving along rural roads and arriving at a derelict monument to dead soldiers of World War II built in 1981 by the government of the former Yugoslavia. A structure of about five stories with curvy walls, it looks like a small office building designed by Frank Gehry. It’s the focus of a park and plaza now invaded by weeds and shrubbery. Seen from a distance, visitors in small groups mill about without clear purpose. There’s a feeling of mournful nostalgia in sharp contrast to the spirit of forward-looking faith in one of history’s most comprehensive collective endeavors — i.e., Communism — that the monument once embodied.In a similarly deflating vein, a group of small paintings titled “Exploitation of the Dead” (1984-90), by another Croatian, Mladen Stilinovic, hangs at the start of the show. Compositions in black, white, red and tan painted on wood scraps and cardboard parody, with slacker attitude, paintings from the early years of Russian Modernism as well as Soviet-style symbolism.AdvertisementOn an adjacent wall hangs the first piece that visitors see on entering the exhibition. Made last year by Rirkrit Tiravanija, it’s an approximately seven-foot-by-seven-foot collage of Thai newspapers over which are stenciled words declaiming, “The days of this society is numbered.” A wall label explains that this is a deliberately mistranslated quote from the French theorist Guy Debord, author of “The Society of the Spectacle.”Reasons that modern society’s days may be numbered are given by many other works. There’s the American legacy of slavery in Kara Walker’s “Gone: An Historical Romance of a Civil War as It Occurred Between the Dusky Thighs of One Young Negress and Her Heart” (1994), a mural-scale vision in black paper silhouettes of an antebellum South rife with sexual perversity. A piece by Doris Salcedo called “Atrabiliarios” (1992-93) that has old shoes in small niches behind foggily translucent rectangles made of cow bladder memorializes people who disappeared during the Colombian Civil War.AdvertisementA distinctively American penchant for violence is fiercely distilled in Cady Noland’s “The American Trip” (1988), in which a pirate flag and a United States flag hang together with handcuffs and a blind person’s cane supported by a configuration of metal pipework. The corporate transformations of seaport industries around the world is reported in a series of photographs by Allan Sekula. Demographics and economics of New York prison populations disproportionately hailing from low-income parts of Brooklyn are revealed by posters and a video by a group called Spatial Information Design Lab.“Lament of the Images” (2002), an installation by Alfredo Jaar, consists mainly of a nearly blindingly bright rectangle of white light projected on one wall of an otherwise unlit room. A museum label notes, “It is not about a particular historical event or the exhaustion of certain aesthetic strategies, but rather the future of images in their most reproducible state.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What more can art do about the mess we’ve made of things? Nothing in the exhibition offers any ambitious proposals. To critique, bear witness and decry is as far as it goes. We of the industrialized world live in a time of suspicion of universal schemes and grand narratives, a state of mind poignantly expressed by the German artist Hito Steyerl in her 25-minute video “November” (2004). It’s about a charismatic woman named Andrea Wolf, a high school friend with whom Ms. Steyerl began but never completed a feminist-martial-arts film starring themselves. While Ms. Steyerl went on to become an artist, Ms. Wolf pursued a career in revolutionary politics that led ultimately to her death as a fighter for the Kurdish independence movement in Turkey. Thereafter, the Kurds celebrated her as a martyr for their cause, her face appearing on demonstrators’ posters.Ms. Steyerl didn’t mean for her film to be propaganda for any cause. Rather, she has written, it “deals with the gestures of liberation after the end of history, as reflected through popular culture and traveling images.” There’s a sense of futility in this intellectually elevated perspective, which might be extended to address the whole exhibition: What can anyone do now but enact empty gestures of liberation?A short, mesmerizing video by a Brazilian team, Rivane Neuenschwander and Cao Guimarães, called “Ash Wednesday (Quarta-Feira de Cinzas)/Epilogue” (2006), projects the close-up view of ants scurrying over rough terrain of dirt and dried vegetation. Many are carrying and occasionally fighting over brightly colored, man-made discs about a quarter-inch in diameter. They’re dragging them down into their nest for an unknown purpose.Ants are some of the world’s greatest collectivists, though probably few people would regard their form of society as a good model for human community. But maybe we are more like ants than we think. Maybe like them, humans are collectively engaged in some enormous, possibly cosmically significant project the nature of which hardly any one of us has an inkling. To expand our minds and imagine what that might entail would be a good job for art now.“Scenes for a New Heritage: Contemporary Art From the Collection” runs through March 2016 at the Museum of Modern Art; 212-708-9400, moma.org. A version of this review appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page C24 of the New York edition with the headline: Looking Back Sadly and Looking Ahead the Same Way.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.