By JOSEPH GIOVANNINIMARCH 26, 2015
At Gaetano Pesce‘s solo exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in 1979, his cartoonish, riotously colored lamps, vases, chairs and drawings dealt a body blow to the sleek Modernist Bauhaus objects enshrined in the museum’s vitrines. To judge by the generous show of 90 objects and drawings at the Allouche Gallery in SoHo, this Italian iconoclast has expanded his irreverent critique, humanizing the domestic landscape with even more sass, color and social comment. The many octopus vases, centipede tables, rag chairs and lamps with ears — all cast in resins that bounce when dropped — amount to a mini career retrospective of his considerable influence in design and design theory.Trained as an architect in Venice in the suave tradition of Italian bel disegno (“beautiful drawing”), the designer, with an office in SoHo and a workshop in Brooklyn, has steadily produced his antidesign statements in rubberized technicolor. The show is a Noah’s ark of eccentric creatures, characters and objects — animal, human, animistic — that surreptitiously deliver social commentary. There’s the Fourth-of-July-worthy “America Table” (2012), with a red-white-and-blue resin tabletop American flag pointedly supported on letters that spell “independence,” and “Verbal Abuse” (1994), a tall, grided lamp that bends forward sadly with attachable weights. The show includes the rough original study model for his “Up” lounge chair, shaped like a fulsome earth mother but chained to a ball-like ottoman that denotes women’s servitude throughout history.Mr. Pesce was one of the first designers to chip at the iceberg of Modernism in the 1960s with functional art, radicalizing production so that objects do not come off the assembly line standardized and cold, but imperfect and warm. The liquid resins, poured before they gel, have an elasticity and softness that suit a historical moment that values constant change.Other more strident critiques of classic Modernism have joined Mr. Pesce’s, so his pieces do not shock now as they did in the MoMA show. But like the creatures in Jorge Luis Borges’s “The Book of Imaginary Beings,” Mr. Pesce’s expanding bestiary remains as fresh and untamed — and the messages as relevant — as when he first announced his gentle manifesto.Allouche Gallery 115 Spring Street, at Greene Street, SoHo Through April 25 A version of this review appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page C23 of the New York edition with the headline: Gaetano Pesce: ‘One-of-a-Kind Iconic Works, 1967-2015.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.