By ROBERTA SMITHMARCH 26, 2015
An idiosyncratic show combining the work of two geniuses who used metal in new if nearly opposite ways needs to be carefully balanced. Displaying 12 crushed car-body sculptures by the American sculptor John Chamberlain (1927-2011) in and around two prefab structures by the French architect-designer Jean Prouvé (1901-1984) doesn’t quite do the trick.Astutely reimagined function trumps innovative abstract form. Mr. Chamberlain’s bent and folded metal pieces have a beautiful excess and also brought a new level of abstraction and color to postwar sculpture. But Mr. Prouvé designed and patented methods of folding sheet metal that enabled reusable building elements to be mass produced. His spare structures exalt simplicity, logic, economy and, above all, the ideal of affordable housing.It doesn’t help that to look their best the Chamberlain works need more space and better lighting than the Prouvé structures allow. Or that, these structures — a temporary one-room schoolhouse with bright-red supports and a loftlike house — are supplemented by lots of additional material: 13 beautiful architectural models with explanatory texts; several doors in wood and aluminum; and, above all, four portal-like roof supports in folded metal. They made possible lightweight walls, while their tapering legs echo Prouvé’s furniture designs, which are unfortunately not included here.Ultimately, this counts as an invaluable and fabulous solo show, assembled in collaboration with Galerie Patrick Seguin, a leading dealer in all things Prouvé headquartered in Paris. The Chamberlain sculptures serve as light entertainment or garnish. They get a little revenge when color-coordinated with the red-limbed, glass-walled schoolhouse, which they use as a giant vitrine.Gagosian Gallery 555 West 24th Street,Chelsea Through April 4 A version of this review appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page C23 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘Chamberlain/Prouvé’ at Gagosian Gallery.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.