AdvertisementSupported byInside ArtBy Robin PogrebinFire-engine-red benches that spike, arch and undulate. A room with walls of rising water. A labyrinth of mirrored panels.These whimsical installations by the Danish artist Jeppe Hein will animate Brooklyn Bridge Park beginning on May 17 in the Public Art Fund’s new exhibition, “Please Touch the Art.”“One of the brilliant things about Jeppe’s work is he can engage you no matter what your background or experience or age in a very direct way,” said Nicholas Baume, the organization’s director and chief curator. “And through that process — whether it’s through something joyful or something funny or something strange or something perplexing — he works on all of those human and intuitive levels to then allow you to think differently about your environment, about yourself, about who you’re with and where you are.”The show, which is to continue until April 17, 2016, will run the 1.3-mile length of the park and include 16 “Modified Social Benches.”“You sit with your lover or your child, or you sit next to someone and strike up a conversation,” Mr. Baume said. “The ways the benches interact with the landscape — seemingly disappearing underground or embracing a tree — they really do that thing of slipping you from your expectation of how something functions to this playful, imaginative and interactive experience.”MENIL IS SET TO EXPANDThe Menil Collection in Houston has a rapidly expanding number of drawings through major gifts from donors including Louisa Stude Sarofim, William F. Stern, Cy Twombly and David Whitney.To give these holdings a proper home, the Menil on Friday will break ground on its new $40 million drawing institute — designed by the Los Angeles firm Johnston Marklee — which purports to be the first free-standing building in the United States designed for the exhibition and study of modern and contemporary drawings.“The Menil is about the immediate encounter between the visitor and art, and drawing is really the medium that’s the mind of the artist at work,” said Josef Helfenstein, director of the Menil Collection. “So for us to have a place for the most intimate kind of expression of creativity is almost like a dreamlike completion of the Menil vision.”The 30,000-square-foot building will feature a “living room” connecting the west and east entrance courtyards and serving as a circulation space and gathering area. Located south of the main museum and the Cy Twombly Gallery, and north of the Dan Flavin Installation, the institute will be surrounded by new green spaces and gardens designed by Michael Van Valkenburgh Associates.“On the one hand, it will be a radically modern, contemporary building,” Mr. Helfenstein said. “On the other hand, it has a kind of a timelessness.”JEROME H. STONE AUCTION A Giacometti bronze, along with paintings by Marc Chagall, Joan Miró and Juan Gris, are among the treasures that belonged to Jerome H. Stone, a Chicago businessman and philanthropist who died in January. Now about 30 of these works are coming to Sotheby’s as part of its spring sales — a cache with an estimated value of more than $40 million.“These estates — in the modern field, in particular — have really fueled the auction market of Impressionist and Modern art; collections put together after the Second World War,” said Simon Shaw, the co-head of Sotheby’s Impressionist and Modern Art department worldwide. “Very few of them are left. We don’t have the opportunity to see this sort of thing very often.”Mr. Stone, who built his family’s business — Stone Container Corporation — into a multibillion-dollar company, helped found the Alzheimer’s Association in 1979 after learning that his wife, Evelyn, had the disease. (She died in 1984.)He was also a lifetime trustee of the Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago.Most of the collection will be offered in New York in Sotheby’s Impressionist and Modern evening and day sales on May 5 and 6 and in its contemporary day sale on May 13. Some works will be offered in Sotheby’s contemporary sale in Paris in June.Mr. Stone and his wife assembled their collection mainly in the 1950s from major dealers, including Pierre Matisse and Sidney Janis. “Jerome Stone was one of a generation who was buying these when they were contemporary art — the paint was still wet,” Mr. Shaw said. “These are the latest things from the European avant-garde. As such, this is a particularly rich window on a generation of collecting.”NEW CURATOR IN NEW YORKThe big shoes left by Lowery Stokes Sims when she retires on April 5 as chief curator of the Museum of Arts and Design — after seven and a half years there and 43 in the art world — are to be filled by Shannon Stratton.Ms. Stratton, who will start in June, comes to this Manhattan museum after 12 years as founder and executive director of Threewalls, a contemporary arts organization in Chicago that presents exhibitions and public programs and provides artists with grants and resources.MUSEUM WEEK Top museums, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art (@metmuseum) and MoMA (@MuseumModernArt), are among the more than 2,200 museums, galleries and cultural institutions from over 64 countries that have joined forces on Twitter for #MuseumWeek, an online introduction to their organizations, which ends on Sunday. Each day has a different theme, like “souvenirs” or “secrets.”Advertisement