By ALEC M. PRIESTERMARCH 28, 2015
6:45 P.M. (Sundance) SHAUN OF THE DEAD (2004) Shaun (Simon Pegg) and his girlfriend, Liz (Kate Ashfield), are having problems because of Shaun’s insistence on always doing the same thing. He likes to hang out at the pub with his friend Ed (Nick Frost) and has yet to meet Liz’s mother. After Liz dumps Shaun, he continues in his habits. Shaun and Ed are so complacent that it takes them an astonishingly long time to realize that the odd events increasing in frequency around them are the result of a zombie outbreak. Shaun and Ed find themselves in a comedic fight for survival in which zombies are fought with bad records and clumsy luck in this film directed by Edgar Wright (“Hot Fuzz,” “Scott Pilgrim vs. the World”). “There is something intrinsically ridiculous about zombie movies,” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times. “The British horror comedy ‘Shaun of the Dead’ skillfully plays off that ridiculousness by implying that Britain may already be populated with the living dead, metaphorically speaking.”7 P.M. (Ovation) ARTFUL DETECTIVE Detective William Murdoch (Yannick Bisson) has a fan club. Dr. Julia Ogden (Hélène Joy) considers running for office in addition to her work as a suffragist.8 P.M. (Nickelodeon) NICKELODEON’S 28TH ANNUAL KIDS’ CHOICE AWARDS Nickelodeon viewers vote on the year’s best television, music and film, with celebrity guests and green slime. Nick Jonas hosts and performs.8 P.M. (Epix) KATY PERRY: PRISMATIC WORLD TOUR Katy Perry performs live with an elaborate stage production. Russell Thomas directs this Epix original special.Advertisement9 P.M. (Travel Channel) GHOST ADVENTURES Zak Bagans checks in with people and places previously visited to see what paranormal perils have troubled them since last time. In this episode, he follows up on the Oman house, haunted by its proximity to the Charles Manson murders, and an apartment complex, frequently fled by residents, that was once the Linda Vista Hospital.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (Sundance) THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION (1994) This adaptation of a Stephen King novella was written and directed by Frank Darabont. Andy Dufresne (Tim Robbins) is a banker who is sentenced to the brutal Shawshank Prison after being convicted of murdering his wife, though he maintains his innocence. He befriends Red (Morgan Freeman, above left with Mr. Robbins), an older prisoner with the ability to pull strings. Andy uses his banking abilities to garner favor with the guards. “There are times when ‘The Shawshank Redemption’ comes dangerously close to sounding one of those ‘triumph of the human spirit’ notes,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times. “But most of it is eloquently restrained.”11:30 P.M. (TBS) THE DARK KNIGHT (2008) In the second film in Christopher Nolan’s Batman trilogy, Batman’s popularity has inspired clumsy crime-fighting copycats in the newly safe Gotham City. Enter the Joker (Heath Ledger), a grotesque, unhinged villain whose only goal seems to be to introduce chaos. Bruce Wayne (Christian Bale) struggles with his affection for Rachel Dawes (Maggie Gyllenhaal), who is in a relationship with Harvey Dent (Aaron Eckhart), the new district attorney. The Joker teams up with the mob as Harvey cracks down on crime. “Pitched at the divide between art and industry, poetry and entertainment, it goes darker and deeper than any Hollywood movie of its comic-book kind — including ‘Batman Begins,’ Mr. Nolan’s 2005 pleasurably moody resurrection of the series — largely by embracing an ambivalence that at first glance might be mistaken for pessimism,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowTHE MINDY PROJECT Mindy Kaling plays Dr. Mindy Lahiri, a New York City obstetrician with a goofy personal life. In the Season 3 finale, Danny (Chris Messina) doesn’t show up to dinner with Mindy’s parents, causing her to doubt his commitment. Morgan (Ike Barinholtz) tracks down every man Mindy has ever slept with to determine the paternity of her unborn child. (hulu.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Saturday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.