By JAMES R. OESTREICHMARCH 27, 2015
You had to wait till the third encore for things to bust loose, but most of the audience did so, clearly expectant.The São Paulo State Youth Orchestra of Brazil, conducted by its music director, Cláudio Cruz, showed a lot of energy in its program at Alice Tully Hall and in the first two encores on Wednesday evening, but even that seemed not quite enough. By now, programs like El Sistema in Venezuela and Carnegie Hall’s National Youth Orchestra of the United States of America have led audiences to expect an excess of energy from young ensembles, and a certain flair, sometimes even extending to dress.In fine performances of Guarnieri’s “Abertura Concertante” (“Concert Overture”), Beethoven’s Third Piano Concerto and Villa-Lobos’s “Chôros No. 6” the young players, wearing dark suits or gowns, seemed all business, almost to a fault. After more of the same in an encore, the Overture from Carlos Gomes’s 1873 opera, “Fosca,” a slightly more unbuttoned feel came in Paulo Aragão’s arrangement of Antônio Carlos Jobim’s “The Girl From Ipanema.”Then Ary Barroso’s “Aquarela do Brasil” (made popular by Jimmy Dorsey in an arrangement, “Brazil,” in the 1940s) brought the house down, as groups of players leapt to their feet periodically, brandishing instruments and bows aloft, and two orchestra members danced at the front of the stage. This was just the right amount of show business to follow a concert in which even the works by Brazilian masters proved relatively restrained in their use of local color.AdvertisementThe 1942 concert overture by the grandly named São Paulo-born Mozart Camargo Guarnieri, dedicated to Aaron Copland, was scored with no percussion except timpani. “Since Guarnieri hoped the piece would be his North American calling card,” Matthew Mendez wrote in comprehensive program notes, “the reduction of means was almost certainly meant to demonstrate that he could do without the exotic frisson of Brazilian percussion.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Rio de Janeiro-born Heitor Villa-Lobos, in his “Chôros No. 6” from 1926, partly made up for that lack, with a sustained outburst of Latin-tinged percussion at the start. But even he chose not to dwell on it through most of the colorful, episodic tapestry that followed.AdvertisementThough it takes its title from the Portuguese word “choro,” meaning lament or weeping, the work is mostly upbeat. More germane is that the choro genre that evolved in the 19th century depended heavily on improvisation, and Villa-Lobos’s form develops here with seeming whimsy, seldom looking back on itself.The soloist in the Beethoven was Tengku Irfan, a 16-year-old Malaysian majoring in composition and piano in the precollege division of the Juilliard School, and a regular at the Aspen Music Festival. Mr. Cruz, evidently (and understandably) less concerned with period propriety than with giving his players maximum exposure, used the full orchestra in the Beethoven and gave the pianist little quarter.But Mr. Irfan’s playing, eminently cultured and almost impeccable, stood up well to the sonic weight, as much though sheer incisiveness as through power. A slightly odd match, it nevertheless made for a winning combination.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.