By STEPHEN HOLDENMARCH 27, 2015
The singer and songwriter Shaina Taub belongs to a breed of performers who, apart from being artists, are gravitational forces around whom others cluster like filings to a magnet. For her concert on Wednesday at the Kaplan Penthouse as part of Lincoln Center’s American Songbook series, Ms. Taub commanded a musical army that included a sizable chorus and a horn section in a program of 19 original songs. A prolific songwriter, Ms. Taub won a 2014 Jonathan Larson Grant, awarded to rising musical-theater talents.Much of her material belongs to the Broadway-oriented pop-gospel tradition associated with Carole King and Laura Nyro. Like them, she borrows from gospel to express a viewpoint that is at once secular and spiritual. The opening number,  “Joyful Noise,” is a rousing anthem reminiscent of Ms. Nyro’s “And When I Die,” in which she declares, “I may never know religion/but I have faith.” A well-worn term that might describe her is earth mother.Ms. Taub, who conducted most of the show from the piano, has a shrill, piercing voice with a nasal edge that is not ideally suited to such openhearted material, but she wielded it with enough authority and enthusiasm to keep the disparity from sounding grating. Typical of her quieter side was her ballad “Given,” which observes, “Love is the one thing you can’t take.”I kept thinking that if some of her backup singers took solo turns, the concert would have more variety and depth. The mood changed radically when Ms. Taub exchanged the piano for an accordion to bring a European flavor to songs like “The Visitors.”The grand final number, “Harvest,” returned to the spirit of celebration that had begun the evening. In the lyrics, Ms. Taub became the earth mother evoked in “Joyful Noise” as she summoned one and all to “come down to the open well” and scatter seeds for “the harvest waiting in the untilled ground.” This melodically sturdy chorale, a musical collaboration with David Farrell Melton, was a welcome reminder that spring is upon us.An earlier version of this review included an erroneous reference to the song “Joyful Noise.” It is not from the musical “There’s a House” or from any other musical. The review also misstated a word from the ballad “Given.” The song says “Love is the one thing you can’t take,” not “fake.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.