By JONATHAN WOLFEOCT. 15, 2015
Sure, New York City has plenty of vibrant public spaces and man-made structures for everyday urban exploration. But there is another part of the city, largely off limits, where only the most adventurous or well-connected tread: lavish terraces guarded by vigilant doormen and stunning interiors tucked away behind closed doors.This weekend is your chance to visit some of these sites, along with dozens of architectural wonders, during Open House New York Weekend. The event, now in its 13th year, is organized by the nonprofit Open House New York, which aims to educate the public about the city’s architecture and design.Some of the locations could be the destination of any second-grade field trip, but others are truly exclusive New York experiences, like a tour of Eero Saarinen’s TWA flight center at Kennedy International Airport. This modernist terminal (open on Sunday from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.) was largely closed to the public 14 years ago. Visitors can bask in the glamour of the Jet Age for what may be the last time before the terminal becomes  part of a planned hotel.Misers looking for a taste of gilded city life will most likely have to miss out on tours of the Mercedes House, the snaking, terraced residential building in Hell’s Kitchen, and the Tudor City penthouse that was used as the Green Goblin’s lair in the “Spider-Man” movies, as both have already sold out. But some of New York’s most coveted real estate is still open for gawking, including a renovated brick townhouse in Red Hook, Brooklyn (Sunday from noon to 4 p.m.; tours by the architect take place every 30 minutes) and the Bartow-Pell Mansion in Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx (Saturday and Sunday from noon to 4 p.m.), a moneyed estate of yesteryear that is now a museum.AdvertisementAnd you won’t need to be on official business to climb what appears to be a floating staircase at City Hall in Lower Manhattan and grab a seat in the City Council’s chamber (Saturday from noon to 4 p.m.), or to tour the Department of Transportation’s Traffic Management Center in Long Island City, Queens, the control center for 12,500 traffic signals and 250 real-time cameras (Saturday at 11 a.m., reservations required).AdvertisementTwenty interior landmarks, including the Ford Foundation’s atrium and the Four Seasons restaurant, both in Midtown Manhattan, will also be open for this year’s event, which is celebrating the 50th anniversary of the city’s landmarks law. Most of the weekend events are family-friendly, and some have special programming for children.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And here’s a tip: Many museums waive entrance fees for this event, including the New York Hall of Science, the Museum of the City of New York and the Morgan Library & Museum.(Saturday and Sunday at various times. For some events that require reservations, there is a $5 reservation fee. More information is at ohny.org.)Tours in Gowanus and ChelseaNot to be outdone, dozens of artists will also be opening their studios this weekend. In Gowanus, Brooklyn, visitors can join a curator-led bike tour of some of the more than 300 participating art studios ($20) or explore on foot (free). Just below the High Line, in the West Chelsea Arts District, more than 50 studios will be accessible as part of a free self-guided tour.(Gowanus: Saturday and Sunday from noon to 6 p.m.; artsgowanus.org. Chelsea: Saturday and Sunday from noon to 6 p.m.; the self-guided tour starts at the West Chelsea Arts building; highlineopenstudios.org.)A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page C31 of the New York edition with the headline: Weekend Miser.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.