By SIOBHAN BURKEMARCH 27, 2015
Get-low, gliding, bone-breaking, connecting, pauzin, waving: Even the language of flexing, a street-dance style born in Jamaica and raised in the Brooklyn neighborhood of East New York, pops with energy. Flip through the enormous program book for “Flexn,” a show of grand proportions that opened on Wednesday at the Park Avenue Armory, and you’ll find a “Flexapedia” defining these terms. It’s a glossary of action words. Flexing is doing.Dance as action, as forward momentum, was one topic of conversation on opening night, as the show’s creators — the theater director Peter Sellars and the flexing pioneer Reggie Gray, or Regg Roc — joined three panelists for an inspired preperformance talk on the theme of “Race and the City.” (Wednesday’s guests were The New York Times columnist Charles M. Blow, Tynesha McHarris of the Brooklyn Community Foundation, and the New York City Council member Ritchie Torres. A different group will speak each night.)When Mr. Sellars and Mr. Gray began working on “Flexn” last summer, two events that shook the nation also shook their rehearsal process: The deaths, about three weeks apart, of Eric Garner and Michael Brown. Most of the show’s 22 dancers are young black men.“Those stories didn’t go away,” Mr. Sellars said, and “Flexn” addresses them head-on, while making room for the dancers’ own narratives. Part protest, part dance party, part collective autobiography — all playing out in the 55,000-square-foot Wade Thompson Drill Hall, on a stage more than half the length of a football field — the production rails against social injustice, from police brutality to the prison system’s failures in America.AdvertisementThere’s a scene in court, a scene in jail (an opportunity for “solitary dances” performed within cells of light). There are multiple deaths and mournings. Throughout 14 episodes, by turns tragic and playful, we see the dancers at war, at work (FedEx, Walgreens), at home with their families; these situations are evoked with a mind-boggling repertoire of quaking, pretzeling, rippling freestyle moves.AdvertisementBen Zamora’s lighting installation, a backdrop of LED rods — imagine the letters F-L-E-X cut up, multiplied and scrambled — is also capable of morphing, as different segments flash on and off.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The unofficial script could be the lyrics, often mimed or mouthed, to the blasting reggae, pop and hip-hop soundtrack, supplied by Epic B: “I hate that I’m so underrated”; “It was hard times, now it’s our time.”Yet that narrative skeleton, along with the hugeness of the space and its haphazard use doesn’t always serve the dancing. The 18 men and 4 women are extraordinary movers. But the arenalike setting drowns out their finesse, the details of techniques fine-tuned at parties and dance battles. Seen from a front-and-center seat, a duet at the outer reaches barely registers. And while mimetic gestures are often part of flexing, the literal storytelling here undermines the form’s inherent rebelliousness.Still, the dancers can transcend those drawbacks. Sam I Am, or Movieman Sam, has a breathtaking lyricism, an unearthly mix of lightness and weight that pools in his big, sad eyes. Derick Dashawn Unique Murreld, known as Slicc, locomotes on his knees as gracefully as others do on their feet. Martina Heimann (Android) is not to be messed with, and Deidre Braz (Dayntee) laces willowy poise with toughness.The vast scale of “Flexn” makes a statement: This dance form, these artists, won’t be boxed in. That message is most powerful when the story line drops away, and the cast dances together. “Flexn” ends with a section called “D.R.E.A.M. Ring,” named for the communally minded competition founded by Mr. Gray: Dance Rules Everything Around Me. It’s one of the few parts in the show where dance defers to nothing.“Flexn” runs through next Saturday at the Park Avenue Armory, 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org.A version of this review appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Sending a Social Message From Street to Stage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.