AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon Caramanica“I’m going to switch to guitar — that cool?” Tobias Jesso Jr. was a few songs into his first official New York concert Thursday night, and he was ready for a change. He got up from behind the piano, an instrument he began playing only a couple of years ago at age 27, and shuffled over to the other side of the stage, where a guitar was waiting for him.“Looking for a capo around here,” he muttered. A helpful voice from the audience screamed, “It’s on the mike stand!” Indeed it was. Mr. Jesso looked sheepish, then psyched.People seem to want to help Tobias Jesso Jr., who appears perpetually in need of a hug, or a hand, or at least a pat on the back. Standing 6-foot-7 but somehow still in a perpetual shrug, he’s puppyish and cheeky and understands his limitations. “I never imagined myself much of a performer,” he told the Mercury Lounge crowd once he’d secured the capo to his guitar neck. The crowd laughed and aw-shucksed — they wanted to embrace him, make him feel not alone.This dynamic is already a touch disingenuous. For someone who’s only just released his debut album, “Goon” (True Panther), Mr. Jesso has received a perhaps outsize amount of attention (including the kind that muses over whether he and Taylor Swift might have canoodled). His record label paid for a billboard hovering over Sunset Boulevard in Echo Park. Adele tweeted about how much she loved his song “How Could You Babe.”“Goon” is meditative and intimate and also half-formed, an album flush with good intentions. For the most part these are simple, sopping-wet sad-sack songsbuilt on wide-brush-stroke piano. Rarely do they attempt something beyond a single sentiment; rarely do Mr. Jesso’s pleading questions get answered. The obvious touchstone is Randy Newman, from the mode to the songwriting balance to the way Mr. Jesso’s words are sometimes delivered as if he’d slipped on a banana midway through.At this show, the effect was not unlike a Will Ferrell sketch about lounge singers. He scrunched his face up for extra effect on tough notes. On “Tell the Truth,” he tossed exaggerated looks at individual audience members. Mr. Jesso is trying hard, but wants you to know how silly he thinks trying hard is.When he sings, his syllables are mealy and noncommittal. The high notes, like the ones at the end of “True Love,” didn’t quite congeal. And his lyrics, while elegantly structured, rarely get beneath the surface, especially on songs like the deeply trite “Hollywood,” about getting chewed up by that town. He deprecatingly referred to his song “Can We Still Be Friends” as a cover of the “Cheers” theme song, then midway threw in the piano figure from that song to emphasize the similarity. “I hope I don’t get sued,” he said.The new naïveté doesn’t leave much room for expertise. Mr. Jesso is far more adept on guitar — that was clear on “The Wait.” And his encore cover of “Georgia on My Mind” was exceptional; he does not have the facility of Ray Charles, its most famous interpreter, but he nailed the song’s lonely mood.A few times during the show, Mr. Jesso mentioned being nervous, and on two occasions, he worried about people taking pictures: “I hear your photos,” he said. “I really do.” Why weren’t those people helping him out? He told a story of how he had recently recorded a performance for a radio show: “The engineer was like: ‘Your guitar was pretty out of tune. You sure you want that to be the take?’ ” Just another person trying to give Mr. Jesso a hand, but yes, undeniably, he wants that to be the take.Advertisement