By ALASTAIR MACAULAYMARCH 27, 2015
The Juilliard Dance performances of late March have long been one of the finest fixtures on the New York dance calendar. The programs consist of two or more works, often classics; the student dancers spend months preparing with leading authorities. The level of execution is often professionally excellent; it’s easy to believe the students will remember lessons from the choreography for the rest of their lives.This year’s double bill is one of related but dissimilar master-choreographers: Martha Graham (1894-1991) and Merce Cunningham (1919-2009). Graham’s “Dark Meadow” had its premiere in January 1946, at a time when Cunningham was still occasionally performing roles he had created in her repertory from 1939 to 1944. His “Biped” (1999) proved, in many countries, the most popular work of his final 20 years.These are the first performances of the complete “Dark Meadow” outside the Martha Graham Dance Company. And “Biped” has not been presented in the United States since the Cunningham company’s final performance of it in 2011. I watched both Wednesday’s and Thursday’s performances — different casts, both superb.Light-years apart in style, these works have things in common. No two choreographers make a more powerful use of the back than Graham and Cunningham, and their barefoot styles make both marvelous three-dimensional shapes and dynamically keen phrases. In both pieces, you see dancers making drama simply out of addressing and invading space. And, though Graham’s dances are tied to musical detail as Cunningham’s are not, the start and end of “Dark Meadow” show clearly that she knew to make dance rhythms independent of any score.AdvertisementThe choreography for “Dark Meadow” features three unalike solo characters and a male-female ensemble, given the names One Who Seeks, He Who Summons, She of the Ground and They Who Dance Together, and distinct costumes, designed by Graham. Each offers juicy sequences; One Who Seeks has scrumptious phrases in which, balanced on one foot with the other foot tucked across the opposite bent knee, she then forcefully bends her whole torso down toward her leg, like shutting a book.Alas, to me, and many others, many aspects of “Dark Meadow” are both ponderous and ludicrous. I’d like to see the choreography without the costumes or Isamu Noguchi’s set. The combo of crown and tube-jersey skirt worn by She of the Ground is a hoot; likewise, however handsome Noguchi’s several items of statuary, it’s hard not to laugh at the ways the dancers have to relate to them.AdvertisementUnder the direction of Aaron Sherber, Juilliard musicians play Carlos Chávez’s chamber-scale Modernist score — but Graham’s musicality is a puzzle. Now she’s free from her music (sometimes awkwardly); now she’s fussily knitted to it.This is much like the “Dark Meadow” I saw the Graham company dance in 1990, and perhaps better; Tiare Keeno, as One Who Seeks, and all the Juilliard men are extraordinarily good. But did it look like this in 1946? I strongly suspect that this is one of the several pieces whose choreography Graham coarsened in later years. Today it looks as if Graham had turned her own dance theater into a mythological version of a late Joan Crawford melodrama.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It’s odd that Cunningham, whose dance theater is based on mutual independence of design, music and dance, often achieved excitingly Gesamtkunstwerk fusions, whereas Graham seldom did. “Biped” is one of the stunningly imaginative Cunningham pieces in which music (by Gavin Bryars, in this case), décor (projected motion-capture artwork by Shelley Eshkar and Paul Kaiser), lighting (Aaron Copp), costumes (Suzanne Gallo) and choreography all come together to create a single world like no other.It’s wonderful to see again the way the Eshkar-Kaiser artwork crosses, descends, flies up or slowly explodes upon the front gauze — and to hear the different atmospheres conjured by the cello, keyboard and amplified dice-rattling in Mr. Bryars’s score. Ms. Gallo’s first set of blue-silver costumes gleam, suggesting futuristically sleek chain mail; and the gray pajamas into which the dancers change make them seem like moths. The changing floor squares of Mr. Copp’s lighting make human-size chessboards. Entrances, exits and half-shadowy peripheral half-emergences make amazing effects.The choreography opens with a stream of five quick solos that have always seemed to me to be Cunningham’s version of the first five Prologue fairy variations in “The Sleeping Beauty.” The way they establish outgoing energy in terms of steps, changing floor patterns and urgent through-the-body coordination starts the work on a high. In what follows, you often see three women who haunt the space like fates; in one scene with one man, they recall not just George Balanchine’s “La Valse,” but Macbeth with the three weird sisters, too. We’re not encouraged to find meanings in this work, yet they pour forth from it.“Dark Meadow” and “Biped” run through Saturday at the Peter Jay Sharp Theater, 155 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center; events.juilliard.edu.A version of this review appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Addressing the Space Onstage as a Drama in Itself.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.