AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim“America for the moment has no idea of what to make of me,” Mahler wrote to a Swiss correspondent in 1908 as he was rehearsing his Symphony No. 2 with the New York Symphony Orchestra. A century later, Mahler’s music is a familiar and well-loved fixture on American concert stages. But this season the inspired Argento Chamber Ensemble is making the case for a fresh listen with a four-concert series titled Mahler as New York Contemporary. By performing the composer’s seminal works in chamber arrangements alongside contemporary pieces that reflect his influence, the group draws attention to aspects of Mahler’s music that remain bracingly original and even weird.The centerpiece of its concert at the DiMenna Center for Classical Music on Thursday was Mahler’s “Songs of a Wayfarer” in an arrangement by Michel Galante, Argento’s conductor, featuring the soprano Sharon Harms. Chamber reductions of Mahler’s orchestral scores heighten the boldness of his instrumentation, with wind and percussion accents popping into stark relief. Here the arrangement lent the songs a lurid Expressionist character, which was sometimes grating but occasionally revelatory. Vocally unsteady at times, Ms. Harms was dramatically committed and not averse to risk in this performance, frying her voice on some words and whispering others.The program opened with a brilliant rendition of Giacinto Scelsi’s “Kya” for solo clarinet and ensemble, featuring the fiercely focused clarinetist Carol McGonnell as soloist. Mr. Scelsi’s command of color and texture is masterly in this piece, with particular attention paid to the transformation of timbres and the potential of pitch to sculpt texture through deliberate bending and stretching.The cellist Saeunn Thorsteinsdottir was riveting in Ligeti’s Cello Concerto. With much of the music skirting the outer edges of perceptibility, the listener’s attention is drawn to the effort expended in producing sound to tragic and occasionally comic effect. In the final “whisper cadenza,” the notes are neither bowed nor plucked, so that the only sound heard was that of Ms. Thorsteinsdottir’s left hand thudding and slapping the fingerboard in a valiant attempt to make music.Absence and futility were also themes in Mathias Spahlinger’s “Furioso.” The work consists of gestures deliberately assembled to negate one another so that sounds always work in opposition: Milky meets tangy, dull answers sharp; a unison statement is left to splinter. Under the meticulous guidance of Mr. Galante, the Argento players gave an impressive performance that balanced the exhilaration of individual virtuosity with the sense of democratic chaos in what the program notes aptly called an “anti concerto.”The Argento Chamber Ensemble performs Sunday at Sonoma State University in Rohnert Park, Calif., and Monday at the Colburn School in Los Angeles; argentomusic.org. Advertisement