AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperCedar Lake Contemporary Ballet was the envy of many in New York’s dance world: It had a wealthy patron who loved dance, provided good pay and benefits to its dancers, built the troupe a chic Chelsea home and almost single-handedly bore the brunt of the company’s costs.But the perils of relying on a single donor became clear this month when Cedar Lake’s founder and benefactor — Nancy Laurie, a Walmart heiress — had a change of heart and announced that she would close the company after performances in June at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. News of the impending demise of Cedar Lake, which had become known in recent years for introducing European choreographers to America and seemed to have plentiful resources, stunned its fans. Many weighed in on the company’s Facebook page with anguished comments like “This is so sad! I would never have guessed!” and “What happened? I have so many questions...”Ms. Laurie, whose net worth was estimated at $4.5 billion by Forbes, declined an interview request. A spokeswoman for Ms. Laurie, Melissa Nathan, said in a statement: “Over the past decade we have dedicated substantial resources to Cedar Lake. Unfortunately, prevailing circumstances make running Cedar Lake no longer viable in this community.”A review of the dance company’s tax filings showed that for the year ending in July 2013, Ms. Laurie and a foundation she ran provided more than three-quarters of Cedar Lake’s $5.9 million in revenue. Tickets and touring brought in only around 7.6 percent of the company’s revenues — about half of what it made by renting out its West 26th Street home for special events. There were indications that the company had considered trying to broaden its donor base. As recently as October, Cedar Lake had advertised for a manager for external affairs whose duties were to have included developing “multiplatform sponsorship proposals for corporate partners, foundations, government, and individuals.” The position was never filled.Katharine DeShaw, the president of Philanthropology, a philanthropic consulting firm, said that while some nonprofit organizations are created by single donors willing to endow their budgets in perpetuity, many of the strongest are created by single donors who then get like-minded supporters to join in the effort. “I guess the big message here is that whoever that founding donor is, unless they’re willing to put enormous endowments behind their vision, their organizations won’t survive if they don’t invite other people in, and I would argue early in the game,” Ms. DeShaw said.When Ms. Laurie decided to start the company more than a decade ago, she offered dancers an almost unheard-of 52-week contract (even many top ballet companies do not pay their dancers year-round), along with benefits and vacation pay. But the company also raised eyebrows with a system of fining dancers for lateness, changing choreography or missing entrances.Even the company’s debut was unusual. In 2004, Cedar Lake filed a lawsuit against another contemporary ballet company, Complexions, charging that Ms. Laurie had donated $82,500 to Complexions with the understanding that Cedar Lake could make its dance debut at a Complexions performance — only to have Cedar Lake dropped from the program. It is unclear how the lawsuit was resolved; Ms. Laurie’s spokeswoman declined to comment on it, and officials at Complexions did not respond to an email and a phone message seeking comment.The company was initially viewed suspiciously as a rich woman’s whim and got decidedly mixed reviews.But it developed a following in New York and beyond, as it toured extensively, and its studio and dancers were featured in the 2011 film “The Adjustment Bureau,” starring Matt Damon and Emily Blunt. In 2012, Roslyn Sulcas wrote in The New York Times that it had “become a New York success story, possibly the country’s most innovative contemporary ballet troupe with an A-list repertoire, and an accent on creation that few companies worldwide can match.”But there was internal upheaval in recent years as well. The artistic director who helped establish the company, Benoit-Swan Pouffer, a French-born former member of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, resigned in 2013. The company’s executive director died, and a successor left after a brief tenure. Several company dancers and officials, still employed as they prepare for their final performances in Boston in May and Brooklyn in June, declined to comment on the closing of Cedar Lake.The story of Cedar Lake reminded Ms. DeShaw, the consultant, of another New York dance company: the Harkness Ballet. The Harkness Ballet was created in 1964 by Rebekah West Harkness, a philanthropist who gave millions to dance and to medicine, and who also built a theater for dance on 62nd Street and Broadway. It dissolved after a somewhat rocky decade when Ms. Harkness said she had sustained stock market losses and could no longer support it alone.The Harkness Theater was demolished. Ms. Nathan, the spokeswoman for Ms. Laurie, said that Cedar Lake’s home on West 26th Street, which is owned by the Laurie family, would continue to be rented out for private events.Advertisement