AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SeibertSome dances aim to entertain, some to tell a story or make a point or transport a viewer with beauty. The goal of “On the Nature of Things,” the latest work by the choreographer Karole Armitage, is to fundamentally alter human behavior and save the world. That’s a tall order for a dance show, and the high ambition of it seems to stem from desperation. Paul R. Ehrlich, the Stanford professor of biology and population studies who provided the show’s text, has been ringing alarms about the dangers of overpopulation and climate change for decades. Yet, as he related at the work’s premiere on Wednesday, telling people the scientific facts doesn’t persuade them to alter their behavior. For that, you need to provoke emotion — through narrative, perhaps through dance.The setting for “On the Nature” was certainly attention grabbing: the Milstein Hall of Ocean Life at the American Museum of Natural History, with its 94-foot-long blue whale hanging over the audience and a stage. But Ms. Armitage is not a tug-at-your-heartstrings kind of artist. And as a work of persuasion, “On the Nature” falls short. Ms. Armitage’s narrative is abstract — harmony disrupted and restored, paradise lost and regained — and her style, in which legs are forever extending above head height on askew bodies and women are always struggling and kicking defiantly, is better at conveying disruption than peace. The earth may groan with the birth of each new human, but the multiplication of bodies is good for Ms. Armitage. The work is strongest when she floods the stage with 35 dancers, maintaining multiple fields of activity in rippling counterpoint. Overcrowding — the dancers push one another out of the way — is the work’s most effective kinetic metaphor, though other images register: blindness, the precariousness of walking on tiptoe, the ticking clock (those split limbs) of time running out. A late duet for two women finds a beauty both cosmic and Edenic. Yet the shifts in mood come mainly from the music: the grinding distress signal of Michael Gordon, the meditative calm of Arvo Part. The text, recited by Mr. Ehrlich, is wisely spare, lamenting what people don’t understand, prickly toward advertising and those who believe in fixes less than a change in “the scale of the human enterprise.” The argument it presents is apt to make you want to put your face in your hands or point a finger at someone else. The dancers do both, but at the end, their fingers turn upward, and Ms. Armitage brings in children from Manhattan Youth Ballet. That’s a classic appeal to emotion. Too bad that it feels too late.“On the Nature of Things” continues through Friday at the American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West and 79th Street; 212-769-5200, amnh.org. Advertisement