Season 6, Episode 17: Undisclosed Recipients Despite the predictions of some of our commenters, it looks as if Alicia Florrick really is going to settle in as state’s attorney. Sunday night’s episode of “The Good Wife,” titled “Undisclosed Recipients,” found her negotiating her exit package from Florrick Agos and, most important, receiving a series of visitors who came not to kiss her ring but to claim their rewards for having supported her campaign.(Not that there’s ever any point in comparing a television drama to reality, but it’s interesting to note that the actual Cook County, Ill., state’s attorney’s office employs nearly 900 lawyers and 1,500 people over all. I’m going to guess that the actual state’s attorney, Anita Alvarez, spends most of her time in meetings and pushing paper, managing what amounts to a medium-size business. And that this is not what Alicia Florrick will be doing.)But the high point of the episode was a fleeting view of a couple of old emails, which were dredged up because of the law firm’s case of the week, in which a video-sharing site (named Wharf Master, perhaps a play on the embattled Pirate Bay) was being sued by a filmmaker over illegal downloads. The pirate site fought back by encouraging hackers to conduct Sony-style attacks on both the filmmaker and Florrick Agos, and among the embarrassing messages about to be made public were Will Gardner’s day-after mash notes to Alicia. For those who didn’t have time to pause their TVs, here’s a sampling:“My only purpose? To be a servant to your body. Thinking about kissing you … Everywhere … You leave me exhausted, baby.”And:“I can’t stand it. … phone sex isn’t enough. … I wish I could have your tongue to chain around my hips so that I could get those delicious linguistics whenever I want!”You can’t unsee it.The episode was one of the show’s timeouts for screwball comedy, without a lot of story advancement but with a lot of comical running around in circles that set up future story lines. In the case of the week, the email leaks turned Florrick Agos into a viper’s nest — everyone had said something nasty about everyone else — and there was yelling, waving of arms, even pushing and shoving and spitting. Julius had gay-bashed David; David had called Julius an affirmative action hire; in the best line, Diane had said of Cary: “Good lawyer, not great lawyer. Going to prison is not a total loss for us.” For comic relief, Howard Lyman had fantasized about doing things to Kalinda in the supply closet.In the midst of this, Finn was representing Alicia in her exit-package dispute, arrayed against Diane, Cary, Julius and David. Alicia was playing several games at once. The email leaks were harmful to her as state’s attorney, and she needed Diane and Cary to settle the piracy case to limit the damage. At the same time, in the episode’s main story line, Eli Gold was going through continual conniptions trying to coach her through her meetings with James Castro (who wanted her to promise not to investigate him), Gus Redmayne (who wanted her to appoint a crony of his as her deputy) and Lemond Bishop (who wanted her to quash Geneva Pine’s investigations into his drug dealings). Alicia, exhibiting a highly implausible degree of naïveté, said no to all of them. But Eli was there to yell at her and beat her into submission, teaching her a new mantra — all options were open and she would get back to them within 48 hours — that became the episode’s running joke. (It was fun to see old-school Eli also brushing aside the more diplomatic approach urged by his own daughter, Marissa.) She used it to mollify Castro, Redmayne and Bishop, then kept using it — as a veiled threat to her former partners when they tried to low-ball her, implying that they didn’t want to mess with the new state’s attorney, and finally to Eli himself, when he tried to push his own candidate as her new deputy. (She wants Finn to take the job. Now that Johnny Elfman’s out of town.)Let us know what you thought of “Undisclosed Recipients” in the comments. It was an episode of good lines — what was your favorite? Mine might have been one of Eli’s several realpolitik maxims: “Absence of ‘yes’ times time equals no. That’s the law.”