The Flea Theater, an Off Off Broadway company that proudly embraces being named for an irksome insect, has chosen a new artistic director who promises to continue producing risky theater while also seeking to reach out to families when the organization moves into a new TriBeCa home.The Flea has chosen Niegel Smith, a 35-year-old North Carolina native, to succeed Jim Simpson, who helped found the organization in 1996 and is stepping down. Mr. Smith was an associate director of “Fela!” and an assistant director of “Caroline, or Change.” “I’ve been a fan of the Flea, and what it’s always said to me is ‘scrappy,’ ‘now,’ ‘urgent’,” Mr. Smith said. “It’s a home for people to take risks, to say ‘I’m hungry and I have something urgent I need to say right now.'”Mr. Smith said he would seek to continue the work the Flea has been doing, but also to introduce more performance art, music, and dance, as well as programming for families. He has recently been working with Taylor Mac, and said “he’s on my roster of artists I would love to work with at the Flea.”Asked about his thoughts on the Flea’s practice of not paying members of its resident company of volunteer pre-professionals, the Bats, Mr. Smith said, “I’m proud that the Flea gives young artists a platform, provides them with materials, produces their shows, and creates a community, and I’ll be looking at ways we can best serve all of our artists, including the Bats.”The Flea is a small organization, staging 10 to 12 productions a year with $1.3 million annual budget. Bolstered in part by contributions from Mr. Simpson and his wife, the actress Sigourney Weaver, the company is building a three-theater performing arts complex on Thomas Street, a $20 million project that the Flea hopes to finish on time for its 2016 to 2017 season. The company describes its mission as “raising a joyful hell in a small space,” and its producing director, Carol Ostrow, said, “We do exist to be an irritant — to do the kind of theater that maybe uptown won’t allow.” Ms. Ostrow said that Mr. Smith was chosen from about 110 applicants for the job because “he had a vision that was both exciting and charismatic, and he has an incredible personal reputation.”A version of this article appears in print on 03/30/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Flea Theater Names Its Next Artistic Director.