By ALEC M. PRIESTERMARCH 29, 2015
8 P.M. (HBO) GOING CLEAR: SCIENTOLOGY AND THE PRISON OF BELIEF (2015) The Oscar-winning documentarian Alex Gibney directs this film about the Church of Scientology, based on Lawrence Wright’s book “Going Clear.” Details about the church (above, its building in Los Angeles), which was founded by the science-fiction writer L. Ron Hubbard, are revealed through profiles and interviews with former members including the Oscar-winning screenwriter Paul Haggis. “Drawing from a trove of archival material, including filmed interviews with Mr. Hubbard, Mr. Gibney paints a profile of a church that grew by leaps and bounds through profound faith and drag-out fights,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “Mr. Gibney spends a lot of time on Scientology’s celebrities, but those sections of the film pale next to the harrowing allegations of the church’s serious physical and psychological abuse, including exploited labor.”2:30 P.M. (Cooking) EMERIL’S FLORIDA Emeril Lagasse visits downtown Miami, Miami Beach and the Florida Keys to see friends and eat at a few of his favorite restaurants.7 P.M. (CBS) 60 MINUTES Charlie Rose interviews President Bashar al-Assad of Syria. A second segment looks at a promising effort by scientists at Duke University to kill cancer cells using a re-engineered polio virus.7:30 P.M. (Nickelodeon) HARVEY BEAKS In this series premiere, a polite bird named Harvey is pulled into adventures by his rule-breaking friends Fee and Foo. “The series, created by C. H. Greenblatt, may not have the slick animation or big budget of a Disney movie, but it has a quirky sensibility that is refreshing,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times.Advertisement8 P.M. (National Geographic) KILLING JESUS This special, based on the book by Bill O’Reilly and Martin Dugard, examines the political climate during the time of Jesus, who is played here by Haaz Sleiman, left. The Roman Empire goes to great lengths to quash threats to its power. Pontius Pilate (Stephen Moyer) and King Herod (Kelsey Grammer) begin to see Jesus as a rebel and political enemy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9 P.M. (Fox) THE LAST MAN ON EARTH  Todd (Mel Rodriguez) and Melissa (January Jones) continue their relationship, to the confusion of Phil (Will Forte). Carol (Kristen Schaal) tries to persuade Phil that she should move in with him.Advertisement9 P.M. (AMC) THE WALKING DEAD In this season finale, Daryl (Norman Reedus) encounters problems. The eerie comfort of life in the Alexandria Safe Zone has an alienating effect on Rick (Andrew Lincoln) and his group.9:30 P.M. (ABC Family) HOME ALONE 2: LOST IN NEW YORK (1992) Kevin (Macaulay Culkin, left) is once again separated from his vacationing family in the holiday season when he boards the wrong flight. He winds up in New York City, where he stays at the Plaza and orders room service while thwarting the suspicions of the hotel staff. When Marv (Daniel Stern) and Harry (Joe Pesci) see him on the street, they vow revenge for the pains Kevin inflicted upon them in the Chicago suburbs in the original “Home Alone,” and Kevin must once against devise an elaborate booby-trapped environment so he can evade them. Chris Columbus (“The Goonies,” “Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone”) directed the film, which was written by John Hughes (“The Breakfast Club,” “Ferris Bueller’s Day Off”). “The return of Mr. Culkin in this role is irresistible, even if this utterly natural comic actor has been given little new to do,” Janet Maslin wrote in The Times. “Mr. Pesci and Mr. Stern bring great gusto to their characters’ stupidity, to the point where they are far funnier just walking and talking than they are being hurt.”What’s Streaming NowTHE STAIRCASE The SundanceNow Doc Club is showing this serialized true crime documentary about the trial of Michael Peterson, whose wife, Kathleen, was found dead on the stairs in their home in North Carolina. The series was directed by Jean-Xavier de Lestrade, who won an Oscar for best documentary for “Murder on a Sunday Morning,” also being shown here. (VOD) ALEC M. PRIESTERA version of this schedule appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.