By KEN JOHNSONOCT. 15, 2015
Dana Schutz called a painting she made in 2012 “Getting Dressed All at Once.” It’s not in this exuberantly adventurous exhibition, but the title tells a lot about what she’s been up to. She’s trying to capture what it’s like to experience multitudes of contradictory things happening simultaneously. Combining Cubist abstraction and funky expressionism in dissonantly gaudy colors, her paintings range freely from the broadly sociopolitical to the intimately personal.The chaotic altercation represented by “Fight in an Elevator,” from which the exhibition takes its title, is based on the surveillance video of Beyoncé’s sister, Solange, attacking Jay Z in a Manhattan hotel’s elevator. Metaphorically it’s an image of the mind trying to contain its own conflicts and contradictions about men and women, celebrity and the electronic media’s saturation of contemporary consciousness.“Shaking Out the Bed,” which measures nearly 10 feet by 18 feet, presents a vertiginous aerial view of a couple in spooning position in bed. They’re tangled up in white sheets, and disproportionate body parts, like a giant pink foot, as well as a slice of pizza, a rolled magazine and a number of unidentifiable objects emerge from the disorder. An infant’s basket at the foot of the bed hints at something that might be contributing to the mess: Ms. Schutz had a baby last year.The show’s most appealing canvas depicts a woman with a wildly distorted, pink body up to her shins in turquoise tub water frantically lathering herself under a big shower head. It’s called “Slow Motion Shower,” but there’s a frenetic, panicky feeling about it, as if the bather were rushing to make an appointment she’s already late for. Ms. Schutz is a brave risk-taker, a 21st-century version of Baudelaire’s painter of modern life.Dana Schutz‘Fight in an Elevator’Petzel456 West 18th Street, ChelseaThrough Oct. 24A version of this review appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page C26 of the New York edition with the headline: From Dana Schutz, Concoctions of Cubist Abstraction and Funky Expressionism.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.