
Playlist By                     
 JON PARELES
 
MARCH 27, 2015
Amy SpeaceTHAT KIND OF GIRLResilience trumps regrets, but just barely, on Amy Speace‘s “That Kind of Girl” (Windbone), an album of post-breakup songs and other heartaches depicted with the succinctness of country tradition. “She and I shared a lie/Even though we’ve never met,” Ms. Speace sings, perfectly distilling a situation in “One Man’s Love.” She warns a commitment-shy boyfriend that she can do “Better Than This”; she wrestles with desire in “Nothing Good Can Come From This” and, more wryly, in “Trouble Looks Good on You.” In the mysterious “Strange Medicine,” she’s pregnant with a child “I knew I could not claim.” And in “That Kind of Girl,” she admits, “I let you get to me/It felt like the end of the world.” Ms. Speace made the album in three days of sessions in Nashville, recording live in the studio with a small band, and the music is unadorned but finely considered. It dips into blues, honky-tonk and gospel along with hymnlike piano ballads. Even when Ms. Speace is sad or bitter, her voice maintains its aplomb; as she spells out what has happened, she prizes grace over drama.DiagramsCHROMATICS“Reality, such a strange geometry,” the songwriter Sam Genders sings, before a chorus of jaunty whistling. It’s one of his first observations on “Chromatics” (Full Time Hobby), the second album that Mr. Genders — a founding member of the English folktronica group Tunng — has recorded as Diagrams. Throughout “Chromatics,” he continues to ponder time, purpose, and his own and humanity’s place in the world, moving between pessimism and reassurance: “Maybe nothing’s right but I’m here,” he offers in “You Can Talk to Me.” The music counters the modesty of his expectations, and the calm melancholy of his voice and melodies, with arrangements that mingle the physical and the synthetic, surrounding the guitars and drums in richly surreal reverberations and touching on decades of British rock, from the Searchers to the Cure and beyond. “All we need is this dirty broken bliss,” he sings, by no means as diffident as his words pretend.Elle KingLOVE STUFFElle King spends most of her album “Love Stuff” (RCA) as a sassy, hard-drinking, love-’em-and-leave-’em hellion with bad tattoos and a broad pedigree across rock, pop and country. She has Adele’s determination and Joan Jett’s stomp, Brenda Lee’s high-voiced bite and some AC/DC shriek. They’re all melded in songs like “Ex’s and Oh’s,” about how much her former boyfriends miss her in bed, and “America’s Sweetheart,” a banjo-picking electronic-dance-music thumper that suggests Avicii commandeered by Miranda Lambert; in it, Ms. King announces, “You try to change me, you can go to hell.” She repeatedly confronts devils and preachers, as she does in “Song of Sorrow,” one of only two songs written without collaborators and one that confesses uncertainty; “I’ve no idea which direction to go,” she sings. It’s a chink in her well-engineered bad-gal armor — and an opening for a sequel.Evans the DeathEXPECT DELAYSSongs by Evans the Death — a London band named after the undertaker in Dylan Thomas’s “Under Milk Wood” — flare up fast and don’t let up on its second album, “Expect Delays” (Slumberland). The songs revitalize the frantic 1990s indie-rock take on psychedelia in the way they hurl themselves into a brawl of melody versus noise. The melody comes largely from Katherine Whitaker’s vocals, as she grapples with circumstances and people, especially herself, in songs with indicative titles like “Idiot Button,” “Waste of Sunshine” and “Badyear.” Behind her, the very analog- and live-sounding band slams the beat and cranks up the distortion. In “Clean Up,” Ms. Whitaker offers, “Come in and see the awful mess that I have left behind/I know that you won’t mind” — and it’s a mess the band can be proud of.AdvertisementThe StavesIF I WASGorgeous entreaties and uneasy farewells fill “If I Was” (Nonesuch), the second studio album by the Staves. They are a folky trio of English sisters — Emily, Jessica and Camilla Staveley-Taylor — who bring angelic harmonies to songs that are mostly about romances in disarray or worse.“How can you tell me/That you don’t love me like you did before,” they sing in “No Me, No You, No More,” their voices rising gracefully together as they portray a sinking heart; “Let Me Down” concludes with them singing “Don’t you let me down” again and again, in cascades of overdubs.AdvertisementJustin Vernon produced the album with the same sense of reverent detail and surreal studio freedom he brought to his own Bon Iver’s “Bon Iver, Bon Iver.” Acoustic close-ups — the core of the Staves’ songs — grow panoramic with reverberation; large-scale arrangements loom up to reveal emotional abysses, then disappear. It’s consistently daring but rarely gimmicky; the songs are illuminated from within.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page AR18 of the New York edition with the headline: Heartache, Surreal Reverberations and Woozy Vertigo.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »