AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair Macaulay“RainForest,” a dance made by Merce Cunningham in 1968, has décor like no other theater piece: helium-filled silver pillows by Andy Warhol that he called “Silver Clouds.” Encountering a flock of them that year at a Warhol exhibition, Cunningham at once spotted their theatrical potential. Four to six of them are moored to the stage, where they sway or bounce like forest undergrowth. Most, however, are loose; some get sent flying by performers. It’s not uncommon during the action for a cloud to float out into the auditorium.In a recent email exchange, Albert Reid, a dancer in the original cast, remembered that a balloon did precisely that at the first New York performance, at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Jasper Johns “got up and batted it back onstage,” he wrote. (Mr. Johns was the Cunningham company’s artistic adviser from 1967 to 1980.) Many audience members have followed suit since. On April 7, “RainForest” and its Warhol pillows return to the stage when the piece joins the repertory of the Stephen Petronio Company at the Joyce Theater.Warhol wanted the dancers to be naked. This idea, Mr. Johns said in a 2012 email interview, had “no appeal for Merce.” Mr. Johns recounted, “Merce showed me an old pair of his tights that were ripped and torn.  I imitated these.” The attire he designed was flesh-colored allover tights in which he made rips while the dancers wore them, either with a razor-blade or large scissors.But these aren’t the only reasons that “RainForest” is unusual. By Cunningham standards, it’s among his least radical works: It shows, as pre-Cunningham generations of modern dance had, a keen interest in the “primitive,” albeit in mysterious ways. And though stylistically challenging, it seems to be about neither virtuosity nor especially complex rhythms.As is customary with Cunningham (1919-2009), though, music and dance are mutually independent. (David Tudor’s score has the same name as the dance, though with a lowercase F: “Rainforest.” When he heard Cunningham’s title, he said, “Oh, then I’ll put a lot of raindrops in it.”) Successive generations of dancers have loved performing this piece: It challenges and extends them. When Cunningham choreographed, he concentrated on specific movements and spatial relationships; for performers, these have opened up rich aspects of drama, atmosphere and climate.“RainForest” has just six dancers: three men, three women. Cunningham gave each one choreography so individualized that it makes the performers as distinct as characters in a play. They might even belong to separate species. All share some degree of wildness. An element of the feral, though different in each case, pervades their movement. The word “wild” recurs in every dancer’s description of the piece. To Carolyn Brown, Cunningham’s most celebrated and longest-serving co-dancer, he gave a rushing entrance and made her swing upside down with her legs hooked over Mr. Reid’s arm; Mr. Reid calls it “the Tarzan duet.”During the course of the dance, dancers depart and others arrive. None of the three women are onstage at the same time as the others. The connections between them make the piece structurally something like Arthur Schnitzler’s play “La Ronde”: A and B have a duet, then B and C, and so on. “RainForest,” though, doesn’t consist only of duets. One character alone (this was Cunningham’s role) returns to the stage, and it is with his final solo that the piece ends.Beyond exits and entrances, the world in “RainForest” keeps changing. When the curtain rises, the man dancing the Cunningham role is near the front with a woman sitting at his feet with raised knees bent. (Her role was created by Barbara Lloyd, but it was Meg Harper who danced it longest with Cunningham.) When the second man, who was Mr. Reid, approaches, she turns her attention to him. Mr. Reid wrote:“It would have been difficult not to feel some drama in ‘Rainforest,’ just from the movement we were given.  I had this in my head: Merce was in his ‘kingdom’ with Barbara in his realm/possession.  I was an interloper, challenging him in some way, and took over with Barbara as Merce left the scene.” Gus Solomons Jr. “came on later, a second interloper, but that’s as far as my ‘story’ goes.”“I think,” Mr. Reid recalled, that Cunningham “assumed that what he wanted was in the movement itself, and he was very specific about how he wanted that performed, with its pelvic bumps.”  It’s the initiating force of the spine, the articulation of the back and the focus of the eyes that are crucial to each character here, but in quite different ways.Though Cunningham was a man of mysteries, in this case he allowed some of the source inspiration for “RainForest” to become known. Long fascinated by anthropology, he had been reading Colin Turnbull’s book “The Forest People” (1961), about his field research in what was then the Belgian Congo. Cunningham later talked to David Vaughan, his company’s archivist, about Turnbull:“He was a tall man, and he lived with these pygmies for a long time, so that some kind of relationship developed,” he said. “He gave this marvelous picture of himself trying to follow them in the forest, and they would go under everything, and he would constantly be hung up by a branch some way, and they would turn and laugh at him.” But Cunningham’s title is revealing in another way. Ambiguity imbues all his work: In his mind, he punningly connected Turnbull’s experience with pygmies in the Congo to his own upbringing in Washington State. Interviewed in 2003 by the choreographer Trisha Brown, he remarked:“The Olympic Peninsula has a rain forest. It’s just astonishing. My parents took us there when we were children. I was this big, and the ferns were this big over you. It was just a marvelous experience. I think it’s the only rain forest in the United States, and it’s temperate. That means that it’s wet. And it drips. You go in and there’s the sense of dampness and warmth, but also the presence of greens, the color. I had two brothers, and we were small then. And I remember we would see little animals. I don’t know what they were. They were obviously what would be in that situation. But scurrying.”Out of these different sources, Cunningham conjured a drama that goes far from the African or North American continent. Every Cunningham dancer agrees that the meanings are in the movements, and apart from the recurrent word “wild,” most of them interpret its dramas differently. Daniel Madoff, who danced Cunningham’s role in the Cunningham company’s final “RainForest” performance in 2011, speaks of the “rage” the character feels when he returns to the stage at the end.“The final solo is physically so dramatic,” he said in a recent telephone interview. “There are extremes of tempi — they’re important. He’s just galvanized.”Not all performances of “RainForest” succeed. Cunningham supervised a 1988 revival (at the Joyce Theater) that was too guarded, although later performances acquired more vehemence. Nonetheless, it is a work of the imagination whose strange events and startling characters take both dancers and the audience into uncharted territory. From 1939 on, Cunningham regarded New York as home; “RainForest” shows how far from it he traveled in his mind.Advertisement