AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave ItzkoffIt’s not only the 1960s that will come to an end when “Mad Men” reaches its conclusion on May 17, but also a chapter of television history. Since its debut in 2007, this influential period drama has shaped our present while turning its lens on the past: The series, which returns for its final seven episodes on April 5, has helped to revive the fashion and pop culture of a tumultuous decade, while also reminding viewers of the racism, sexism and selfishness that was endemic to one of the most picked-over eras in American history.Following in the tradition of HBO’s “The Sopranos,” a proving ground for the “Mad Men” creator Matthew Weiner, this AMC series has helped fuel a modern-day frenzy for serialized dramas, starting water-cooler conversations and (in latter seasons) Internet conspiracy theories with plot lines that played out over multiple episodes and seasons. It made the once-lowly AMC a significant purveyor of prestige TV and won four consecutive Emmys for best drama, while making stars of an ensemble cast of largely unknown players.“We got lucky — we got really lucky,” said the actor Jon Hamm, who is several shades more modest (and bearded) than Don Draper, the irresistible if deeply flawed “Mad Men” protagonist he has played for its seven seasons. During this time, Draper has earned a reputation as a peerless advertising copywriter, a decisive office leader and a debonair ladies’ man — not to mention an incorrigible alcoholic, an unrepentant adulterer, an inadequate parent and an identity thief.How this years-in-the-making narrative ends for Draper — conclusively or ambiguously; with his redemption or his demise — remains a secret that Mr. Hamm isn’t sharing. He has, however, managed to portray a character that has grown over seven seasons while nonetheless remaining trapped in an existential loop. In a recent interview, he spoke about some of the moments — triumphant and otherwise — that made Don Draper who he was. In these excerpts from that conversation, he recalls how these scenes were created and shares some final insights about the man they reveal.The Teary Carousel (Season 1, “The Wheel”)In a stirring and intensely personal pitch, Draper demonstrates how a simple Kodak slide projector can also be a time machine, and reminds us why nostalgia — Greek for “the pain from an old wound” — is “delicate but potent.” “It was the end of the first season, and the show hadn’t been picked up [for Season 2]. We didn’t know if anybody was going to watch it. We wondered if that was going to be the end of the series. It’s an important moment in the development of the character, where people go, ‘Oh, this guy’s not just a sweet-talking guy in a fancy suit. He’s a soulful person.’ It was beautifully shot. We didn’t really want to use a working slide projector, they’re crazy noisy, so we had some digital thing. But the slides looked wrong somehow. We had to fix that and make them smudgy. At some point we ended up just running the slide projector in the room. I don’t know [how people were reacting to the speech]. I wasn’t exactly running back to the monitors, seeing how every line was landing. I was pretty focused on myself.”The Tipsy Carousel (Season 4, “Waldorf Stories”)Drunk on confidence and a sizable amount of alcohol, a beady-eyed Draper stumbles and slurs his way through a pitch meeting for Life cereal. He rattles off terrible tag lines like “Enjoy the rest of your Life ... cereal” and makes a plastered callback to his early moment of triumph: “I kept thinking, you know, about nostalgia,” he says, pausing for a silent burp. “How you remember something in the past and it feels good but it’s a little bit painful.”“I’m not exactly the go-to guy for light comedy, but the moments where Don has been funny, or less severe, have been a joy to play. It’s a different note — not just, ‘It’s the guy that smokes and scowls on TV all the time.’ It’s a little closer to who I am. I grew up listening to comedy, as an only child of a single mom. I had a library card, so I would go and check out comedy records. It was what was available: Bob Newhart, and Nichols and May. Then I would get George Carlin and Richard Pryor and Redd Foxx — if you could find that stuff — because if it had bad words in it, you were in good shape. I had no desire to be a standup or a writer. It was a great way, in a pre-Internet, pre-video game, pre-everything era, to get entertainment that made you feel better.”Peggy and Don, Part 1 (Season 4, “The Suitcase”)A struggle to create a campaign for Samsonite luggage eventually leads to understanding between Draper and Peggy Olson (Elisabeth Moss), but it also provokes a fight in which Olson demands greater recognition and Draper rebukes her, shouting, “That’s what the money is for.”“That whole episode was an unpacking of the relationship between these two people who started as a subordinate and a boss, and has moved to co-worker status. They have this marathon sharing session, a long dark night of the soul, but that particular speech is where the fuse gets lit. That whole episode was a very emotional episode for us. We both had a lot going on in our lives. Your life doesn’t stop when you have a shoot. You have dog walks and doctor’s appointments and all this other stuff, and it’s very, very difficult. But it’s exciting, because just for that moment, it all recedes. I could tell when I said my lines and she said her lines, we were both in the moment and the scene worked. But there was no concept that any of this episode was going to resonate or land or be what it’s become.”California Arrival (Season 7, “Time Zones”)In a dialogue-free sequence set to “I’m a Man” by the Spencer Davis Group, Draper floats through Los Angeles International Airport and into a car driven by his wife, Megan (Jessica Paré) — a moment that belies his professional and marital problems. “Matt likes to start the new season with a certain tone. It’s a big rock ’n’ roll song called ‘I’m a Man,’ and of course the irony is, he’s getting picked up by his wife at the airport. Not exactly the manliest. He doesn’t even get to drive. Don is now very much out of this time. He’s not of L.A., he’s not of the generation that seems to be driving the culture. The day we shot at LAX, they shut down the airport because of a bomb scare. We wrapped and they said, ‘No one’s leaving.’ The whole production staff. And when you travel to a location, there’s a lot of things and a lot of people. Hundreds of people, carts and lighting equipment — everything has to be accounted for. And of course, if there’s a bomb scare, if there’s any electronic equipment, they’re immediately freaking out about it. That presented a bit of a production challenge.”Peggy and Don, Part 2 (Season 7, “The Strategy”)Having spent laborious weeks creating a seemingly perfect campaign for the fast-food chain Burger Chef, Draper and Olson scrap it for a better one that she composes at the last minute. Proud of his pupil, Draper takes her hand, and they slow dance to Frank Sinatra’s “My Way.” “It is very tender, and it’s loaded with meaning. For Don, part of that moment is letting go, letting her do it. Then that song comes on: Frank Sinatra, another person who’s a vestige of this older generation, on his quote-unquote last legs, and that song was a huge hit. As the camera pulls away, there’s a reflection of them both in the window, of what is and what might have been. It’s such a wonderful button on their relationship. That was choreographed, but it’s not as technical as all that. You’ve got a little wiggle room. There’s a wonderful image from the end of Season 5, where we’re all standing, backlit by a bank of windows. And everybody is in their little window, except me. So I clearly missed my mark. I started rationalizing it. I’m like, ‘Maybe they wanted Don a little out of the box.’ Everyone was perfectly lined up except me. I’ll call myself out on that.”Advertisement