Season 1, Episode 9: “Pimento”That was brutal.The dramatic high point of “Pimento,” and of the entire season of “Better Call Saul” thus far, is the revelation that Chuck has actively blocked the career of his younger brother, Jimmy. It’s a terrible shift. Chuck started the season as Jimmy’s ward, as dependent on him as a child is on their parent. Now, he is revealed as Jimmy’s saboteur. And just as bad, he has lied and schemed to conceal that role. It’s Shakespearean, this betrayal, although most of the Bard’s double crosses are helpfully telegraphed by the betrayer, in monologues with the audience. Chuck never tips his hand, though clues about his intentions are now visible in hindsight. If nothing else, we knew that Chuck was sanctimonious and proud to an insufferable degree. To the extent that character is destiny, this was foreordained. The twist is that Chuck uses deceit and fakery to block Jimmy, all because Chuck believes that Jimmy is morally lacking, given to deceit and fakery. Put another way, Chuck has demonstrated the very flaws he bemoans in his younger brother. That final scene demonstrates why the show’s creators wanted Michael McKean, who, though best known for comic roles in movies like “This is Spinal Tap,” is also a superb dramatic actor (One who has done Shakespeare.) There were layers to his performance throughout this season that are obvious only now. How did we get to the reckoning that ends “Pimento”? Chuck convinces Jimmy that the two can’t handle the class-action lawsuit against Sandpiper Crossing, part of a chain of assisted living facilities, by themselves. They need the help of a team, Chuck argues, and the team that Chuck recommends is the horde of lawyers at the firm he co-founded, Hamlin, Hamlin & McGill. Jimmy reluctantly agrees, though only because he believes he’ll join the firm and participate in the case.But during an all-hands meeting at the firm, the show’s bespoke-suited devil, Howard Hamlin, explains that the firm will cut Jimmy in on the upside, but won’t give him an office.“Jimmy, I’m just going to say it,” Hamlin says. “You’re not working here.”“What is it that you can’t let go of?” Jimmy asks, stunned.It turns out that Hamlin is not the one with issues letting go. By the end of the episode, we realize that a lot of the nastiness that we, as viewers, have ascribed to Hamlin actually has its origins in Chuck. In fact, it feels, as the credits roll, that we owe Hamlin an apology. We’ve seen him through Jimmy’s eyes, and Jimmy doesn’t realize that Hamlin is almost surely just following Chuck’s orders. It appears to be Chuck, not Hamlin, who didn’t want Jimmy hired at HH&M after Jimmy passed the bar. Chuck used Hamlin to deliver that ugly news early in Episode 8. Thomas Schnauz, who both wrote and directed this episode, lets Chuck make a plausible enough case for his actions in the final scene. One part of Chuck’s argument is lame and credentialist (“The University of American Samoa, online course. What a joke!”), and another part suggests that Chuck thinks Jimmy hasn’t earned the stature that a job at HH&M will provide (“You don’t just slide into it like a cheap pair of slippers and then reap all the rewards”).But Chuck’s most compelling point centers on a question that animated “Breaking Bad” as much as “Better Call Saul”: Can people change? They sure can, said “Breaking Bad,” and demonstrated the point by transforming a benign chemistry teacher into a homicidal thug. In “Better Call Saul” we’ve seen another lead character evolve, though less dramatically — from scam artist to earnest plaintiffs’ attorney, with the occasional moral lapse. But if the writers of the show believe people can change, not all of their characters do. Chuck can’t imagine that his brother has risen beyond his youthful roots as a con man nicknamed Slippin’ Jimmy. “I know what you were, what you are,” Chuck shouts. “Slippin’ Jimmy with a law degree is like a chimp with a machine gun!”We know this isn’t true. Jimmy is a force for good, if we can judge by his ventures in elder law. But now he can’t have a perch at a corporate firm and the respectability that it confers. I assume it is this knowledge — that he will never shake his reputation as a morally dubious man — that will drive him to become Saul Goodman.But I’ve said it before: predictions are a mug’s game on this show. The secondary plot here is about Mike and is a lot lighter and more fun. He takes a gig protecting a jittery schmo peddling prescription meds, and gets to demonstrate his physical prowess by disarming a doofus in camouflage pants who has been hired for the same job. The assault happens right after that guy asks what Mike is packing, prompting Mike to nod in the direction of a brown paper bag, which contains his lunch, a pimento sandwich. Mr. Camouflage Pants clarifies that he is asking if Mike is carrying a gun.“Pimento is a cheese,” Mike deadpans. “They call it the caviar of the South.”Oddly enough, they do. It turns out that the schmo with the pills (Price) is selling to Nacho, played with winning sang-froid by Michael Mando, who has been far too absent from this show for far too long, at least for my tastes. His confrontation with Mike, in the parking lot of some abandoned industrial site, is one of the few scenes Mando hasn’t stolen — though only because Jonathan Banks won’t hand it over. Mike makes sure that Price is paid in full, then informs Price that he is now, officially, a criminal. This seems to startle Price, who insists he isn’t a bad guy.“I didn’t say you were a bad guy,” Mike replies. “I said you’re a criminal.” What we have is a story about self-perception, which weaves nicely around Jimmy’s story, which is about how others perceive him. “Pimento” is an episode that deals with identity, conceived here as a combination of what you do and what you, and others, think about what you do. Price is a criminal who thinks he’s a nice guy. Jimmy is a nice guy whose brother thinks he’s a menace. This theme popped up in Episode 6. “Five-O” told the story of Mike’s son, Matty, a good cop who reluctantly agreed to pocket money illegally skimmed by his partner. Matty had agonized over that decision and originally considered turning in his partner. That partner, and his equally dirty sergeant, ultimately murder Matty, unconvinced that he’s actually one of them. In other words, Matty was a good guy, who tried to be a bad guy. But neither his partner nor sergeant believed that transformation was sincere. So they killed him.Those cops went through a similar mental exercise as Chuck. They, too, were assessing the trustworthiness of a man. All three of these people find the assessed man lacking. All three commit an act of fratricide, one literal, the other symbolic.I think a lot of “Pimento” is strong and it has the raw material for a great stage drama. I do wish there were a little more Nacho in “Better Call Saul,” by which I mean not just more Michael Mando but more danger, more guns and more violence. More of what follows in Nacho’s wake, I suppose. One issue that confounds me is what comes next. I’m not sure what the show is building toward. There are not obvious threads that need tying up, nor is there a story line that is badly in need of resolution. At this point, the show’s writers should have us dying to know how X is going to turn out, or fretting that Jimmy is on the verge of Y. If there is an X or a Y at this point, I’m not sure what it is. I expect that the last episode will be filled with action and rich in plot. The writers of “Breaking Bad” know from cliffhangers. But what cliff are we going to hang from? Bonus MaterialI watched this episode in Los Angeles, in a packed theater on the Sony lot, at an event held for people who vote for Emmy awards. Not everyone in the audience, though, was in the Television Academy, or even familiar with the show. When the episode ended and the lights went back on, the elderly woman sitting next to me asked, “Which one is Saul?”Afterward, co-creators Vince Gilligan and Peter Gould, along with Thomas Schnauz and the cast, sat in front of the crowd and took questions from a moderator. Some highlights.• Gould said that the relationship between Jimmy and Chuck was inspired, to some degree, by the relationship between the artist R. Crumb and his brother, Charles, as shown in the documentary “Crumb.” If you’ve seen the film you know that Crumb’s brother is mentally ill and, at least for a period of his life, a shut in. • McKean said that when he was contacted by the producers of the show he was told that his character had an “affliction,” but didn’t specify what it was. He quipped that he worried that it was a horrific, full-body case of psoriasis, requiring seven hours of make up a day. • Gilligan and Gould said they were open to introducing any number of “Breaking Bad” characters into the show, but only if it didn’t feel like a “stunt.” They debated, onstage, whether Jimmy/Saul actually knew Gus Fring during “Breaking Bad,” deciding ultimately that he probably did not. • Bob Odenkirk said that he was frequently asked, during the making of “Breaking Bad,” if he would want to hang out with his character, Saul, at parties and his answer was always “no way.” Goodman was putting on a show, he said, and the show was a little annoying. Jimmy, on the other hand, is someone he likes.• Gilligan noted that the character of Price is played by Mark Proksch. A few years back, Proksch was a minor YouTube sensation when he punked a number of local television morning shows, pretending to be a yo-yo master named Kenny Strasser. K-Strass, as he called himself, said he was touring the country, visiting schools and teaching kids about the environment as he dazzled them with his act. On the morning shows, he’d first describe his unique brand of infotainment to some unsuspecting host and then attempt a yo-yo trick that ended in disaster. Here’s a good example.