The sword came off the wall, but it was too late to make a difference.“The Walking Dead” has always walked a line between comic book (or video game) and sociological treatise. The second half of its fifth season on AMC, which ended on Sunday night, was like eight episodes of post-apocalyptic debate club — a thought experiment that weighed the value of stability and community against the imperative of ruthless preparedness. Ruthlessness won — marked by the decision of Michonne (Danai Gurira), who had held out hope until the end for a peaceful life in the fractured suburbia of Alexandria, to strap on her katana. With the latest band of marauders now aware of Alexandria’s existence, the stage could be set for a satisfying round of siege and battle in Season 6.That’s if you made it through Season 5B. (Certainly many people did — about 19 million a week in recent live-plus-three-days viewing numbers.) You can argue that the show needs breathing spaces, that it can’t be just an endless succession of escapes from zombies and battles with inhospitable fellow survivors. And the ambient gloom of its quiet moments — it’s one of the quietest shows on TV — is an important part of its appeal.But it’s not a profound show, for better or worse. And the ideas it has about home, family and the necessity of violence are best expressed through action, not through talk or staring at old photographs or baking cookies. Carl (Chandler Riggs) shooting his mother in Season 3 said more about the world these characters live in than the entire half-season we just watched. The best, most believable moment of the finale came early, when the wandering Morgan (Lennie James) looked up to see a friendly, crazy, homicidal young man pointing a gun at him. That’s what’s likely to happen after the zombie apocalypse.Which brings up the larger problem with the Alexandria story line — it was just so hard to believe. Fans have been picking apart the details, like Father Gabriel (Seth Gilliam) failing to close the gate in the finale. (That didn’t bother me so much — Gabriel’s been turned into such a morose loser that it made sense as part of his death wish.) But look at the bigger picture: A spick-and-span little J. Crew town with plumbing and electricity, thriving despite its commitment to nonviolence and its utter incompetence at killing zombies? The implausibility of its very existence, and of the way so many of Rick’s group immediately accepted it, was a constant annoyance.Of course you completely jettison disbelief when you enter a zombie thriller, but internal logic still counts for a lot. And even if you engaged with the debate between Rick and Alexandria’s leader, Deanna (Tovah Feldshuh), there was another problem: Rick was so obviously right. The refusal of most of the other characters — with the exceptions of Carol (Melissa McBride), Daryl (Norman Reedus) and Glenn (Steven Yeun) — to unquestioningly back him up was one way to generate tension, but it quickly became yell-at-the-screen irritating. “The Walking Dead” is a series that’s reliably smart and well made but sometimes chases bad ideas, forcing us to wait until it gets back on track. (In that way it’s a lot like a very different show, “The Good Wife,” which I write about every week.) Here’s hoping that with Rick in charge and the Wolves (the mysterious new group of marauders) at the door, Season 6 will pick up the pace.