By ROBERTA SMITHOCT. 15, 2015
Richard Serra’s “Equal,” a room-size sculpture installation at David Zwirner in Chelsea last summer, was among the year’s best shows. Now he’s making a splash at Gagosian, his principal representative, with a series of 60 new drawings. In them, Mr. Serra takes that medium someplace he hasn’t before, toward gentleness and modest size.In the past Mr. Serra’s large rough-surfaced drawings of thickly applied (black) lithography crayon have waged an unevenly match battle in terms of scale, weight and aggressiveness with his looming sculptures.For his new “Ramble Drawings” — named after the sculpture series he was working on at the time — Mr. Serra has scaled things way down, applied lithography crayon in terms of ounces, not pounds and sometimes added black pastel powder. The paper is handmade, so each piece is a slightly different size. The variety of surface, space, light and touch is extraordinary as are the fluid associations with nature and other artists (Seurat, Pollock, Barnett Newman, Vija Celmins).The drawings are made by two methods with varying degrees of control: some result from a two-sheet pressure-transfer process involving a metal tool whose traces inflect the composition while others use direct marking on a single sheet, a more old-fashioned way.Mr. Serra remains, after all these years, the Process artist par excellence. The series echoes his famous “Verb List” (1967-68), which compiled different ways to manipulate materials. Now adjectives are compiled by us as we look: dense, atmospheric, flecked, porous, arboreal, lunar, glimmering, cascading, photographic, matte, shiny. We stretch our vocabularies, as Mr. Serra brings another side of his rigorous sensibility into view.Richard Serra‘Ramble Drawings’Gagosian980 Madison Avenue, ManhattanThrough Oct. 24A version of this review appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page C26 of the New York edition with the headline: Richard Serra Scales Down With ‘Ramble Drawings’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.