Tonight I lived a dream. Thank you Jon Stewart and @TheDailyShow and everybody that watched. //t.co/EdWDJCseVi— Trevor Noah (@Trevornoah) 5 Dec 14When Jon Stewart started as the host of “The Daily Show,” in 1999, Internet video was hard to come by, and social networks like Twitter didn’t exist. During his years as a professional comedian, Trevor Noah, like many of his peers, has established a strong footprint on Twitter, YouTube and Instagram. His tweets and clips from his standup performances may offer clues about what kind of host he’ll be on Comedy Central’s crown jewel nightly program.Mr. Noah’s Twitter account has accumulated nearly two million followers since he created it in 2009. His tweets show a comedian who is just as likely to sincerely engage the news as make jokes about it. Many of his most popular tweets have been focused on South African politics. A series about the memorial service for Nelson Mandela offered an example of Mr. Noah’s penchant for going beyond comedy:People shouldn’t have booed Zuma at Mandela’s memorial. But it’s crazy that their anger supersedes their pain.— Trevor Noah (@Trevornoah) 10 Dec 13Obama just gave one of the most powerful speeches I’ve ever heard. “Mandela freed not only the prisoner but also the guard”— Trevor Noah (@Trevornoah) 10 Dec 13Zuma’s speech was factual, Obama’s speech was emotional and personal.— Trevor Noah (@Trevornoah) 10 Dec 13Mr. Noah also wrote many tweets about the trial of Oscar Pistorius, the Olympian who shot and killed his girlfriend, Reeva Steenkamp, in 2013. Mr. Pistorius was found guilty of culpable homicide but acquitted of more serious murder charges.And the Oscar goes to – jail— Trevor Noah (@Trevornoah) 14 Feb 13People must calm down over this Oscar thing. Just because he got bail doesn’t mean he’s going to walk.— Trevor Noah (@Trevornoah) 22 Feb 13O. J. Pistorius— Trevor Noah (@Trevornoah) 12 Sep 14Of course, there are many jibes and one-liners:Disgusting to see that Anc rioters are throwing petrol bombs at police. Petrol is so expensive smh. #ThrowParrafin— Trevor Noah (@Trevornoah) 12 Feb 14Ok so America is attacking Syria for the chemical gas thing but who’s attacking America for the Miley Cyrus thing?— Trevor Noah (@Trevornoah) 27 Aug 13I’ll miss the Olympics. It’s the one time, when a group of black people can run, with no suspicion.— Trevor Noah (@Trevornoah) 14 Aug 12Mr. Noah’s YouTube channel has far fewer subscribers than his Twitter account, but his videos have been streamed millions of times in total. In one clip, he reflected on an extreme form of American ignorance about people living on the African continent:In a video posted on another YouTube channel, Mr. Noah’s routine focused on his parents and how his upbringing prepared him for his arrival in the United States:But Mr. Noah’s routines have also found humor in South Africa’s multicultural setting, too:Do you have a favorite Trevor Noah joke? Tell us about it in the comments.