Updated, 1:06 a.m.Season 5, Episode 16, “Conquer”Spoilers and conflicted bloodlust lurk below.“Just do it.”That was me, talking to my television first as Glenn put a gun to Nicholas’s head and then again as Sasha took aim at Father Gabriel toward the end of Sunday’s 90-minute “Walking Dead” season finale. I doubt I was alone.I stand by that statement. I don’t feel great about it, though, not after Deanna followed suit, ordering Pete’s execution, and then Mr. “All Life Is Precious” Morgan showed up to judge us all.Since our heroes first arrived in Alexandria a few weeks ago, the show has derived most of its conflict from the tension between the pragmatic brutality of Team Grimes and the dithering fecklessness of the Alexandrians, culminating in Rick’s bloody breakdown last week. This week, we saw plenty of stupefying Alexandrian decisions, from leaving Rick unattended to plot with his friends to assigning Pete a house in straight view of the wife he had routinely beat.The most unpardonable, of course, was off-handedly trusting Father Gabriel to close the gate. (So, so dumb. More on that in a minute.)The choice, we were led to believe for most of the season, was between a sort of clueless impersonation of life as it once was or a clear-eyed embrace of the ways and means of a collapsed and violent world. But then along came Morgan the Jedi to suggest a middle path, wielding not a blade but a magical staff (a little much but I’m O.K. with it), using it to suggest that you can beat the barbarity without joining it. Morgan, you’ll recall, was the man who, back in Season 1, first filled in a freshly awakened Rick on the particulars of the undead new world. He was with his son back then but the boy didn’t last, and Morgan didn’t take it well. His last lengthy appearance on the show, in Season 3, found him emotionally tormented and surrounded by booby traps of his own design. He stabbed Rick before he remembered who he was and refused an offer to join him at the prison.He’s doing better now. We opened on Morgan and a member of the “W” gang, another entity that’s been suggested but not seen for much of the season. Many viewers have assumed these people are the “Wolves,” based on references in past episodes, and that seems to be the case. The lad told a rambling story about wolves but that wasn’t the actual point, which was to take Morgan’s stuff and try to kill him.In retrospect, the scene functioned equally as a symbolic meeting of the two poles of humanity as it now stands. Last week we covered the terribleness of the Wolves, although their diesel trailer traps are things of meat-hooked, pulleyed wonder. They take. They kill. They don’t seem particularly troubled by it.Morgan, meanwhile, was cast as a sort of spiritual warrior whose combat skills co-exist with an appreciation of human life.Advantage Morgan, who bested two Wolves but didn’t kill them (sorry, Red Poncho Man). Later Morgan went into savior mode, freeing Daryl and Aaron from the walker-swarmed sedan in the nick o’ time, as they say. But it wasn’t until the last scene that Morgan’s true purpose finally became clear: to serve as a sort of moral barometer to show Rick and the rest of us how far off course the constable, increasingly a shoot-first guy prone to bloody-faced ranting, has traveled.Will Morgan point the way forward toward a more humanistic and enlightened form of post-apocalyptic survival? Michonne seemed headed that way but then the penultimate scene found her briefly hanging up her sword, only to resheath it. Probably for the best: she might not know it yet but “WOLVES NOT FAR,” as the final shot of the season had it. We’ll see in a few months, I guess.Elsewhere, Sasha buried walkers and then laid down with them. Father Gabriel went for a stroll, killed some walkers and cried some more. The two finally came together for a sort of P.T.S.D. cage match — spitting their tortured histories into each other’s faces — that ultimately ended in a group prayer. Perhaps they’ll forgive me for not caring all that much. It seems like we’re being led to believe that Gabriel’s erratic behavior stems from his continued unresolved remorse over abandoning his flock to the walkers. Fine, but what that’s tended to look like is him doing dumb things just in order to create problems for our heroes to solve. Seth Gilliam is a good actor — perhaps they’ll give him something more interesting to do next season.Instead of Gabriel, we lost a different delicate man this week. Poor Reg, we’ve suspected for awhile that he was too tender for this vicious world but the humanitarian speech he gave to Maggie sealed it:The cavemen, they were all nomads and they all died when we evolved into this, and we lived. Civilization starts when we stop running, when we live together, when we stop sending people away from the world and from each other. That’s what I’m going to tell her. That’s what I’m going to tell everyone.
Yeah, he was a goner. A few thoughts while we groan-laugh-snort-moan• Can we pause for a second to ponder the stunning facepalm moment that was Father Gabriel’s non-closing of that gate? I’m not talking about the act itself, but the fact that everyone in the writers room was apparently fine with that plot point.• Speaking of implausible, so no explanation for how Glenn, with a bullet in his shoulder, got away from all those walkers, huh? Well O.K., then.• I enjoyed the Red Poncho spin on the old “Star Trek” redshirts — characters who exist only to get killed off.• Glad to see Abraham and Eugene finally bury the hatchet. Methinks they should celebrate with a trip to Jessie’s salon.• Some day, somehow, someone will actually actually eat one of Carol’s casseroles.• What say you? Are you ready to see Rick rehabilitated? Can you let go of your own bloodlust toward Nicholas? Where did Season 5 fall in your personal “Walking Dead” power rankings? We’ve traveled quite a distance since Terminus, physically and emotionally, and lost some good people along the way — Bob, Beth, Tyreese, Noah. But on the other hand, we gained . . . uh, Gabriel, I guess? (Not exactly an even swap.) Please share your thoughts in the comments.