AdvertisementSupported byBy Alec M. Priester8:30 P.M. (ABC Family) THE GOONIES (1985) Richard Donner directed, Chris Columbus wrote the screenplay and Steven Spielberg wrote the story for this classic buddy adventure. Friends in Astoria, Ore., face the glum prospect of having their group broken apart as a country club tries to build a golf course on their properties. They a map they believe will lead them to buried treasure with which they can buy off the country club and keep their homes. They set off in search of the treasure. “The Goonies themselves are an appealing bunch: There is a smart-alecky one (Corey Feldman), a mature one (Josh Brolin), a precociously responsible one (Sean Astin), a weirdly inventive one (Ke Huy Quan) and an effervescent fat one (Jeff Cohen) who steals half the film,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times. The film “has crooks, bats, cobwebs, skeletons, a lovable monster, an underground grotto and a treasure hidden by some of the most considerate, clue-loving pirates who ever lived.” (The Goonies, above.) 5:30 P.M. (Oxygen) FERRIS BUELLER’S DAY OFF (1986) John Hughes wrote and directed this beloved story of Ferris Bueller (Matthew Broderick), a high school senior who recruits his girlfriend, Sloane (Mia Sara), and his best friend, Cameron (Alan Ruck), to skip school and cavort around Chicago. Ferris’s sister, Jeanie (Jennifer Grey), and principal, Edward Rooney (Jeffrey Jones), try to spoil the truants’ fun. With memorable cameos by Ben Stein and Charlie Sheen. Writing of Mr. Hughes in The Times, Nina Darnton said: “He has the sensibility and vision of an adolescent with the technical know-how and expertise of an adult. The movies that result are uncanny re-creations — and celebrations — of a teenage point of view.”9 P.M. (13, 49) CANCER: THE EMPEROR OF ALL MALADIES Ken Burns is the executive producer of this documentary series directed by Barak Goodman, adapted from the book by Dr. Siddhartha Mukherjee. The series is split into three episodes totaling six hours, the first of which shows this evening. The episode follows the search for the cure for cancer, providing background while interweaving the story of a cancer patient.9:30 P.M. (National Geographic) THE BIG PICTURE WITH KAL PENN Mr. Penn searches for treasure in the form of gold in Nevada, rare baseball cards in Ohio and jewels lost during World War II in Poland.10 P.M. (Comedy Central) COMEDY CENTRAL ROAST OF JUSTIN BIEBER The roastmaster, Kevin Hart, is joined by guests including Hannibal Buress, Snoop Dogg, Ludacris, Martha Stewart, Shaquille O’Neal and Chris D’Elia to publicly insult Justin Bieber (above) to his face. 12:00 A.M. (CW) FRIENDS Chandler (Matthew Perry) and Rachel (Jennifer Aniston) eat a cheesecake mistakenly delivered to their apartment and fret about what to do when a second one arrives. Ross is invited to the wedding of Monica’s childhood best friend, but Monica is not. Phoebe (Lisa Kudrow) struggles in her love life, which is complicated by distance.12:00 A.M. (9) HOW I MET YOUR MOTHER Robin (Cobie Smulders) becomes a local celebrity after an on-the-job act of heroism. Lily (Alyson Hannigan) tells Marshall (Jason Segel) she had a dream about somebody else, to his distress. Ted (Josh Radnor) adjusts to living alone, and Barney (Neil Patrick Harris) presses him to behave wildly every night.What’s Streaming Now PRISONERS (2013) Keller Dover (Hugh Jackman) is a family man in a small Pennsylvania town. When his daughter, Anna, goes missing, Detective Loki (Jake Gyllenhaal) leads the investigation. He questions a mentally disabled man named Alex (Paul Dano), whom he suspects abducted Anna. Alex is released from custody, but Keller believes so strongly in Alex’s guilt that he considers torturing him into confessing. “ ‘Prisoners’ is the kind of movie that can quiet a room full of casual thrill-seekers,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “It absorbs and controls your attention with such assurance that you hold your breath for fear of distracting the people on screen, exhaling in relief or amazement at each new revelation. By the end, you may be a little worn out, and perhaps also slightly let down by the fussily clever revelations that wrap up the story, but in the meantime, you are a willing captive, unable to tell the difference between dread and delight.” (hbogo.com) ALEC M. PRIESTERAdvertisement