By NEIL GENZLINGERMARCH 29, 2015
Whatever happened to Ziva? Those still wondering can rest easy. She has been located on a mountaintop in the first century A.D.Ziva is the character Cote de Pablo played for years on the popular CBS series “NCIS,” and when the actress left that show in 2013, it threw some viewers into a tizzy that continues to be evident on fan boards. Ms. de Pablo, though, re-emerges on Tuesday and Wednesday in “The Dovekeepers,” a CBS mini-series based on Alice Hoffman’s fictional treatment of the siege of Masada.Ziva was independent-minded and protective of those she loved, and so is Shirah, Ms. de Pablo’s character in “The Dovekeepers.” But there’s a well-scrubbed tepidness to Shirah, and to this whole mini-series, that Ziva never would have tolerated.“The Dovekeepers” is from Roma Downey and Mark Burnett, who shook up the television world in 2013 with “The Bible.” As in that mini-series, the version of the ancient world they give us here is full of clichéd dialogue served in overwrought fashion; subtlety, it appears, had not yet been invented in robe-and-sandal times. The series does have a few powerful moments; the mystery is why it doesn’t have more.AdvertisementThe novel, told through the narratives of four women, has been slimmed down here. We get the story through just two, Shirah and Yael, played by Rachel Brosnahan, who will be familiar to viewers of “Manhattan” and “House of Cards.” As a framing device, we see them after the siege, relating their stories to Flavius Josephus (Sam Neill), the real-life historian whose account is the main source of the story about Jewish rebels who killed themselves or one another rather than submit to Roman troops.AdvertisementIt’s refreshing to see history, even fictionalized history, told from alternate perspectives, in this case those of two women who were outcasts of sorts. Both Yael and Shirah become pregnant by men married to other women. In Shirah’s case the man is Eleazar Ben Ya’ir, the leader of the rebels making a last stand in the mountaintop fortress of Masada. That she is thought of as a witch also doesn’t help her social standing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.These women ought to be more interesting than they are. As with another recent ancient-world concoction, “The Red Tent” on Lifetime, the filmmakers here seem to think alternate perspectives must be delivered in the language of bodice-ripping paperbacks.“I was a woman of the desert,” Yael explains as she relates the moment when she becomes a mistress. “Wild. And he was the lion I always knew would take me.”And after Shirah’s lover rouses the resistance with a speech telling them there will be no retreat from Masada, what is her role? To drag him off for some naked groping in the underground baths.The two actresses certainly have the ability to bring something other than submissive mush to their parts, but they aren’t asked to do so very often. The most intense work in the series comes from Kathryn Prescott as Aziza, daughter of Shirah (and one of the narrators in the book), a warrior who, in Part 2, faces the trauma of seeing her boyfriend commit some horrible acts in battle.The whole enterprise is bathed in a gloss that doesn’t fit the story. The landscape is hot and dusty, but the actors rarely are — even the slaves and soldiers seem immune to sweat and grime, and the women always look as if they just came out of a desert spa. “The Dovekeepers” is aimed at people who might want to see history from something other than a male, generals-and-kings viewpoint but at the same time don’t want it too messy or too real.The DovekeepersTuesday and Wednesday evenings at 9, on CBS.Directed by Yves Simoneau. Teleplay by Ann Peacock. Produced by CBS Television Studios and LightWorkers Media, a division of United Artists Media Group. Roma Downey, Mark Burnett, Frank Siracusa, John Weber, Yves Simoneau, executive producers.WITH: Cote de Pablo (Shirah), Rachel Brosnahan (Yael), Kathryn Prescott (Aziza), Diego Boneta (Amram) and Sam Neill (Flavius Josephus).A version of this review appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: An Ancient Siege on a Mountaintop, Retold With Liberties Taken.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.