By NEIL GENZLINGERMARCH 29, 2015
Among television’s current epidemics — zombies, serial killers, reality-show families with gigantic numbers of children — one is easy to overlook: rootless single characters reluctant to commit to love or anything else. “Undateable.” “About a Boy.” The recently departed “Mulaney.” And so on.You’d think there couldn’t possibly be room for another, but “Weird Loners,” which begins Tuesday night on Fox, is worth a half-hour of your time. It’s not loud or frenetic. It’s not particularly cutting-edge. It’s just funny, in a relaxed way that’s welcome somehow in a television spectrum full of pushiness and intensity.It’s about four single people who find themselves living in adjacent townhouses and forming an odd rectangle of mutual support. These ones are a bit older than most in looking-for-love comedies. The youngest, Zara (Meera Rohit Kumbhani), is 33; the oldest, Caryn (Becki Newton), is 37. They and a third member of the group, Stosh (Zachary Knighton), are past the point of being anxious about not being coupled up. They’re unapologetic and a bit militant about it.We first meet Zara as she is moving out on a boyfriend without warning or explanation. Caryn is fending off pressure from her family and her inner voices to marry a drab suitor she doesn’t love. Stosh is a Lothario whose penchant for bedding other men’s wives and fiancées has just cost him his job.AdvertisementAnd then there’s Eric (Nate Torrence), Caryn’s neighbor, who has been living with his father so long that when the old man dies he is at a loss as to how to go on. Stosh, his cousin, who is broke, exploits the vacuum, offering to move in with him under the guise of helping him adjust.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Eric character is a bit of a problem. It’s not entirely clear whether he’s simply a man-boy, which would make him an overused archetype, or cognitively challenged in some way, which would border on offensive.AdvertisementIn any case, the four unconsciously form a support group that’s enjoyably screwball and not particularly taxing. This is one show that you can drop in on just to grab a few laughs without feeling you have to invest your whole being in it.An ensemble effort like this of course relies on the chemistry between the characters and the actors playing them. That sometimes takes time to develop, but everyone clicks pretty comfortably here right from the start.Ms. Newton and Mr. Knighton work a hot-cold dynamic amusingly, their characters being alternately sexually attracted to and infuriated by each other. And Ms. Kumbhani, a relative newcomer, is a real comic find. If this show sticks, the characters will all soon be too old to carry the premise. Somebody should already be writing her spinoff series.Weird LonersTuesday evenings at 9:30, on Fox.Created and written by Michael J. Weithorn. Produced by 20th Century Fox Television. Mr. Weithorn, Jake Kasdan and Melvin Mar, executive producers.WITH: Becki Newton (Caryn), Zachary Knighton (Stosh), Nate Torrence (Eric) and Meera Rohit Kumbhani (Zara).A version of this review appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: Misfits United by Their Romantic Follies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.