By BROOKS BARNESMARCH 29, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  A plaintiff shuffled onto a courtroom set at Sunset Bronson Studios here with a simple complaint. She had lent money to a shady guy who — shocker — turned out to be a total deadbeat.Judge Judith Sheindlin, the irascible star of “Judge Judy,” would have swiftly deemed the woman too dumb to live and rendered an insta-verdict. But here on “Hot Bench,” no spat is too small for serious investigation. As the cameras rolled, a three-judge panel began to solemnly sort it out.The concept sounds ridiculous: It takes three legal heavyweights — a former New York State Supreme Court justice, a Yale-educated litigator and a criminal defense lawyer — to adjudicate dog bites and fender benders? Before giving a verdict at the end of each 30-minute episode, the trio even adjourns to a chamber to weigh the testimony.But “Hot Bench,” created by Judge Sheindlin, is a surprise syndication hit, proving that sometimes all it takes to revive a tired television genre is a single format tweak, a leap of faith by local stations and the willingness of the American public to play along.AdvertisementDespite being buried in little-watched time slots when it arrived in September, “Hot Bench” has defied the odds to become the No. 1 new syndicated offering of the 2014-15 season. Household ratings have climbed roughly 50 percent from its debut, according to Nielsen, and original episodes have been attracting about 2.5 million viewers. By some ratings measures, “Hot Bench” is even beating entrenched competitors like “Divorce Court” and “Judge Mathis.”AdvertisementOn Monday, “Hot Bench” will be upgraded to CBS-owned affiliates in seven cities, including New York, Chicago, Boston and Los Angeles. “I guess the lesson is to never bet against Judge Judy,” said Bill Butler, vice president for programming at Sinclair Broadcasting, which runs “Hot Bench” on stations in more than a dozen cities, including Baltimore and Washington, where it has also been upgraded to a stronger slot. The show is co-produced by Judge Sheindlin’s production company, Queen Bee Productions, and CBS Television Distribution, which is the syndication arm of CBS.Judge Sheindlin apparently knew instinctively what audience research on “Hot Bench” has shown: People watch court shows to see judges verbally smack around litigants but also “as a way to learn about the judicial system,” Mr. Butler said.And, as it turns out, the three “Hot Bench” judges genuinely do not always agree on the small-claims cases that come before them.“People rely too much on the judicial system to be perfectly calibrated,” Judge Sheindlin said in a telephone interview. “Very often, it’s a crapshoot. I wanted people to see that when you go to court you can never be sure of the outcome. The people hearing and determining the cases bring all their history with them.”A recent “Hot Bench” case, for instance, involved a woman suing for $3,500 in car repairs. She was a bit wishy-washy in her testimony — each of the three judges gets a turn to grill the litigants — but in the end, one of the show’s judges, Larry M. Bakman, the criminal defense lawyer, wanted to award her the full amount.But Justice Patricia DiMango, who stepped down last year from the State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, declared the woman’s story “baloney.” The show’s third judge, Tanya Acker, a civil litigator, also thought the woman had been telling a tall tale. The plaintiff received $992.“Judge Judy” is still a juggernaut in its 19th season, generating household ratings in the 7.0 range. (Judge Sheindlin recently extended her contract through 2020.) But the court genre as a whole has been troubled, with viewers tiring of the repetitive formula and the daytime audience continuing to fragment. Stations last spring pulled the plug on “Judge Joe Brown” and “Judge Alex.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Hot Bench” is no “Judge Judy.” The new show has been generating a 1.8 household rating. But audience growth is what matters to stations, and “Hot Bench” has been delivering by that measure.Advertisement“Hot Bench” publicists and producers seem to go out of their way to treat the three judges equally, but the unpredictable and quick-witted Justice DiMango is the clear breakout. “My signature is the nice-hard mix, which I know can be entertaining,” she said, teetering backstage in leopard-print stilettos. “But we all bring something fun and unique to the show. I think we’ve really gelled as a trio.”The camaraderie was clear when the three stars posed for a photo between cases. Asked by the photographer to stand closer together, Mr. Bakman leaned way in.“We judge together, Larry, we don’t sleep together,” Justice DiMango said, shoving him back into his spot.“We can change that,” Mr. Bakman shot back. “ ‘Hot Bench: After Dark.’ ”Ms. Acker shouted, “Now it’s a hot bench!” All three burst into laughter.Adapting to the role of television judge was trickier for Ms. Acker and Mr. Bakman, who are still practicing lawyers.“I’ve had to learn to dial back the aggressiveness of the examination,” Mr. Bakman said. “I have to remember that this isn’t the leader of the international drug ring in front of me. It’s a lady with a roommate who didn’t pay the rent.”Ms. Acker agreed.“It’s really not fair to give short shrift to these people just because it’s small claims,” she said. “They feel they have been wronged, and they deserve to be taken seriously. But I have had to learn to be concise. Otherwise you’re sitting up there for an hour and a half on a dog-bite case. And that’s a little silly.”A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: May It Please TV’s New Court: A Ratings Hit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.