By MIKE HALEOCT. 15, 2015
These are a few of the ways Amy Schumer refers to herself in “Amy Schumer: Live at the Apollo,” her HBO stand-up concert airing on Saturday night:Garden gnome. Jack-o’-lantern with breasts. (She doesn’t say breasts.) Werewolf. Fat tumbleweed. Gilbert Grape’s mom. One of those inflatable things outside a carwash. Super bloated. “I’m not a real woman, I’m just harvesting organs for one.”She doesn’t call herself the hottest comedian around, though she coyly drops in “I wrote a movie” to thunderous applause from the audience at the Apollo Theater, where this special was taped. Later, she gets even more cheers during an extended bit in which she compares herself (a “funny girl”) with the model and actress Kate Upton (a “beautiful girl”) and asks, “When’s her hour special coming out on HBO?”Ms. Schumer, of “Inside Amy Schumer” on Comedy Central and writer and star of the film “Trainwreck,” isn’t afraid to say insulting things about herself. But she doesn’t do it with the self-mocking edge of a Joan Rivers. It’s a comfortable kind of self-deprecation, born of insecurity but delivered with a confidence that takes the sting out and gives the listener a snug feeling of complicity. There are comics who inspire more raucous, helpless laughter, but no one has the audience so completely on her side.The hourlong “Live at the Apollo,” her first HBO special, follows a trajectory from one side of feminist comedy to the other. Much of the first half involves jokes about her weight and appearance, which don’t register as defensive, because she frames them as someone else’s perception of her. “You’re here for the girl getting gastric bypass?” a Los Angeles casting agent asks. The trainer hired to help her lose weight for “Trainwreck” tells her that for dinner she should “put a peanut under your pillow and hope you dream of pizza.”AdvertisementDuring the second half, the focus swings to sex, and the notion — not new, but rarely conveyed this pungently and hilariously — that women enjoy it just as much as men. “I’d say in a relationship 50 percent of the time I initiate sex, and then 50 percent we don’t have it,” she announces. Recalling her mother’s telling her that men wanted only one thing, she looks expectantly around the stage and says: “O.K. And then I waited. Am I on the wrong street?”There is very little that’s explicitly political or topical about Ms. Schumer’s comedy, though she drops in a throwaway liberal-guilt line about the audience at the fabled Harlem theater (“You guys all look like you’re from this neighborhood”). The show was directed by one of the sharpest political-cultural critics around, Chris Rock, but he frames the hour simply with home movies of a very young Amy, who sings “Let Me Entertain You” under the closing credits.AdvertisementMs. Schumer sticks, with perhaps a little too much regularity, to the themes of the unfair expectations and limiting stereotypes imposed on women and the self-absorbed, piggish behavior of men, a subject that gets a long workout in a closing routine about sex acts with funny names. A refreshing hint of anger seeps into Ms. Schumer’s generally placid affect as she recounts a series of (fictional) acts whose details are increasingly demeaning to women, affirming the idea that men dominate and define the conversation about sex. Where’s the good one for the girl, she asks, in which she is pleasured while reading tweets?A version of this review appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Tart Words About Women, Men, Sex and Herself.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.