By ZACHARY WOOLFEMARCH 29, 2015
BERLIN —  Dmitri Tcherniakov’s suggestive yet stolid production of Wagner’s “Parsifal,” which opened on Saturday at the Staatsoper here, doesn’t begin in a forest, as the libretto indicates. But it otherwise conforms to the description provided in the text: a scene “shady and solemn, but not gloomy.” The audience enters with the curtain already up on a great hall lined with columns joined by high arches, the smoky air cut by a thick shaft of afternoon light.If you don’t immediately recognize this set — designed, in his usual practice, by Mr. Tcherniakov — as a reference to the original 1882 production of “Parsifal,” with its similar arches, not to worry, there’s a reminder. In Act I, when Gurnemanz, the chief guard of the Holy Grail, tells the story of the struggles that have befallen him and his fellow knights, he does it here with a slide lecture that includes a drawing of that ornate 19th-century design.“I’m well aware of this opera’s storied past,” this gesture from Mr. Tcherniakov seems to say. He is Russian, and it’s still a rarity for foreigners to be invited to direct Wagner in Germany. But this new production — conducted by Daniel Barenboim, the Staatsoper’s music director, and the marquee offering of the theater’s weeklong Festtage festival of opera and concerts — is respectful of the work, its history and meanings, even when Mr. Tcherniakov diverges from the libretto’s particulars.This director, who led Borodin’s “Prince Igor” at the Metropolitan Opera last year, has collaborated with Mr. Barenboim on a series of productions here, most recently a galvanizing, incisive staging of Rimsky-Korsakov’s “The Tsar’s Bride.” In that show, as in this “Parsifal,” he depicts an unstable world in an uneasy (and ultimately unsuccessful) search for leadership.AdvertisementMr. Tcherniakov sets the opera, about the quest for an untainted soul who can purify the Grail knights’ worship, in the present day, seemingly in a cold northern country. (Are we in Scandinavia? Siberia?) Though weapons aren’t omnipresent, there is a paramilitary, perhaps millennialist feel to the knights’ drab earth-tone garments and their undercurrent of wariness. The production, particularly in a haunting first act, memorably conveys the strangeness of a new religion: the arbitrary nature of its rituals coupled with the stringency with which they’re performed.AdvertisementThe elderly Titurel, here, is not just an offstage voice, as in the libretto. He is an imposing physical presence, laying himself in a coffin and eventually rising from it as a symbol of the immortality he is offering those who seem to be his followers. His son, Amfortas, is usually presented as the knights’ suffering ruler, the object of their veneration and protection, but here he’s more of a prisoner, the blood from the wound in his side milked and sampled by the others as a life-giving potion.The second act, played on an eerily white-walled version of the Act I set, presents a parallel cult. The Flower Maidens are not the traditional temptresses, but a crowd of winsome girls in flower-print frocks, playing with jump-ropes and dolls. Their keeper — and, perhaps, father — the evil magician Klingsor, is a dirty old man in thick glasses and sweater vest, compulsively smoothing down his few remaining strands of hair.Intimations of pedophilia and incest like this are scattered throughout the production. During Kundry’s attempted seduction of Parsifal, a pantomime depicts his sexual experimentation with a girlfriend being discovered by his mother, whose furious reaction is clearly fueled by jealousy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As usual with Mr. Tcherniakov, the details are immaculate. In Act I, each of the knights has clearly been schooled on his individual attitude when he splashes himself with holy water or genuflects to Titurel’s coffin. But a general mood — the spirit of the knights; their longings; their perspective on their leaders or, when he unexpectedly arrives, Parsifal — is harder to detect, which feels less like stimulating ambiguity than vagueness, like a production that hasn’t fully gelled.Part of the trouble on Saturday was two problematic performances in crucial roles. Radiating humane warmth, the soprano Anja Kampe acted Kundry with febrile intensity, conveying a charge at once maternal and erotic. But announced as ill, her voice gave out almost entirely in the strenuous second act; it’s difficult to tell the impact this act might have once she recovers.As Gurnemanz, René Pape’s voice had no such problems. His bass remains secure and authoritative, his diction crisp. But while the words were clear, their meaning was less so in a bland performance that revealed next to nothing of this rich character’s conflicted motivations. Many years pass between the first two acts and the third, yet Mr. Pape gave little hint of anything having changed. Gurnemanz’s long narratives went for little.The rest of the cast was more evocative, including Wolfgang Koch, a volatile Amfortas, and Tomas Tomasson, a sneering Klingsor. As Parsifal, the tenor Andreas Schager sang with robust, clear tone and credibly portrayed the character as a young backpacker who stumbles on a dystopia and loses his innocence. The chorus was shining and superb, as was the Berlin Staatskapelle under Mr. Barenboim, aching and tortured in his slow, somber interpretation of the opening, then sinewy in the prelude to the third act.In that final act, the drawing of the 1882 “Parsifal” is once again projected, but askew: a nod toward the past replaced, perhaps, by a sense of anxiety about being trapped in it. What are the opera’s characters, after all, if not the ultimate psychoanalytic patients, defined and, invariably, inhibited by their submerged histories?That Mr. Tcherniakov makes the mind go in directions like this attests to his characteristic thoughtfulness. But while his “Parsifal,” both in its conception and its execution, keeps generating flashes of interest, it has trouble sustaining them over the opera’s marathon spans.AdvertisementThe cluttered final moments, in which Gurnemanz stabs Kundry and Parsifal carries her offstage as Amfortas collapses and the remaining knights quiver in ecstasy, set off neither intellectual nor emotional sparks. Nor do they bring the necessary sense that, over a six-hour performance, a journey has been taken, a world conveyed.A version of this review appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: On a Quest for the New, While Respectful of History.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.