AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott ReyburnPARIS — When someone pays a high price for a watch, handbag or car, the expense is usually justified by the presence of an instantly recognizable, status-enhancing name. Similar principles apply to the art market, where Pablo Picasso remains an enduringly prestigious brand.Picasso (1881-1973) no longer ranks as the world’s best-selling artist at auction by volume. Last year, for the third year running, that accolade was held by Andy Warhol, whose works generated $569 million of public sales in 2014, compared with $375 million for those of Picasso, according to data compiled by artprice.com. Nonetheless, Picasso’s status as the Genius of Modern Art continues to add plenty of value to pretty well anything to which he put his signature during his long, mistress-strewn life.At one end of the price spectrum, Picasso’s 1955 painting, “Les femmes d’Alger (Version ‘O’),” inspired by Eugène Delacroix’s “Women of Algiers,” has been given an estimate of about $140 million in Christie’s “Looking Forward to the Past” auction of trophy-quality 20th- and 21st-century works in New York on May 11. Should that late painting achieve its estimate — and Christie’s has guaranteed its seller an undisclosed minimum price — the final figure, with the addition of buyer’s fees, could well make a Picasso once again the most expensive work of art sold at auction.At the other end, we have Picasso ceramics. On March 18, Sotheby’s fetched 1.7 million pounds, or about $2.5 million, for a 146-lot sale of the ceramics the artist conceived and decorated in collaboration with the Madoura Pottery in Vallauris, Southern France, during the last 25 years of his life.With their plentiful supply (Madoura produced more than 600 different designs in editions of as many as 500), broad range of price points and the auction houses’ policy of keeping their estimates attractively low, these playful, colorful terra-cotta wares have for some time been a popular way for a first-time buyer to own “a Picasso.” Last year, 1,125 auction sales of his unique and editioned ceramic works generated $18.3 million (albeit that is at least $5 million less than in 2013, according to data provided by artnet.com).“They are fun and can fit anywhere,” said Séverine Nackers, Sotheby’s head of prints in Europe. “They’re good for entry-point collectors who want to buy Picasso. Brand is a big factor.”At this latest London auction, 95 percent of the lots were successful, and of those, 62 percent went to bidders new to Sotheby’s specialist Picasso ceramics sales, Ms. Nackers said. Russians and Chinese were prominent among the buyers from 17 countries, she added.But while a monochrome terra-cotta 1955 “Sylvette” plate could be bought for as little as £1,500 at Sotheby’s, Picasso’s bigger, more sculptural ceramics are now making the sort of sums that are paid for his unique works on paper. A 30-inch “Tripode” vase, from an edition of 75 made in 1951, sold for four times its low estimate at £233,000, topping the sale.Interestingly, this was slightly more than the 260,000 euros, or $282,500, the Munich gallery Arnoldi-Livie was asking for the unique 1961 Picasso black crayon line drawing “Les Dejeuners,” at the Salon du Dessin fair, in Paris through Monday.Recently sourced by the German dealership from a private collection, the drawing, related to Picasso’s studies after Manet’s “Dejeuner sur l’herbe” and featuring the artist’s favorite late subject of an old man gazing at a naked woman, was one of a number of high-quality, fresh-to-the-market works on offer at the 24th edition of this elegant boutique fair. The event attracts a knowledgeable crowd of more than 10,000 visitors who, unlike most of today’s art fair-goers, tend to look at the pictures before the labels.There is always plenty of art on offer in Paris in the last week of March, including works by Picasso. The 2015 editions of the Pavilion of Art and Design fair (PAD) in the Tuileries gardens — where the Paris dealer Jacques Lacoste sold a unique Picasso 1957 “Azteque” vase, priced at €320,000, to an American collector — and Art Paris in the Grand Palais both run through Sunday. But the Salon du Dessin, and its younger relative, Le Salon du Dessin Contemporain/Drawing Now Paris, which also closes on Sunday, are the events that attract the most international museum curators. “I’ve seen people from the Getty, the National Gallery in Washington, the Art Institute of Chicago, Houston, the Met and Dallas,” said Alan Edward Salz, director of the New York branch of the Paris-based Didier Aaron, one of 39 dealerships exhibiting in the stately neoclassical Palais Brongniart.“If you’re a drawings curator in a museum, and your budget is small, this is where you come,” said Mr. Salz, who was showing a recently acquired 1912 chalk portrait by Paul César Helleu of Coco Chanel in her late 20s, priced at €80,000. “You see fresh things and there are opportunities.”The connoisseur market for drawings, most of which are small and are often by unknown or little-known artists, in many ways represents the absolute antithesis of the brand-buying of big-name 20th- and 21st-century paintings that motivates many wealthy collectors.“Drawings aren’t about the brand, they’re about the energy of the drawing itself, which can often be stronger than a finished painting,” said the Dutch collector Christine Koenigs, who was browsing the Salon du Dessin. “With knowledge, you can still achieve a lot. You can buy decent things for €5,000.”A case in point was a superbly detailed and idealized brown ink study of the tomb of François I of France by the all-but-forgotten Étienne François Imbard (1780-1830). Presented in a period gilded frame, this was sold at the March 24 preview by the Paris dealer Galerie Paul Prouté for about €5,000.Arguably, an abandonment of brand-awareness is even more important at Drawing Now Paris, held at the restored Carreau du Temple in the Marais, where 73 galleries exhibited works by more than 400 artists, few of whom would have been known to dedicated followers of collecting fashion on Instagram.The fair’s lone Korean exhibitor, Wooson Gallery, did however sell the powerful 2011 Barthélémy Toguo watercolor figure study, “Jugement dernier XI,” priced at €25,000, to a collector from the south of France. Mr. Toguo, who was born in Cameroon and lives in Paris, will be among the participating artists at this year’s Venice Biennale, curated by Okwui Enwezor of Nigeria.Far more typical of discoveries to be made at Drawing Now is the work of the Philadelphia artist Sharka Hyland, who has studied art history, comparative literature and graphic design. All these disciplines are combined in her minimalist pencil drawings of texts by novelists such as Kafka, Hardy and Proust. These were priced at €1,550 at the booth of the Philadelphia dealer, Gallery Joe.As yet, Sharka Hyland might not be a “brand” artist, but at least most people have heard of Marcel Proust.Advertisement