Season 6, Episode 11: “Fugitive No. 1”This whole time, I’ve been categorizing “Justified” as a classic western merged with a cop story. But I was only partly right. This is a love story.There are Raylan Givens and Ava Crowder. They had the hots for each other in high school, slept with each other in the first season and  in the last episode, he let her get away after she shot Boyd Crowder, her fiancé and partner in crime, in the chest and made off with $10 million. He didn’t even try to shoot out her tires. But he does lead the manhunt for her, despite the fact that he is lying to his co-workers about what transpired.Then there are Avery Markham and Katherine Hale, who have teamed up because they say they are in love with each other. We have our doubts, but Markham professes his love for her even after he learns she had set about to steal his money. “I can usually smell a rotten bud before it blooms, but your scent, my dear, has always been Presidential Kush,” he tells her, referring to a popular strain of marijuana. Even though he knows marriage could give her a claim on his money, they go on, knowing they won’t ever trust each other. (Do criminals sign prenups?) You notice, though, he doesn’t look her in the eye when he says he loves her. You might even include Boon, the psychopathic gunman, and Loretta, the teenage aspiring pot queen. Marriage isn’t about love and romance, he explains to her. It’s about alliances. Does he mean Loretta will marry Avery or marry Boon? Both are pretty detestable options. The final love story involves Wynn Duffy and Mikey Cosmatopolis, his loyal bodyguard-driver-gofer. Mikey has Duffy handcuffed to a table in their R.V. when he figures he can turn him over to Katherine because he informed years ago on her husband (his boss) and turned informant again. He’d also like to be called Mike, not Mikey. In the best scene of this episode and, to my mind, the season, Katherine arrives at the R.V., but Mike has a change of heart when she attempts to execute Duffy, promising to deliver his head to Markham as a wedding present. “What we don’t do for love,” she says. Mikey (oops, Mike) tries to intervene. She shoots him, and he wrestles her and tries to choke her as she shoots him again and again. With at least five shots in him, he kills her with a blow to the windpipe. “Will you hold me?” Mike says to Duffy, who cradles him in his arms as he dies. In true Hollywood fashion, Boyd survives by a few millimeters and is chained to a hospital bed. (I thought he might be dead at the end of the last week’s show. Working off an advance-screening copy of the show, I didn’t see the previews for this week’s episode, which spoiled any suspense for those watching it live. Why did the producers go and do that?) Anyway, Boyd wants to escape, of course, but he lets Raylan know that he is perfectly fine with Markham dishing out retribution.  Raylan clearly isn’t. He cares for Ava. But Boyd does give Raylan a clue about how to find her; what do you think he hopes to accomplish by doing that? I still can’t figure out why Raylan let Ava escape (except affection), but he sincerely wants to hunt her down. The assistant attorney general’s accusations that he is in on the heist don’t ring true. But it may just end that way. He does threaten Markham with prosecution for his plot to kill Boyd in the hospital if Markham doesn’t back off from hunting down the money or if he hurts Ava. Why Markham would is beyond me. He will undoubtedly be prosecuted once this is all over anyway. As for Ava, she is somewhere in a maze of moonshiner trails in the mountains with her crazy uncle Zachariah, probably lost, because the mountain man who was to lead them out is found desiccated on the floor of his cabin. And Boyd, escaped from the hospital after killing his right-hand man to do it, knows where she is.  As we’ve seen in scores of cop shows and movies, the lawman puts down his badge to go after the criminal after he is ordered off the case. But without the badge, Raylan isn’t guided and protected by the lawman’s code. He’s just another Harlan County man. He has done lawless things before — like ignoring the shooting on the tarmac in Season 4, when he was suspended. The conflict in next week’s episode — on full display as he walks alone down the middle of a darkened street — appears to be whether he will decide to nab Ava or join her. A few questions. It’s now time for the hard-core speculation on whether Raylan makes it to the end. If I had to hazard a guess, I’d say it is his boss, Art Mullen, who will be faced with a decision about killing Raylan after he turns to Ava. As for Boyd, do you think it is just a matter of how he dies, not if he dies? And what about Ava? Does anyone know what kind of hat Boon is wearing? It’s a good-looking hat, and even Raylan liked it. We do know it doesn’t smell of patchouli and scared hipster. The show drink: No one did any drinking. There was just too much going on. 