The Blue Note Jazz Festival will celebrate its fifth anniversary in June, with headliners including the pop-R&B singer Natalie Cole, the blues legend Buddy Guy and the venerable South African jazz pianist Abdullah Ibrahim. The festival runs all month long with shows at a handful of venues in Manhattan; details are at bluenotejazzfestival.com.Presented by the Blue Note Entertainment Group, which operates the Blue Note Jazz Club, the Highline Ballroom and the B.B. King Blues Club, the festival chiefly involves those three spaces, with a few exceptions. A new addition to the company’s network, Subrosa, officially opens this spring; its lineup will include the Pedrito Martinez Group, which has a long-term residency at the club, and the Alfredo Rodríguez Trio, on June 28.The Town Hall is home to three festival bookings: Ms. Cole, on June 28; the flamenco star Buika, on June 18; and the Manhattan Transfer with another well-traveled vocal group, Take 6, on June 11. A festival concert at Central Park SummerStage on June 6 will feature the singer-songwriter Meshell Ndegeocello and the trumpeter Roy Hargrove.Jazz artists will account for some of the festival’s timelier offerings this year. The pianist Robert Glasper, widely heard on the new album by the rapper Kendrick Lamar, will celebrate the release of his acoustic trio record, “Covered,” at the Blue Note Jazz Club from June 24-27. The Israeli bassist Avishai Cohen will lead his trio at the Highline Ballroom, drawing from another new album. Also at the Highline: the Bad Plus with the saxophonist Joshua Redman, as on a forthcoming Nonesuch Records release (June 10); the harmonica player Grégoire Maret, with the vocalist Lizz Wright (June 15); and the soprano Alicia Hall Moran, with her husband, the pianist Jason Moran (June 12).And along with Mr. Glasper, the Blue Note will present Mr. Ibrahim (June 18-21); the tap dancer Savion Glover (June 2-3); and the saxophonist David Murray, with Geri Allen on piano and Terri Lyne Carrington on drums (June 15-17). The drummer Roy Haynes, who just celebrated his 90th birthday at the club, will return there on June 9 and 10.This year happens to be the 15th Anniversary of the B.B. King Blues Club. Mr. Guy performs there for three nights, June 9-11, and his final night will be an anniversary party, with an array of guests. Other bookings at the club include the Robert Cray Band (June 2); a 71st birthday celebration for the multi-instrumentalist and singer Al Kooper (June 4-5); the drummer Ginger Baker, in his small-group jazz mode (June 17-18); the soul singer Darlene Love (June 27); and the fusion guitarist Al Di Meola (June 28).A version of this article appears in print on 04/02/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Wide-Ranging Lineup for Blue Note Festival.