By ALEC M. PRIESTERMARCH 31, 2015
11 P.M. (Spike) CON AIR (1997) Cameron Poe (Nicolas Cage) kills a man with his fists while defending his pregnant wife (Monica Potter). In court, a judge says that because he is a United States Army Ranger veteran he is a deadly weapon, and sentences him to 7 to 10 years in prison. When it comes time for him to return home, he finds himself the only good man on a flight full of villainous convicts, played by Ving Rhames, Danny Trejo, Steve Buscemi and others. Led by Cyrus the Virus (John Malkovich), the convicts plan to hijack the plane. Cameron must prevent the hijacking so he can get home to his wife and daughter on her seventh birthday. “As directed by Simon West and written wryly by Scott Rosenberg (“Beautiful Girls”), ‘Con Air’ is a simple setup followed by endless stunts,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times.9 P.M. (Fox) NEW GIRL Jess (Zooey Deschanel) crashes a funeral after having sent a compromising text to a recently deceased person. Schmidt (Max Greenfield) is made to finish business related to his bar mitzvah when his mother comes to visit. And Winston (Lamorne Morris) wants to be better friends with his police partner, Aly (Nasim Pedrad).9 P.M. (CW) IZOMBIE When Liv (Rose McIver) looks into a zombie sighting, she unveils parts of her past. And she and Detective Babineaux (Malcolm Goodwin) investigate the case of an assassin who was killed in a hit-and-run.9 P.M. (BBC America) FROZEN PLANET This episode, about autumn at the poles, features a beluga whale pilgrimage to an estuary, polar bear fights, musk oxen head-butting duels and sexual competition between caribou. A leopard seal snatches a penguin chick from an ice floe.Advertisement9:30 P.M. (Fox) WEIRD LONERS This series premiere — which includes Zachary Knighton and Becky Newton — introduces four single 30-somethings who are drawn together through their adjacent Queens townhouses and experience a range of unexpected and wacky moments.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters. 10 P.M. (ABC) FOREVER When a mummified woman is found in the walls of a punk club, Detective Martinez (Alana de la Garza) tries to solve the cold case. The woman’s punk-rock boyfriend was convicted in her death, but maintains his innocence.11:55 P.M. (Encore) ALIEN (1979) The spaceship Nostromo is returning to Earth, and its crew members have been awakened to investigate a strange signal from a nearby planet. They discover remnants of an alien civilization and what appear to be alien eggs. One crew member is attacked by a spiderlike alien, which attaches itself to his face and cannot be removed for fear it will kill him. It then vanishes and cannot be found until it makes a spectacular return, and once again disappears into the cavernous parts of the ship. The crew must deal with the dangerous presence in the remoteness of space. “Sigourney Weaver is impressive and funny as the Nostromo’s executive officer, the second in command, a young woman who manages to act tough, efficient and sexy all at the same time,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowTHE GRAND BUDAPEST HOTEL (2014) In this Wes Anderson film, Zero Moustafa (F. Murray Abraham) tells the Author (Jude Law) the story of how he came to own the Grand Budapest Hotel. The film flashes back to 1932, detailing the friendship between young Zero (Tony Revolori) and the hotel concierge, Gustave H. (Ralph Fiennes). Gustave is framed for the murder of an aristocrat (Tilda Swinton) and flees with Zero. They are pursued by her family and henchmen (Adrien Brody, Willem Dafoe) while trying to protect a prized painting. Zero, meanwhile, deals with romance. “There is no doubt that Mr. Anderson possesses a distinctive sensibility and a consistent visual style, and that instead of striking out in new directions, he tends to embroider and elaborate on familiar themes and pictorial habits,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “You will see many of them here: static, densely packed, fussily composed frames; traveling shots in which the camera glides alongside the characters like a low-flying bird; action sequences that refuse the usual digital hocus-pocus in favor of the older, artisanal magic of stop-motion animation, matte paintings and rear projection. You will also meet eccentric characters possessed by a kind of madcap melancholy, soulful and silly in equal measure.” (hbogo.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Tuesday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.