By JON PARELESMARCH 30, 2015
A hushed, intent Sufjan Stevens contemplates death, grief, family and memory on his quietly moving new album, “Carrie & Lowell,” in songs that entwine autobiography and archetype. The music is restrained and meticulous, all graceful melodies, plucked strings and shimmery keyboard tones. But ungovernable circumstances and emotions course through the lyrics.The album is named after Mr. Stevens’s mother, Carrie, who died in 2012, and his stepfather, Lowell, who was married to her for five years as the 1980s began and now works at Mr. Stevens’s label, Asthmatic Kitty. In a Pitchfork interview, Mr. Stevens said Carrie struggled with mental illness and alcoholism, and that when he was a year old, she left her children with their father, Rasjid Stevens. Sufjan saw her only occasionally through the years, though he was with her at the end.As a child in the early 1980s, he also spent three summers in Oregon with Carrie and Lowell. Images from those visits, not all of them idyllic, are sprinkled through the songs; “When I was 3, 3 maybe 4/She left us at that video store,” he sings in “Should Have Known Better.” Another particular Oregon spirit suffuses the music: the sound of Elliott Smith, a songwriter long associated with Portland, who placed his own sorrows and uncertainties in similarly fragile settings.While the details may come from Mr. Stevens’s personal life, the songs face up to universals: grief, guilt, anger, questions of faith, self-destructive impulses, the sense of absence, the sense of finality. “I forgive you mother, I can hear you,” Mr. Stevens sings in the album’s opening song, “Death With Dignity,” which concludes, “You’ll never see us again.” In “Eugene,” he sings, “I’ll never forget/I just want to be near you”; in “The Only Thing,” he wonders, “How do I live with your ghost?” And in “Fourth of July,” he sings a deathbed conversation that ends with a stoic refrain: “We’re all gonna die.”Most of Mr. Stevens’s albums have flaunted orchestral reinforcements and electronics. “Carrie & Lowell” is more subdued — it doesn’t use drums — but it is by no means plain. The foreground may be folky guitar or simple, steady chords from a piano, but Mr. Stevens places them in a ghostly realm, his own voice overdubbed into a hovering choir, subtle auras of reverb. “Drawn to the Blood,” which conjures biblical images and wonders, “What did I do to deserve this?,” begins with a lone strummed guitar, later joined by one persistently repeating keyboard note. But after a final question — “How did this happen?” — the entire last minute of the song is a series of edgeless, sustained chords: a refuge from sorrow or a glimpse of eternity.SUFJAN STEVENS“Carrie & Lowell”(Asthmatic Kitty)A version of this review appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: Sufjan Stevens’s Quietly Moving ‘Carrie & Lowell’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.