AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate ChinenThe composer and keyboardist  Missy Mazzoli has a thing for unlikely connections and startling gestures, and one of her gifts is the ability to tease out the hidden logic behind her choices. Her ravishing, unsettling album “Vespers for a New Dark Age” unfolds as a meditation on technology and spirituality, alienation and self-interest. Its ominous but propulsive score ranges from the chamber-operatic to the electronic and semiabstract.Ms. Mazzoli conceived “Vespers” as a secular response to a liturgical tradition. Rather than sacred verses, she incorporated text by the contemporary poet Matthew Zapruder, particularly his 2010 collection “Come on All You Ghosts.” She composed the piece not only for her expressive new-music ensemble, Victoire, but for the percussionist Glenn Kotche, best known as the drummer in Wilco, and for several classically trained singers: Martha Cluver and Virginia Warnken of the vocal cohort Roomful of Teeth, and Mellissa Hughes, a more regular collaborator.For most of the piece, which spans five movements with three wordless interludes, these singers directly address some form of the divine. But Mr. Zapruder’s poems aren’t inherently formal — he has a way with the quotidian digression, and there’s disarming ambiguity at work here. “Hello Lord,” goes the opening line of a track by that title. “Are you sorry you woke me?” A later track, “New Dark Age,” opens with the inverse scenario: “Hello Lord/Sorry I woke you.”Elsewhere the phrase “Come on” becomes a building block, or a puzzle piece, deployed in layered or echoing repetition. It happens most bewitchingly on “Machine,” a track driven and punctuated by Mr. Kotche’s meticulous drumming, alongside a plaintive, drifting violin and a gluey electronic undertow.The keyboardist and electronics artist Lorna Dune, of Victoire, helped produce the album, and there’s probably no way to parse the lines of her involvement. One possible frame of reference would be the only track on the album that is not a part of the “Vespers” suite: her stylishly spooky remix of “A Thousand Tongues,” which Ms. Mazzoli originally wrote for the cellist Jody Redhage.“A Thousand Tongues” is a somber setting of a five-line poem by Stephen Crane. Sung in this version by Deidre Muro, it’s about the futility of striving for truth. The only thing about it that feels out of place is the ironclad certainty of its despair.MISSY MAZZOLI“Vespers for a New Dark Age” (New Amsterdam)Advertisement