By JON CARAMANICAMARCH 30, 2015
A few months ago the soul savant D’Angelo released a new album, “Black Messiah,” some 14 years after his previous one, “Voodoo.” On its own, it was an accomplishment, but it was also a reminder of many things that today’s R&B mainstream lacks: political engagement, the warmth and tension of a live band, a voice with fascinating crevices.Just as R&B badly needs D’Angelo’s righteous howl, it also needs K-Ci Hailey’s ecstatic wail. Mr. Hailey is the centerpiece of Jodeci, which also includes his brother JoJo and the brothers Donald and Dalvin DeGrate. In the early- and mid-1990s, Jodeci was the group that fully imported hip-hop’s louche swagger into soul.“The Past, the Present, the Future,” the fourth Jodeci album, arrives 20 years after the last one. (There have been some projects by individual members and by the Hailey brothers together, but nothing of note since 2000, the same year that D’Angelo’s “Voodoo” emerged.) And if you can forgive the album’s concessions to the musical innovations of the last decade or so, like the Timbaland-assisted production on “Incredible,” it’s a logical, if slightly aged, continuation of the group’s music from its prime.The best Jodeci songs are slick marches that focus on the body, like this album’s “Checkin for You” and “Stress Reliever.” Atop it all is K-Ci. He may have roots in the church, but the Lord’s favor isn’t what his music typically craves. When K-Ci is seducing, he’s pleading and moist. And he gets better as he devolves, his finest moments less about lyrics than postverbal utterances. (One exception here is “Jennifer,” an anguished ballad that shows off some of K-Ci and JoJo’s peak harmonizing.)His deepest feelings exist somewhere beyond human vocabulary. He’s less ostentatious about this than he once was, but he can still catch that spirit, as on this album’s final song. “Nobody Wins” is a measured number about failed love until K-Ci really gets hold of it: “Nobody! No buh dee! Nobahhhhdy!”JODECI“The Past, the Present, the Future”(Sphinx/Epic)A version of this review appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Review: 20 Years Later, Jodeci Is Back, in ‘The Past, the Present, the Future’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.