AdvertisementSupported byBy Vivien SchweitzerCertain musicians are often referred to as “communicative performers,” a particularly apt description in the case of the soprano Dawn Upshaw, who sang at the Town Hall on Sunday afternoon as part of the Peoples’ Symphony Concerts series. Ms. Upshaw is also down to earth, with an undivalike stage presence that exudes familiarity, and she creates an instant rapport with her audience. Her communicative gifts were readily apparent during this program, ably accompanied by the pianist Gilbert Kalish, her longtime collaborator.Ms. Upshaw has been an energetic champion of contemporary and American composers; her lively rendition of a set of cabaret songs by William Bolcom proved a highlight of the afternoon. She brought a wry charm to his “Song of Black Max,” and a jovial sensibility to the quirky “Toothbrush Time.” She infused the mellow “Waitin’ ” with a poignant intimacy. Ms. Upshaw’s voice has lost some of its luster and occasionally sounded frayed, but she also imbued the other works on the program with expressive commitment, beginning with a set by Charles Ives, including “Songs My Mother Taught Me” and “Memories.” Mr. Kalish spoke briefly about Ives’s eclectic life, including his work as an insurance executive, before offering a poetic rendition of “The Alcotts” from Ives’s Piano Sonata No. 2 “Concord, Mass.” He didn’t always match Ms. Upshaw’s range of nuance in the songs, however. The program also included songs by Schubert, choppily accompanied by Mr. Kalish, including “Im Frühling” (“In Spring”) and “Gretchen am Spinnrade” (“Gretchen at the Spinning Wheel”). Mr. Kalish sounded at his best in a set by Bartok, imbuing his Hungarian folk songs — energetically rendered by Ms. Upshaw — with colorful flair. She demonstrated an alluring timbre and a broad emotional palette in Berg’s “Seven Early Songs.” The program concluded on a tender note with the encore: a wistful rendition of Stephen Foster’s “Beautiful Child of Song.” The Peoples’ Symphony Concerts continue through May 8; pscny.org. Advertisement