By GEORGE GENE GUSTINESOCT. 15, 2015
One of the best parts about the digital innovation of comic books has been the increased ability to admire artwork. Panels can be zoomed in to savor every detail of an image. Being able to see original comic art in person — with the traces of blue line, ink smudges and editorial notes — can take a fan’s appreciation of the art to a new level. This month, New York City is playing host to several exhibitions that will allow for up-close-and-personal looks.The title may be unwieldy and confounding to grammarians, but “Chip Kidd Presents: Batman Black and White: The Sketch Covers” is a feast for the eyes. The show features 88 Batman covers, commissioned by Mr. Kidd, that offer depictions of the Dark Knight by artists from inside and outside the world of comics. The inspiration was a blank cover that was published as part of a 2013 Batman anthology to which Mr. Kidd, a graphic designer and passionate comic fan, contributed. What started as a handful of covers “went further and further because of my obsessive personality,” he said. There are some delightful surprises, including one cover by the cartoonist Roz Chast, who warned him that she would end up drawing Batman and Robin, the Dynamic Duo, arguing on a couch. His response: “That’s perfect!” The hope is to amass 100 covers and publish a collection, to benefit the Comic Book Legal Defense Fund. (Mr. Kidd is a board member.) Through Nov. 7. Tuesdays, 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Wednesdays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Saturdays, noon to 4 p.m. Admission: $10; $5 for students and people 65 and older. 123 East 63rd Street, Manhattan; 212-838-2560, societyillustrators.org.When Metropolis Collectibles moved to its current location last year, the increased square footage allowed space for an art gallery. The first show was devoted to the fantasy paintings of Frank Frazetta. The new exhibition, which will run at least six weeks, is “Masters of Fantasy,” with works by Mr. Frazetta and some of his brethren: Greg Hildebrandt, Michael Golden and Bernie Wrightson. “My goal since I started selling comics and original art was to increase the visibility and respectability of the art form,” said Vincent Zurzolo, a co-owner of Metropolis. “Comics are one of the greatest American art forms ever created. I’d put them up there with jazz and movies.” The Metropolis collection runs deep, though some of it is not for sale. A picture window behind the reception desk offers a tantalizing glimpse of covers from the 1930s to 1970s. They can be seen online but viewing them in person recently was an unforgettable treat. No closing date announced. Tuesday through Friday, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Free. 36 West 37th Street, Manhattan; 212-260-4147, metropolisgallerynyc.com.Adriaan van der Plas had a goal when he opened his gallery in 2013: “One day I will have a nice comic strip exhibition,” he said. That time has come thanks to “Popeye by Hy Eisman,” which features 40 Sunday newspaper strips. Though the sailor man, who was introduced in 1929, is in fewer newspapers today, the strip continues in print and online. The show is the first devoted to work by Mr. Eisman, Popeye’s current cartoonist. “It feels great. I didn’t think it would ever happen. I’m stunned,” he said. His portfolio of comic book and newspaper strips — though he was sometimes uncredited — includes “Kerry Drake,” “Tom and Jerry” and “Little Lulu.” He began working on Popeye in 1994, and the exhibition focuses on a sampling of his work from 2008-12, which was truly the luck of the draw. When he was asked to make a first pick of 125 strips to consider for the show, he reached for a nearby stack in his home. “I have hundreds of them,” he said. Through Oct. 31. Wednesday to Sunday, noon to 6 p.m. Free. 156 Orchard Street, Lower East Side; 212-227-8983, vanderplasgallery.com.“The Mad Genius of Harvey Kurtzman” is “a big thing for me,” said the gallery owner Scott Eder, who is a passionate fan of that cartoonist and editor. He was “the godfather of underground comics,” Mr. Eder said, and was known for his sharp social commentary and farce. Mr. Kurtzman, who died in 1993, had an influential run in MAD Magazine in the 1950s and Help! in the 1960s, which drew attention to cartoonists like Robert Crumb. “Mad Genius” features a range of work: preliminary sketches of “Pot-Shot Pete,” a western parody from the 1940s; color work from “Little Annie Fanny,” a sexual satire that ran in Playboy for more than 25 years; and pages from “Jungle Book,” a paperback graphic novel from 1959 whose stories were for adults. Mr. Eder’s fervor for the work is almost self-sabotaging. “I never want to sell any of them, and I’m an art dealer,” he said. Through Oct. 30. Tuesday through Friday, 1 to 6 p.m. Free. 18 Bridge Street, No. 2I, Dumbo, Brooklyn; 718-797-1100, scottedergallery.com.Quite a few pieces of comic artwork travel through the Heritage offices, so aficionados know to keep up with the company to get a hint of what might be seen. The New York office has four pieces from coming sales, and two of them feature work by Jack Kirby, who with Stan Lee created many of Marvel’s major characters. One page, penciled by Mr. Kirby and inked by Joe Sinnott, is a dynamic six-panel action sequence from 1967 of Captain America fighting the mad scientists of Advanced Idea Mechanics. The other is a jaw-dropping 1965 cover of “Journey Into Mystery,” inked by Wally Wood, which features Odin on his throne, the villainous Absorbing Man bowing to him and the Mighty Thor slinking in. I guess the Thunder God was late for the meeting. Through Oct. 28. Monday through Friday, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. Free. 445 Park Avenue, near East 56th Street; 212-486-3500, ha.com.A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page C30 of the New York edition with the headline: From the Drawing Board to the Page.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.