AdvertisementSupported byTelevision ReviewBy Alessandra StanleyWhen it comes to stories about time travel, male characters often focus on what they would do. Mark Twain’s hero uses 19th-century technology to outsmart medieval sorcerers in “A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court.” The time traveler in “Back to the Future” can perform “Johnny B. Goode” years before that song’s release.Women in these stories seem to focus more on who they might be.“Younger,” an amusing new TV Land comedy about recapturing lost youth by Darren Star of “Sex and the City” and “Melrose Place,” is a case in point. The series, which has its two-episode premiere on Tuesday, follows Liza Miller (Sutton Foster), a 40-year-old divorced and unemployed mother in the suburbs who decides to start over by pretending she is 26.She doesn’t need a time machine, magical realism or a freak glitch of nature to go back to her 20s. Liza cheats the calendar by changing her look, getting a fake driver’s license, erasing her social media presence and memorizing the names of One Direction’s members.This yearning to become younger — not smarter, richer, more powerful — is telling in an age that considers itself postfeminist. But plenty of inequities between the sexes linger, especially when it comes to romance; age discrimination is different for men than it is for women. Men, if they are smart, rich or powerful, can attract women of all ages, including much younger ones. Older women with wit, wisdom and strong portfolios can’t get arrested. So the female yearning for lost nubility has more traction — and comic appeal.That’s also what fuels “Hindsight,” a VH1 scripted series that began in January and centers on Becca (Laura Ramsey), a woman who, on the eve of her second marriage, finds herself back in 1995, the year she married her first husband, with a chance to relive her 20s and correct her mistakes. She has some news for her best friend, Lolly (Sarah Goldberg), about the future, and it isn’t to buy stock in Apple.“Patrick Dempsey gets cute, really?” Lolly marvels.“No one was more surprised than me,” Becca replies.(Both “Hindsight” and “Younger” also joke about the uncoolness of using AOL email.)Even “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt” on Netflix has a time-lag fantasy. Kimmy (Ellie Kemper) spent 15 years in a bunker as a prisoner of a doomsday cult and upon her release, moves to New York to reclaim her lost girlhood. Her skin, after all those sunless days, helps maintain the fiction. (In Starz’s “Outlander,” the lead character, Claire (Caitriona Balfe), is magically transported from 1945 to 18th-century Scotland, where she marries a man with less sexual experience.)On “Younger,” Liza can’t resume the publishing career she set aside to raise a family because 20-something editors think she is too old. When a handsome young man in a hip Brooklyn bar tries to pick her up, however, Liza is convinced by her best friend, Maggie (Debi Mazar), to pass herself off as younger and to apply for an entry-level job. Maggie assures her that people are credulous. “They believe ‘The Real Housewives’ are real, they think that coconut water is going to shrink their ass, they’ll believe you’re 26.”Liza goes undercover, a Gen X in millennial clothing. Her boss, Diana (Miriam Shor), is over 40, divorced and a tyrant — a devil sporting Judith Leiber, not Prada. Diana is contemptuous of Liza, assuming that she is like all the other pampered millennials who have no work ethic and “just expected a gold star for doing your job.” But Diana can’t master social media. She orders Liza to create a Twitter account and tweet as Jane Austen to market an e-book edition of “Pride and Prejudice.” She also tells her to put Austen on Match.com.Liza has a lot to learn — she searches the web to find out how to set up a Twitter account. When a hip young man tells her he is a tattoo artist, she asks if he has his own “parlor.” She also almost gives away her real age when she strips in the gym after a krav maga workout, and Kelsey (Hilary Duff), one of her young co-workers, sees her untamed pubic hair and is horrified. “Apparently, nobody under 30 looks a day over 12 down there,” Liza complains to Maggie.There are a lot of jokes about Brooklyn, sex and millennial entitlement, but the underlying sensibility echoes that of “Sex and the City.” It’s a lighthearted but wistfully knowing look at the gender imbalances and generational rifts that make life hard for even fabulous women.It helps that Ms. Foster, who is 40, looks young but has a mature voice and manner: She is not a young actress posing as an older one pretending to be young, but an appealing older actress who can look half her age on a good day and in the right lighting.There is a wish-fulfillment fantasy that underlies both “Hindsight” and “Younger.” Sometimes it works in the other direction as well, with children magically finding themselves in adult bodies, as in the movies “Big” and “13 Going on 30.” “Freaky Friday,” about a mother-daughter body exchange, had it both ways.All these fantasies require a suspension of disbelief, and so does “Younger.” When one character has doubts about Liza’s Dartmouth attendance, he asks probing questions but doesn’t race to the school’s alumni website to check her facts.But that doesn’t matter. “Younger” is a fairy tale, not about finding Prince Charming but about looking as young as Cinderella.YoungerTV Land, Tuesday nights at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Produced by Jax Media in association with TV Land Original Productions. Created by Darren Star; Mr. Star and Tony Hernandez, executive producers.WITH: Sutton Foster (Liza), Hilary Duff (Kelsey), Miriam Shor (Diana), Debi Mazar (Maggie) and Nico Tortorella (Josh).Advertisement