AdvertisementSupported byBy Nate ChinenPaquito D’Rivera practiced an impish historical revisionism at the Rose Theater on Friday, in his first of two nights at Jazz at Lincoln Center. At one point his darting lines on soprano saxophone came girded by the triplet thump of a Peruvian landó rhythm — not the usual musical setting for Beethoven’s “Pathétique” piano sonata. But Mr. D’Rivera had explained himself in an introduction to the piece: “Beethoven was really from Machu Picchu,” he said, agreeably. “His name was not Ludwig but Luisito.”Mr. D’Rivera, who at 66 cuts both a statesmanlike and a tricksteresque figure in Latin jazz, was revisiting the premise behind “Jazz Meets the Classics” (Paquito/Sunnyside), an album from last year. As the title suggests, the album’s brand of interpretive flair goes back as far as Paul Whiteman in the 1920s. But Mr. D’Rivera and his partners bring a cultural specificity to their arrangements, advancing wild theories of connection.That mind-set suits the current season of Jazz at Lincoln Center, with its emphasis on hemispheric cultural exchange. The concert was billed as “Paquito D’Rivera: Around the Americas,” and if it didn’t push Mr. D’Rivera past a comfort zone, that reflects well on his mission of pan-Latin synthesis, informed but not circumscribed by his Cuban roots.He brought his regular sextet, with Diego Urcola on trumpet and valve trombone, Alex Brown on piano, Oscar Stagnaro on electric bass, Pernell Saturnino on percussion and Mark Walker on drums. It’s a band of dynamic range and restraint, and on one of a few big showpieces — “Las Abejas,” by the Paraguayan guitarist-composer Agustín Barrios — it swerved neatly between tempos and sections, the picture of churning composure. Mr. D’Rivera worked mainly on alto saxophone, his most bracing voice, and clarinet, his most effervescent. His bravura turn came in an otherwise glib take on the Mozart Clarinet Concerto in A, set to a New Orleans gospel groove; approaching the cadenza, he ratcheted into high gear, mixing a fluttery classical phraseology with his own zippy eloquence. For much of the concert, he featured the string ensemble Quinteto Cimarrón, as a supplement to the sextet or on its own. On his “La Fleur de Cayenne,” the strings worked compellingly with a guest, the Venezuelan maracas player Leonardo Granados. “Almendra,” a Cuban danzón, featured solos by most of the strings; elsewhere the quintet’s first violinist, Eduardo Coma Vega, showed himself to be an improviser of confident élan. Mr. D’Rivera’s rapport with Quinteto Cimarrón found ample expression, as much on the bolero “Longina” as on “La Comparsa,” a processional by Ernesto Lecuona. And on the finale — “Pa Bebo,” a Pepe Rivero tune for the pianist Bebo Valdés — the strings and the sextet meshed perfectly, framing euphoria as an irresistible buildup of energies.Advertisement