Season 2, Episode 5It’s not hard to imagine another version of “Broadchurch” in which Tom Miller, the son of Ellie and Joe Miller, is the protagonist. In this version, like Harry Potter, Donnie Darko, Huck Finn and countless other fictional young men, he’s the young hero summoning courage amid the adult forces raging around him.And just maybe, that show might be better than the one that’s materialized halfway through Season 2. Because this one now lacks a center. Episode 5 struggles with bloat: There are plenty of intriguing characters, but less depth and less wit. We’ve only seen 13 episodes so far, but “Broadchurch,” in this moment, looks like a midlife show that could use a youthful injection.And rohypnol isn’t going to do it. That drug is referred to several times, and is one of several sinister additions used to goose the plot: there’s a church full of sex offenders, a jail beating and an old abandoned warehouse with a bloody furnace. Paradoxically, as the show gets more outrageous, fatigue sets in.We get a glimpse of that alternate, Tom-based story at the start of this episode. Played by Adam Wilson, Tom hasn’t been given much to do other than stare at screens, but he shines here in his first meeting with his mother since his dad’s arrest. He’s trying so very hard to do the right thing, but all of his idols have been smashed. Still, there’s a soft core beneath his frustration and distrust, one that screams out for sympathy and guidance. And Olivia Colman, her face more gaunt than it appears to be in the family portrait sitting on the table, plays the rejected mother expertly.Meanwhile, the major cliffhanger that ended last episode — Susan Wright’s accusal of her alleged son, Nige Carter — doesn’t look like such a big deal anymore, as Jocelyn Knight promptly interrogates Susan into oblivion. When Susan yells, “Police get it wrong all the time! It’s a fact!,” she may as well be an antivaxxer or a Westboro Baptist Church member in the eyes of the jury. “You ain’t all that,” she mumbles to Jocelyn at the end of her onslaught. Oh, but she is.Maybe Susan’s thick-headed mysteriousness has less use now that literally everyone from the Sandbrook story line is certifiably crazy. If Broadchurch is the representation of the small town with human flaws but a beating heart, Sandbrook is Sodom. Its residents lie, drink and drug and beat the living daylights out of each other. Claire ping-pongs from enchantress to victim with blinding speed; Ricky tramples over everything like the Hulk; together, along with Lee and Cate, they form an insufferable love square. (And that’s not even including Lisa Newberry, who has so far been presented only as a virginal, voiceless object of lust.) It’s all quite over the top for a show that was so tightly orchestrated and morally ambiguous in its first season. As Ellie and Alec try to put their finger on a single suspect out of the ravenous lot, you can feel the show gaining intensity but losing focus.When you throw in the Sharon-Jocelyn showdown, it amounts to far too much. Sharon’s back story is very moving, as I addressed in a previous post, but there’s just not enough room here for the story line to grow organically. When she visits her son in jail this time, he’s battered and swollen; both actors do good jobs, but the scene feels rushed and engineered for shock value. Same goes for the final confrontation between the two lawyers, in which the pupil blames the teacher for her son’s incarceration, and the teacher fires back, “I didn’t like you enough … I had such high expectations of you.” There are just too many platitudes here, as Ellie puts it, using profanity as an adjective.At the end, Ellie and Hardy team up for another adventure, this time into a very creepy warehouse, where it seems like bodies have burned. If the show is going to catch fire again, and won’t organize itself around Tom, here’s hoping it gets back to the tumultuous Ellie-and-Hardy relationship that served as the bedrock.Stray Observations • The Paul Coates-Becca Fisher relationship, shown here briefly along the beach, is lifeless. They never really made sense together and have barely been acknowledged this season.• Hardy’s idea of “just conversation” is bluntly asking Jocelyn why she never married.• The Jocelyn-blind-justice metaphor is a little too obvious, don’t you think?• Adam Wilson, who plays Tom, and Dean Charles-Chapman, who plays Tommen Baratheon on “Game of Thrones,” could swap roles and I wouldn’t blink.• No bluebells this episode, thank goodness.