Season 3, Episode 10: ‘Stingers’Intro Товарищи, у вас есть дети?
(Comrades, do you have kids?)At last, the moment we have been waiting for all season. An irresistible challenge is lobbed across the Jennings’s kitchen island and their response is unexpected and unrehearsed.Paige seizes the opportunity and throws her parents off-balance. “Do you love me? Then tell me the truth.” She pours out her years of uncertainty and fear and confusion: “What — are you in the witness protection program? Did you kill somebody? Are you guys drug dealers like your friend Gregory? Am I adopted? Are we aliens? What?”Philip and Elizabeth have no choice but to answer truthfully. The Cold War spy drama on FX.Once the words are spoken, gently, circuitously, padded with euphemism and shorn of detail, Philip and Elizabeth become the hunted, vulnerable at every turn to the whims of their idealistic 15-year-old daughter and by extension her now-even-more-sinister mentor, Pastor Tim (who shows off yet another hairstyle). No wonder he wants to lure the whole family to Kenya for a mission project. He’s got their whole world in his hands.The moment brings Philip and Elizabeth together. For once, when he asks if she’s O.K., the woman who has survived rape and beatings and bullets — and who has killed casually and repeatedly — says, quaveringly, that she doesn’t know.Although Elizabeth and Philip warn Paige (“If you do tell anyone, we will go to jail for good.”) they are reluctant to leave her at home the next morning. In the car, Elizabeth’s eyes fill with tears, but it’s not clear whether they are tears of compassion or fear or anger. Philip tries to be reassuring. “She won’t do anything stupid,” he says, even as Paige is calling Pastor Tim. On the phone, she tells him that she asked her parents the questions just the way he had coached her to — then she stopped short of giving him the answer. Now Philip and Elizabeth may never be as sure as they were before. Control has probably been an illusion for them all along. As Gabriel says about another matter, “It’s not up to us.” It never is.This week, the focus of “The Americans” is almost purely domestic, save for some international window-dressing in service of episodes to come. While last week’s show was an impossible act to follow, this episode changes the future.A plague of bugs.Stan has an awkward moment of awakening as the investigator Walter Taffet questions him about who might have planted the bug in Agent Gaad’s pen. Moments later, he is back in his department asking after Martha.Kimmy, meanwhile, reappears as a damsel in distress, stranded at a frat party. Once again, she is a conveniently sleepy drunk, giving Philip a chance to swap out the tape secreted in her father’s briefcase while avoiding the dreaded seduction scene. “You know, I think you’re the only one who really cares about me,” she tells him drowsily.Stan comes over, the gift of a confiscated pirated videotape in hand. It’s “Tron,” for Henry. Is that all it is? Wouldn’t that be the perfect vehicle for a listening device? Or perhaps the conversation was simply an innocent meeting of the hearts of two guys with a similar outlook on life and the same taste in women. Whatever the reason, it doesn’t take Henry long to show up at Stan’s door for a game of Strat-O-Matic, which allows us to see not only their developing friendship but also the heaps of great ’80s period props that litter Stan’s house, right down to the harvest gold hand mixer and smiley face cookie jar. Henry is a welcome guest as Stan prepares to divvy up the material effects of his marriage to Sandra (a signal that we’ll see her again?). Of course, Stan might not have had spying in mind when he brought the tape over. Pastor Tim, though, could have been carrying a small, easy-to-install listening device that he surreptitiously left in the travel agency when he popped in, ostensibly to talk about arranging a mission trip. He also gave Philip some unsolicited advice about child-rearing, suggesting that Paige be treated more like an adult than a child. He should be more careful.As we count reluctantly down to the end of the season, anything seems possible. Where is thy sting?This week brings another barbed title: “Stingers,” the defensive mechanism of insects; the quivering killer tip of the scorpion’s curved tail; and the name give to the shoulder-mounted missile that the United States supplied to mujahedeen fighters in Afghanistan and which was credited with helping to turn the tide of the Afghan war with the Soviets. The tape from Kimmy’s reveals something is coming. The Pakistani intelligence agency I.S.I. is sending a representative of the mujahedeen to talk to the C.I.A., it seems, based on the snippets of tape we hear, presumably of agents discussing the covert operation.With some elisions, and no clear idea of who was saying what:“What happened to Hilton?”
“It didn’t get approved.”
“They’re going to stay at the Clayton in Crystal City. These guys won’t know the difference; they’re used to sleeping in caves.”Their main concern, it seemed, was to keep the United States Army out of the picture until the last possible moment.“The Army isn’t on the ground in Afghanistan, so basically it’s not their war,” one voice says.
“Well, if this works we aren’t going to need them,” says another.And so, Philip and Elizabeth are off to the Clayton in this week’s wigs to lay the groundwork, so to speak.Just when you thought it was safe to go to the ladies’ room again.That wasn’t a piece of gum Zinaida stuck under the sink at the multiplex where she and her coterie of agents were seeing “Tootsie.” Did Stan take her out to set her up with an opportunity to use the ladies’ room again as part of his plot with Oleg? Zinaida does make a queenly request to use the restroom, and after Stan checks it, she hands him her Kit Kats (is she unfaithful to Milky Ways or just trying something exotic for one night?) with aplomb. At the Rezidentura, enter the newish agent Tatiana, interrupting a meeting between Arkady and Oleg. Last time she seemed almost flirtatious with Oleg. Now, looking ever so secretive and making exaggerated spy-like moves that border on mime, she shoos him away. She is bearing a coded message to Arkady from the mysterious agent Willow, who reports that she is being threatened by one of their own. Arkady, furious, chalks it up to overcompartmentalization, that flawed structure of plausible deniability which every espionage organization embraces from time to time. Arkady believes in a bureaucratic solution, not realizing that the problem is a local one. Could he possibly imagine Oleg in his bad-guy outfit sitting smugly in Zinaida’s darkened hotel room?Far from the tree.A nice shot of Henry’s hiding place echoes familiar shots of his father, and Henry has loosened a floorboard for his strongbox full of junior “porn” in the finest K.G.B. tradition. One moment of humiliation by Paige, and Henry goes underground. (At least, it looks like he made the hole in the floor himself to conceal his own secrets. The moccasins in the scene do look rather large, though. He wouldn’t use his father’s closet as a hiding place, would he?)Henry’s impression of the classic “Saturday Night Live” skit “Mr. Robinson’s Neighborhood” was one of his longest speeches yet, and it enlivened an otherwise awkward morning after the talk with Paige and gave his character a chance to say a few more words than usual, if nothing else.It’s Miller Time.When Stan comes over to dine, we see the scene through Paige’s eyes for a moment. Now that she has been enlightened about her parents, she stares at Stan as if she had never seen an F.B.I. agent before. Philip brandishes that big kitchen knife we saw earlier in the season, and then, like a TV chef, scrapes one knife against another. It goes on just a beat longer than it needs to, as if to emphasize the message.Comments on the comments.Nancy Duggan of Morristown, N.J., you are right about the pronunciation “male robot.” Martha especially described it that way. I think the writers and actors were having a bit of fun with us. Does anyone see anything deeper there? Lois Smith does indeed have a stunning résumé, and some of the clips of her in her youth were quite arresting.  Thanks to commenters, I went hunting and loved this sample from the screen test with James Dean. The Elizabeth/Betty observations by all of you are astute and add dimension to an already powerful scene. Will we see Betty again in a flashback or in the event that she did leave a note? We certainly won’t forget her.And thanks for all the interpretive assistance regarding “Blade Runner” and “Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?”Товарищи, помните: Говорите по-русски.
(Comrades, remember: Speak Russian.)