A New Jersey university has retracted its announcement that the socially conscious rapper Common would give the commencement speech at the school’s graduation ceremony in May following an outcry from police officials over a 15-year-old song.On Monday, Kean University in Union, N.J., said on Twitter and its official website that Common, the musician and actor, would deliver the address. But Chris Burgos, president of the State Troopers Fraternal Association of New Jersey, told The Record, a local newspaper, that the selection was a “slap in the face” to law enforcement officers.He pointed to Common’s 2000 track “A Song for Assata,” which, Mr. Burgos said, was sympathetic to Joanne D. Chesimard, also known as Assata Shakur, who in 1977 was convicted of killing Werner Foerster, a New Jersey state trooper. She fled to Cuba after escaping from prison in 1979. (“Listen to my love, Assata,” Common says in the song. “Your power and pride is beautiful.”)Susan Kayne, vice president of university relations at Kean, said on Wednesday that the announcement had been “released prematurely.” She added, “The students expressed interest in Common because he composed the Oscar-winning song ‘Glory’ with John Legend, our commencement speaker in 2011. While we respect Common’s talent, Kean is pursuing other speaker options.”Capt. Steve Jones, a spokesman for the State Police, said in a statement: “We can’t control who the university invites to speak. However, we will continue our efforts to make the public aware of Joanne Chesimard’s escape and life on the lam and continue to seek her return to New Jersey and justice.”In an email on Wednesday, Mr. Burgos said, “It appears Kean University has taken our concerns into consideration once brought to light.” In an earlier statement, he said, “The selection and invitation of a commencement speaker is not to be taken lightly.”The New Jersey State Police and its unions had previously spoken out against Common after he was invited to the White House for an arts event in 2011.Through his representatives, the rapper declined to comment.