By MICHAEL POWELLOCT. 15, 2015
Oh man, there was nothing quite like fifth-grade comics love.I would hustle down the stairs at P.S. 166 and trot with my buddy Peter to the soda and newsstand at 91st Street and Broadway. We’d squeeze past old Viennese ladies drinking coffee and the white-haired couple who owned the place. Bunched on a low rack were the latest comic books, with Batman, Legion of Super-Heroes (Saturn Girl!), Superman and Spider-Man.We plunked down a pile of quarters and darted down Broadway, working out how we would sneak our troves past our parents, who imagined we’d be better off reading novels. In a fashion we only half intuited, we were reading about New York in all its disguises.Peter Parker, whose alter ego was Spider-Man, lived in Queens. Clark Kent worked for The Daily Planet in Metropolis. Please. We assumed that these were just cover names for The Daily News and New York.And there was Batman, whose loss and menace and darkness spoke to our beloved dystopia, which is to say the New York of the late 1960s and ’70s, a place of light and many shadows.Years later, I began to write a Metro column for The New York Times. I titled it Gotham.Now the New-York Historical Society has mounted a homage to this world: “Superheroes in Gotham.” The curators found in a private collection the Pow! Bam! Wham! Pop Art-era Batmobile and put it in the lobby. They mounted the Penguin’s umbrella and Catwoman’s hot unitard upstairs, along with Action Comics No. 1 (the first appearance of Superman) and art originals of the singular Steve Ditko’s Spider-Man.AdvertisementThe exhibition focuses on comic book founding fathers. They were predominantly Jewish kids — with a few Italians and the occasional wayward Protestant mixed in — from the Bronx, the Lower East Side and Brooklyn. And in the 1930s and ’40s, they created a world.Bob Kane (born Robert Kahn), a creator of Batman, and Will Eisner, a son of Jewish immigrants and the creator of the Spirit, attended DeWitt Clinton High School in the Bronx, as did the wisenheimer bard Stan Lee (born Stanley Lieber), who created the Fantastic Four, Spider-Man, the Hulk and many more.AdvertisementMr. Lee’s collaborator was the illustrator Jack Kirby (born Jacob Kurtzberg), whose style owed a little to Cubism and a lot to the tenements of his native Lower East Side.Occasionally a kid from somewhere out there would take a bus to New York and start writing and drawing. So Joe Shuster and Jerry Siegel befriended each other at a Cleveland high school and created Superman, the first and most powerful of the superheroes.“If you are Jewish, you’re not going to get work at The New Yorker magazine of that time, you’re not going to get a job at a big ad firm,” said Debra Schmidt Bach, who organized this show with Nina Nazionale.It’s not difficult to divine the attraction of superheroes. America was struggling out of the Depression. The clouds of fascism, anti-Semitism and war hung low across Europe.What New York kid wouldn’t scan the sky for a Superman?These heroes and their alter egos were, like most of us, a bit singed. Batman was a bloodied orphan and a loner. Daredevil was blind. Peter Parker was a brainiac nebbish living with his aunt and uncle when a radioactive spider bit him. I would run my hand along the cobwebbed windowsill of our fifth-floor rent-controlled apartment and think: “A single bite and I’m climbing that wall and swinging from water towers … .”Subtext abounded. The historical society features a strip by the cartoonist Jules Feiffer in which a neurotic Superman talks of saving a woman who “took one look at my cape and said I was a latent transvestite, and why was my costume so skintight and did I rescue more men than women?”AdvertisementMr. Siegel created Superman a year after his father died during a robbery in Cleveland. Scholars have argued that the Superman myth is the story of Moses, with the baby Kal-El arriving in a rocket ship rather than an ark of bulrushes. They have suggested that the name Kal-El has roots in Hebrew.My friends and I roamed the city in search of dusty shops with piles of old comics filled with such mysteries. We found a favorite haunt on Amsterdam Avenue, an unnamed, often padlocked storefront known as “the old lady’s place.” To get there we had to walk by the teenage boys at Joan of Arc Middle School, who shook us down for quarters.Where was Batman when you needed him?Still later we found the Memory Shop on Fourth Avenue in the East Village. I bought Justice League of America No. 1 for $7. (Note to burglars: Yes, I still have it, but it’s in pretty crummy condition.)Long ago, during nocturnal city wanderings, my friend Paul Spillenger and I imagined a time-altering superhero. Alas, beer and joints left us with shards of memory the next morning.My comic book days are long gone, although boxes with plastic-wrapped comics sit somewhere in my basement. Maybe our pasteurized city has less need of superheroes, although one who could roll back insane rents or bring an arrogant hedge funder to his knees might be welcomed. (The writer Ta-Nehisi Coates has signed on to reimagine Black Panther, an African superhero who spends, of course, much time in New York City.)More likely, a Bangladeshi kid in Elmhurst and a Senegalese kid in University Heights are doodling in their seventh-grade math classes, and they have their own ideas. You may hear about them in the New-York Historical Society’s next superhero show, in 2060.­“Superheroes in Gotham” continues through Feb. 21 at the New-York Historical Society, Manhattan; 212-873-3400, nyhistory­.org.A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page C23 of the New York edition with the headline: Daily Planet Exclusive: Heroes Star in Exhibition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.