Tracking down art looted during World War II usually takes decades. But the Dutch royal family achieved the feat in relatively record time: A 16-month investigation of the palace art collection identified a 17th-century painting that the family pledges will be returned to the descendants of the Jewish owner.The review, commissioned by Queen Maxima in November 2013, explored the records and histories of thousands of paintings that were acquired since 1933 in a collection spread among palaces and residencies.The most problematic work that emerged was a painting of the Hague forest by Joris van der Haagen, according to the investigation report released this week. It had been stored in the Lippmann, Rosenthal & Company bank in Amsterdam, which was a repository during World War II for Dutch Jews, who were forced to deposit valuables there before deportation to concentration camps.Investigators concluded that Queen Juliana bought the painting in 1960 from an art dealer “without knowledge of the provenance.” The painting was then hung in the royal family’s private residence, Noordeinde Palace. The heirs of the work have asked to remain anonymous.To identify ownership, Dutch art experts studied scattered palace records and histories. Another painting, “Landscape with Saint Hubertus,” also raised suspicions.   A work of the 16th-century artist Paul Bril, it was purchased in 1948 by Queen Juliana and was part of the collection of Hans Fishböck. He was an SS officer and the Third Reich’s finance minister in Holland, and was in charge of seizing property from Jews. He ultimately assumed a new identity and fled to Argentina.Investigators believe the work was owned previously by Henri Joseph Gosschalk, a Jewish Dutch painter who was interned in 1942 at the Westerbork concentration camp in the northeastern region of the Netherlands. Mr. Gosschalk, who continued to draw in the camp and survived the war, recovered other paintings he was forced to deposit with the Lippmann bank.But investigators could not date his ownership of the Paul Bril painting and concluded that “archives are inconclusive about who was the owner of the painting around the end of 1939 and beginning of 1940.” Unlike the owners of other missing works, according to the report, Mr. Gosschalk never declared the loss of that painting.A version of this article appears in print on 04/02/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Dutch Act Quickly on a Looted Painting.