LONDON — Penelope Curtis, the director of Tate Britain, will leave her position this summer to become the director of the Calouste Gulbenkian Museum in Lisbon, the Portuguese museum has announced.Ms. Curtis will serve as the first non-Portuguese director of the Calouste Gulbenkian, which has a small but prominent collection of about 6,000 works stretching from ancient Greek art to modern pieces.In her five years as director of Tate Britain, Ms. Curtis, who joined the museum in 2010 after serving as curator of the Henry Moore Institute in Leeds, England, drew a mix of praise and pointed criticism. She was applauded in 2013 for rehanging the museum’s permanent collection, which surveys the history of British art, in roughly chronological order. Many praised that move for rectifying problems with the former setup that grouped paintings by theme. Ms. Curtis, who has a doctorate from the Courtauld Institute of Art, also oversaw hit exhibitions like a major survey starting in 2012 of the Pre-Raphaelite school and a well-attended exhibition starting in 2014 dedicated to the painter J. M. W. Turner.But several projects under her tenure, like “Ruin Lust,” a 2014 show that brought together a wide swath of seemingly disparate paintings of ruins, were seen by some art critics as obscure. Last April, the critic Waldemar Januszczak published an article in The Sunday Times entitled “Tate Britain is in a Right Old Mess,” which concluded that, “Curtis has to go. She really does.” (Many supporters leaped to her defense.)Formerly known as Tate Gallery, Tate Britain opened in 2000 when the Tate umbrella organization rebranded its museums and established the larger and more central Tate Modern on the south bank of the River Thames.In a statement, Nicholas Serota, the director of Tate, praised Ms. Curtis for her accomplishments during her tenure. “We shall miss Penelope but we are delighted that a distinguished British scholar is the first international director to lead and develop this prestigious museum,” he said, referring to her move to the Calouste Gulbenkian.