AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (Starz Cinema) CAPOTE (2005) Philip Seymour Hoffman, above, won an Oscar for his embodiment of Truman Capote as he uncovers the story that became “In Cold Blood,” the novel about the 1959 murder of the Clutter family in Holcomb, Kan., in this drama directed by Bennett Miller from a script by Dan Futterman. Catherine Keener plays Nelle Harper Lee, Capote’s research assistant; Chris Cooper is Alvin Dewey, the lead investigator on the case; and Clifton Collins Jr. is the murderer Perry Smith. Writing in The New York Times, A. O. Scott called the film “a fascinating and fine-grained reconstruction of that period in its subject’s life, a time when he pursued literary glory and flirted with moral ruin.”7 A.M. (CUNY) BRIANLEHRER.TV Ido Aharoni, the consul general of Israel in New York, discusses geopolitical issues, anti-Semitism and technology. Tupper Thomas, executive director of New Yorkers for Parks, talks about preserving midsize city parks that don’t have conservancies.9 P.M. (NBC) LAW & ORDER: SPECIAL VICTIMS UNIT When a popular television personality (Rob Morrow, right) broadcasts an interview with a college student (Ally Ioannides) who claims she was gang-raped in a fraternity house, Sergeant Benson (Mariska Hargitay) and Assistant District Attorney Barba (Raúl Esparza) find themselves swimming in suspects but with no clear-cut evidence.9 P.M. (Travel) MAN FINDS FOOD Adam Richman scours the country for off-the-menu culinary treasures, starting in Los Angeles, where he samples the Lomo Burrito, a Peruvian-Korean-Mexican concoction at Cha Cha Chili, and the Inside Out at Greenspan’s Grilled Cheese. At 9:30, Mr. Richman heads to Chicago to snatch up one of only five Guapichosa sandwiches created at Scofflaw each day and Size Me Up, a mountain of meats personalized for each diner by the chef John Manion at La Sirena Clandestina.9 P.M. (Esquire) BEST BARS IN AMERICA The comedians Sean Patton and Jay Larson begin a second season in their cross-country bar crawl, inspired by Esquire magazine’s annual rundown of favorite watering holes. In San Francisco they visit a detective-theme speakeasy, do waffle shots at brunch and get drunk with the Oscar-winning screenwriter Nat Faxon (“The Descendants”). In “Brew Dogs,” at 10, the Scottish-malt rebels James Watt and Martin Dickie return to their own BrewDog Brewery in Aberdeen to revive a dead beer in a whiskey super cask and search for ghosts with paranormal investigators.9 P.M. (ABC) MODERN FAMILY It’s the birthday of Jay (Ed O’Neill), and Phil (Ty Burrell) can’t wait to unveil the high-tech outdoor grill he got him. Claire (Julie Bowen) and Mitchell (Jesse Tyler Ferguson), meanwhile, offer to repay a loan their father gave them ages ago, not thinking he’ll actually take them up on it. In “black-ish,” at 9:30, Bow (Tracee Ellis Ross) discovers that Dre (Anthony Anderson) never had the vasectomy he was scheduled to undergo several years earlier.9 P.M. (Cooking) EXTRA VIRGIN Gabriele Corcos repairs the bocce ball court on his Italian property that his grandmother Lola used to play on, then celebrates with a feast of her favorite recipes, including ricciarelli, traditional biscuits made in Colle di Val d’Elsa, a medieval Tuscan town.10 P.M. (ABC) NASHVILLE Rayna (Connie Britton) tries to help Deacon (Charles Esten) battle his illness, but her concern only causes him to withdraw. Scarlett (Clare Bowen) has cold feet when she, Avery (Jonathan Jackson) and Gunnar (Sam Palladio) are asked to open for Rascal Flatts on tour. And Will (Chris Carmack) can’t understand why his new writing partner, Kevin (Kyle Dean Massey), is suddenly unavailable.10 P.M. (BBC America) BROADCHURCH Hardy (David Tennant) and Ellie (Olivia Colman, left, with Mr. Tennant) begin to wonder if they’ve been wrong all along.What’s Streaming NowSTARDUST MEMORIES (1980) In this Felliniesque comedy from Woody Allen, a director (Mr. Allen) faces an existential crisis when he attends a festival of his films and recounts his life and the loves (Charlotte Rampling, Jessica Harper and Marie-Christine Barrault) who inspired his work. Writing in The Times, Janet Maslin called the film “starkly handsome and imbued with a very special bravado.” (hulu.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCKAdvertisement