AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasBallet West has been in existence since 1963, but this Salt Lake City company didn’t gain national prominence until it became the focus of “Breaking Pointe,” a reality show more consumed by the dancers’ backstage lives than ballet. The program ran on the CW network for two seasons beginning in 2012. Now in the a five-night run at the Joyce Theater, Ballet West had a chance to put the emphasis back where it belongs, on dancing. The company, under the artistic direction of Adam Sklute, features comely dancers; where it falters, at least judging from its program on March 25, is in its choice of repertory, which included the premiere of Helen Pickett’s “Games.” In a field where there is a frustrating scarcity of female choreographers, one wishes there were better news to report. “Games,” is inspired by “Jeux,” Nijinsky’s 1913 sexually enigmatic ballet, set to Debussy’s music, which unfolds during a tennis game. In Ms. Pickett’s ménage à trois, Allison DeBona and Arolyn Williams are first seen in a close embrace. But why does the sleek Ms. DeBona keep reaching for her phone? As it turns out, she’s texting another dancer, Christopher Ruud, to arrange a rendezvous. What follows are kisses, fights and more kisses, yet what this dance-theater production aches for is tension. Apart from Michael Andrew Currey’s set — in which walls are rotated to reveal both an office and a foyer where, along with a poster of Nijinsky, there are two tennis rackets — cute touches override any possibility of titillation. It’s a ballet that just keeps winking at you. Nicolo Fonte, the company’s resident choreographer, offers “Presto,” a piece for two couples with requisite extensions and lifts in which the women are stretched like taffy by their partners while maintaining borderline-ferocious expressions. “The Sixth Beauty,” by Matthew Neenan, possesses more soulfulness and life — a duet for Christiana Bennett and Rex Tilton hints at tragedy and redemption, and Beckanne Sisk glitters as the playful leader of four — but the pacing is rocky, rendering the choreography unfulfilled. Val Caniparoli bases “The Lottery” on Shirley Jackson’s short story. Seven couples unite in a series of pas de deux that start out sunny and gradually reveal frayed nerves. Oddly enough, tension is lacking here too, even though, according to a program note, the dancers have no idea who is chosen to be the victim ahead of time. On the March 25 program the duty fell to Sayaka Ohtaki, who shouted, “It’s not fair!” (Shouldn’t that sentiment have been expressed through her body?) As she writhed in convulsions much too controlled to be believed, the suspense fizzled. Rocks fall from the ceiling — in the story, the chosen one is stoned to death — and she collapses. What should be horrifying is merely hokey. Advertisement