AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon ParelesCryptic with a crisp beat: That’s how Alt-J keeps its songs, letting listeners choose how much to decipher and how much to enjoy more simply. It’s a strategy the band probably learned from Radiohead; Alt-J also shares Radiohead’s broad but particular eclecticism and now its arena-sized audiences. On Monday night, Alt-J sold out Madison Square Garden. (On Apple keyboards, Alt-J produces the symbol for delta, used in equations to represent change.) The band draws on, among other things, medieval vocal counterpoint, Afro-pop guitars, postpunk austerity, hip-hop beats, minimalism, hard rock, Celtic modes and the grand dirges of Pink Floyd — art-rock ingredients that Alt-J combines methodically and cerebrally, usually in songs that prefer minor keys and take their time. The lyrics allude to films, books and band members’ experiences, often in ways that call for an Internet search or an explanation to decode, sometimes leading to bleak glimpses of alienation, sexuality and violence. A seemingly straightforward, upbeat refrain like the one in “Leon” — “Yeah she loves you Leon”— refers to movie characters and connects to another Alt-J song, “Matilda,” which, despite its comforting guitar chords, is not quite the pensive ballad it sounds like. Alt-J’s songs are somber but laced with hooks: clear melody lines, wordless vocal refrains, upfront guitar riffs, stray effects. They don’t go out of their way to irritate or ingratiate themselves; they’re well-constructed pieces that the band presents without hoopla. The stage at Madison Garden was bigger and darker than Alt-J’s previous club and festival stages, with horizontal streaks of light and flashing video abstractions behind a band that didn’t linger in the spotlight, even though all four members were at the front of the stage.Alt-J’s guitarist and lead singer, Joe Newman, sang in his brooding tenor and occasional falsetto, not going out of his way to enunciate words or overdramatize them; the other members concentrated on their instruments and vocal harmonies. The band’s strongest physical presence was the drummer, Thom Green, keeping even the slowest songs in steady motion with a backbeat or a layer of double time and revealing, onstage, an unexpected fondness for cowbell. Yet Alt-J’s reserve has drawn listeners closer. When Mr. Newman paused his vocals to invite singalongs, they arrived loud and strong, and shouts of recognition greeted some songs even before the words arrived. And Alt-J wasn’t so dour that it withheld all of arena rock’s easier pleasures. Its final song — after the keyboardist Gus Unger-Hamilton announced, “I wish it wasn’t over, I’m afraid it is” — was “Breezeblocks,” from the band’s 2012 debut album, “An Awesome Wave.” It’s a little faster than most Alt-J songs; it starts out almost folky but then, with a touch of the Pixies, leaps to a loud interjection of “la la la la!” and a galloping drumbeat. And its chorus, though it follows some ominous verses, couldn’t be more pop: “Please don’t go, I love you so.” Alt-J knows how to build a pop song but — a little standoffishly, yet also idealistically — it has artier plans. Advertisement