By DANIEL McDERMONOCT. 15, 2015
Need help finding something to do?We are here to help. Here’s a formidable fistful, chosen by The Times’s arts editors.Based on the best-selling book by Emma Donoghue, “Room” stars Brie Larson as a woman held captive by a sexual predator in a garden shed, and Jacob Tremblay as the young son she raises there. It may sound like grim subject matter, but the movie won the audience award at the Toronto International Film Festival last month, and has drawn applause and tears at early screenings. “Grown agents wept,” the film’s director, Lenny Abrahamson, told the New York Times reporter Cara Buckley, “which I actually thought should be the tagline of the film, but no one would let me.”(Read more about “Room” or find a showtime.)Clive Owen returns for a second season in the role of Dr. John Thackery, a brilliant and dope-addled surgeon in turn-of-the-20th-century Manhattan. As our critic James Poniewozik writes, the show, produced and directed by Steven Soderbergh, “takes a much-visited genre, the medical drama, and renders it transfixingly new.”(Read Mr. Poniewozik’s review or catch up with Mike Hale’s recaps of Season 1.)Because Taylor Swift said so.
            So 'Electric Love' by Børns sounds like an instant classic to me..... #justsayingggg
garrettborns http://t.co/I32poRlhVd For the record: His shows on Saturday at Music Hall of Williamsburg and Monday at the Bowery Ballroom are sold out. (But really, when is anything really sold out?)(If you can’t make it, here are a few hundred other concerts to choose from.)It’s the fourth installment of this show, and the focus has widened to include not just up-and-coming new artists but plenty of others — more than 150 altogether — who were previously overlooked or underappreciated. Our critic Holland Cotter writes that this sprawling exhibition blends fashionable modes of painting “into a larger story, one that goes beyond a fixation on form to focus on ideas that tie art and artists to life.”(Read Mr. Cotter’s full review or find more online at MoMAPS1.org.)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.