By NEIL GENZLINGERMARCH 31, 2015
What, you ask, became of Lizzie? Turns out she stayed very busy. Call the cops, alert the warden. No one’s safe around this Borden.All right, so maybe children will never jump rope to that ditty the way they did to another about the same woman. But it’s a suitable introduction to a sly new Lifetime series, “The Lizzie Borden Chronicles,” which begins on Sunday night.The channel did well a year ago with a movie about the ax murders of Borden’s father and stepmother in Massachusetts in 1892 and her subsequent trial and acquittal. Christina Ricci made a pretty good Lizzie then, and she’s back for this eight-part series, just as gleeful and ruthless.In Lifetime’s telling, justice may not have been served all those years ago, and the series picks up Lizzie’s life after the trial. She and her sister, Emma (Clea DuVall, also reprising her role from the made-for-TV movie), are famous because of the case but also social outcasts. And they are facing challenges to their inheritance.AdvertisementA half brother (deliciously played by Andrew Howard) shows up, feeling as if he deserves a share. The business partner (John Heard) of Lizzie’s father wants it all. Perhaps they should have known that messing with her is not a step to be taken lightly.The series also draws a nice performance from Cole Hauser as Charlie Siringo, a Pinkerton detective whom someone has hired to look further into the Borden murders. He’s a formidable adversary for the defiant Lizzie, and a much more careful investigator than the police.AdvertisementThe show mixes tidbits of actual history — there really was a Charlie Siringo, for instance — with lots of fiction and speculation, so don’t take anything here seriously; this is period-piece television served with a wink. Just enjoy the notion — sometimes lost amid all of TV’s male murderers — that women too can be wicked.The Lizzie Borden ChroniclesLifetime, Sunday nights at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Produced by Sony Pictures Television. Judith Verno and Christina Ricci, executive producers.WITH: Christina Ricci (Lizzie Borden), Clea DuVall (Emma Borden), Andrew Howard (William Borden), Jonathan Banks (Mr. Flowers), Cole Hauser (Charlie Siringo), Jessy Schram (Nancy O’Keefe) and John Heard (William Almy).A version of this review appears in print on April 1, 2015, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: For the Acquitted, Life Under a Cloud.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.