AdvertisementSupported byFront Row CenterBy David BelcherLONDON — Staging “Aida” without elephants sounds a lot like doing “Hamlet” without Elsinore Castle. Yet opera, even Verdi’s classic about ancient Egypt, doesn’t have to come in a lavish package to resonate with audiences — as a growing number of opera companies and orchestras are finding out.Concert versions of operatic works are giving a new home, and new audiences, to operas that normally demand huge spectacles but don’t always draw large crowds.For opera companies and orchestras, the benefits are myriad, starting with the financial: It is much less expensive to stage an opera as a concert and therefore can be far more profitable. For singers, concerts offer a chance to make a more direct connection with the audience without costumes, sets and supernumeraries getting in the way.And for audiences, opera concerts, such as a recent “Aida” in Rome with the opera superstars Jonas Kauffmann and Anja Harteros, can be thrilling in a way a fully staged opera cannot.“How do you out-Cecil B. DeMille Cecil B. DeMille? You can do it because people have a lot of imagination,” said Antonio Pappano, music director at the Royal Opera in London. “When you leave it up to the audience sometimes, it can work brilliantly. I’m a theater man, but certain pieces lend themselves to a concert.”Mr. Pappano conducted a concert version of “William Tell,” Rossini’s rarely performed masterwork, in 2010 with the orchestra of the Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia in Rome, where his recent “Aida” was staged. He will conduct a fully staged version of “William Tell” at the Royal Opera this summer.“There’s not a lot of action in ‘William Tell,’ but there is so much action in the music,” he said, referring to the story of the Swiss marksman and the overture that depicts a huge storm.“The physical surge in an opera concert can come from the orchestra,” Mr. Pappano said. “It’s like a sort of visual back and forth: all those arms moving back and forth.”The Canadian bass-baritone Gerald Finley, who sang the difficult title role in “William Tell” and will repeat it for the Royal Opera production, said that appearing in a concert version of the work allowed him to stretch new muscles as a performer.“I love the physicality of a character in concert,” Mr. Finley said by telephone from Chicago, where he was singing in “Tannhauser” at the Lyric Opera. “The stage director is taken out of that equation to some degree, so what happens is that the orchestra becomes the focal point because the music is raised from the pit onto the stage.”“Many people will say that their first encounter with an opera was by radio or in a concert version where their imagination had to be part of it,” he continued. “We’re doing that as performers in concert. We’re imagining ourselves involved in a story.”Conveying a story, important to any opera production, is crucial to a concert opera, many singers agree — especially in rarely performed works that are too obscure or too difficult to fully stage. Almost all concert versions are staged without supertitles, but normally they have a libretto in the program for the occasional peek.A recent example was a tour of Handel’s four-hour opera “Alcina,” written in 1735, with The English Concert, the baroque orchestra in London. Considered one of Handel’s most difficult operas, with four female lead roles, “Alcina” toured to Pamplona and Madrid in Spain, Vienna, Paris and New York and starred the American mezzo-soprano Joyce DiDonato in the title role of a doomed sorceress, along with Alice Coote, Anna Christy and Christine Rice.“The English Concert could never afford to put on ‘Alcina’ fully staged with five weeks of rehearsal and, say, three weeks of performances. The economics of that are mind-boggling,” said Harry Bicket, the company’s music director. “We put our concerts together in three days, and tour for two to four weeks.”The tour was a sellout in every city — Mr. Bicket noted that Pamplona had never had a Handel opera performed there — and was noteworthy for a gown worn by Ms. DiDonato that nearly upstaged the performance.“When I look at an opera in concert, I want to help the audience enter the world of that opera through a character,” Ms. DiDonato said. “When ‘Alcina’ came up I thought this was perfect for Vivienne Westwood, who designed my gown for my ‘Drama Queen’ tour, so I explained the character to her,” said Ms. DiDonato, referring to her 2012 album.“Alcina starts in this hugely powerful mode, sexual and sensual,” she continued. “But she loses her power as the opera goes along. So the gown is sort of like a metallic rocker mode. It was meant to shed layers as she loses her power. By the end, she is almost in rags.”Ms. DiDonato’s approach, complete with an almost punkish hairdo to accompany the Westwood gown, is part of a trend to spruce up the normally placid concert approach.“I’m on a mission that I think the traditional concert needs a bit of help right now,” she said. “The music doesn’t need to be transformed, but a concert needs some pizazz. You usually have flat lighting, which you don’t have in pop and jazz concerts. A modern audience just needs a bit of help in a visual sense.”Singers say they have seen a renewed interest among audiences in concert operas.“I think that the major difference is that you have only the voice in concert and the interpretation and inflection of your voice to convey the role,” said the Maltese lyric tenor Joseph Calleja, who sang with Ms. DiDonato in “Maria Stuarda,” Donezetti’s bel canto masterpiece about the last days of Mary Queen of Scots, at the Deutsche Oper in Berlin in June. “You don’t have movement, props, costumes, scenery or makeup. If there’s a production that really gets in the way of the singing, then a concert version is almost better.”Concert versions have a notoriously short rehearsal time. Singers often follow scores on podiums — usually because they have not had enough rehearsal time to memorize the score and words — which creates another barricade to the audience. In some productions, the singers have their roles memorized, which takes more preparation but can create a more immediate connection.“It’s a lot of pressure because you have such a short rehearsal time,” said the Canadian soprano Barbara Hannigan, who lives in Amsterdam. She said she preferred to sing from memory, as having sheet music in front of her “changes the way I sing and perform an opera.”And while opera companies may prefer the lower cost of putting on concert operas, singers also see a trade-off.“If a singer performs in an opera, they are paid for performances, and there are usually between six and 12 of them,” Ms. Hannigan said. “Sometimes we are even paid for rehearsals, depending on the country. When you do a concert, you’re just paid for the performance or performances only.” She cited the example of “Le Grand Macabre,” which was performed at the New York Philharmonic a few years ago. The company members had 10 days of rehearsals but were paid for just the three days of performances.Yet once the market is established for concert versions of operas, audience demand overtakes economics, and venues will probably continue to schedule them.Mr. Bicket said that Carnegie Hall approached The English Concert about staging concert operas during the recent economic crisis. Simple costs, big-name singers and a repertory that included gems of the so-called Handel Renaissance were major selling points.“Now we go there every year, and our concerts sell out,” Mr. Bicket said. “The idea that you can sell out Carnegie Hall with a concert version of a Handel opera is crazy. It wouldn’t have happened 15 years ago.”Advertisement