AdvertisementSupported byFront Row CenterBy George LoomisROME — Say the words “classical music” in Italy and your listener will hear “opera.” Go to an orchestral concert and the group onstage will most likely have come from an opera house — the Filarmonica della Scala, for instance, or the Orchestra Filarmonica della Fenice.One group counts as an exception to the rule: the orchestra of the Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia, based in Rome. As Italy’s unofficial national symphony for more than 100 years, the Santa Cecilia orchestra has long commanded respect and attracted the finest conductors. And while it is regularly ranked among the world’s top orchestras, it has had its ups and downs, like most such groups.These days, the trend is up. Since 2005 the group’s music director has been Antonio Pappano, better known in the English-speaking world as music director of the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden. From all indications, Mr. Pappano has used his 10 years at the helm to breathe new life into the orchestra and keep it humming.“He brought a new energy to the orchestra,” said Mauro Bucarelli, the artistic manager of Santa Cecilia, “and won it greater recognition. Touring and recording have increased significantly.”Born of Italian parents but raised and trained mostly in the United States, Mr. Pappano has brought a returning emigrant’s perspective to his post with the Santa Cecilia. A lover of Italian cuisine, he sprinkles his speech with culinary references: In search of a crisper interpretation of a piece of music, he will suggest that the passage be like pasta cooked al dente — firm and with definition, rather than mushy.The group’s Italian intensity and personality — its “Italianità,” as he puts it — was “asleep a little bit when I arrived,” Mr. Pappano, 55, said during an interview in his office at the orchestra headquarters. A few years ago, he said, apparently out of frustration, it took four sessions to get results he could achieve immediately with the Covent Garden orchestra, which he has directed since 2002. “That is no longer the case,” he said. “The issue of discipline and attention to rehearsals has gotten so much better.”“Everybody has a fiery temperament here, but the screaming has pretty much stopped,” he said.The Accademia is one of Italy’s 14 “fondazioni lirico-sinfoniche,” a government classification. It is the only one that is not an opera house. The Accademia, which supports a chorus, educational programs, a music archive and a museum of instruments, gets about 45 percent of its 32 million euro, or $35 million, annual budget from the national government, 15 percent from ticket sales and 40 percent from private donors and sponsors. It has about 200 concerts a year.As one of Europe’s premier music-loving countries, Italy is unique in having few independent symphony orchestras. Only one other orchestra of national stature exists, the RAI National Symphony, based in Turin.Mr. Pappano sums up the reason: “Opera ate everything up alive,” he said. “In that environment symphonic music didn’t have a chance to breathe.”By the middle of the 19th century, the pioneering efforts of 18th-century Italian composers in the development of the symphony and the concerto were long in the past, and little had come along to take their place.A number of upper-class cultural figures formed societies for performance of orchestral and chamber music, but they faced stiff headwinds. In the late 19th century, Italy was still coming to grips with its own identity as a unified country. People gravitated toward cultural areas of common ground, such as opera, rather than an essentially foreign art form, which is what instrumental music had become.“People liked the story lines of operas about being oppressed and finding resolution,” Mr. Pappano said. And it didn’t help that those who championed instrumental music were often pro-Wagner, whose approach to opera was seen by many as subversive of Italian tradition.Motivation for change came in part from within. “With late Verdi and Puccini, the writing became more sophisticated for the orchestra,” Mr. Pappano said. And in the Santa Cecilia, Italy’s emerging orchestral composers had an artistically first-rate forum.Mr. Bucarelli links the orchestra’s status as a permanent ensemble to the opening in 1908 of the Augusteo concert hall, which became its home. The first concert was conducted by Giuseppe Martucci; he and Giovanni Sgambati were the leading instrumental composers of the day. Others composers followed, including Ottorino Respighi, whose blockbuster orchestral works “The Pines of Rome” and “The Fountains of Rome” were given their world premieres there.Many world-class conductors appeared at the Augusteo, including several leading composers: Strauss, Mahler, Stravinsky, Sibelius, Saint-Saëns and even Debussy.But in a clash between music and nationalism, in which the latter prevailed, the Augusteo was demolished in 1936 by the Fascist government to permit excavation of the burial site of the first Roman emperor, Augustus, over whose tomb the hall was built.After the destruction of the Augusteo, the orchestra performed in other halls — including the Teatro Argentina in Rome, where “Il Barbiere di Siviglia” had its world premiere — while remaining a destination for top conductors. After recording Puccini’s “La Bohème” in 1987, Leonard Bernstein raved that it was “the best Bohème of my life,” adding, “It’s a splendid orchestra.”Mr. Pappano’s arrival at the orchestra — after stints at the Bayreuth Festival as Daniel Barenboim’s assistant, at the Norwegian National Opera and at La Monnaie in Brussels — came at a favorable time: The orchestra’s new home, the Auditorium Parco della Musica, was completed just two years before. The Renzo Piano-designed complex includes three halls and an open-air amphitheater. The largest of the three, the Sala Santa Cecilia, is the orchestra’s performing venue, a 2,800-seat hall with seating in the so-called vineyard style of discreetly arranged blocks of seats. Its excellent acoustics surpass those of the typical horseshoe-shaped opera house for orchestral performances.Once onboard, Mr. Pappano intensified the orchestra’s recording activity, particularly for the EMI label (now part of Warner Classics).The orchestra was no stranger to making records, including recordings of operas. In the 1920s, it produced the first recording of Vivaldi’s “The Seasons,” and later it participated in a number of classic postwar opera recordings for Decca. Under Mr. Pappano the orchestra issued a complete recording of Rossini’s “Guillaume Tell” and more recently recordings of Britten’s War Requiem and of symphonies by Dvorak, Mahler and Rachmaninoff.In February, Mr. Pappano and the orchestra, as well as Santa Cecilia’s renowned chorus, participated in what will surely rank as one of the most prestigious recording projects of the year: a new studio recording of Verdi’s “Aida,” with an all-star cast headed by Anja Harteros and Jonas Kaufmann, for Warner Classics, scheduled for release in October. After the recording sessions were completed, the assembled forces gave a concert performance of the opera in the Auditorium Parco della Musica, a highly anticipated event.Another of Mr. Pappano’s initiatives reflects his recognition of the absence of a significant Italian tradition of symphonic composition: a commissioning project under which a composer, usually an Italian, writes a work for the orchestra each year. The new work this year is “La Nuova Euridice secondo Rilke” (“The New Eurydice according to Rilke”) by the Sicilian composer Salvatore Sciarrino, which had its world premiere March 28. It was paired with Bach’s Magnificat, part of a continuing survey of the German master’s greatest choral works. Other non-Italian works, including Sibelius’s Second Symphony and the Bruckner Eighth, will constitute the programs of the orchestra’s next tour, a four-day sweep through Prague, Venice and Dresden, Germany, starting on May 28.The 2017 schedule will include a breakthrough event: an American tour. It will include New York and constitute the orchestra’s first trip across the Atlantic since the 1960s.Advertisement