AdvertisementSupported byFront Row CenterBy Rebecca SchmidBERLIN — Few musicians in history have been as influential within their lifetimes as Pierre Boulez. As a composer and theorist, he shaped the path of modernism in postwar Europe. As a conductor, he redefined concert programming. As an educator and administrator, he oversaw the creation of groundbreaking music facilities.Celebrations around Mr. Boulez’s 90th birthday this season reveal his omnipresence. The Lucerne Festival, the Salzburg Festival, the London Symphony Orchestra, the Aldeburgh Festival in Britain, the newly opened Philharmonie de Paris and the Staatskapelle Berlin are just some of the institutions to have included homages to Mr. Boulez in their programs.While Mr. Boulez made his start as a young radical, denouncing composers who did not ascribe to the necessity of 12-tone music and famously declaring the need to blow up opera houses so that they could reinvent themselves, he would take action in the mainstream. While his career as a conductor nourished his orchestral writing, it also prompted him to promote a better infrastructure for modern and contemporary music in general.As principal conductor of both the BBC Symphony Orchestra and the New York Philharmonic, principal guest conductor of the Chicago Symphony and a regular presence with leading institutions such as the Cleveland Orchestra and the Vienna Philharmonic, he introduced experimental performance formats and reshaped the canon with a 20th-century repertoire.In his native France, after a self-imposed exile in the 1970s, Mr. Boulez was the catalyst behind the creation of the Institute for the Research and Coordination of Acoustics and Music, or Ircam; the Ensemble InterContemporain, specializing in modern and contemporary music; the multipurpose Cité de la Musique; and — with some delay — the Philharmonie de Paris. In 2003, he founded the Lucerne Festival Academy in Switzerland to train young musicians in the performance practice of 20th-century and contemporary works.Laurent Bayle, president of the Philharmonie and former director of both the Cité de la Musique and Ircam, said Mr. Boulez’s international conducting career had awakened him to the need for reform from within. “He quickly realized that the system was a dangerous one because it led to facile solutions,” Mr. Bayle said by telephone from Paris, “that it would always be the same audience and would kill new creations because it was looking for fast action. He realized that if he didn’t fight, no one would.”The pianist and conductor Daniel Barenboim, who first performed under Mr. Boulez in 1964 and went on to become a close friend and colleague, especially credits him for championing 12-tone music, which was relegated to the margins after World War II.“He was able to make this music accessible by the quality of his conducting and analytical capacities,” Mr. Barenboim said, recalling rehearsals with the BBC Symphony in which Mr. Boulez dissected works by Schönberg, Berg and Webern “like a car mechanic.” “He is completely at the service of the music,” he added. “I wouldn’t be half the musician I am without him.”The composer and conductor Matthias Pintscher, music director of the Ensemble InterContemporain, has similarly found in Mr. Boulez an essential role model. “He passed on the encouragement to work on the music itself — not packaging but content,” Mr. Pintscher said by phone from Paris. “I strongly believe that this is the only chance to carry us into the future.”Despite an unbending commitment to modernist complexity, Mr. Boulez allowed a wide spectrum of schools to flourish side by side at Ircam, bringing in composers ranging from the spectralist Tristan Murail to the technological innovator Tod Machover.Mr. Machover’s work with digital synthesizers in the late 1970s and 1980s would provide the foundation for his invention of hyperinstruments — acoustic instruments enhanced in real time by computers — at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.Mr. Machover is currently developing a new generation of hyperinstruments controlled by smartphones that will debut at the Lucerne academy this summer. “There are a lot of unresolved questions that Ircam set the standard for and still inspire people all over,” Mr. Machover said by Skype from Boston.It was at Ircam that Mr. Boulez perfected his vision for the integration of computer technology into live performance, developing a new version of his “...explosante-fixe...” for flute, ensemble and live electronic and, with Mr. Machover as project manager, the seminal electroacoustic work “Répons.” Legendary for his exactitude, Mr. Boulez conceives of every composition as a work-in-progress.In June, the Aldeburgh Festival will present unpublished parts of Mr. Boulez’s string quartet “Livre Pour Quatuor,” of which he transformed two movements into “Livre Pour Cordes,” for string orchestra. His “Notations I-IV and VII,” which will be performed in Berlin, Lucerne and Salzburg, Austria, similarly evolved from early piano pieces into a complex orchestral fabric.Pierre-Laurent Aimard, artistic director of the Aldeburgh Festival and a former solo pianist with the Ensemble InterContemporain, believes that Mr. Boulez’s compositions reflect “a sense of global reflection toward his era.”“There is never a work that repeats another,” Mr. Aimard said. “With each new work he confronts a new, essential problematic.”Mr. Boulez extended the principles of 12-tone music not just to pitch, but also to sound duration and intensity — a technique known as total serialism — while exploring the open, or mobile, forms that came into fashion in the postwar era. But he also carried forth the French tradition of impressionist color, from the early song cycle “Le Marteau Sans Maître,” scored for flute, xylorimba, vibraphone, percussion, guitar and viola, to “Sur Incises,” one of his last works, which grew from a piano piece into a work for three percussionists, three pianists and three harpists.Mr. Boulez still has plans to orchestrate the full cycle of “12 Notations” and continue his “Anthèmes” series with a violin concerto for the German soloist Anne-Sophie Mutter.A prime concern of his is future generations. In 2010, Mr. Boulez invested the revenue of his many international prizes into a foundation to underwrite commissions from young composers. At the Lucerne Festival Academy he has hand-picked and personally trained young talent. A commissioning program created in 2013 pairs young conductors and composers in a two-year process intended to create more dialogue between performer and creator.As a nod to Mr. Boulez’s generosity of spirit, Mr. Barenboim will name both the chamber hall and the resident ensemble of his Barenboim-Said Academy, scheduled to open next year in Berlin, after him.“He is not less revolutionary than Wagner in his time,” Mr. Barenboim said of Mr. Boulez. “Except that he is a very good character.”Advertisement