By DAVID BELCHERMARCH 31, 2015
STRATFORD-UPON-AVON, England — Willy Loman is a name laden with tragedy, the personification of the failed American dream in an era when it was held up for the world to envy.For the Royal Shakespeare Company, that battered soul at the center of “Death of a Salesman” is akin to the greatest of Shakespeare’s tragic characters, a King Lear of the working class or a Macbeth with a scheme for redemption. This spring, the company has scheduled Arthur Miller’s play, which opens on Wednesday, as the first production of the main theater’s summer season, and as its “Birthday Play” in honor of Shakespeare’s birth month, the first such distinction for a non-Shakespeare play.“I believe ‘Death of a Salesman’ is the greatest American play and is of a scale, ambition and power of any Shakespeare play,” said Gregory Doran, the company’s artistic director,  who is directing this production. “Miller has created the burden of fulfilling or not fulfilling dreams in the way that Shakespeare did by homing in on the particular that can somehow create the universal.”Willy’s dreams are at the core of “Salesman,” which opened on Broadway in 1949, during the promise of postwar America. It depicts a family on the verge of poverty despite Willy’s life of hard work. In his early 60s, he keeps referring to his “big break” as he wearily nears retirement. The play was a huge sensation and made Miller, whose father had lost a successful clothes-manufacturing business in the Great Depression, a celebrity playwright.AdvertisementA major film, thousands of productions in dozens of languages and four Broadway revivals later, it is considered the ultimate portrayal of an American family — and an America — in demise.AdvertisementMr. Doran and Antony Sher,  the company’s go-to actor, who plays Willy, discussed the play after rehearsal on a recent afternoon at a local pub here. They said “Salesman” was a chance for them to discover parallels among three works: the Miller play; their previous production,  a run of “Henry IV, Parts 1 and 2” here and in London; and their next Shakespeare endeavor, “King Lear” at the Royal Shakespeare Company in 2016, which will be part of a massive celebration planned around the 400th anniversary of Shakespeare’s death. “Salesman,” running through May 2 (with a possible London run to be announced), is a pause from Shakespeare and an unexpected link to his work.“I think it’s correct to say Willy is a domestic King Lear in a way,” Mr. Doran said, “but oddly, having just directed the ‘Henry IV’ plays, there’s a lot of connections there between fathers and sons. You notice the dreams that your parents had for you in all of these plays.”Mr. Sher, the life  partner of Mr. Doran since 1987, echoed this, even though he portrayed Falstaff, a far more jovial character, in the “Henry IV” plays.“I think the angst-ridden relationship between King Henry and Prince Hal is similar to Willy and Biff,” Mr. Sher said, referring to one of the sons. “Miller has written a dreamscape, and most Shakespeare plays demand that you acknowledge a similar fluidity from one place to another, like in the Boar’s Head Tavern, the court and the Battle of Shrewsbury in ‘Henry IV.’ Miller demands the same thing: a mixing of past and present.”Mr. Sher will be joined by Harriet Walter as Linda, Willy’s devoted but weary wife.  She played Lady Macbeth to his Macbeth in a 1999 production that was a hit in London and was filmed for television. Playing Biff, the more pivotal role among Willy’s two sons, is Alex Hassell, who was Prince Hal in the same “Henry IV” production. Sam Marks plays the other son, Happy.It is the first time Mr. Doran has worked on “Death of a Salesman” (he said he had never even seen a production nor any filmed versions). Mr. Sher played the small role of Willy’s boss in a production in the 1970s but said he had never seen any other performances. Mr. Doran became interested in the play several years ago when the Royal Shakespeare Company was in residence at the University of Michigan, which Miller attended in the 1930s and which houses a major archive at a theater named in his honor. Mr. Doran was unable to secure the rights at the time because a Broadway production, staged in 2012 and starring Philip Seymour Hoffman, had the option to transfer to London. When that didn’t happen, the company stepped in, and the centenary this year of Miller’s birth seemed an ideal time to stage the play, Mr. Doran said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The director and Mr. Sher said the play had turned out to be a revelation for them during rehearsals, especially as they had less familiarity with the text than, say, a Shakespeare standard.“Because the language in ‘Death of a Salesman’ is heightened — it isn’t just conversation that you’re eavesdropping upon — there’s a real deliberateness to it. It’s a constructed memory,” Mr. Doran said. “Miller insisted that some of the scenes are not flashbacks. He’s constructing each of these sequences, sort of like in a dream where you can rehearse an argument, and the dream keeps on repeating the argument throughout the night. Some of it’s a Norman Rockwell painting, and some of it’s an Edward Hopper painting.”AdvertisementThat juxtaposition of dream and reality, as well as loneliness and tragedy, has shaped Mr. Sher’s performance, he said, as has his connection to the traveling salesmen of decades past. His paternal grandfather, who was born in Lithuania, was a peddler in South Africa, and Mr. Sher recalled seeing such salesmen in the town where he grew up.“This town had a hotel, petrol stop and a bar, basically, and I used to see these guys when we were at these big family tables, and there would be a single man at his own table with that sort of strange exhaustion that they all had,” Mr. Sher recalled. “Yet there they were, as Miller writes in the play, ‘riding on a smile and shoe shine,’ like Willy. They’d get very drunk and have that smile, even though they were exhausted.”Mr. Sher is fascinated with Miller’s devotion to honoring the common man, the Willys of the world for whom carrying one’s burdens in suitcases — Miller once said they contained Willy’s dreams — is universal.“I think there’s something about the compassion that Miller writes with that reminds me of Shakespeare, something about that lack of judgment and the view of humanity,” Mr. Sher said. “He takes this little family in Brooklyn, and somehow you can see all of us.”He added: I can’t think of many other modern writers who have that scope and view of humanity.”A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.