“Mad Men” starts the final half of its seventh season on Sunday, and it’s been quite a run for the critically acclaimed AMC drama. But before the show’s pilot premiered on July 19, 2007, it was impossible to predict how influential “Mad Men” would eventually become. Here is a brief look back at how The New York Times first covered the show.• Stuart Elliot, the advertising columnist for The Times, wrote the paper’s first preview piece more than a year before the show aired. At the time, it wasn’t a guarantee that AMC would even pick up “Mad Men” for a full run. The network was playing around with several ideas that never came to be: “In another example of how the more things change the more they remain the same,” Mr. Elliott wrote, “if AMC decides to pick up the series, each episode may be sponsored by a single advertiser — just as was done in 1960.”• The day before the “Mad Men” premiere, the reporter Jacques Steinberg’s piece made many reference to HBO’s “The Sopranos,” the show for which “Mad Men” creator Matthew Weiner wrote many episodes: “Though nobody is killed, at least early on, Mr. Weiner’s lead character, an archetypal advertising man named Don Draper, is surrounded by a supporting staff of misogynistic executives who engage in enough lying, backbiting, drinking and sexual shenanigans during the industry’s golden age to rival the bad behavior of the crew at the Bada Bing club.”• The first review was written by the chief television critic Alessandra Stanley, who emphasized the show’s nuance: “The magic of ‘Mad Men’ is that it softly spoofs those cruel, antiquated mores without draining away the romance of that era: the amber-lit bars and indigo nightclubs, soaring skyscrapers, smoky railway cars and the brash confidence that comes with winning a war and owning the world. It’s a sardonic love letter to the era that wrought ‘The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit’ and ‘The Best of Everything,’ but homage is paid with more affection than satire.”• Television reporter Bill Carter, a television reporter ’s piece on cable’s “breakout summer” placed “Mad Men” alongside shows like “The Closer” and “Damages” in a piece on cable’s “breakout summer.”  “ ‘Mad Men,’ which has received the kind of rave reviews usually reserved for HBO series,” Carter wrote, “has improved AMC’s ratings for its Thursday-night time period by more than 100 percent. But as Mr. Weiner put it, ‘I think those reviews were 90 percent of the business plan.’ ”• A feature by the reporter Margy Rochlin focused on stars Jon Hamm and January Jones: “When ‘Mad Men’ was first shown in July, it appeared to be about Vaselined hair, crisp suits and the glamorous world of Madison Avenue advertising in the early 1960s. Lately, though, the series has become a grim exploration of what it meant to be locked into a traditional, unhappy marriage at a time when divorce still carried a stigma. It’s no shock that stay-at-home, casserole-cooking, Bryn Mawr-educated Betty is miserable; she’s lonely, unfulfilled and having so much trouble processing the grief over the recent loss of her mother that she suffers from mysterious hand tremors.”