AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck1:15 P.M. (Starz Cinema) IN AMERICA (2003) With their entire lives packed into a groaning station wagon, Johnny (Paddy Considine), an Irish actor, and his wife, Sarah (Samantha Morton), enter the United States from Canada illegally and try to start over in a battered walk-up apartment in New York after the death of their young son. In this drama, directed by Jim Sheridan, Djimon Hounsou is Mateo, a reclusive painter dying of what seems to be AIDS and is befriended one Halloween by Johnny and Sarah’s daughters. Mr. Sheridan (“My Left Foot”) wrote the film with his own two daughters, Naomi and Kirsten Sheridan, and all three received Oscar nominations, as did Ms. Morton and Mr. Hounsou. “This movie, from moment to moment, feels small, almost anecdotal,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “It is only afterward that, like Mr. Sheridan’s other films, it starts to grow into something at once unassuming and in its own way grand.”1:40 P.M. (MoreMax) THE TRUTH ABOUT CHARLIE (2002) In Jonathan Demme’s remake of the 1963 comic thriller “Charade,” Thandie Newton steps into the Audrey Hepburn role as a new wife who returns to her Paris apartment to break it off with her art-dealing husband, Charlie, only to find the place ransacked. She soon discovers that nothing is as it seems. Mark Wahlberg, in the role originated by Cary Grant, portrays the charming stranger eager to help; Tim Robbins is the man she turns to at the United States Embassy. “The sensual, butter-voiced” Ms. Newton is “so good that when she’s on screen, the movie works — or at least you think it does,” Elvis Mitchell wrote in The Times. “It’s a spot-specific case of alchemy.”7:05 P.M. (HBO Signature) UP IN THE AIR (2009) George Clooney portrays Ryan Bingham, a corporate assassin — he fires people for a living — and frequent flier who reaches a crossroads when an upstart (Anna Kendrick) tries to change the rules of the game in this film from Jason Reitman. Vera Farmiga is Alex, the fast-moving executive who causes Bingham to rethink his life for the first time. “ ‘Up in the Air’ is an assertively, and unapologetically, tidy package, from its use of romance to instill some drama into the narrative (the book introduces disease instead) and the mope-rock tunes that Mr. Reitman needlessly overuses,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times about this adaptation of the Walter Kirn novel. Still, one of the film’s pleasures is that its actresses “share the frame with Mr. Clooney as equals, not props.” The film, chosen by Ms. Dargis as a Critics’ Pick, received Oscar nominations for best picture, its three leads and Mr. Reitman.8 P.M. (ABC) GREY’S ANATOMY A group of students on a field trip to the emergency room are wide-eyed when two injured police officers arrive. In “Scandal,” at 9, a congressman asks Olivia (Kerry Washington) to help his imprisoned father escape the death penalty. And in “American Crime,” at 10, Aubry (Caitlin Gerard) cuts the ankle bracelet of Carter (Elvis Nolasco), now out on bail, and persuades him to make a run for the Canadian border to avoid facing trial and a possible death sentence.10 P.M. (A&E) 8 MINUTES Kevin Brown, a minister, and his Houston-based Passage to Freedom team help prostitutes and victims of trafficking begin their lives anew.10 P.M. (NBC) THE SLAP Harry (Zachary Quinto) and Thanasis (Michael Nouri) leak information that forces Ritchie (Lucas Hedges) to consider suicide in this series finale. Then Gary (Thomas Sadoski) steps in.10 P.M. (Sundance) THE RED ROAD Season 2 picks up in the aftermath of the shootout involving the police officer Harold Jensen (Martin Henderson) and Phillip Kopus (Jason Momoa), a dangerous member of a local American Indian tribe whose newfound federal recognition may bring a casino to the mountain — and with it, murder.What’s Streaming NowCONNECTED In this first long-form series from AOL Originals, six people use camcorders to document their lives for six months, starting with Jonathan Bricklin, an aspiring writer and the owner of Spin, a Ping-Pong social club in New York, as he deals with living in the shadow of his girlfriend, Susan Sarandon. Morgan Spurlock is an executive producer. (aol.com/connected)Advertisement