AdvertisementSupported byBy Nina SiegalLAREN, THE NETHERLANDS — It was a celebrated case of the artist defeating his critic. In 1877, the expatriate American painter James McNeill Whistler (1834-1903), who had been working in London for 20 years, objected to the English art critic John Ruskin’s damning words about one of his paintings: “I have seen, and heard, much of Cockney impudence before now; but never expected to hear a coxcomb ask two hundred guineas for flinging a pot of paint in the public’s face.”Whistler sued Ruskin for slander and won, but it was a Pyrrhic victory. The costs of the case sent him into bankruptcy, and he fled Britain in 1879, leaving about 50 artworks rolled up in his London studio. Some were secreted away; they were later disbursed to a bookseller and various art dealers, while others simply disappeared.Officials at the Singer Laren, a modest house museum near Amsterdam, say that its painting “Symphony in White: The Girl in the Muslin Dress” was most likely one of those works, rolled up and damaged and then heavily repainted by a clumsy restorer. Last week, the museum’s director and affiliated experts here reclaimed the painting as an authentic Whistler, currently insured at €500,000, challenging a leading Whistler authority who had discredited the work about two decades ago.“We have our Whistler back,” the director, Jan Rudolph de Lorm, said at the museum on Monday. “It is clear that if you look at the proof, both the pedigree proof and the underlying images, it’s enough for us to say it was our Whistler.”The tale of how officials at a small museum in the Netherlands came to claim an authentic Whistler illustrates the way new technologies are allowing museums to tackle attribution issues when works of art are called into question. In the past, the word of top scholars was often enough to authenticate or discredit a work, sometimes robbing an art institution of prestige. But with new scientific methods and independent scholarship, museums are now vying to assert the value of their own treasures.The Whistler attribution here is based on new scientific and art-historical research conducted by the museum over the past two years, in collaboration with art historians and specialists in painting analysis from the Rijksmuseum, the University of Amsterdam and the University of Antwerp. Using tools like infrared and X-ray imaging and X-ray fluorescence spectrography, they were able to more precisely date the work and explain how and where it was subsequently repainted. Similar techniques have been employed in recent years to make the case for authenticating works such as Rembrandt’s “Saul and David” at the Mauritshuis in The Hague and to determine the original colors Vincent van Gogh used in paintings like “The Bedroom” at Amsterdam’s Van Gogh Museum.If it is indeed a genuine Whistler — which is still in dispute — that would bring to two the number of Whistler paintings in the Netherlands’ collections. The other is the Rijksmuseum’s full-length portrait “Arrangement in Yellow and Gray,” known informally as “Effie Deans,” a reference to the heroine of Sir Walter Scott’s novel “The Heart of Midlothian.”Both paintings are on display in a one-room Whistler exhibition at the Singer Laren, which also includes his “Harmony in Brown: The Felt Hat” (1890-92) and a small “Self-Portrait” (1896-97), both on loan from the Hunterian Museum at the University of Glasgow. In addition to these four paintings, the museum is displaying several prints of X-ray scans of the “Muslin Dress” painting and a documentary about the findings, “to make the research transparent” Mr. de Lorm said.Much of the narrative behind “The Girl in the Muslin Dress” — as with many of the paintings from the bankruptcy period — is still murky. Singer Laren officials trace its appearance on the market to 1910, when it was seen, with other Whistler works, at the shop of the London art dealer Dowdeswell.Whistler’s appointed biographers, Elizabeth Robins Pennel and Joseph Pennel, documented the viewing in “The Whistler Journals,” published in 1922, which seems to describe this painting to a tee, including: “She is dark, her short upper lip shows her teeth, and her black hair is rolled up on her head somewhat.” They noted also that the curtains were “rather elaborately finished” while the figure was “not carried very far” — a suggestion that someone else may have tried to complete an unfinished painting.It is unclear to scholars exactly what happened to the work for the next 30 years, but in 1949 there are records of Dowdeswell offering it to the Springfield Museum of Fine Arts in Massachusetts, which did its own X-ray of the painting. They questioned its authenticity, and turned it down.The Singer Laren believes that Anna Singer-Brugh, the widow of the American painter William Henry Singer Jr., bought the work as a Whistler from the art dealer M. de Beer in London between 1949 and 1954. William was the son of a Pittsburgh steel manufacturer and had taken up painting and moved with his wife first to Paris and then to Holland to join a utopian artists’ colony that became known as the “Laren School” of landscape painting.Singer-Brugh established the Singer Memorial Foundation on their former grand estate in Laren and donated her personal art collection to its museum, including works by Paul Rodin, Kees van Dongen, and her husband. But the prized work of the collection, proudly displayed on the front cover of the 1956 catalog for the opening exhibition, was her supposed Whistler painting.There the “Girl in the Muslin Dress” remained for nearly a half century until 1997, when, according to Mr. de Lorm, a leading Whistler authority, the University of Glasgow professor Margaret MacDonald, author of the 1980 catalogue raisonné of the artist, visited the museum and cast doubt on its authenticity.The museum’s directors quickly moved the painting from the gallery to the storage facility, where it remained, unseen, for nearly two decades.“When Margaret MacDonald was hesitant, the Singer made a stupid move,” said Arie Wallert, a professor of technical art history at the University of Amsterdam, one of the leaders of the research project. “They dis-attributed the painting and put it in storage, and almost forgot about it.”It wasn’t until 2009, when Mr. de Lorm, former head of exhibitions at the Rijksmuseum, was hired as the new director of the Singer Laren, that someone took notice. After seeing the painting in the depot, he looked up its inventory card, which showed that the insurance value of the painting was 300,000 guilders in the 1990s and after Ms. MacDonald’s visit, it was decreased to 3,000 guilders. “I was angry,” he said. “I couldn’t really understand why they would be so fast in diminishing one of the crown jewels of their collection.”Ms. MacDonald, who is currently working on the Whistler catalogue raisonné, which hasn’t been updated since 1980, said she wasn’t the only scholar who was uncertain about the work. “I’m one of several people who have cast doubt on the image,” she said in a phone interview, citing the co-authors of the catalogue raisonné, the late Whistler authority Andrew McLaren Young and Robin Spencer. “We’ve got records at the University of Glasgow going back to the 1940s and they do cast doubt on the evidence at the time.”Mr. de Lorm initiated the new research with the help of Mr. Wallert, who had been a colleague at the Rijksmuseum. They tested paint samples to compare the work with the Rijksmuseum’s painting, did modern X-ray fluorescence scans and revealed interesting new information. After removing the darkened varnish, for example, the restorers found that the curtains behind the figure were painted at a later date, probably by a restorer. Also, it was found to be cut down, and was likely originally a full-length portrait, Mr. Wallert said.“It’s a very over-painted Whistler and a very damaged Whistler,” he concluded. “But I don’t have any doubts that what we have here is a decent Whistler.”Erma Hermens, a technical art history professor at the University of Glasgow, on the other hand, doesn’t see it as such a straightforward case. “To be totally conclusive is very, very difficult,” she said in a phone interview. “There’s a gap in the history, where this painting traveled to or where it was kept.”Ms. MacDonald also said she isn’t convinced. “I saw it a couple of weeks ago and I felt I still needed to do more research,” she said. For example, she still wants to date the hairstyle and the dress, and compare the painting to a work of the same period, “Harmony in White and Blue,” at the Leeds Art Gallery in Britain. But Mr. de Lorm is confident: “We believe in what we’re presenting now, and now the ball can go to the next player, and we will follow it and participate.”He said the museum’s work on this painting would help Whistler scholars learn more about the painter’s bankruptcy period. “I hope our research is a start to look again at this whole group of paintings from Whistler’s oeuvre.”Advertisement