AdvertisementSupported byNew MusicBy Nate ChinenDesertion — inseparable from its aftermath of recovery — haunts “Kintsugi” (Atlantic), the eighth album by Death Cab for Cutie. Titled after the Japanese art of mending cracked ceramics with precious metals, it’s a smartly shaped response to two recent disentanglements, at least one of which seems to have left a residue of trauma.Death Cab for Cutie formed in 1997 as a melodic indie-rock band with a lineup featuring the singer-songwriter Benjamin Gibbard, the bassist Nick Harmer and the guitarist Chris Walla. Mr. Walla announced his departure last year; this is the first proper Death Cab for Cutie album that he didn’t produce, though he stayed long enough to finish his parts.The other development, less recent but apparently more disruptive, involves Mr. Gibbard’s divorce from Zooey Deschanel, star of the Fox sitcom “New Girl” and the indie-pop duo She & Him. Though the word “amicable” has been dutifully deployed, and Mr. Gibbard has bristled at those who mine his songs for the confessional, it’s hard to ignore the subtext of a song like “Ingénue,” in which he coolly disparages cuteness, bright colors and “the currency of being 23.” If he were a bit more like Taylor Swift, he’d have arranged the tune for parlor piano and ukulele, with too much reverb on the vocal.But in terms of style, “Kintsugi,” produced by the alt-rock veteran Rich Costey, values continuity: Its sound suggests a reasonable next step for Death Cab, tastefully embellishing a guitar-and-drums core with some atmospheric cushioning and brittle rhythm production. Less startling a departure than “Codes and Keys,” from 2011, it nevertheless holds on to some of those textures — and those of the Postal Service, Mr. Gibbard’s electropop side project — folding them into a comfortingly familiar fabric.But Mr. Gibbard has something other than comfort on his mind here, even if his fallback as a vocalist is sweetly articulate introspection. Maybe these new songs aren’t meant as a personal rebuke of Ms. Deschanel, who is engaged and expecting a child.Best to draw your own conclusions, then, from “Little Wanderer,” in which Mr. Gibbard calls out longingly to a globe-trotting lover, while casting himself, metaphorically, as a beacon. Likewise with the opening track, “No Room in Frame,” which sounds like the passive-aggressive complaint of a red-carpet arm attendant, and “El Dorado,” whose chorus hinges on the phrase “I’m trying to be hyped for you.”On “Hold No Guns,” a spare acoustic ballad, he sings: “Darling, though you may pretend that you are selfless/You break with but the slightest bend and it leaves you lost and helpless.” Even better is the acidic couplet that opens “Good Help (Is So Hard to Find),” an appealingly slick pop-disco confection: “You’ll never have to hear the word ‘no’/If you keep all your friends on the payroll.”There’s a voyeuristic thrill in all of this, not unrelated to certain moments on Björk’s “Vulnicura,” whose songs plunge into the feelings surrounding her breakup with the artist Matthew Barney.But the songs that shine on “Kintsugi” are those that transcend particulars.“How could something so fair be so cruel?” Mr. Gibbard asks in the chorus of “Black Sun,” against warbling synthesizer chords. If you can tune out the image of Ms. Deschanel, it’s a keeper. And a synth-pop tune called “Everything’s a Ceiling” is seamless with its blend of gut-punch sadness and lyrical grace, conveying a relatable sensation of strandedness, of “nowhere to go except further below.”Advertisement