AdvertisementSupported byBy Alastair MacaulayThe eight dancers in Liz Gerring’s “Glacier” keep changing its temperature. At first, the mood is clinical. Dancers walk, run, balance, fall; they’re often on the cusp of pedestrianism. Since much of the movement is big — and some of it is sports-related — that’s already arresting. But a kinesthetic impetus soon develops, and this becomes full-bodied dancing that changes my breathing. New 18 months ago at the Alexander Kasser Theater in Montclair, N.J., “Glacier” has a quite different impact at the Joyce Theater, where I watched it on Tuesday. Aspects of the dance have certainly changed, not least its use of peripheral space and parts of its music, but both times I found it marvelous. What you see is what you get. This is not choreography that turns into poetic images, metaphors, stories, anything other than itself. Yet at times it’s wild, cold, amusing, surprising, impetuous.Its scale varies immensely. While others are dancing onstage, Brandon Collwes, his back to them, arrives from stage left, and then keels over backward toward them, arriving — bang! — on the floor, face up. By contrast, Tony Neidenbach, in profile to us, crosses the back of the stage in an eager tiptoe-through-the-tulips, prancing, hopscotch-like step — the funniest moment of the show (the more so from a virile, athletic performer). Having gone from right to left, he immediately retreats along the same line in huge, hungry strides. Yes, to stride (almost crawl) backward, and fast! — an intriguing task, one that Mr. Neidenbach takes up rapaciously. Other men succeed Mr. Collwes and Mr. Neidenbach in these assignments; it’s fascinating the way the tone changes.The analytical tone of “Glacier” becomes just part of Ms. Gerring’s recipe. When Adele Nickel, Jessica Weiss and Mr. Collwes do lines of turns on one foot across the stage, they tip their torsos sideways, as if to counterbalance the raised feet. The feeling is investigative — let’s see what it’s like to turn with our balance and line changed this way — but what’s remarkable is how that sense of exploration makes it reach into our bodies as we watch. Likewise when a dancer throws himself full-force onto the floor and, as if bodysurfing a wave, slides across.Ms. Gerring scrutinizes movement and communicates it at the same time. You feel this again with a wide range of balances. No matter how used you are to seeing an elongated straight front-hand-to-rear-toe line (arabesque allongée) or the same line tipped downward (arabesque penchée), you feel them here anew, partly because of the unreserved involvement of the torso in making the dancer’s line feel like a single stroke of the brush. Benjamin Asriel is especially fine here. We see (and feel) arm gestures that look as if they are hurling unseen objects, and others that are simply big gestures, like an umpire’s; both affect us like something we recognize from life outside the theater. Other arm movements — Mr. Collwes rolls his arms (like twiddling thumbs, but with the whole forearm) as he slowly tilts to the floor — have a different quality, without being any less like “real life.”Although I’ve described individual motions as if they’re isolated events, usually they’re part of longer clauses; the dancer’s momentum and transitions are vital factors here. In one sequence, Mr. Neidenbach, simply alternates four running steps with four walking steps as he briskly traces a circular path onstage left, and the transition from run to walk and vice versa is compelling every time. Mr. Collwes’s startling fall-over-backward actually turns out to be the start of a traveling phrase, all on the floor, in which every shift of weight becomes important. Mr. Collwes has extraordinary power in his torso and feet, so the spring of a quick jump or the downward plunge of his upper body toward his feet has a special impact.There are passages of partnering, and here too the same let’s-see quality prevails. One dancer strains away off balance while the other holds on; sometimes the two dancers are the same sex, but when (more often) they are male-female, it’s interesting to see that the roles of partner and partnered are alternated.“Glacier” takes its name from its taped score, by Michael J. Schumacher, which (in turn taking its name from Glacier Lake, Colo., where its composition was begun) is a collage of found sound that shares Ms. Gerring’s sensibility — both analytical and coolly poetic. It has changed more than the choreography, not least with the addition of isolated phrases (played on a piano) from the haunting allegretto of Beethoven’s Seventh Symphony. The dancers — the others are Brandin Steffensen, Jake Szczypek and Claire Westby — all suggest not just a wide range of dance backgrounds but also Ms. Gerring’s interest in their individual inflections. Costumes, by Márion Talán, are assorted in style, cut and color; nobody wears formal dance attire. Ms. Gerring’s choreography here and there reminds me of a number of other choreographers, not least Merce Cunningham and the early postmodern dance experimentalists associated with Judson Church, but she doesn’t seem inhibited by their precedent. This is engagingly here-and-now dancing; and that kinesthetic effect is something rare, even intoxicating.“Glacier” runs through Thursday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-242-0800, joyce.org. Advertisement