By NEIL GENZLINGERAPRIL 1, 2015
Few people have led a more examined life than Frank Sinatra did, so a documentarian taking on the subject needs a distinctive approach. Alex Gibney (who also directed the recently-aired Scientology documentary “Going Clear”) finds at least a somewhat successful one for “Sinatra: All or Nothing at All,” which has its premiere Sunday and Monday nights on HBO. Still, there’s no disguising that the story is awfully familiar.The two-part, four-hour film uses as a framework a 1971 performance in Los Angeles that Sinatra billed as a retirement concert — a misnomer, as it turned out, since there were many more concerts before his death in 1998. The film’s premise is that the songs he picked for that performance are both career-defining and self-defining. Footage from the concert becomes a gateway to archival material and commentary by Sinatra experts, family members and Sinatra himself, who is heard in excerpts from various interviews.Four hours may seem like a lot, and some of the commentary sounds as if it’s being read from a script, which doesn’t help the time pass quickly. But if anyone deserves a longer-than-usual television documentary, it’s Sinatra, who would have turned 100 this December.The film becomes more interesting the less far back your memory goes. Above all, it reminds us of the type of stardom Sinatra enjoyed, one that some people might think was invented by Elvis Presley or the Beatles. The music of the rock era was louder, but the screaming by swarms of fans, most of them women, was just as deafening for Sinatra as it was for anyone who came later.AdvertisementThere is also confirmation here of the darker side of the retro chic inspired by “Mad Men,” for those who like the suits but don’t actually watch the show. Like the men in that AMC series, Sinatra and his pals in the 1950s and ’60s lived lives marked by broken relationships, booze, cigarettes and a dismissive view of women.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Race, too, was a troublesome issue. The film credits Sinatra with pushing for the rights of the black performers he worked with, but in Part 2 it also has a recollection from Harry Belafonte about how Sinatra and the other white members of the Rat Pack eventually turned their friend Sammy Davis Jr. into the butt of racist jokes. Even for the most famous entertainer of his age, cool apparently had its limits.The film is primarily about Sinatra the singer; it doesn’t delve too deeply into the acting side of his résumé. Among its best segments is a stretch of Part 2 where Mia Farrow, to whom he was married briefly in the ’60s, describes Sinatra’s struggles with the cultural upheaval of that decade.Advertisement“Clearly he did not embrace the change,” she says. “It was way different when girls looked like dolls; that he could be comfortable with. But when girls looked like Janis Joplin” — here Mr. Gibney shows us a clip of Joplin in concert — “he seemed uncomfortable with that.”A version of this review appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Seeing Ol’ Blue Eyes in Shades of Light and Dark.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.