By VIVIEN SCHWEITZERAPRIL 1, 2015
Some musicians take extra care preparing the first bars of a concert’s opening piece, to ensure a flawless start to the evening. It certainly sounded as if the violinist Alexi Kenney had done so at Weill Recital Hall on Tuesday evening, immediately drawing listeners in with his beautifully phrased and delicate playing in the first-movement Allemande of Johann Paul von Westhoff’s Suite No. 2 in A for solo violin.Mr. Kenney’s performance of the suite by Westhoff, a German baroque composer 29 years Bach’s senior, also proved impressive for its elegance and liquid trills and the way he conveyed each movement’s dance elements with characterful flair.Mr. Kenney was presented by the Concert Artists Guild, an organization that promotes and manages young soloists and ensembles. He had an excellent partner in the pianist Renana Gutman, who matched his finesse with playing that was passionate and insightful by turns.The duo concluded the first half of the program with Schumann’s meandering Sonata No. 2, a work of turbulent surges and lyrical interludes rendered here with conviction and dramatic contrast.AdvertisementAs part of the Concert Artists Guild’s commissioning program, which has produced some 100 new works since 1984, the program featured the premiere of Shawn Jaeger’s “Thousands of Years to Make It What It Was,” inspired by a poem by Wendell Berry about a field whose soil eroded after being cleared for farmland. Introducing his piece, Mr. Jaeger described the poem as being about both human error and faith that things will grow again.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The work’s solitary piano notes and spare violin whispers, which evolved into turbulent interludes featuring broad violin strokes over a chaotic dissonant piano accompaniment, certainly suggested uprooting and disconnection. And if not hope, the stark, bleak conclusion vividly depicted the barren aftermath of human interference in nature.The program concluded with a vigorous interpretation of Enescu’s Sonata No. 3 in A minor, enhanced by Mr. Kenney’s rich tone and Ms. Gutman’s vivid partnership.AdvertisementAs an encore, Mr. Kenney offered a virtuosic, gorgeous rendition of Piazzolla’s Tango Etude No. 3. “To be fair to Renana,” he said, they concluded with a duo: the first of Dvorak’s four “Romantic Pieces.”A version of this review appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Liquid Trills, Turbulence and an Ode to the Soil.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.