AdvertisementSupported byBy the NumbersBy Stephen HeymanWhen Gabriele Finaldi, the departing director of the Prado in Madrid, arrives at the National Gallery in London in August, he will be taking over an art museum whose visitor base is in the middle of a rapid transformation. Over the past five years, while the museum’s domestic attendance has remained relatively stagnant, its international visitors have more than doubled in number — from 1.5 million (or 35 percent of all visitors) in 2009 to 3.6 million (or 60 percent) last year.The National Gallery is not the only museum in London that has seen its foreign audience swell to record highs, according to new statistics from the British government’s Department for Culture, Media and Sport. Overseas visitors to the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Natural History Museum, the Royal Armouries and the Horniman Museum have all more than doubled since 2009. The jump in foreign museumgoers is no doubt connected to London’s popularity as a tourist destination; the city now has more overseas visitors than either Paris or New York. But tourism numbers don’t entirely explain why some museums are welcoming droves of new international visitors each year while attendance numbers at others — like the British Museum — have remained comparatively flat. In the case of the National Gallery, location might play a role. The museum has a commanding position in the tourist hub of Trafalgar Square, a focal point for relatively recent citywide events like the Queen’s Jubilee and the Olympics. Mona Walsh, a spokeswoman for the National Gallery, said that while the museum has siphoned off some of the overflow from events like these, it’s also done a better job of raising its profile with major new acquisitions (including works by Titian and George Bellows and blockbuster exhibitions like a 2012 Leonardo da Vinci show). Ms. Walsh said that while the majority of the National Gallery’s audience is no longer British, the character of the museum has not changed. “What has changed is the behavior of the visitor, whether they’re local or from abroad,” Ms. Walsh said. She added that contemporary museumgoers expect “experiences that they can share — either with a friend at the time, or through social media.”Like many major museums, the National Gallery has embraced some cultural shifts while resisting others. Last year, the museum added free wireless Internet in its galleries and started allowing guests to photograph the permanent collection.But the museum’s directors seemed to draw the line at so-called selfie sticks, which some say make art museums less about seeing art than posing around it.Last month, the devices were officially banned from the National Gallery. Advertisement