

      By GILBERT CRUZ, 
    
DAVE ITZKOFF and 
    
KATHRYN SHATTUCK

APRIL 3, 2015

Pop culture artifacts of the 1960s have always figured heavily in “Mad Men,” which ends its seven-season run in May. “All of these things are used for thematic purposes in the story, and for story itself,” said the creator Matthew Weiner in an interview with The New York Times. “Nothing ended up in the show that wasn’t related to story.”

Here is a look at some of the pop culture touchstones featured in “Mad Men,” and how The New York Times originally covered them.
Related Article
The old-guard mainstream begins to feel the first tremors of an oncoming youth culture upheaval.“Submitted for your approval,” says Paul Kinsey, attempting his best Rod Serling as he and Peggy Olson stand outside Pete Campbell’s office door. Peggy expresses a lack of interest in the anthology show, which in the spring of 1960 was more than halfway through its first season. (The episode “A Stop at Willoughby,” about a stressed-out New York ad executive who escapes to a peaceful town in his thoughts, would have aired around this time.) “I’m gonna pretend you didn't say that,” Paul responds. His disbelief at Peggy’s disregard for the show telegraphs his interest in science-fiction, which will culminate in his Season 5 attempt to write a script for a new series called “Star Trek.”Science Fiction New Trend on TV (March 10, 1958)Twilight Zone To Keep Serling (June 7, 1960)After giving Don Draper a $2,500 bonus, Bert Cooper points to his bookshelf and urges him to buy a copy of Ayn Rand's magnum opus: “I believe we are alike. By that I mean you are a productive and reasonable man and in the end, completely self-interested. It’s strength. We are different. Unsentimental about all the people who depend on our hard work.” Later in the episode, Don will make a convincing hard sell to Belle Jolie by being unsentimental about whether they like the pitch or not.Book Review: A Parable of Buried Talents (Oct. 13, 1957)Talk With Ayn Rand (Oct. 13, 1957)As the episode opens, Pete, Harry, Paul and Ken sit in Pete’s office and listen to Bob Newhart’s debut comedy album. “This guy used to be an account man, did you know that?” says Harry, a fact reflected by the album’s multiple bits about advertising — including the first track, “Abe Lincoln vs. Madison Avenue.”Weiner: “Early in the show, I knew that part of what would need to go on was explaining both to the audience and to a character like Pete the difference between his job and the job of creative. The success of Bob Newhart, whose whole persona was based on being a Peter Campbell-like character, was such a great moment for those who dream of more than what they’re doing. It’s the whole idea that accounting is your day job, that maybe it’s a way station before something else.There was also the idea that they’re at work listening to it. Just like when you go to a brokerage house today and see everyone watching the basketball game during the day and you think, ‘What kind of job is this?’ I had heard a story about people sitting around listening to comedy records at work. Probably the way that people are sitting at work today secretly listening to ‘Serial.’ ”New Sick and/or Well Comic (Aug. 7, 1960)When representatives from Israel’s tourism ministry visit Sterling Cooper, one of them pulls out a copy of Leon Uris’s novel about the founding of the Jewish nation. “This book has been on the bestseller list for two years in the States,”  she says. Don consults Rachel Menken, whom he has romantic designs on, for advice. “I don’t know what I can say,”  she responds. “I’m American, I’m really not very Jewish.” In a recent interview, Mr. Weiner teased out parallels between the former Dick Whitman and mid-century American Jews. “Their identity is the same story as Don’s identity,”  Weiner said. “How do we become white? How do I get my kid to go to Wesleyan so he can be in that law firm? What’s it going to take?” The Founding of the New Israel (Oct. 12, 1958)‘Exodus’ and Israel (Oct. 4, 1959)Guiding a Film ‘Exodus’ (April 17, 1960)Most of the office leaves work early and heads over to P.J. Clarke’s, a long-running Manhattan bar, to drink and dance. Everyone goes wild when Chubby Checker’s new hit song, which was released in the summer of 1960, pops up on the jukebox. Everyone but Pete. Glum and pouty, he rejects Peggy’s awkward Twist come-on with a withering, “I don’t like you this way.” Peggy, who moments before had been celebrating the fact that her copy was successfully used in a client pitch, is brought back down to earth. The Twist? ‘It’s Not a Dance’ (Dec. 3, 1961)“The way those men treated that girl, handing her around like a tray of canapés,” Joan Harris says, referring to Shirley MacLaine’s character in “The Apartment,” a Billy Wilder film from 1960, which won the  Academy Award for best picture. Ms. MacLaine plays an elevator operator in a building much like Sterling Cooper's and becomes entangled with several men in the office. Joan, in the midst of an affair with Roger, sees parallels between herself and the character.Weiner: “Bringing that in was part of the philosophy of the show—I didn’t want people to say he’s remaking ‘The Apartment,’ ” says Weiner of the movie in which Shirley MacLaine's elevator operator becomes entangled with several men in an office not unlike Sterling Cooper. “I wanted them to see that we were creating a world where the characters watch ‘The Apartment.’ It’s a satire of the manners of the time. That movie was completely contemporary. How did people feel about it then? Some people didn’t think it was funny. For Roger, it’s just another movie. Roger doesn’t really care, he doesn’t reflect on movies. For Joan it hits close to home.”The Wilder — and Funnier — Touch (Jan. 24, 1960)'Apartment' With View (June 12, 1960)Don continues his
philandering and Peggy tries to break out of her secretarial role. Don goes off the grid for a few days in California and returns to New York just in time for the Cuban Missile Crisis.As Don sits in a bar eating lunch, he glances over and sees someone reading Frank O’Hara’s book of poems. “Is it good?” Don asks. “I don't think you'd like it,” replies the man, seeing Don as nothing but the prototypical man in the gray flannel suit. At episode’s end, we see Don reading from the poem “Mayakovsky” and hear, in voiceover, a particularly resonant phrase: “Now I am quietly waiting for the catastrophe of my personality to seem beautiful again, and interesting, and modern.”Weiner: “That was a magical occurrence. I had studied poetry in college, and I read a lot of poetry, but I did not know Frank O’Hara. My wife took me to an exhibit between the first two seasons at the Museum of the City of New York and they had individually printed pieces of paper where you could read some Frank O’Hara poems. So I had one of these folded up in my pocket and it led me to think that Don, who was experiencing boredom after recommitting himself to his family, runs into this guy who just says he’s a suit, he’s a button-down guy. In my mind, Don bought the book ‘Lunch Poems.’ But that had not come out yet, so we had to use Meditations in an Emergency. I read a little bit of it and said, we’ll use this. It has a great cover, it's very period, it was definitely a popular book.We put it into the episode and then at the end, Kater Gordon, who was the writer's assistant at the time, said, ‘Don’t you think he should read some of it? Don’t you think we should hear it?’ And I had not read the whole book. So I sat down and read that last poem, ‘Mayakovsky,’ and I said 'What? This is the story of the season!' It was exactly related to how Don felt in that episode. I wish I could act like it was planned that way, but it wasn’t.”Two Voices, Two Moods (Nov. 19, 1967)
In this episode, Sterling Cooper finds itself having to search for a  sponsor for the CBS show “The Defenders” after an episode’s references to abortion scares away its initial advertiser. Peggy, who gave up her baby, as we learned in a previous episode, finds herself involved in the campaign.Weiner: “The drama of an unwanted pregnancy was such a part of American popular culture at that time. I just loved it as a resonant story for Peggy, having to sit through it.“The interesting thing to me is always talking about where the American public’s mind is at versus where the conservative nature of advertising and network television is at. I got my hands on the script for ['The Defenders’] before I saw the episode. It was just a great hour of TV. I put it into our script and sent it to the network. And they said ‘I know you’re making a point, but you don’t need to say abortion 47 times, you don’t need to do this. Can you tone it down a little bit, we don’t want to do this.’ And I said, ‘this is a real TV show and it won the Emmy in 1962, I can’t believe we can’t do this in 2008.’ ”'The Defenders' and the Law (Aug. 20, 1961)“He’s all business, isn’t he?” says Rachel Menken, Don’s former mistress, to Bobbie Barrett, his latest, during an awkward encounter at Sardi’s before her husband sweeps her away to see “A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum.” The story line of that Tony-winning Stephen Sondheim musical — about a Roman slave who tries to win his freedom by helping his master get the girl — plays out in the episode when, after the inebriated lovers crash their car, Don summons Peggy to bail him out of jail and asks her to let Bobbie recuperate in her apartment. “I’m sorry but it’s killing me: why are you doing this?” Bobbie asks Peggy, later advising, “You’re never going to get that corner office until you start treating Don as an equal.”Theater: 'A Funny Thing Happened...' (May 9, 1962)“You know he’s going to ask you about the picture,” Paul tells Harry Crane before his meeting with Bert. “Some new painting. He calls people in to see what they think.” That abstract-expressionist study in orange by Mark Rothko, worth $10,000, prompts Jane Siegel, Don’s secretary, to sneak Ken, Harry and Sal Romano into Bert’s office for some after-hour ogling. Speculating on what it’s supposed to mean, each explanation offers a glimpse into that character’s personality — Jane’s smudgy squares, for instance, or Harry’s emperor’s-new-clothes scenario. Then there’s Ken, who insists that maybe you’re just supposed to experience it. “People buy things to realize their aspirations — it’s the foundation of our business,” Bert later says to Harry. “But between you and me and the lamppost, that thing should double in value by next Christmas.”Art: Lecture by Rothko (Oct. 31, 1958)Mark Rothko, Artist, A Suicide Here at 66 (Feb. 26, 1970)A Pure Abstractionist (Feb. 26, 1970)
“Does
he sound like the album?” Peggy wonders of Bob Dylan after learning that designer Kurt Smith saw him at Carnegie Hall where, in a 1962 hootenanny
with Pete Seeger, he performed “A Hard Rain’s Gonna Fall,” a song about nuclear
war, a recurring theme throughout the series. But it’s not a date when Kurt
suggests that Peggy join him at a Dylan concert in Greenwich Village — after
the Sterling Cooper men start making kissy noises, he announces that he’s gay. “I
don’t know why I pick the wrong boys,” Peggy bemoans over a glass of wine when
Kurt comes to pick her up. “You are old style,” he says — before snipping off
her ponytail and bringing her into the ‘60s with a modern haircut.Bob Dylan Appears as an 'Angry Young' Recitalist (October 28, 1963)Sterling Cooper has been bought by a British company. Peggy wants to smoke some marijuana. Don's past comes to light and he, and a small group, leave to start their own agency. John F. Kennedy is assassinated. There is an incident involving a lawnmower.When Pepsi’s new diet soda, Patio Cola, wants an ad that replicates the opening sequence of the film “Bye Bye Birdie,” in which Ann-Margret sings directly to the camera, Sterling Cooper agrees. Frame for frame. Yet, the client is displeased. “It looks right,” Harry says. “It sounds right, it smells right, but something's not right. What is it?” Roger replies simply: “It’s not Ann-Margret.”Weiner: “Advertising is not artistically bold. The techniques that we are exposed to in advertising that seem artistically bold are only there because the people making advertising have to be informed of the cutting edge. All these techniques are developed by people, usually in some other non-commercial context, and then advertising will grab them right away and adapt them.The whole point was to get to the line, ‘It’s not Ann-Margret.’ That one line. I love that as a thematic element in that show. You did everything exactly like that movie. Why didn’t it work? Well, guess what, Ann-Margret has a quality that is bigger than that idea. You can’t just rip it off. It’s like when you hear people reverse engineering stuff now to try to become viral. You can’t create that sometimes.I thought it was fascinating how you couldn’t take your eyes off of her and the mixture of sexuality and adolescence and all the creepy stuff that goes into that opening, which is really shot in a fascinating way — one shot. When I showed it in the writer’s room, a predominantly female environment, especially that season, the reactions were so mixed that I thought, I am on to something here. There were people who said everything you hear on the show. She’s annoying, she’s a teenager, she’s a woman dressed like a little girl, the whole strange, almost perverse image. All of that was fascinating to me.”'Birdie' Over Hollywood' (May 13, 1962) Twice in this episode, we see Betty Draper reading “The Group,” Mary McCarthy’s 1963 bestseller — once in the bath and once at a kitchen table. (She takes a break to snap at her daughter, of course.) The book concerns a group of friends who graduate from Vassar in 1933 (it was then a women’s college) and make their way into the world. We see their successes and failures at work, in their marriages, with their kids. Betty, who graduated from Bryn Mawr and was briefly a model, surely sees echoes of her own many difficulties in the book’s protagonists.Out of Vassar and On The Town (Aug. 25, 1963)The new agency, Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce, is up and running. But Don begins to lose the plot. He drinks more. He does many bad things. Peggy starts to hang with some beatniks and she and Don connect over one long and memorable night. Don takes a stand against tobacco and proposes to his secretary, Megan.
A drunk Lane Pryce, at the movies on New Year’s Eve with an equally 
inebriated Don, breaks into Japanese gibberish when a woman shushes him 
during a showing of “Gamera,” a 1963 Kaiju film starring a giant 
fire-breathing turtle, that was created to compete with the “Godzilla” 
franchise; an American version was released later in 1965. Their movie 
date is only the first stop on a long night in which the two men stomp 
around and raise hell.Old Creatures in New But Familiar Films (May 9, 1956)
“So far I’ve been advised to read ‘The Chrysanthemum and
the Sword,’ ” says Pete when Sterling Cooper decides to go after the Honda
motorcycle account. “From what I can tell, they have their own way of doing
business.” Written by the anthropologist Ruth Benedict in 1946 at the behest of
the United States Office of War Information, the influential (if controversial) book was intended
to help Americans better understand Japanese behavior, particularly during the
postwar Allied occupation. After negotiations with Honda sour, Don
insists that the agency try to win the account by manipulating the other firms
into breaking the rules — and then imply that the Honda executives did not
honor their own guidelines. The outcome: Sterling Cooper gets to work on a new
car.Japan - the Tradition and the Reality: A Review of 'The Chrysanthemum and the Sword' (Nov. 24, 1946)
“I was just saying I think Clay would make one
hell of an ad man,” Stan Rizzo says to Don as Harry doles out tickets to the
Loews Capital Theater for the broadcast of the May 1965 boxing match between Sonny
Liston and Cassius Clay, their second meeting. “You’re right,” Don says. “Give me $100 on Liston.”
(Clay knocked out Liston in the first round.) Don never makes it to the theater after
staying late in the office to work on the Samsonite account — with Peggy, on
her birthday. As the evening wears on, an argument erupts in which she demands
greater recognition. “That’s what the money is for,” he shouts. Later that
night, Don takes a swing at Duck Phillips when Duck calls Peggy a whore.Clay Knocks Out Liston in One Minute (May 26, 1965)Don calls his daughter. He has tickets to see the Beatles on the band’s first trip to Shea Stadium, in 1965. She loses her mind.Weiner: “Don is on the outs with Sally after the divorce. She hates both of her parents, but she’s particularly mad at him. And Don, like many guilty fathers, is trying to win his daughter over.What I love about that moment, besides the fact that we were able to reproduce those tickets, is that Don’s trying to bribe his daughter with the greatest currency in the world, and it completely worked. I don’t know if it was in the script, but when Sally did the scream, Kiernan [Shipka, who plays Sally] totally knew what to do. We knew this would be the reaction. But Betty is equally excited by the idea that this is going to happen. Betty, who has nothing nice to say about Don. Betty smiles, and you’re pretty sure she’s wishing she could go.”55,000 Fill Shea To Hear Beatles (Aug. 16, 1965)Michael Ginsberg makes a jittery entrance. Pete moves to the suburbs and Roger tries LSD for the first time. Joan gives up a piece of herself for the firm and Lane Pryce loses even more. Megan goes back to acting. Apparently, you only live twice.Several versions of the poppy love song “Zou Bisou Bisou,” an exemplar of yé-yé music composed by Bill
Shepherd and Alan Tew with French lyrics by Michel Rivgauche, and whose title
refrain translates as “Oh, kiss kiss,” were released in the 1960s but only
gently caressed the American consciousness. (The most famous is the Gillian Hills version, though there is also a notable English-language version that was sung by Sophia Loren in the 1960 film “The
Millionairess.”) It can be argued that the sultry spin it was given by Megan
Draper as a 40th birthday gift to her husband made a more
lasting impression – and left onlookers like Harry hot under the collar.
Despite Don’s bewilderment, the cover version by Jessica Paré, who plays Megan, was sufficiently popular to
warrant its own release as a single in March 2012. 
England’s newest hit-makers really did perform at what was
then the Forest Hills Tennis Stadium (now the West Side Tennis Club) in Queens on July 2, 1966, as part of an American tour to support the release of
their album “Aftermath.” But Don and Harry didn’t get much satisfaction on
their backstage trip to this concert, on a fool’s errand to see if Allen Klein,
the notorious Stones manager, could be persuaded to let the band cut a jingle for
Heinz baked beans. (“Heinz Is On My Side,” anyone?) Neither Klein nor any of
the band members materialize, and a pair of young Stones fans reminds Don and
Harry that time is not on their side. “None of you want any of us to have a
good time, just ‘cause you never did,” one of them tells Don. “No,” Don
replies, “we’re worried about you.”
5 Rolling Stones Gather Avid Fans (July 4, 1966)Frustrated by a fight with her boyfriend, Abe, and an unsuccessful pitch to Heinz, Peggy leaves work to go to see this 1966 movie about a British couple who raise an orphaned lion cub. There, she encounters a pot-smoking stranger and manually stimulates him in the dark.Weiner: “I loved the idea that in Manhattan, where movies were playing 24 hours a day at that point, you could duck into one for any reason. People had much more of a habit of walking into a movie when it was already going. We loved it because it’s a G-rated movie, as most movies were then, and there’s Peggy in the middle of the day, going in there and having this animal moment, a moment of personal control, a secret moment where we get to see that she’s still a woman with some power in her life, which she’s not feeling it in her job, in her relationships.We often capture this dynamic on the show — when people are powerless in one area of their life, they will take it out in another.” Roar, Lion, Roar - But Don't Bite (June 5, 1966)“You said you didn’t know what was going on,” Megan says as she hands Don a copy of ‘Revolver’ and points to the song list. “Start with this one.” He puts on the psychedelic final track and sits back with a drink. (It’s rare for a Beatles song to be used on a television episode and the show paid about $250,000 for the rights.)Weiner: “The first record I ever had was a Beatles compilation, that red album. It came with the record player my parents bought me for my birthday. When it came to the show I was like how can we possibly be talking about this period without hearing the Beatles. It’s such an elephant in the room. It would be everywhere. It would be constant. That was one of the reasons I fought so hard to get a Beatles song, and ‘Tomorrow Never Knows’ was the perfect one. For me, it was used as an emotional expression — not of Don being behind the times, but of Don losing his romantic fantasy with Megan.”Beatles Manager Here to Quell Storm Over Remark on Jesus (Aug. 6, 1966)This episode takes its
title from the gothic ABC soap opera that ran for more than 1,200 episodes from
1966 to 1971, and which is best remembered for its science-fiction plot lines
and ghoulish monster characters, most notably the undead vampire Barnabas
Collins. (“Dark Shadows” is worst remembered for the
campy Tim Burton film, a dud that, by coincidence, opened the same
weekend this episode was originally shown.) Megan, who is seen helping her
friend Julia get ready for her “Dark Shadows” audition, mocks the
show, but an ensuing argument about her cossetted life causes Megan to
go all in on her acting career. The path it leads her on, it would seem,
eventually puts a stake in the heart of her marriage to Don. 
More About Vampire Frid (December 29, 1968)As Pete heads into the city on his morning commute, he reads Thomas Pynchon’s second novel, “The Crying of Lot 49,”  about a housewife named Oedipa Maas who discovers what might be a giant conspiracy. The story's through line, of a woman stretching out past her formerly prescribed boundaries, is echoed in the episode in two plots: Megan’s desire to leave the agency and begin acting again and the sexual overture made by Beth, the wife of Pete’s fellow commuter, to Pete after she tells him about her failing marriage.Book Review: 'The Crying of Lot 49' (June 3, 1966)Things are getting chaotic. Martin Luther King Jr. is assassinated and there are protests in Chicago. Peggy stabs her boyfriend and a bunch of people at the agency are injected with drugs. Bob Benson appears out of nowhere. Many people are having affairs. The ’60s are winding down.“It’s just filled with profanity, marijuana smoking, and simulated sexual acts ... and a few songs,” Pete says of the Broadway musical “Hair” to his suburban neighbors, one of whom he ends up having an affair with. Credited with being the first rock musical, and the first non-Shakespeare offering presented by Joseph Papp at the Public Theater, “Hair” tells the story of some sexually liberated New York hippies fighting conscription into the Vietnam War. Hippie culture and the sexual revolution are both making their way into the lives of the show's characters.'Hair' - It's Fresh and Frank (April 30, 1968)“Johnny and Joan — Bonnie and Clyde,” a man says before kissing Joan in a psychedelic club to the strains of Serge Gainsbourg and Brigitte Bardot’s song “Bonnie and Clyde.” On the sofa next to them, Joan’s out-of-town friend Kate, makes out with another guy. Inspired by the film of the same title, Gainsbourg composed the song around “The Trail’s End,” a poem written by Bonnie Parker not long before she and Clyde Barrow were shot to death in a police ambush. “I’m really not you, am I?” Kate — mascara smudged and lipstick smeared — says the next morning, leading Joan to reveal that 15 years later, the men in the firm still treat her like a secretary. “What’s it have to do with them?” Kate replies. “I don’t care how they make you feel. It’s right in front of you for the taking.”Record Companies Are Plugging 'Bonnie and Clyde' (March 11, 1968)Don and his son Bobby go to see “Planet of the Apes” the day after Martin Luther King Jr. is assassinated and Bobby experiences a moment of sadness for one of the theater’s ushers.Weiner: “Bobby recognizes that this African-American man working in the movie theater the day after M.L.K.’s been killed has got to be feeling something. Seeing your child having any empathy for another human being is exciting. It really is.We see how Don responds to these historic moments. Megan’s in the park crying at the vigil and Don just doesn’t want to think about it. That’s part of his survival skills. And he takes Bobby to see this mind-blowing movie. It’s written by Rod Serling, who I love. It should not be lost that this movie was so clearly a racial critique of the United States. Serling, coming from that 50s tradition, is constantly reinforcing this political agenda.I feel guilty about having spoiled the movie, but the statute of limitations might be up on that.”The Apes, the Fox, and Charlie Bubbles (Feb. 25, 1968)For a good while, Bob Benson — always ready with that extra cup of coffee — was the most enigmatic character on “Mad Men.” It was eventually revealed that he was a social climber with a made-up past. Here he listens to a recorded version of Frank Bettger’s best-selling self-help book.Weiner: “I have a great interest in self-help. The Don Draper story, to me, is a story of self-made people. Bob Benson was created as a parallel to Don. A man who invented himself. I collected a lot of things while I was doing research before the show existed. And I bought these albums at a garage sale. They were unopened, so whoever bought them did not benefit from them. I said, ‘We gotta put this in there. And it can’t be in there as kitsch. Because someone like Bob believes in this.’It could have been Dale Carnegie, who was a very important part of business culture from the 50s on. But if you think Tony Robbins is a joke, you’ll think that record is a joke. Believe it or not, though, that kind of practical advice or psychological advice is a big part of success for some people.”New Editions on the Business Bookshelf (Feb. 7, 1955)“That was really, really scary,” Megan says as the lights go up after the film “Rosemary's Baby,” in which Mia Farrow stars as a New Yorker who gives birth to Satan’s spawn. “It was disturbing,” Don agrees. Then they spy Peggy and Ted Chaough, who say they’re doing research for a St. Joseph’s baby aspirin advertisement based on the film. Later, when the client challenges the ad’s exorbitant budget, Don credits the idea — a takeoff on the famous scene in which the coven in Rosemary’s Upper West Side building stands around the baby’s cradle — as Frank Gleason’s last. He then privately accuses Ted of letting his love for Peggy impair his judgment. “You killed him, you killed the ad, you killed everything,” says Peggy after storming into Don's office. “You’re a monster.”The Screen: 'Rosemary's Baby,' a Story of Fantasy and Horror (June 13, 1968)The ’70s are just around the corner. Roger tries his hand at group relationships and men are about to walk on the moon. Bert reminds Don that the best things in life are free.Back-to-back Season 7 episodes made references both subtle and explicit to Stanley Kubrick’s mysterious cosmic film, “2001: A Space Odyssey,” which had been released in April 1968, the year before the events of this season. In “The Monolith,” Don walks into the office one morning (past a door that looks incredibly like the similarly titled object from Kubrick’s film) to discover everyone at the announcement of a new computer that will be installed — shades of HAL 9000. Roger Sterling utters the line, “He spent three weeks alone in that cave and he hasn’t clubbed another ape yet” — a nod to the film’s prehistoric opening sequence. And then, in a blatant visual nod to the film, Michael Ginsberg tries to read lips as Lou and Jim Cutler plot away. (See above.)In 2001, Will Love Be a Seven-Letter Word? (April 14, 1968)‘2001’ and ‘Hair’ – Are They The Groove of the Future? (May 12, 1968)On Seeing ‘2001’ a Second Time (Sept. 22, 1968)There are few instances where Lou, the office’s bad-tempered,
petty tyrant, is worthy of
anyone’s sympathy. But one might feel a twinge of guilt for laughing at him, as
his subordinates do, when his goofy drawings for a cartoon called
“Scout’s Honor” – about a clumsy monkey who joins the military – are
found on a copy machine. An embarrassed Lou doesn’t get the last laugh. But
he does make the point that another popular cartoon of the day, “Underdog,”
makes “hundreds of thousands of dollars a year” for the advertising executive
Chet Stover, who helped create the cartoon. The real-life Stover, a copywriter at the
firm Dancer Fitzgerald Sample, dreamed up “Underdog” – a pooch who took energy
pills to transform from a shoeshine boy to a superhero – with W. Watts Biggers,
an account manager and colleague. The character, designed to sell General Mills
cereals, was the star of his own animated TV series that ran from 1964 through the
1970s.  
For Super Heroes, New Frontiers (March 20, 1966)Hours before a crucial pitch for Burger Chef, when Don and Peggy have scrapped a long-in-the-works campaign and Peggy has intrepidly spun out a new and even better concept, Frank Sinatra’s then-new version of this Paul Anka anthem comes on the radio. Don invites Peggy to join him in a sentimental slow dance. The parallels between Don and Sinatra – both seemingly past their prime but not yet ready for the scrap heap – are intentional. When “My Way” was released in 1969, Jon Hamm said, Sinatra was “another person who’s a vestige of this older generation, on his quote-unquote last legs. And that song was a huge hit. Here’s Frank Sinatra, this old-guard crooner, who is still relevant. It’s a song that asks, ‘What is a man, what has he got? If not himself, then he has naught.’ It’s laden with meaning for these people.”Sinatra Bows Out Sotto Voce (June 15, 1971)“Is that all there is to a fire?” the singer Peggy Lee asks as Don watches a beautiful woman stroke her bare skin while wrapped in chinchilla. “If that’s all there is my friends, then let’s keep dancing. Let’s break out the booze and have a ball.” For a while Matthew Weiner considered using “Is That All There Is?” as the theme song for “Mad Men.” Then he learned that the Leiber and Stoller tune — which drew inspiration from “Disillusionment,” a 1896 Thomas Mann novella, and earned Ms. Lee, one of several artists to cover it, a Grammy for best female pop vocal performance — came out in the late ‘60s. “The sentiment is very symbolic of the end of a decade that saw material success coupled with life and death,” Mr. Weiner said in a New York magazine interview. It also serves as the perfect backdrop for Don’s encroaching disillusionment with his own life. Peggy Lee Is Still On Top — Is That All There Is? (April 26, 1970)
 “We can’t get mad at her for being independent — it’s normal,” Betty says to Don about Sally. “Is that what Freud says?” he asks, eying the copy of “Dora: An Analysis of a Case of Hysteria” she’s reading at her kitchen table. “Mmm, so far I haven’t come across anyone normal,” Betty replies with a faint smile. “Mad Men” was nothing if not Freudian — the first episode invoked the psychoanalyst’s death drive theory to rationalize Americans’ unwillingness to give up cigarettes. And nowhere was that drive more keenly conceived than in Don Draper, who essentially "killed" Dick Whitman and assumed the identity of a dead lieutenant during the Korean War. The hysteria of Freud’s Dora manifested itself in the loss of her voice, which in this episode resonates for Betty, Peggy and especially Joan, who watches the status she fought for come crashing down amid the casual sexism in the McCann Erickson offices. Produced by JEREMY EGNER, MATT RUBY and RUMSEY TAYLOR. This interview has been edited and condensed.When “Mad Men” debuted on AMC on July 19, 2007, it was impossible to predict how influential the show would eventually become.AdvertisementWhen “Mad Men” debuted on AMC on July 19, 2007, it was impossible to predict how influential the show would eventually become.