The lawyer for the author Harper Lee, Tonja B. Carter, received notice on Friday that an investigation by Alabama officials into whether Ms. Lee, 88, and confined to an assisted living facility, was manipulated into publishing a second novel has been closed and no evidence of abuse or neglect had been found.Bobby Segall, a lawyer for Ms. Carter, confirmed receipt of the letter, which was dated April 1 and sent by the State Department of Human Resources, the agency that has led the inquiry into whether Ms. Lee was coerced into agreeing to publish a sequel to “To Kill a Mockingbird” this summer. Mr. Segall said that neither Ms. Carter nor he had any further comment. The inquiry was begun in response to at least one anonymous complaint brought to state officials. A spokesman for the Human Resources Department, Barry Spear, said that the agency had wrapped up its investigation and sent Ms. Carter a letter, but he said that he was prohibited by law from discussing the inquiry’s findings.Word of the state’s determination comes several weeks after an agency that assisted in the investigation, the Alabama Securities Commission, announced it had ended its role in the inquiry. The commission, among other things, tries to prevent financial fraud of the elderly.At the time, the commission’s director, Joseph Borg, said his investigators had interviewed Ms. Lee and found “she has opinions and seems to be aware of what is going on with her book and the book deal.” In Monroeville, Ala., Ms. Lee’s hometown, and elsewhere, some of her friends and acquaintances have said they are concerned as to whether the author is lucid enough to have agreed to the publication of the recently discovered manuscript, “Go Set a Watchman,” now set for July from HarperCollins. She had long said she was happy to have just published the single book. Ms. Lee suffered a stroke in 2007 and has severe hearing and vision problems. A version of this article appears in print on 04/04/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Harper Lee Inquiry Finds No Abuse.