Wael Shawky: Crusades and Other Stories
Mathaf: Arab Museum of Modern Art.
Through Aug. 16.The Egyptian artist Wael Shawky (born 1971) spent four years filming “Cabaret Crusades,” a film trilogy that retells Amin Maalouf’s 1983 book “The Crusades Through Arab Eyes” using hundreds of puppets. The trilogy will screen alongside another movie series he made, “Al Araba Al Madfuna,” based on parables by the Egyptian novelist Mohamed Mustagab. A number of sketches and puppets that Mr. Shawky used to film his crusades trilogy are also on view.Defining Beauty: The Body in Ancient Greek Art
British Museum.
Through July 5.Marble, bronze and terra-cotta renderings of the human form appear in this exhibition, which explores the body in Greek sculpture and in some later imitators. The show comprises about 150 works. The presentation also includes six of the so-called Elgin Marbles from the museum’s Parthenon gallery. Last month, the museum rejected the Greek government’s appeal to enter into a formal United Nations-sponsored mediation process over the marbles, which Greece maintains were looted by the British in the 19th century. A Golden Age of China: Qianlong Emperor, 1736–1795
National Gallery of Victoria.
Through June 21.The Qianlong Emperor ruled China for much of the 18th century, guiding the empire through a period of unprecedented wealth and a major population boom. The emperor was also an enthusiastic art collector. This exhibition brings together many of the works he gathered, which now belong to the Palace Museum in Beijing. They include textiles, vases, paintings and works in ink, primarily by Chinese artists of the era.A selection of arts events taking place across the world in the coming week.Zhao Gang: The Road to Serfdom
Ullens Center for Contemporary Art.
Through May 31.The artist Zhao Gang (born 1961) was part of the collective of Chinese artists who in 1979 staged a public protest art display, placing their works outside of the state-sanctioned art galleries that refused to show them. Since then, he has lived and traveled in Europe and the United States, where he focused primarily on painting and photography, before moving back to Beijing in the early 2000s. This exhibition presents a new series that combines portraits of China’s early 20th-century intelligentsia with paintings he made of their homes. “The Chinese Photobook,” an exhibition about the history of Chinese photography books, also runs here through May. Erwin Wurm. Fichte
Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg.
Through Sept. 13.A forest of trees hanging upside down from the ceiling and a sausage-shaped truck where patrons can buy the popular German street snack currywurst are among the works by the Austrian artist (born 1954) in this solo exhibition. Designed for the Kunsthalle’s airy exhibition space, the display shows a number of Mr. Wurm’s droll installation pieces, including several riffs on Marcel Duchamp’s urinal artwork, “Fountain.” Snowbombing
Various venues.
Monday through Saturday.The actor Idris Elba, who performs as a D.J. under the pseudonym Driis, will spin tracks late into the night at a mountaintop concert in an igloo here. Over 100 acts are scheduled at venues spread across this winter resort town. Other major names include the American D.J. Skrillex, the German house group Modeselektor and the producer Anja Schneider. This weekend a group of enthusiastic festivalgoers plans to travel in a convoy of 150 cars from Britain to the festival site.Michael Joaquin Grey: My Lagerstätte
Chronus Art Center.
Through May 1.For more than two decades, the American artist Grey (born 1961) has made artworks that explore the relationship between science and art. Several of his film works will show in this exhibition, including “Umwelt Belt,” a video piece in which a solar system full of technological products orbit like planets. Another work, “The Sanctuary Orrery,” juxtaposes images of outer space with 20th-century cultural sound bites. The exhibition initiates a new series of monthlong exhibitions focusing on experimental film. Macbeth
Dutch National Opera.
Through April 28.Andrea Breth, the former director of the Burgtheater Wien, will show her new take on Verdi’s “Macbeth” in a staging that features eerie touches like a chorus decked out in distorted silicone masks. The baritone Scott Hendricks will sing the title role. Marc Albrecht, who collaborated with Ms. Breth on a 2013 production of Prokofiev’s “The Gambler” here, will conduct. Aida
Sydney Harbor.
Through April 26.Latonia Moore and Daria Masiero trade off performances of the title role in this world premiere production of Verdi’s opera about the princess of Egypt’s doomed slave. The production, directed by Gale Edwards and conducted by Brian Castles-Onion, takes place on an outdoor stage adorned with a giant head of Nefertiti overlooking the city’s harbor. The set and costume designs are by Mark Thompson. 