By KATHRYN SHATTUCKAPRIL 3, 2015
9 P.M. (13) BILLY PORTER: BROADWAY AND SOUL Mr. Porter — who won several awards as the drag queen Lola, above, in the Broadway musical “Kinky Boots” — performs jazz-inflected standards from the American Songbook in this “Live From Lincoln Center” presentation. As he transformed “Take the Moment,” an obscure song from the Richard Rodgers-Stephen Sondheim musical “Do I Hear a Waltz?,” into a pop-gospel plea, “his performance created the kind of epiphany that a great voice can conjure out of thin air,” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times. “The key lay not only in Mr. Porter’s innate vocal power but also in his commitment to shoot the moon, no matter the consequences.” But the evening’s coup was his reinvention of “Sunday,” from “Sunday in the Park With George,” as a church anthem, fusing Broadway and gospel traditions. “It was the kind of juxtaposition that probably only Mr. Porter could have pulled off,” Mr. Holden added, “and it struck deep.” In “Annie Lennox: Nostalgia Live in Concert,” at 10, Ms. Lennox puts her own spin on the genre with “Summertime,” “Strange Fruit,” “God Bless the Child” and other works in a “Great Performances” presentation taped at the Orpheum Theater in Los Angeles.8 A.M. (CUNY) TIMESTALKS Larry David speaks with Charles McGrath, a writer at large for The Times, about “Fish in the Dark,” Mr. David’s Broadway show.8 P.M. (Fox News) KILLING JESUS This special, based on the book by Bill O’Reilly and Martin Dugard, and previously broadcast on the National Geographic Channel, examines the political climate during the time of Jesus, who is played here by Haaz Sleiman. The Roman Empire goes to great lengths to quash threats to its power. Pontius Pilate (Stephen Moyer) and King Herod (Kelsey Grammer) begin to see Jesus as a rebel and political enemy.8 P.M. (Pop) NO RESERVATIONS (2007) Catherine Zeta-Jones portrays Kate, a New York chef whose world is upended when she becomes the guardian of her niece, Zoe (Abigail Breslin), in this remake of the German film “Mostly Martha.” Kate and Zoe fall for Nick (Aaron Eckhart, left with Ms. Zeta-Jones), an opera-blasting rebel sous-chef with a pickup truck and good parental skills. “Make no mistake: ‘No Reservations’ is a factory-sealed romantic comedy,” Matt Zoller Seitz wrote in The Times. “But the emotional details of Kate, Nick and Zoe’s journey are surprising, honest and life size, and the film’s determination to present their predicament sympathetically, without appealing to retrograde ideals of femininity and motherhood, makes it notable.”Advertisement1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK The historian Robert Kimball and the director Rob Fisher discuss George Gershwin and the coming Broadway production of “An American in Paris,” based on Gershwin’s 1928 symphonic poem and the Oscar-winning 1951 movie. Also, a tribute to the restaurateur Jean-Claude Baker, who died in January, and his foster mother, Josephine Baker.What’s Streaming NowDEREK In this special, Ricky Gervais bids farewell to his character Derek Noakes, a tenderhearted if slow-witted nursing home volunteer in love with his job and those around him, in this hourlong series finale. Kerry Godliman plays Hannah, a worker in the home and Derek’s best friend; Brett Goldstein is Tom, her boyfriend; and Vicky Hall is Tracy, the woman Derek loves. Season 1 and 2 are also available for streaming. (netflix.com)AdvertisementGHOST TOWN (2008) Ricky Gervais, below, is Bertram Pincus, a misanthropic Manhattan dentist who sees spirits after having a near-death experience during a colonoscopy. Greg Kinnear plays Frank Herlihy, a two-timing yuppie who was hit by a bus while avoiding a falling air-conditioner. And Téa Leoni is Frank’s widow, Gwen, whom he wants Bertram to befriend and prevent from remarrying. She hates Bertram, and then she doesn’t. “A latter-day hybrid of ‘Topper’ and ‘Blithe Spirit’ and a visual ode to autumn in New York, ‘Ghost Town’ is a screwball comedy with no big surprises or hidden metaphors,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times about this romantic froth, directed by David Koepp. But instead of becoming “mired in sentimentality like flies in molasses,” the film “tiptoes to the edge of that sticky mess, but it doesn’t get caught there.” (iTunes) KATHRYN SHATTUCKA version of this schedule appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page C19 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.