AdvertisementSupported byBy Vivien SchweitzerEclecticism has always been a dominant feature of the music of the composer and percussionist Lukas Ligeti. In the last decade his recorded output has included “Mystery System,” which revealed his fascination with the polyphony of sub-Saharan African music, as well as releases with his irresistible Burkina Electric, a band that meshes dance-oriented electronica with the traditional music of Burkina Faso.In more recent discs, the classically trained Mr. Ligeti has explored different elements with his new jazz-rock band, Hypercolor, described as “experimental grafting surgery gone horribly awry” and influenced by 1980s No-Wave and orchestral rock textures. His “Imaginary Images” album features improvisations with the pianist Thollem McDonas. Mr. Ligeti, who turns 50 in June and is the son of the composer Gyorgy Ligeti, has been showcasing his disparate interests in a weeklong residency at the Stone in the East Village, performing there as percussionist in a range of his works.On Wednesday night the early set featured works Mr. Ligeti wrote for this event and his two collaborators, the pianist Marilyn Crispell and the violinist Michelle Makarski. It was billed as a “perhaps slightly introspective side” of his residency.None of the pieces resonated with me like some of Mr. Ligeti’s earlier works. But there were certainly introspective elements, like the misty tones produced when he used a bow to gently saw the sides of a xylophone during an enigmatic interlude in the second work, a free improvisation that began with Ms. Makarski’s wailing fiddle. In another improvised part of the program, Mr. Ligeti created intriguing textures by rubbing his mallets against the cymbals. In “#2,” which concluded the set, he used a bow against the cymbals to elicit eerie sonorities after mournful passages by Ms. Makarski took on a more agitated hue.“Time Machine Passacaglia” featured a wild panoply of sounds, from the baroque-tinged opening and Ms. Crispell’s jazz solo, to brash violin slides over declamatory piano chords.Lukas Ligeti performs through Sunday at the Stone, Avenue C and Second Street, East Village; thestonenyc.com. Advertisement