AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike HaleThe BBC mini-series “Wolf Hall,” beginning on Sunday night on PBS, is a historical drama of conspicuous quality, like one of the shimmering tapestries hanging in the castles where its 16th-century power players hatch their schemes.Based on not one but two Booker Prize-winning novels, and starring Mark Rylance, one of the great stage actors of our time, it’s acutely intelligent, luxuriously dressed and well acted across the board. It’s also notably serious and quiet, despite the occasional beheading or session on the rack required by a tale involving Thomas Cromwell, Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn.Its virtues are so obvious that raising a few red flags seems more churlish than usual. Fans of costume drama, and of “Wolf Hall” and “Bring Up the Bodies,” the Hilary Mantel novels on which it is based, are likely to be overwhelmingly pleased with this six-episode series. The reviews in Britain  were of a rapturousness not seen since “Downton Abbey.”But let’s note, if only for the record, that there’s something the tiniest bit dull at its core. This isn’t because Ms. Mantel’s story, as adapted by Peter Straughan (a writer of the excellent screenplay for “Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy”), focuses on court intrigue and whispered conversations at the expense of swashbuckling action.Rather, it has something to do with how the emotional and psychological underpinnings of the narrative don’t resonate as strongly as its ideas about history and governance. The sketchy motivations involving cruel fathers and sexual jealousy aren’t that far removed from the sort of costumed potboilers like “The Tudors” and “The White Queen” that “Wolf Hall” is careful to distinguish itself from.There’s also the matter of Peter Kosminsky’s direction. It’s tasteful and efficient and always keeps the story legible, but over six hours you can’t escape how prosaic it is — Mr. Kosminsky, best known in the United States for the film “White Oleander,” often stages the show’s crucial conversations like talking-heads scenes from a documentary that happens to be shot with a ravishing candlelit chiaroscuro. (The lovely cinematography is by Gavin Finney.)Finally, there’s Mr. Rylance’s dominating (he’s practically always on screen), in some ways mesmerizing, performance as Cromwell, the 16th-century lawyer and royal counselor. Despite the popularity of Ms. Mantel’s novels and the fastidious majesty of the production, the biggest appeal of “Wolf Hall” is that Mr. Rylance is rarely seen on American television. And his intensely self-contained, watchful performance as a man who spends all his time observing others, the better to manipulate them, is indeed sufficient reason to watch.But there is, eventually, something disappointing about the character itself, which is not Mr. Rylance’s fault. The basic dramatic device of “Wolf Hall” is to imagine Cromwell as a proto-modern — the original fixer, forerunner of Olivia Pope and Ray Donovan, the man who can keep a country running while disposing of inconvenient queens who fail to bear sons. As a blacksmith’s boy risen through guile and talent to become the adviser of kings, he also has to practice a heroic self-restraint to protect himself in a milieu in which any careless word can result in the loss of your head.Mr. Rylance communicates this by centering his performance on his wonderfully expressive, baleful eyes, which often seem to be the only things moving on-screen — darting from king to duke to cardinal to mistress, seeing many moves ahead in the deadly chess game of royal politics, matrimony and childbearing. He’s an island of quiet concentration, around which a number of other fine actors are allowed to make more noise, notably Damian Lewis as the endearingly, murderously narcissistic Henry, and Anton Lesser as the tragically principled Thomas More. Cromwell, in Mr. Rylance’s hands, is absolutely believable from moment to moment, but in the long run he’s a little hard to figure. We need to sympathize with him for the drama to work, and the script supplies indications (trembling hands after a confrontation with Henry, slightly cheesy flashbacks to his abuse at the hands of his father) of the toll life has exacted on him. But we never really get an understanding of how he reconciles himself to the horrific tasks he carries out. He explains it — the needs of the country and the king come first — but there’s still something missing.Another adaptation of Ms. Mantel’s novels, the Royal Shakespeare Company’s two-part, five-and-a-half-hour “Wolf Hall” stage production, which is in previews in New York, takes an almost opposite approach to the material — it’s a high-energy, dizzyingly paced school pageant of a play that cherry-picks the sex and scandal and goes for every low laugh possible. You’d never say that it’s as good as the TV version, but you might have to admit that it’s equal, or maybe even superior, entertainment.Advertisement