By ALASTAIR MACAULAYAPRIL 2, 2015
As a dancer, Rashaun Mitchell has always given powerfully dramatic colorings to his roles: In his illustrious years with the Merce Cunningham Dance Company (2004-11), above all, he could show feral intensity, quiet sophistication, exploratory innocence, glinting mystery. This March, at Danspace at St. Marks Church, in a shared program, he was an electrifying mover and a vivid theatrical presence. He is an actor, but at a level at which you don’t see the acting.In “Light Years,” a 55-minute piece he choreographed, which opened on Wednesday evening at New York Live Arts, you do see the acting but you don’t see him: It’s a weaker piece on both counts. A dance quartet, with elaborate costumes, it strongly suggests role-playing and the acting out of changing relationships, with a hefty dollop of imaginative weirdness. Characters include a knight in shining armor, a dreaming girl daubed in woad (the blue dye ancient Britons applied to their bodies) and a couple of wild children whose antics suggest tribal behavior. But the dramatic side is only intermittently engaging.And dance is of secondary interest, despite some memorable images and the excellent level of execution. Three of the four performers — Cori Kresge, Silas Riener and Melissa Toogood — are well-known New York dancers (Mr. Riener and Ms. Toogood joined the Merce Cunningham Dance Company in the last two years of Cunningham’s life); the fourth is Hiroki Ichinose. They all share a gift for focus, but Ms. Kresge and Ms. Toogood are also exponents of the pointedly widened-eye school of acting, not just registering each situation facially but also registering that they’re showing us that they’re registering, while Mr. Riener, always sly, is somewhat arch. This, coupled with the slow evolution of the scenario, keeps us on the cusp of melodrama.The knightly armor worn by Mr. Ichinose is marvelously dance-friendly; the rippling undulations that pass through him stay in the memory. So do the constant shifts of balance in Ms. Kresge’s chief solo, in which she, on one leg or another, addresses her torso, face and raised limbs to the sky. (She’s the one extensively daubed in woad.)AdvertisementMs. Toogood wears brightly jungle chic with palm fronds attached; Mr. Riener begins dressed only in a loincloth, and later dons a more modest brown two-piece outfit. Part of the theatricality of any show with Mr. Riener is how he wears his long, dark, full hair; in “Light Years” he lets it flow past his shoulders, like the young Mark Morris.The most remarkable feature of “Light Years” is its lost-in-space feeling. It begins with Mr. Riener circumnavigating a slowly expanding point of light on the floor; in the half-light, he every so often emphatically changes his gait. There and in his ensuing duet with Ms. Toogood, we’re on this earth. But in much of what follows, stage space and dynamics are fluid, as if we’re floating elsewhere. And the intensely costumed differentiation of the characters makes all this surreal.Advertisement“Light Years” develops too slowly and continually borders on preciosity; the dramatic aspects of its costuming are far more specific than their counterparts in the choreography. A duet in which Mr. Ichinose and Mr. Riener go through a series of semiacrobatic partnering moves advances their relationship, but so what? Despite individually striking positions, it’s not of much consequence. The same applies throughout. Nothing is at stake. There were warm cheers at the end — these dancers deserve no less — but it’s fair to have hoped for something more eventful as dance and/or theater.“Light Years” will be performed through Saturday at New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org.A version of this review appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page C10 of the New York edition with the headline: Surreal Yet Supple.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.