AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurel GraeberNanoDays“It’s the little things that count.”Your parents may have told you that, but nanotechnology proves it. On Saturday, children can prove it themselves when the Sony Wonder Technology Lab presents its annual NanoDays, a large celebration, and investigation, of tiny particles. This free festival is part of NanoDays nationwide, a series of events by researchers and institutions in the NISE Network, which stands for Nanoscale Informal Science Education.Nanoscale “is essentially the atomic scale,” said Corrine Doron, the lab’s senior manager of programs. Its unit of measurement, a nanometer, is one-billionth of a meter. “The reason it’s so important,” she said of nanotechnology, “is that it closely affects materials science, so it affects products.”But nature practices nanotechnology, too. At the lab, children will pour water on the leaves of cabbage, kale and elephant ear plants. It beads and rolls off because of a nanoscale waxy layer that repels liquids and even dirt. The clothing industry has adapted this botanical engineering, known as the lotus effect, to develop stain-resistant pants.“They have a nano coating,” Ms. Doron said. “We have two small samples, one that has the coating and one that doesn’t.”What also makes nanotechnology fascinating is that a substance at the nano scale often behaves differently — or more powerfully — from the way it does at the macro scale. Take graphite, or ordinary pencil lead.“Graphene is graphite broken down to a smaller layer, a single layer of carbon atoms,” Ms. Doron said. Stronger than diamonds, it’s peerless at conducting electricity. Children can get an idea of its potential on Saturday in an activity that involves rubbing a pencil on a sheet of paper, then using that pencil smudge to complete an electrical circuit that turns on a buzzer or a small LED.But of all the day’s experiments, recommended for children 6 and older, one has special appeal. “All kids love the idea of possibly being invisible,” Ms. Doron said. In this demonstration, a borosilicate glass bead becomes undetectable in a beaker of baby oil because light travels through both substances at about the same speed. “They’re trying to create material at the nanoscale that will allow things to become invisible to our eyes,” she said, adding that this raises ethical implications that program participants will discuss. “It could be kind of cool, and it could be dangerous.”Because if God is in the details, the Devil might be, too.(From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., 550 Madison Avenue, at 56th Street, 212-833-8100, sonywondertechlab.com.) LAUREL GRAEBERFor Children‘The Amazing Max’ (Monday through Thursday) Max Darwin, a.k.a. the Amazing Max, may come across like the M.C. at a raucous bar mitzvah party, but he does know his craft. In this hourlong magic performance, back for a brief run, he performs feats like mind reading, making objects disappear and then reappear, and sending coins raining from various parts of the body. The show includes lots of audience participation. (Through April 11.) At 1 p.m., the McGinn/Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 866-811-4111, theamazingmax.com.‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Monday, Tuesday and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays; closed this Sunday for Passover; 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org.‘The Bully’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company has revived this ever-topical musical, by John Gregor and David L. Williams, which refreshingly avoids the trap of bullying its own audiences with heavy moralizing. Instead, the many pitfalls of the typical middle school relationship of victimizer and victim are revealed through wit, humor and a killer of a sly twist. (Through April 26.) At 3:30 p.m., McGinn-Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor; 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org. ‘Camp Kappawanna’ (Saturday and Sunday) This fresh and funny new musical from Atlantic for Kids, a division of the Atlantic Theater Company, focuses on a pivotal first summer at camp for the shy heroine, Jenny (Mara Measor), who tends to hide behind Lou, her guitar. The plot involves a contest with a rival camp and plenty of middle school antics. Ms. Measor and the creative team, which includes the Grammy-nominated singer and songwriter Lisa Loeb, excel at making Jenny believable as both an unpolished musician and a budding talent: Maybe this is how Liz Phair sounded at 12. (Through April 12.) At 10:30 a.m., Linda Gross Theater, 336 West 20th Street, Chelsea; 866-811-4111, atlantictheater.org.‘Catch Me!’ (Friday through Sunday, and Wednesday and Thursday) Flip FabriQue is the French Canadian troupe performing this circus show at the New Victory Theater, and you’d better believe that its members do a lot of catching: They fly through the air as acrobats, aerialists and athletes. They also literally bounce off the walls: One of their signature acts combines a vertical surface and a trampoline. (Through April 19.) At noon, with additional 5 p.m. shows on Saturday and Sunday, 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org.‘Celebrate Earth Week’ (Friday through Thursday) What better way to celebrate the earth than by taking care of it? In this spring break festival at the Brooklyn Children’s Museum, little visitors will learn all about environmentalism. Each day is packed with programs, but some of the highlights include “Enchantments of the Earth,” on Saturday at 2 p.m., when guests will plant seeds as part of a site-specific art project; screenings of ecologically themed episodes of the PBS children’s show “Cyberchase,” Saturday through Monday at 1, 2 and 3 p.m.; “Chickens in the Garden!,” a chance to meet an urban farmer and her brood of hens, Wednesday from noon to 3 p.m.; and “Butterfly Boogie,” an insect-themed performance by Wildlife Theater, part of the Wildlife Conservation Society, on Thursday at 2 p.m. Daily activities will include making art from trash and learning about ocean species through a touch tank. (Through April 12.) Open daily from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., 145 Brooklyn Avenue, at St. Mark’s Avenue, Crown Heights, 718-735-4400, brooklynkids.org.‘Dig! Plant! Grow!: Wake Up, Garden!’  (Saturday through Thursday ) No garden could stay asleep after all that exhortation. In the Ruth Rea Howell Family Garden at the New York Botanical Garden, children will help get things up and growing by sowing seeds, planting seedlings and spreading compost; they can also observe germinating seeds through magnifiers and microscopes. For a different take on outdoor exploration, the Bronx Arts Ensemble will present “Hansel and Gretel” on Saturday only. In this interactive concert, at noon and 1:30 p.m. in the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden, young visitors can become acquainted with the instruments of the orchestra at the same time that the piece’s hapless hero and heroine encounter the wicked witch. (“Dig! Plant! Grow!” programs run through May 3.) New York Botanical Garden, Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, Bedford Park, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org. (Search under calendar).Easter Egg Hunt (Saturday and Sunday) You don’t often find eggs in a museum, unless they’re made by Fabergé. But eggs can be discovered high and low this weekend at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. Little visitors will search for them in the form of symbols inscribed with favorite museum characters. Those who record the locations in a scavenger hunt booklet will be able to claim prizes: plastic eggs filled with Easter stickers. From 10 a.m. to 4:45 p.m., Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.Eco Fair (Saturday and Sunday) This family art project at Wave Hill, the public garden in the Bronx, will involve seeing the unusual in the ordinary. Children will make nature-inspired crafts from recycled materials, turning an old CD into a plastic flower, metal zippers into whimsical insects and bottle caps into a board game. They can also create Earth Day pins from recycled jar tops. From 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., Wave Hill House, West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, 718-549-3200, wavehill.org.‘Fancy Nancy the Musical’  (Saturday and Sunday) One of the arts’ youngest divas is about to leave the McGinn/Cazale Theater. This musical from Vital Theater Company, closing this weekend, focuses on a little girl who wants everything to be fancy — especially herself. Based on the book series written by Jane O’Connor and illustrated by Robin Preiss Glasser, the production explores the predicament that ensues when Nancy finds out that she hasn’t been cast as the glamorous mermaid she’d hoped to be in the coming dance show. With a book by Susan DiLallo, a score by Danny Abosch, and lyrics by both, the musical humorously follows Nancy’s attempts to cope with a most unfancy role: that of a tree. At 1:30 p.m., 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org.‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’  (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Thursday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com. ‘Hello From Japan!’ (Friday through Thursday) Japanese culture comprises both unbridled whimsy and serene seriousness. Young visitors can get acquainted with these two sides at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan, which recreates different aspects of Tokyo in this new exhibition. One-half of the show, Kawaii Central, captures the fun of the city’s Harajuku district with the opportunity to sing karaoke, serve a Japanese meal and create cute, cartoonlike family mascots. The exhibition’s other half includes a Shinto shrine park, where young visitors can build a bridge, meet kami (spirits) and express their desires at a wishing tree. Programs, free with museum admission, accompany the show. (Through May 17.) Museum hours: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; to 7 p.m. on Saturdays; also open free from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of every month. Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org.‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Thursday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one sprouts indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which has revived Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. (Through June 28.) Friday at 10:30 a.m. and noon; Saturday and Sunday at 1 p.m.; Monday through Thursday at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., with an additional performance on Wednesday at 3 p.m. (Some shows are sold out.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park; 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts.‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’  (Saturday and Wednesday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton; 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com. La MaMa Kids: ‘Seucy and Boto: Stories of the Amazon Jungle, Episode 2’ (Saturday) La MaMa, the downtown theater famous for cultivating cutting-edge adults, has in recent years been turning its attention to cutting-edge kids, too. This series for families, which presents interactive workshops and performances, continues its season with the further adventures of Seucy and Boto, created by Federico Restrepo and Denise Greber. Presented by Loco7 Dance Puppet Theater Company, this Latin American tale features music, body puppets and oversize marionettes in a story about a little girl and her half-boy, half-dolphin sidekick, who unite with various creatures to keep a river monster from ruining the water. At 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., 74 East Fourth Street, East Village, 212-475-7710, lamama.org.MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Thursday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. Young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab.‘My Superhero, Roberto Clemente’  (Saturday) Roberto Clemente (1934-72) may not have had superpowers, but he was certainly a hero, both on and off the baseball field. Battling discrimination throughout his sports career, he became the first Latino athlete inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame, and was killed in the crash of a plane he had chartered to deliver aid to earthquake victims in Nicaragua. This bilingual children’s musical from Teatro SEA, written by Manuel Antonio Morán and Alejandro Zuleta, and closing on Saturday, focuses on a boy named Bobby, who, with his friends, discovers Clemente’s legacy. At 3 p.m., Los Kabayitos Puppet and Children’s Theater, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org.New Museum First Saturdays for Families: ‘Avatars’ (Saturday) What if you could put yourself in someone else’s shoes — or something else’s skin or shell? Children 3 to 8 are invited to do so in this free program, linked to the museum’s 2015 Triennial: “Surround Audience,” a celebration of early-career artists. Working in the museum’s Skyroom, young visitors can use puppetry and movement to create new identities for themselves, taking inspiration from Triennial participants like Casey Jane Ellison, Renaud Jerez, and Eduardo Navarro. From 10 a.m. to noon, 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org; tickets are limited, first come first served. ‘Rapunzarella White: A Fairly Fractured Tale’ (Saturday and Sunday) Yes, it’s fractured, but it’s also blended: In this creative musical retelling, by June Rachelson-Ospa and Daniel Neiden, Rapunzel, Cinderella and Snow White are infant triplets abducted by an ill-tempered witch. These heroines aren’t like their traditional selves — Snow White, for instance, is allergic to apples — and neither are their princes, who may be more clumsy than charming. (Through May 10.) Saturday at 1 p.m., Sunday at noon, 13th Street Repertory Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-352-3101, rapunzarellawhite.bpt.me.School Vacation Week at the New-York Historical Society (Friday through Thursday) Soaring seems to be a theme these days at the historical society’s DiMenna Children’s History Museum, where young visitors will be invited to fly paper planes and make kites. Through April 12, from 1 to 3 p.m., they can draw inspiration from the show “Audubon’s Aviary: The Final Flight” to design paper aircraft based on bird species, then pilot their winged creations into a target wall of clouds. This Sunday only, children ages 3 through 7 can celebrate Qingming, a Chinese festival that honors ancestors and heralds spring, by building and decorating kites, a popular pastime associated with the holiday (1 to 3 p.m.) and hearing Bruce Edward Hall’s “Henry and the Kite Dragon,” a tale about a Chinatown kite maker (11:30 a.m. and 2 p.m.). The society’s exhibition “Chinese American: Exclusion/Inclusion” will provide context. Freedom is also in the air: All day, through April 12, the society will offer a museumwide scavenger hunt devoted to civil rights history, with children searching for artifacts like a letter from Lincoln and an antique ballot box. At various times, New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.‘Sing Back, Brooklyn! With Lloyd H. Miller’  (Saturday) The Bronx, Queens, Manhattan and Staten Island are invited to sing back, too, in this free family program at the Brooklyn Historical Society. Lloyd H. Miller, a proud son of Brooklyn and leader of the band the Deedle Deedle Dees, known for its tunes celebrating science and history, hosts this event — with singalongs, stories and skits — the first Saturday of every month. April commemorates the 150th anniversary of the end of the Civil War, and Mr. Miller will invite the audience to join in a reading of “The Gettysburg Address.” At 11 a.m., 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.A Taste of Magic (Saturday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. (Also on April 11.) At 8 p.m., Gossip Bar and Restaurant, 733 Ninth Avenue, between 49th and 50th Streets, Clinton, atasteofmagicnyc.com.‘Tiny Giants’ (Friday through Thursday) The heroes of this film may be small, but they’re mighty in their will to survive. Inspired by the BBC television series “Hidden Kingdoms,” this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History uses 3-D cameras to peer into the universes of two diminutive creatures: a forest chipmunk and a grasshopper mouse from the Arizona desert, noted for its ability to prey on scorpions. Narrated by Stephen Fry, the film allows viewers to see the world from their perspectives. (Through July 5.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.‘Tunes With Tina’ (Sunday) That’s Tina deVaron, a jazz musician and singer, whose musical brunch for young people at the Measure Lounge at Langham Place, Fifth Avenue, a hotel in Midtown Manhattan, has returned. Ms. deVaron, who often sings show tunes for children, also improvises and gears her performances to the audience. On selected Sundays throughout the season, she will be accompanied by Broadway performers. Singing along is encouraged. (Through May 31.) At noon, 400 Fifth Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-695-4005, measurenyc.com.‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’  (Monday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. This week only, the museum is open from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., and will also feature Jewish-themed game shows in which young visitors can participate and performances of “Bubble Trouble,” a show with the bubble master Jeff Boyer. (The schedule is on the website.) Usual museum hours: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; to 5:30 p.m. on Sundays, but closed this Sunday for Passover; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 718-907-8833, jcm.museum.‘Washeteria’ (Friday through Sunday) In “The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe,” children reach the enchanted realm of Narnia through a portal in a piece of furniture; where do you suppose a magical washing machine might lead? Young theatergoers can find out in one of the two 25-minute cycles in “Washeteria.” This site-specific play, SoHo Rep’s first production for families, takes place in a vacant Brooklyn storefront that’s been transformed by Louisa Thompson, the show’s creator and designer, into a wild realm intended to wash clothes and spin the imagination. Recommended for ages 7 and older, the play closes this weekend. Friday at 3:30 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday at 11 a.m. and 4 p.m.; 321 Broadway, near Rodney Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 212-352-3101, sohorep.org.‘The Wizard of Oz’ and Family Workshops (Friday through Thursday) Since many children are off from school this week, what better time to go off to see the wizard? Coinciding with the city public school break, the Museum of the Moving Image has scheduled daily 12:30 p.m. screenings of Warner Bros.’ remastered 3-D version of the 1939 classic ”The Wizard of Oz.” In addition to spending their vacations in the Emerald City, young visitors can also reimagine and redesign a character from the film. Daily, at 2:30 p.m., a workshop will provide art materials for re-envisioning a role. (Through April 12.) 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.LAUREL GRAEBERAdvertisement