AdvertisementSupported byBy Joshua BaroneAround TownInformation on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. Museums and SitesAmerican Museum of Natural History: ‘Countdown to Zero’ (through July 12) Smallpox is the only human disease to have been eradicated, but what about Guinea worm, polio, malaria and other diseases? This exhibition, presented in collaboration with the Carter Center, examines international efforts to control and wipe out diseases. Daily from 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org.BRIC and the Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Mapping Brooklyn’ (through Sept. 6) This exhibition features artworks that incorporate themes of mapping and cartography in historical maps. The artists here are exploring the ways maps represent the practical and metaphoric aspects of life. The show is on view at BRIC House through May 3. Tuesdays through Saturdays from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Sundays to 6 p.m., 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, bricartsmedia.org. The show will also be at the Brooklyn Historical Society through Sept. 6. Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5 p.m., 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Brooklyn Historical Society: ‘Personal Correspondents: Photography and Letter Writing in Civil War Brooklyn’ (Thursday through spring 2016) The historical society’s new exhibition tells the personal stories of Brooklyn soldiers and their families during the Civil War. Some of the tales, told through photos and letters, are funny; others are tragic. The show’s opening on Thursday coincides with the 150th anniversary of Robert E. Lee’s surrender that ended the war. Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org.Brooklyn Museum: Target First Saturdays (Saturday) The museum presents its monthly night of free programming, beginning with a jazz concert and a curator talk about the exhibition “Basquiat: The Unknown Notebooks.” There will be additional concerts, as well as readings and a screening of the documentary “Jean-Michel Basquiat: The Radiant Child.” The full lineup is at brooklynmuseum.org/visit/first_saturdays. From 5 to 11 p.m., 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000; free.‘Diné Spotlight: A Showcase of Navajo Film’ (Thursday and April 11) The Smithsonian’s National Museum of the American Indian partners with New York University’s Center for Media, Culture and History to present screenings of recent movies by Diné (Navajo) filmmakers. It opens Thursday at 6 p.m. with Sydney Freeland’s “Drunktown’s Finest” and closes on April 11 with Blackhorse Lowe’s “Chasing the Light.” At various times, National Museum of the American Indian, 1 Bowling Green, Lower Manhattan, 212-514-3700, nmai.si.edu; free.Grolier Club: ‘Aldus Manutius: A Legacy More Lasting Than Bronze’ (through April 25) To celebrate the quincentennial of Aldus Manutius’s death, the Grolier Club has assembled over 130 rare books, called Aldines, from that scholar-printer’s Italian Renaissance press. The exhibition explores the ways in which, to this day, Manutius influences how we preserve and disseminate knowledge. As Jennifer Schuessler wrote in The New York Times, “Anyone who has ever sat in a cafe, or in the bath, with a paperback owes a debt to Aldus and the small, cleanly designed editions of the secular classics.” 47 East 60th Street, Manhattan, 212-838-6690, grolierclub.org; free.Morgan Library & Museum: ‘Lincoln Speaks: Words That Transformed a Nation’ (through June 7) This exhibition, which is presented thematically and chronologically, homes in on Abraham Lincoln’s leadership and its relationship to language. In his exhibition review for The New York Times, Neil Genzlinger wrote: “For Lincoln admirers, simply being in the same room with so many artifacts he touched will be a delight. And if they give the exhibition the time it requires, they will certainly come away with a fuller appreciation of the man.” 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.Museum of the Moving Image: ‘Matthew Weiner’s “Mad Men” ’ (through June 14) As one of the most critically acclaimed TV shows in recent years nears its finale, “Mad Men” gets the exhibition treatment in this look at the series’s creative process. On display are large-scale sets, such as Don Draper’s office, as well as costumes, art and research material used by the show’s staff. Viewers should expect not only a look behind the scenes of the show, but also, like “Mad Men” itself, a peek into the era it depicts. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us.New-York Historical Society: ‘Audubon’s Aviary: The Final Flight (Part III of the Complete Flock)’ (through May 10) The third installment of “Audubon’s Aviary: The Complete Flock” comprises nearly 130 plates from the watercolors in John James Audubon’s “The Birds of America” collection, engraved by Robert Havell Jr. The exhibition, as William Grimes wrote in an article for The New York Times, “underlines the natural wealth of the American land, and Audubon’s remarkable talent for producing art as varied as his subject matter.” 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New-York Historical Society: ‘Chinese American: Exclusion/Inclusion’ (through April 19) In his review for The New York Times, Edward Rothstein called this show a “vigorous and imaginative new exhibition,” that includes a look at “how Chinese-American identity came to be, how immigration and discrimination were followed by recrimination and conflict, and how, finally, a people’s trials give way to celebration.” Tuesday through Thursday and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Friday until 8 p.m., Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.New York Transit Museum Grand Central Terminal Gallery Annex: ‘New York’s Transportation Landmarks’ (through Nov. 1) It’s been 50 years since New York passed its Landmarks Law, which covers over 30,000 buildings and structures around the city. To celebrate the anniversary, the New York Transit Museum has created an exhibition that explores the history of development, use and even rescue of these landmarks. More information: 212-878-0106, web.mta.info/mta/museum.New York Transit Museum: ‘Spanning the Narrows: The Verrazano Bridge at 50’ (through next fall) Photographs, maps, drawings, models and other archival materials related to the construction of the bridge (including correspondence from Robert Moses, who oversaw the project) are part of this exhibition commemorating its 50th anniversary. Tuesdays through Fridays from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-694-1600, mta.info/mta/museum.Red Bull Studios: ‘Alone Together’ (through April 12) The artist Ryder Ripps has created a site-specific work that acts as sculpture and performance. It’s a system that covers two floors: Below are six performers whose computer activity is sent above to a collective, frenzied display. Visitors to the exhibition play the part of voyeurs. Mr. Ripps’s idea is that the Internet creates a paradox in which the more connected we are, the more physically withdrawn we become. Thursdays through Sundays from noon to 7 p.m., 220 West 18th Street, Chelsea, redbullstudios.com/newyork; free.Arturo Vega: ‘American Treasure’ (Sunday through April 25) Howl! Happening, a new gallery and performance space in the East Village, presents an exhibition with paintings by Arturo Vega, a Mexican-born artist who worked in New York from 1971 until his death in 2013. Many of his paintings depict open palms holding a silver dollar — what exactly that means is open to interpretation. Howl! Happening, 6 East First Street, howlarts.org.Events‘Bascove/Bridges: Transporting the Metropolis’ (through July 12) This exhibition features more than 30 paintings and drawings of city bridges by the artist Anne Bascove, including the Brooklyn Bridge, the Outerbridge Crossing and the George Washington Bridge. Thursdays through Sundays from 1 to 5 p.m.; also by appointment; Noble Maritime Collection, Snug Harbor Cultural Center and Botanical Garden, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, Staten Island, 718-447-6490, noblemaritime.org.‘Beyond Broadway: Composers Go Choral’ (Wednesday) Essential Voices USA presents an evening of music and conversation with some of Broadway’s most widely known names. Some of the guests include the lyricist Sheldon Harnick (“Fiddler on the Roof”), as well as the composer-lyricists Stephen Schwartz (“Wicked”) and Andrew Lippa (“The Wild Party”). The program will also lead with a premiere from Marvin Hamlisch (“A Chorus Line”), who died in 2012. At 7:30 p.m., DiMenna Center for Classical Music, 450 West 37th Street, Manhattan, essentialvoicesusa.com.An Evening With the Cast of ‘Veep’ (Tuesday) The HBO comedy “Veep” earned nine Emmy nominations in its third season, and is about to enter its fourth. The cast of this political satire, including the Emmy-winning Julia Louis-Dreyfus, will be joined by Alan Sepinwall of HitFix.com for a discussion following a screening of the coming season’s premiere. At 6 p.m., Paley Center for Media, 25 West 52nd Street, Manhattan, 212-621-6800, paleycenter.org.New York International Auto Show (Friday through April 12) This event, which bills itself as the largest automobile show in North America, comes to the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center to showcase concept vehicles, models planned for 2016 and 2017, and special exhibitions. The show takes place over multiple floor levels and includes a food court. More information, along with the schedule, is at autoshowny.com. 655 West 34th Street, Manhattan; 212-216-2000.Spoken WordRenata Adler (Tuesday) Ms. Adler, the longtime New Yorker writer and former film critic for The New York Times, discusses her book “After the Tall Timber: Collected Nonfiction” in an event presented by The New York Review of Books. Ms. Adler’s career as an essayist and journalist has spanned over 50 years, and she has covered historical events such as the march to Selma and the Vietnam War. At 7 p.m., McNally Jackson, 52 Prince Street, between Lafayette and Mulberry Streets, SoHo, 212-274-1160, mcnallyjackson.com; free.Peter Bassett on Wagner (Wednesday) Mr. Bassett, vice president of the Wagner Society in Queensland, Australia, discusses his book “Wagner’s ‘Die Meistersinger’ and Lortzing’s ‘Hans Sachs’,” about the links between the two composers and their works. A social hour, with a cash bar, will follow. Mr. Bassett has been closely involved with Wagner’s Ring Cycle in Australia, as well in a tour of the recent Robert Lepage production. Liederkranz, 6 East 87th Street, Manhattan, 212-534-0880, liederkranzny.org.Richard Eyre and Heather Berlin (Monday) The British film director Richard Eyre is taking to the stage to direct Henrik Ibsen’s “Ghosts” at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Mr. Eyre, who directed “Notes on a Scandal,” is no stranger to Ibsen’s themes of attachment and desire. Heather Berlin, a neuroscientist, will join Mr. Eyre in conversation and provide a biological perspective on those feelings. At 7 p.m., Rubin Museum of Art, 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org.Philip Glass in Conversation With Ira Glass (Monday) Philip Glass, one of the most prolific and widely known composers, discusses “Words Without Music,” a memoir about his decades-long career and the intersection of life experience and art. He will talk with Ira Glass — as the shared surname suggests, they are related (second cousins). At 7 p.m., Barnes & Noble Union Square, 33 East 17th Street, 212-253-0810, barnesandnoble.com.Mireille Guiliano (Thursday) Mireille Guiliano, known for her book “French Women Don’t Get Fat,” discusses her latest book, “Meet Paris Oyster: A Love Affair with the Perfect Food.” This won’t be a typical reading: Ms. Guiliano’s talk will include an oyster tasting, paired with Sancerre. Le Skyroom, 22 East 60th Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, fiaf.org.Francine Prose (Tuesday) The prolific writer Francine Prose discusses her work with Frank Delaney of the BBC as part of Pen, Paper and Palate, a series celebrating Irish and American writing and culture, presented in association with Ruda Beresford Dauphin. Ms. Prose, the former president of PEN American Center, has written over 20 works of fiction and nonfiction. Her most recent book is “Lovers at the Chameleon Club, Paris 1932.” At 7:30 p.m., Irish Arts Center, 553 West 51st Street, Clinton, 212-757-3318, irishartscenter.org.Race and the City (Friday and Saturday) The Park Avenue Armory presents a series of discussions about race to complement the issues explored in its dance performance “Flexn.” The long list of participants includes journalists, police officials, community leaders and representatives from correctional facilities. At 7 p.m., 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org.‘Team Dance: The Dance Critics of The New York Times’ (Monday) Alastair Macaulay, the chief dance critic for The New York Times, is joined by Gia Kourlas, Brian Seibert and Siobhan Burke, who contribute dance reviews to The Times — discuss the purpose of criticism. They will explore such ideas as gender, the critic’s role in shaping the experience of watching dance and whether a critic even has the power to make a difference. At 7 p.m., Julius S. Held Auditorium, Barnard Hall, 3009 Broadway, between 116th and 120th Streets, Morningside Heights, barnard.edu; free.Elizabeth Warren (Thursday) Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts will appear in the Strand Book Store’s Rare Book Room for the paperback release of her best-selling book “A Fighting Chance,” signed copies of which will be available for purchase. Writing in The New York Times Book Review, Amy Chozick, a political reporter for The Times, said “the book is a potent mix of memoir and policy that makes politics seem like a necessary evil.” At 2 p.m., 828 Broadway, at 12th Street, Greenwich Village, 212-473-1452, strandbooks.com; free.Walking ToursChelsea Gallery Tour (Saturday) This tour explores seven shows in West Chelsea’s gallery district. Works include sculptures by an artist who has had a solo exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, as well as a painting installation and an emotionally charged mixed-media show. The tour meets at 526 West 26th Street. At 1 and 3:45 p.m., 212-946-1548, nygallerytours.com.Flatiron District Walking Tour (Sundays) This free tour meets at 11 a.m. on the southwest corner of Madison Square Park, at 23rd Street and Broadway, in front of the William Seward statue. Sponsored by the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership; discoverflatiron.org.The Ghosts of Grand Central (Saturdays) This tour offers shelter from the cold, though discovering the ghosts of Grand Central Terminal may bring a different sort of chill. There will be history of the Vanderbilts, as well as August Belmont, Franklin Roosevelt and his dog, Fala. The tour meets west of the M.T.A. information booth under the four-faced clock in the station’s Grand Concourse. (Through April 25.) At 7:30 p.m., 646-493-7092, ghostsofny.com.History of Wall Street Tour (weekdays) Stops on this tour, led by Wall Street Walks, include the New York Stock Exchange, Trinity Church, the Wall Street Bull, and ground zero and the Sept. 11 memorial. The tours last 90 minutes and begin at 11 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. (Also at 3 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays.) More details: wallstreetwalks.com.‘Passover Nosh and Stroll — Jewish Landmarks of the Lower East Side’ (Tuesday and Wednesday) A walking tour featuring historical Jewish places on the Lower East Side begins with a kosher-for-Passover meal, supplied in part by Streit’s Matzo and the Pickle Guys, at the Eldridge Street Synagogue. The group will then see the currently under renovation Jarmulowsky Bank, Loew’s Theater, Bes Medrash Hagadol Synagogue, Economy Candy and the Forward Building, which formerly housed The Jewish Daily Forward newspaper. At 2 p.m., Museum at Eldridge Street, 12 Eldridge Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-0888, eldridgestreet.org.A Taste of Jewish New York (Sundays) Participants in this tour will get an insider’s look at Borough Park, Brooklyn, by learning about the customs of its Hasidic residents. There will also be the chance to try a range of food. This tour includes a stop at a lively shopping area, as well as at a matzo bakery — with free samples, of course. The tour meets at 9:45 p.m. at Fort Hamilton Parkway and 44th Street; 718-339-2302, timelinetouring.com.Union Square: Crossroads of New York (Saturdays) Sponsored by the Union Square Partnership, this free year-round tour focuses on the area’s political and social histories. The walk, led by guides from Big Onion Walking Tours, meets at 2 p.m. by the statue of Lincoln in Union Square Park, near the 16th Street transverse. 212-517-1826, unionsquarenyc.org.JOSHUA BARONEInformation on events for possible inclusion in Spare Times should be sent to weekend@nytimes.com by Monday at 5 p.m. for publication that week. Longer versions of Around Town and For Children listings are in a searchable guide at nytimes.com/events. Advertisement