AdvertisementSupported byMuseums and galleries are in Manhattan unless otherwise noted. Full reviews of recent art shows: nytimes.com/art. A searchable guide to these and many other art shows is at nytimes.com/events.Museums★ American Folk Art Museum: ‘When the Curtain Never Comes Down’  (through July 5) A sprawling, cacophony of objects, audiotapes, photographs and films is here orchestrated into a curatorial marvel. Strange and wonderful in numerous ways, the show sheds new light on the performance aspects of much outsider art while reminding us how eccentricity is not only basic to creativity but to personal liberty and democracy itself. 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 66th Street, 212-595-9533, folkartmuseum.org. (Roberta Smith)★ Asia Society and Museum: ‘Buddhist Art of Myanmar’ (through May 10) In 1962, Myanmar, once known as Burma, closed its doors to the world and threw away the key for almost 40 years. Under surveillance-obsessed military rule, little from outside could get in, and little from inside could get out, including art. Recently, the country has re-established international contact, and even made efforts to advertise its cultural riches. They couldn’t have made a more persuasive case than with this splendidly designed exhibition of some 70 sculptures and paintings, from small portable eighth- and ninth-century Buddha statuettes, each basically a mobile communication device, a spiritual smart phone kept close for use on the road or at home; a single towering 19th-century lacquered wood shrine, glinting with gilt and cut glass and rising, tier upon tier, to the ceiling. Welcome to Bliss City. 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org. (Holland Cotter)★ Asia Society and Museum: Takahiro Iwasaki: ‘In Focus’ (through April 26) Takahiro Iwasaki, born in 1975 in Hiroshima, Japan, has a lacemaker’s hand, a jeweler’s eye and a shopper’s instinct for cool materials, as he demonstrates in this solo show. Inspired by a 17th-century Japanese six-panel folding screen called “Flowers and Grasses of the Four Seasons” in Asia Society’s collection, he has made his own sculptural version entirely of threads pulled from kimonos. And he has added 21st-century reference to environmental change: open-weave construction cranes like those being used to revive the tsunami-ravaged, radiation-plagued city of Fukushima dwarf a single tiny pine tree that survived the disaster. 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, 212-517-2742, asiasociety.org. (Cotter)★ Brooklyn Museum: ‘Kehinde Wiley: A New Republic’ (through May 24) You can love or hate this artist’s bright, brash, history-laden, kitsch-tinged portraits of confident, even imperious young black men and women usurping heroic roles from the generally lily-white history of Western painting. No matter, the two-decade survey of his extravagant canvases rewards. His career seems to be one of ceaseless ambition, socially conscious generosity and an uncanny skill that he is still harnessing. 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum (continuing) The stately doors of the 1902 Andrew Carnegie mansion, home to the Cooper Hewitt, are open again after an overhaul and expansion of the premises. Historic house and modern museum have always made an awkward fit, a standoff between preservation and innovation, and the problem remains, but the renovation has brought a wide-open new gallery space, a cafe and a raft of be-your-own-designer digital enhancements. Best of all, more of the museum’s vast permanent collection is now on view, including an Op Art weaving, miniature spiral staircases, ballistic face masks and a dainty enameled 18th-century version of a Swiss knife. Like design itself, this institution is built on tumult and friction, and you feel it. 2 East 91st Street, at Fifth Avenue, 212-849-8400, cooperhewitt.org. (Cotter)★ Guggenheim Museum: ‘On Kawara - Silence’ (through May 3) The first retrospective of this Conceptual Art giant turns the museum’s spiral into a vortex suffused with the consciousness of time, life’s supreme ruler, in all its quotidian daily unfoldings, historical events and almost incomprehensible grandeur. The presentation of date paintings, “I Got Up” postcards and “I Am Still Alive” telegrams echoes Mr. Kawara’s exquisite sense of discipline and craft. This is an extraordinary tribute. 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. (Smith)Institute for the Study of the Ancient World: ‘From Ancient to Modern: Archaeology and Aesthetics’ (through June 7) Small but bursting with ideas, this show tells a fascinating tale about the 20th-century excavation and interpretation of some ancient Sumerian artifacts. It focuses on about 50 objects that were unearthed in the 1920s and ’30s in Mesopotamia, including sumptuous jewelry and wide-eyed, bearded men carved from stone. Along with these are profuse archaeological documentation; paintings and sculptures by 20th-century artists like Willem de Kooning and Henry Moore who were inspired by Sumerian art; and politically fraught works by two contemporary artists, Jananne al-Ani and Michael Rakowitz. 15 East 84th Street, Manhattan, 212-992-7800, isaw.nyu.edu. (Ken Johnson)Japan Society: ‘Life of Cats: Selections From the Hiraki Ukiyo-e Collection’ (through June 7) Cats were brought to Japan from China in the mid-sixth century. Adopted as pets and valued for their rat-killing skills, they naturally infiltrated Japanese art, literature and folklore. This excellent show should be catnip for cat lovers; all the better if they’re into art, too. Its 86 drawings, paintings, woodblock prints and decorative objects dating from the 17th to the early 20th century represent cats behaving in typical, ridiculous and supernatural ways. 333 East 47th Street, Manhattan, 212-832-1155, japansociety.org. (Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Fatal Attraction: Piotr Uklanski Photographs’ (through Aug. 16) A small but succinct survey of the multimedia bad-boy artist’s polymorphous relationship to photography shows him constantly changing scale, film and printing methods while exploring the medium’s ability to startle, seduce and become generic. He appropriates, imitates and pays homage as he goes, regularly invoking his Polish roots. Don’t miss the large photo-banners in the museum’s Great Hall or the massive fiber-sculpture monument to the eye and to insatiable looking. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Fatal Attraction: Piotr Uklanski Selects From The Met Collection’ (through June 14) Complementing the survey of his photographs, the artist has orchestrated 80 works from the museum’s holdings — along with a few of his own — into a mesmerizing display meditating on sex and death. Consisting mostly of photographs, it is bolstered by paintings by Dali and Cranach sculptures from several cultures and several surprises. Scratch any artist of note, even a post-modern one, and you often find a connoisseur. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘The Plains Indians: Artists of Earth and Sky’ (through May 10) Some of the earliest surviving art by native North Americans left America long ago. Soldiers, traders and priests, with magpie eyes for brilliant things, bundled it up and shipped it across the sea to Europe. Painted robes, embroidered slippers and feathered headdresses tinkling with chimes found their way into cupboards in 18th-century London and Paris, and lay there half-forgotten. Now, with the arrival at the Met of this traveling show, some of those wondrous things — truly world masterpieces — have come home in an exhibition context that carries the Native American story from 100 B.C. into the 21st century. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Ennion: Master of Roman Glass’ (through April 13) Active sometime between A.D. 1 and A.D. 50, Ennion is the first known artisan to produce mold-blown glass: objects made by blowing bubbles of molten glass into patterned molds. His elegant cups, bowls, beakers, jugs and flasks decorated with geometric and botanical motifs were sought after by wealthy Romans and traded throughout the Mediterranean world. Today only about 50 to 55 Ennion pieces are known to have survived. This exhibition presents 22 of them, along with fragments of two others. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Reimagining Modernism: 1900-1950’ (continuing) One of the greatest encyclopedic museums in the world fulfills its mission a little more with an ambitious reinstallation of works of early European modernism with their American counterparts for the first time in nearly 30 years. Objects of design and paintings by a few self-taught artists further the integration. It is quite a sight, with interesting rotations and fine-tunings to come. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Smith)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Thomas Hart Benton’s “America Today” Mural Rediscovered’ (through April 19) The prickly American Regionalist Thomas Hart Benton had his share of detractors. But even they would probably acknowledge that his early mural “America Today” is the best of its kind, a raucous, cartwheeling, wide-angle look at 1920s America that set the standard for the Works Progress Administration’s mural program and has remained a New York City treasure. Now installed at the Met in a reconstruction of its original setting (a boardroom at the New School for Social Research), it captivates with period details (from the cut of a flapper gown to the mechanics of a blast furnace) and timely signs of socioeconomic and environmental distress (exhausted coal miners and hands reaching for coffee and bread). 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Karen Rosenberg)★ Metropolitan Museum of Art: ‘Warriors and Mothers: Epic Mbembe Art’ (through Sept. 7) If a dozen masterpiece Renaissance sculptures, done in an unknown and wildly unorthodox style, suddenly turned up in the Italian countryside, the find would make the news. You’ll encounter the equivalent of such a discovery in this show of spectacular weatherworn, wood-carved figures, some dating to before the 17th century, that were made by the Mbeme in southeastern Nigeria and taken to Paris by an African dealer in the early 1970s. They caused a sensation among collectors and scholars at the time, and you can see why. But the effort to find more of them proved fruitless. The examples at the Met, which include the original dozen, represent all the fully intact stand-alone Mbembe figures known to exist. 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org. (Cotter)MoMA PS1: ‘Samara Golden: The Flat Side of the Knife’ (through Sept. 7) Standing at a railing where you look into the museum’s two-story-tall Duplex Gallery, you behold a confoundingly complicated interior architecture with furniture, stairways, musical instruments, wheelchairs and many other domestic items rendered in silvery, foil-clad foam board. The gallery’s floor is covered by a grid of large mirrors so that everything is doubled. What you think is up may really be down and what you take to be real might be a virtual reflection of the real. 22-25 Jackson Avenue, at 46th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, 718-784-2084, ps1.org. (Johnson)★ El Museo del Barrio: ‘Under the Mexican Sky: Gabriel Figueroa, Art and Film’ (through June 27) Painting with light is one way to define the cinematographer’s task, and it describes the art of Gabriel Figueroa (1907-97), who worked with some of the leading international film directors of his time and was a national hero in his native Mexico, the supreme painter-in-light of Mexicanidad. How do you put this particular kind of art across in a museum — art that is as much about time as it is about material, as much about flux as it is about fixity? This show, which mixes Figueroa film clips with paintings and prints by some of Mexico’s greatest artists and in the process utterly transforms El Museo’s interior spaces, gives an enthralling answer. 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street, East Harlem, 212-831-7272, elmuseo.org. (Cotter)Museum of Arts and Design: ‘Richard Estes: Painting New York City’  (through Sept. 20) The core of this show is a selection of vivid, Photorealist paintings of urban subjects like glass and chrome storefronts, movie theater marquees, cars and trucks, subways, the Brooklyn Bridge, views from the Staten Island Ferry and idyllic images of Central Park made between 1965 and 2015. The exhibition also includes didactic sections about the craft and technique that go into Mr. Estes painting and prints, but that aspect doesn’t fully deliver what it promises. 2 Columbus Circle, Manhattan, 212-299-7777, madmuseum.org. (Johnson)★ Museum of Biblical Art: ‘Sculpture in the Age of Donatello: Renaissance Masterpieces From Florence Cathedral’ (through June 14) This terrific 23-piece show features three major works by the early Renaissance sculptor Donatello (1386-1466), including the life-size statue of a bald prophet known as “lo Zuccone” or “Pumpkin Head,” which is widely considered the sculptor’s greatest work. Along with a half-dozen other works by or attributed to Donatello are sculptures by Nanni di Banco (circa 1386-1421), Donatello’s main competitor, including his monumental representation in marble of St. Luke. With the addition of a series of octagonal marble reliefs by Luca della Robbia and wooden models of the Florence Cathedral’s enormous dome attributed to its designer, Filippo Brunelleschi, the exhibition amounts to a tightly cropped snapshot of the birth of the Renaissance. 1865 Broadway, at 61st Street, 212-408-1500, mobia.org. (Johnson)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Scenes for a New Heritage: Contemporary Art from the Collection’ (through March) MoMA’s latest installation of works from its permanent collection fills the second floor contemporary galleries with videos, installations, sculptures, drawings, prints and photographs produced by more than 30 artists during the past three decades. It’s an uneven, haphazard selection, but leaving artistic quality aside, its unusually optimistic-sounding title inadvertently raises a large and intriguing question: At a time when contemporary art seems to be spinning its wheels, what could a new heritage be? 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Johnson)Museum of Modern Art: ‘Björk’ (through June 7) More than most, an exhibition devoted to the Iceland phenomenon — the most avant-garde popular singer of her time — needs to justify its place in a major museum. But MoMA was clearly unable to commit in terms of space, curatorial imagination or a serious catalog. The result is something of a shambles, but at least the music videos — projected on a large screen with surround sound — confirm the visual side of Björk’s complex sensibility and achievement. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Jean Dubuffet: Soul of the Underground’ (through April 5) “Look at what lies at your feet!” Jean Dubuffet wrote in a 1957 essay. “A crack in the ground, sparkling gravel, a tuft of grass, some crushed debris, offer equally worthy subjects for your applause and admiration.” In MoMA’s stimulating show, drawn entirely from its collection, we can see how Dubuffet’s earthbound gaze nourished his reinvention of the painted surface. On view are several canvases smeared with a mixture of oil, putty, sand and gravel, some of them with incised drawings that seem to equate painting with plowing. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Rosenberg)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘Modern Photographs from the Thomas Walther Collection, 1909-1949’ (through April 19) Overflowing with prints by Berenice Abbott, Andre Kertesz, Edward Weston and other luminaries from the first half of the 20th century, this exhibition would seem to be a straightforward look at photography’s past. But the show, packaged with a book, a symposium and an engrossing interactive website, is really a bold attempt to visualize the future of photography inside the museum as it reckons with the unwieldy, image-saturated culture outside the galleries. With works by Aleksandr Rodchenko, Ms. Abbott, Alvin Langdon Coburn and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy that explore cities from unusual angles or abstract their infrastructure, the show’s largest section, “Dynamics of the City,” best encapsulates the Walther Collection’s distinctly urban, peripatetic take on Modernism. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Rosenberg)Museum of the City of New York: ‘Everything Is Design: The Work of Paul Rand’  (through July 19) You may not know the name Paul Rand (1914-96), the immensely influential advertising art director, illustrator and graphic designer, but it’s a safe bet you’re familiar with some of his works. After shaking up American advertising and book cover design in the 1940s and ’50s, he created logos for UPS, IBM, Westinghouse and other American corporations. His admirers called him “the Picasso of graphic design.” This show tracks his six-decade career with 150 examples of vintage magazines, book covers, three-dimensional containers, children’s books and books by Mr. Rand about principles of design. Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. (Johnson)★ Neue Galerie: ‘Egon Schiele: Portraits’ (through April 20) Of the approximately 125 items in this terrific show, there are only 11 oil paintings, which is a good thing. Except for a large picture of his wife, Edith, in a colorful striped dress, Schiele’s works on canvas are dark and turgid. But his drawings are nimble and nuanced. Working on paper with pencil, charcoal, ink, gouache, watercolor and crayons, he portrayed himself and others with infectious avidity. There’s hardly a single sheet here that doesn’t warrant close looking for its virtuoso draftsmanship and psychological acuity. 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street, 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org. (Johnson)★ New Museum: ‘Surround Audience: 2015 Triennial’ (through May 24) If you’re fed up with big joke-shop sculpture, diva spectacle and brain-dead abstraction, this museum’s 2015 Triennial will come as a break in the clouds — not a full flood of new light, but a pull in a different direction. It’s a glimpse of terrain composed almost entirely of border crossings in media, art disciplines, ethnicities, genders and species. The in-between as an aesthetic is no surprise given the curators: Lauren Cornell of the New Museum, who has been paying astute attention to digital art and the Internet for years, and the artist Trecartin, whose laptop-generated, YouTube-distributed, hourslong pop-epic videos add up to some of the most thoroughly genre-collapsing art of the past decade. If nothing by the 51 artists from 25 countries is as genius as his work, there is still a lot to ponder in a show that represents a welcome shift to microgravity flux within a gross-objects industry. 235 Bowery, at Prince Street, Lower East Side, 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org. (Cotter)★ New-York Historical Society: ‘Freedom Journey 1965: Photographs of the Selma to Montgomery March by Stephen Somerstein’ (through Oct. 25) Almost 50 years ago, the picture editor of a campus newspaper at City College of New York assigned himself a breaking story: covering what promised to be a massive march in Alabama, led by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. On short notice the editor, Stephen Somerstein, grabbed his cameras, climbed on a bus and headed south. The 55 pictures of black leaders and everyday people in this show, installed in a hallway and small gallery, are some that he shot that day. The image of Dr. King’s head seen in monumental silhouette that has become a virtual logo of the film “Selma” is based on a Somerstein original. 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org. (Cotter)★ Rubin Museum of Art: ‘The All-Knowing Buddha: A Secret Guide’ (through April 13) This show presents 54 paintings that illustrate step-by-step instructions for followers of Tibetan Buddhism. Delicately painted on 10-by-10-inch paper sheets, most of the pages depict a monk having fabulous visions in a verdant landscape. Thought to have been commissioned by a Mongolian patron and executed by unidentified artists in a Chinese workshop sometime in the 18th century, it is a fascinating and remarkably thorough manual for seekers of higher consciousness. 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org. (Johnson)Galleries: Uptown★ Peter Saul: ‘From Pop to Punk’ (through April 18) This selection of paintings and drawings owned by Allan Frumkin (1927-2002), Mr. Saul’s longtime dealer (30 years), brings a new clarity to Mr. Saul’s early development — when he moved from oil to acrylic and from a garrulous, if lushly painted, variation on Pop Art to paintings that fuse the figurative, the abstract and the scathingly political with a force that has few equals. Venus Over Manhattan, 980 Madison Avenue, at 76th Street, 212-980-0700, venusovermanhattan.com. (Smith)Galleries: ChelseaSubodh Gupta: ‘Seven Billion Light Years’ (through April 25) Like all highly successful global art, the work here is sleek, smart and familiar yet exotic; a local (in this case Indian) variation on well-worn international strategies of 1970s art, whether in sculpture, installation, film or painting. Liberal use is made of found objects that connote hard work and impoverished lives. What’s missing is anything beyond the generic, anything truly personal, as opposed to cavalier. Hauser & Wirth, 511 West 18th Street, 212-794-4970, hauserwirth.com. (Smith)★ ‘In the Studio: Paintings’  (through April 18) Organized by a veteran scholar and curator of modern art, this show roams across several centuries and between academic and advanced, well-known and rarely seen. Full of gems and telling juxtapositions, it explores the studio as subject, beloved sanctuary, container for art and stand-in for the artist. Do not miss it. Gagosian Gallery, 522 West 21st Street, Chelsea, 212-741-1717, gagosian.com. (Smith)Victor Moscoso: ‘Psychedelic Drawings, 1967 - 1982’ (through April 25) In the 1960s, Victor Moscoso produced some of the most memorable acid rock posters of the psychedelic revolution in San Francisco. He also contributed trippy strips to Zap Comix, the underground publication founded by R. Crumb. This exhibition offers a tantalizing glimpse back at an unusually euphoric time in the history of graphic design. Along with vintage concert posters, it presents original drawings, collages and surrealistic comic strips dating from 1967 to 1982. Andrew Edlin Gallery, 134 10th Avenue, near 18th Street, 212-206-9723, edlingallery.com. (Johnson)‘The Painter of Modern Life’ (through April 11) Given its title, taken from an essay by Baudelaire, you might suppose that “The Painter of Modern Life” would offer an alternative to the abstract and conceptually self-reflexive approaches to painting that are so prevalent today. But while this is a lively and engaging show, few of the 70 works by 21 artists have a lot to do with life as ordinarily construed. Most focus on formal and procedural aspects like surfaces, shapes, repetition, color and sensually assertive materials. Anton Kern Gallery, 532 West 20th Street, 212-367-9663, antonkerngallery.com. (Johnson)Charles Ray (through April 18) The main attraction here, “Baled Truck,” is a machine-milled, stainless steel rendering of a truck that was compacted into a 10-foot-long box shape weighing 13 tons. It’s the only object occupying the gallery’s main showroom, which has been constructed into a cruciform layout like that of a minimalist church interior. The sculpture sits at the intersection of transept and nave like a coffin, conceptually provocative but sculpturally inert. 522 West 22nd Street, Chelsea, 212-243-0200, matthewmarks.com. (Johnson)Galleries: SoHoGaetano Pesce: ‘One of a Kind Iconic Works, 1967-2015’ (through April 25) This mini-retrospective of the Italian designer Gaetano Pesce’s career is a Noah’s Ark of imaginary creatures — animal, human and animistic. Octopus vases, centipede tables, hugging couples and lamps with ears, all colorful and most produced in bouncy resins, populate a show of iconoclastic objects that first challenged the sleek world of industrial design in the 1960s. Mr. Pesce has continued to produce signature objects that, like Trojan horses, slip serious social commentary — feminism, abuse, diversity — into the living room under the guise of bashful charm. Humor can be serious. Allouche Gallery, 115 Spring Street, 212-966-6675, allouchegallery.com. (Joseph Giovannini)Galleries: Other‘The Gee’s Bend Tradition’ (through April 24) A show of 14 quilts by seven artists, all made since 1990, and an accompanying exhibition of photographs, demonstrates what makes the Gee’s Bend tradition so compelling. Unlike most quilts in the European-American tradition, which favored uniformity, harmony and precision, Gee’s Bend quilts, made by generations of African-American women, include wild, improvisatory elements: broken patterns, high color contrasts, asymmetry and syncopation. They came into being alongside gospel, blues and jazz. The photographs document how the quilts are historically linked to slavery, Depression-era politics and the Civil Rights Movement, and the rich landscape in which they germinated and thrived. Lehman College Art Gallery, Lehman College, 250 Bedford Park Boulevard West, the Bronx, 718-960-8731, lehman.edu/gallery. (Martha Schwendener)Vera Iliatova: ‘For Now, At Once’ (through April 12) In her dreamy paintings of girls in verdant landscapes, Vera Iliatova toys with conventional associations of nature, femininity, childhood and innocence. The settings combine still life in the form of close-up, renderings of lush, colorful floral bouquets and, further afield, forests, meadows, hills and dales. Into these environments Ms. Iliatova inserts diminutive figures of adolescent girls who seem to have escaped parental supervision and the modern, industrialized world. Monya Rowe Gallery, 34 Orchard Street, at Hester Street, 212-255-5065, monyarowegallery.com. (Johnson)★ Steve Keister: ‘USOs: 1978-1981’ (through April 19) In the late 1970s and early ’80s, Mr. Keister produced a startling series of abstract sculptures, which he displayed overhead in galleries, hanging them by nearly invisible filaments. The eight examples here consist of flat, geometric wooden elements assembled into angular, planar volumes with their outer surfaces clad in various inexpensive materials including rubber, fake fur, leather and colored plastics. They hover close to the ceiling like a flock of strange birds or stylish drones. Mitchell Algus Gallery, 132 Delancey Street, at Norfolk Street, Lower East Side, 212-844-0074, mitchellalgusgallery.com. (Johnson)Out of Town★ National Museum of African Art: ‘Conversations: African and African American Artists in Dialogue’  (through early 2016) For its 50th anniversary, this museum has brilliantly thread together work from two sources: its own holdings in African material and the Camille O. and William H. Cosby Jr. collection of African-American art. The Cosby collection, weighted toward canonical figures like Romare Bearden and Charles White, will bring in the crowds, but it is the curators and museum itself, which is in a period of renaissance, that have made the show rise well above predictability. Smithsonian Institution, 950 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, 202-633-4600, africa.si.edu. (Cotter)Last Chance‘Chamberlain/Prouvé’  (closes on Saturday) This idiosyncratic show combines the work of two geniuses who used metal in new if nearly opposite ways but unevenly. Beginning with two actual prefab structures, the innovative designs of Jean Prouvé (1901-1984) form a solo show unto themselves, with the unprecedentedly abstract (crushed car metal) sculptures of John Chamberlain (1927-2011) serving largely as garnish. Gagosian Gallery, 555 West 24th Street, Chelsea, 212-741-1111, gagosian.com. (Smith)Marsha Cottrell (closes on Sunday) Each work here is created by tweaking image files on a computer and feeding high quality paper — often mulberry paper, which allows the powdery iron oxide toner to build up on the surface — through a laser printer multiple times. The dense accretion of powdery black material reminds you of Ad Reinhardt’s monochromes or Wade Guyton’s black paintings made with inkjet printers. And although Ms. Cottrell uses current technology, there is a deep sense of nostalgia in the works. Paradoxically, because art that looks as if it was created decades ago is popular at the moment, her works appear very contemporary. Eleven Rivington, 11 Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-982-1930, elevenrivington.com. (Schwendener)★ Hayv Kahraman: ‘How Iraqi Are You?’ (closes on Saturday) Reviving once great artistic styles can be fraught. Nonetheless, this young artist’s large yet exquisite paintings successfully imbue the strange, meticulous realism of Persian painting with a contemporary consciousness, bringing an ambience of female empowerment and intimacy to a web of complex cultural, formal and narrative references. Jack Shainman Gallery, 513 West 20th Street, Chelsea, 212-645-1701, jackshainman.com. (Smith)★ Lynn Hershman Leeson: ‘Origin of the Species’ (closes on Sunday) This micro-survey of Lynn Hershman Leeson’s art is a tip-of-the-iceberg event with the potential force of a stealth explosive. For five decades, beginning in San Francisco in the 1960s, this artist has given the realities of ambiguous identity a cyborg-like twist, in sculptures that breathe and in fictional characters that exist primarily through surveillance cameras. Her most recent work documents new life created through DNA manipulation, regenerative medicine and 3-D bio-printing, media that take both aesthetics and ethics in ungraspable directions. Bridget Donahue Gallery, 99 Bowery, near Hester Street, second floor, Lower East Side, 646-896-1368, bridgetdonahue.nyc. (Cotter)★ Museum of Modern Art: ‘The Forever Now: Contemporary Painting in an Atemporal World’ (closes on Sunday) Despite being predictable and market-oriented in its choice of 17 artists, this museum’s first painting survey in decades is well worth seeing. About half the artists are exceptional and the rest are represented by their best work. Based on the premise that all historical painting styles are equally available today, the exhibition has been smartly installed to juxtapose different approaches: figurative and abstract, digital and handmade, spare and opulent. 212-708-9400, moma.org. (Smith)Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts: ‘Peter Blume: Nature and Metamorphosis’ (closes on Sunday) Though not well-known today, Blume (1906-1992) was a famous American artist during the 1930s and ’40s. For many years his painting “The Eternal City” (1934-37) was one of the most memorable artworks displayed in the permanent collection galleries of the Museum of Modern Art. A weird, technically dazzling mix of Magic and Social Realism that envisioned Rome under the Fascist reign of Mussolini, it’s among the highlights of this exhibition of more than 150 works dating from 1924-90. 128 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, 215-972-7600, pafa.org. (Johnson)Advertisement