APRIL 2, 2015
For full reviews of recent concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at nytimes.com/events.★ Arca  (Wednesday) A 20-something producer who already has his thumbprints on Björk’s “Vulnicura,” Kanye West’s “Yeezus” and FKA Twigs’s “LP1,” Arca is primed to explode as the next generation’s Svengali for intriguing electronic textures. This Venezuelan-born London artist, whose full name is Alejandro Ghersi, released his own album, “Xen,” last fall; its warped vocals and chopped-up collages of beats were bewitching in their own right, with equal influence from hip-hop and classical forms. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com. (Stacey Anderson)Bleachers (Thursday) A voluble and unabashedly earnest side project from Jack Antonoff, the guitarist of the pop-rock band fun, Bleachers take open-road soliloquies that are reminiscent of Bruce Springsteen and send them surging through lo-fi synth-pop production. Mr. Antonoff’s blunt confessionalism always cedes to optimism, as on the disjointed but full-hearted single “I Wanna Get Better” — an anthem, and a title, that fully sum up his brand of vulnerability and pluck. With Joywave and Night Terrors of 1927. At 8 p.m., Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)Benjamin Booker (Friday) Fans dived for cover at Mr. Booker’s ferocious set at Lollapalooza last summer, during which he smashed his guitar so thoroughly that wooden shards whizzed into the audience. This talented young singer-guitarist, who performs as part of an electric trio, has already found such success with his self-titled blues-soul album that he could command rooms significantly larger than this one. Accessorize with goggles. With Olivia Jean. At 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementThe Decemberists  (Monday) These poets emeriti of Portland, Ore. — who even have a citywide holiday, January 20, to their name — conceived some of their recent seventh album, “What a Terrible World, What a Beautiful World,” after President Obama’s national address about the school shooting in Newtown, Conn. While the album doesn’t buck under grief or stress, and maintains most elements of the eccentric pop the band has refined, it does streamline the melodies with newfound urgency. With Alvvays. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)AdvertisementSteve Earle  (Tuesday) The roots/country renegade who once growled, “If you buy me a strong drink of whiskey/I will tell you the tale of my life” (in “The Gringo’s Tale”) kicks up his dusty heels at City Winery, his preferred local club. His hardscrabble vagabond stories and baleful slide guitars were on the soundtracks for “True Detective” and “The Wire.” At 8 p.m., City Winery, 155 Varick Street, near Spring Street, South Village, 212-608-0555, citywinery.com. (Anderson)Chet Faker  (Saturday, Tuesday and Wednesday) A rising electro-soul producer in his native Australia — where he collaborated with that scene’s boy king, Flume, on the sauntering downtempo hit “Drop the Game” — Chet Faker is already no slouch on American dance floors. His solo dance track “Talk Is Cheap,” from his debut album, “Built on Glass,” has found frequent club play stateside for its sultry vocals and rich saxophone-and-synth groove. He performs three dates at Terminal 5, all of which have quickly sold out. With XXYYXX. Saturday at 8:30 p.m., Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 p.m., 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com. (Anderson)Rhiannon Giddens  (Thursday) “Tomorrow Is My Turn,” the debut solo album by this longtime singer-instrumentalist of the traditional string band the Carolina Chocolate Drops, is a contemporary affair of warmth and class. The talented Ms. Giddens seems to find fresh zeal while weaving playfully between electric guitars and country-infused percussion; her hearty, deeply emotive voice still earns its spotlight, gilded with soft touches by the producer T Bone Burnett. At 8 p.m., the Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, the-townhall-nyc.org. (Anderson)★ José González  (Wednesday) Wanderlust runs deep on “Vestiges & Claws,” the first solo album in seven years by this Swedish singer-songwriter and erstwhile frontman of Junip; it is a lovely, hushed effort obsessed with naturalistic splendor and escape to misty, far-flung landscapes. The record ties in seamlessly to his last high-profile project: several pop songs for the soundtrack of the winsome adventure film “The Secret Life of Walter Mitty.” With Olaf Arnalds. At 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)★ Debbie Harry  (Through Saturday) In the 1970s, when Ms. Harry and her band Blondie first trod CBGB’s sticky boards, she was the prototype of the glamorous punk: a woman full of righteous conviction who also radiated poise. Now, one year after the band celebrated its 40th anniversary and released the album “Ghosts of Download,” she’s taken to the regal Café Carlyle on the Upper East Side for a short residency. It’s a long way from the East Village, but a fitting place for a rock eminence. Friday at 8:45 and 10:45 p.m.; Saturday at 8:45 p.m.; 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. (Anderson)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Billy Joel  (Monday) The piano man has achieved what the Knicks can only fantasize about: a yearlong winning streak at Madison Square Garden. His open-ended monthly residency, which began in January 2014, has been billed by the arena as its fourth franchise. So far, it has included hearty appearances by Sting, John Mellencamp and Brian Johnson of AC/DC, as well as many euphoric singalongs to “New York State of Mind.” At 8 p.m., Madison Square Garden, 866-858-0008, thegarden.com. (Anderson)Lecrae (Thursday) This Christian rapper appeared to have a higher power behind his seventh album, “Anomaly”: Its rocketing sales made him the first musician to land an album at the top of both the gospel charts and the Billboard 200. His half-shouted lyrics share clear similarities to Kanye West’s, as they sail equally on braggadocio and neuroticism, with charged religious ponderings, myriad fashion references and a healthy splash of Autotune. With Andy Mineo and DJ Promote. At 7:30 p.m., Best Buy Theater, 1515 Broadway, at 44th Street, 888-929-7849, bestbuytheater.com. (Anderson)The Month in Cabaret (through May 2) The spring cabaret season arrives in New York with a saucy Brazilian accent and a whisper of bossa nova as the pianist and singer Eliane Elias opens a five-night engagement at Birdland, Tuesday through April 11, performing songs from her recent album, “Made in Brazil.” This lushly arranged collection includes six original songs, along with standards by Roberto Menescal, Ary Barroso and Antônio Carlos Jobim. At 8:30 and 11 p.m., 315 West 44th Street, Clinton, 212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com. At Café Carlyle, the guitarist John Pizzarelli reunites with Daniel Jobim, Antonio’s son, who played with his father on many of his recordings, from April 21 through May 2. Tuesdays through Fridays at 8:45 p.m.; Saturdays at 8:45 p.m. and 10:45 p.m. The cafe also continues to showcase nontraditional nightclub acts with a two-week engagement, from Tuesday through April 18, by Lena Hall, recently seen in the Broadway revival of “Hedwig and the Angry Inch.” Tuesdays through Fridays at 8:45 p.m.; Saturdays at 8:45 p.m. and 10:45 p.m. Café Carlyle, 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com. The Midtown club 54 Below is hopping with divas from different generations. Patti LuPone brings back her popular show of standards, “The Lady With the Torch,” through April 14. Nellie McKay’s new show, “My Weekly Reader,” looks back at the 1960s from a playful 21st-century perspective, from April 13 through 18. The venerable Marilyn Maye’s new show, “Her Way: A Centennial Tribute to Frank Sinatra,” from April 17 through 30, is another birthday celebration of Ol’ Blue Eyes. At various dates and times, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 646-476-3551, 54below.com. (Stephen Holden)Advertisement★ Nicole Moudaber  (Saturday) A techno and deep-house tastemaker in Europe, Ms. Moudaber is widely credited with bringing raves to Beirut, where she once lived. This Nigerian-born artist is a stalwart advocate for women in the still-macho electronic scene, and an innovative D.J.-producer with a lively stage presence. At 10 p.m., Output, 74 Wythe Avenue, at North 12th Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, outputclub.com. (Anderson)★ The Mountain Goats  (Thursday) The Mountain Goats’ happily eccentric frontman, John Darnielle, has long established himself as a font of verbosity with a keen ear for emotionally gutting hooks. On “Beat the Champ,” the band’s new record, he also unmasks himself as a zealous fan of professional wrestling, which gives this concept album its theme. The song “Werewolf Gimmick” finds Mr. Darnielle gleefully yelping, “Let him who thinks he knows no fear/Look well upon my face.” At 8 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events. (Anderson)Damien Rice  (Saturday) The sparse video for “I Don’t Want to Change You,” a single off Mr. Rice’s third album, “My Favourite Faded Fantasy,” pins down this Irish folk-pop singer-songwriter’s essence in close-ups of tortured expressions and swaths of blue landscape and in a quiet, implacable confidence. His convulsing dance break midsong is a welcome, impish interlude. Mr. Rice found his greatest stateside fame to date on the soundtrack to the Mike Nichols film “Closer” in 2004, his sparse, beseeching folk balladry perfectly amplifying the emotional carnage on screen. At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com. (Anderson)The Ting Tings  (Monday) “Sounds From Nowheresville,” this British duo’s second studio album, was fairly immodest, with yelping, rambunctious dance-punk that mingled with arena-friendly rock and new wave. On the song “Guggenheim,” the singer Katie White pined for the love of a beautiful art snob, forcefully singing, “I’m gonna paint my face like the Guggenheim.” Last year’s follow-up album, “Super Critical,” consisted of less colorful dance tracks. With Kane Holler. At 9 p.m., Rough Trade NYC, 64 North Ninth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, roughtradenyc.com. (Anderson)★ Waxahatchee (Thursday) As wintry as its inspiration, this lo-fi folk project by the singer-songwriter Katie Crutchfield sprang from her jamming during a snowy weekend at her parents’ home near the Waxahatchee Creek in Alabama. Ms. Crutchfield pulls no punches on “Cerulean Salt,” her second album, juxtaposing lilting girl-group harmonies with stripped ruminations on lost innocence. She releases the album “Ivy Tripp” on Monday on her new label, Merge Records. With Girlpool and the Goodbye Party. At 9 p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com. (Anderson)Matthew E. White  (Monday) This spacey folk singer-songwriter delivers low, minimalist mumbles and bright peeks of falsetto over snug strings and brass orchestration. His lovely admissions, like “You give me joy like a fountain deep down in my soul” (from “One of These Days”), cause a few heartstrings to flutter. His debut album, “Big Inner,” landed in 2012; his full-length follow-up, “Fresh Blood,” arrived last month and it’s a worthy, spiritually infused psychedelic jaunt. With Wilsen and Karima Walker. At 8 p.m., Baby’s All Right, 146 Broadway, near Bedford Avenue, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, babysallright.ticketfly.com. (Anderson)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page C16 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Pop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.