APRIL 2, 2015
Full reviews of recent dance performances: nytimes.com/dance. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.★ Soledad Barrio and Noche Flamenca  (Saturday through next Friday) Some dance makes sense in big halls; some thrives in intimate environs. Flamenco is one that comes alive in the cozy, charged energy of a nightclub; hence it’s perfect for Joe’s Pub. And Ms. Barrio, one of the great flamenco dancers of the day, is a treat to see up close. She returns for a weeklong engagement with the vigorous dancers Juan Ogalla and Marina Elana, along with a team of excellent musicians. Saturday and Sunday at 9:30 p.m., Monday through next Friday at 7 and 9:30 p.m., 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com. (Brian Schaefer)Brooklyn Dance Festival  (Saturday) This one-night-only affair offers a sampling of 10 dance companies representing a broad swath of contemporary dance in the city. The festival, now in its fourth year, also offers opportunities for young performers and emerging choreographers, but this night is for the pros. The junior wings of the Paul Taylor and Martha Graham companies will be present, along with local troupes putting forth the artistic vision of their founders, including Francesca Harper, Michael Mao and Kristin Sudeikis. At 8 p.m., Fishman Space, Fisher Building, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 321 Ashland Place, near Lafayette Avenue, Fort Greene, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Schaefer)The Dance Apocalypse  (Friday through Sunday) The folks at Jack have tapped into a rich vein of quirky performance from Philadelphia. Last week, Annie Wilson skewered the representation of female sexuality; this week, Gabrielle Revlock and Nicole Bindler, working as the Dance Apocalypse, dissect the economics of dance. Each presents a solo — one called “Fundraiser,” the other called “Class” — that critiques the circumstances in which contemporary dance is made and presented, but the work is also about their relationship. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m., Sunday at 7 p.m., 505 ½ Waverly Avenue, near Fulton Street, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, jackny.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement★ Dance Theater of Harlem  (Wednesday through April 11) For its New York season, Dance Theater of Harlem brings two programs, a spring bouquet filled with its signature mix of neoclassical gems, contemplative drama and zesty spirit. Examples of each include George Balanchine’s seminal “Agon”; the company premiere of Nacho Duato’s “Coming Together”; and Robert Garland’s “Return,” set to music by Aretha Franklin and James Brown. But it’s that last type of dance in which this company, rebooted in 2012, really shines. Wednesday at 7 p.m., Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, 212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org. (Schaefer)Advertisement★ Dorrance Dance  (Saturday and Sunday) Michelle Dorrance is more than just a talented tap dancer: She’s a tap ambassador and impresario, bringing together intriguing collectives of performers, collaborating with exciting musicians and experimenting with form and presentation. For her Joyce debut, Ms. Dorrance and her stellar fellow hoofers Dormeshia Sumbry-Edwards and Derick K. Grant share the stage with the singer and composer Toshi Reagon and Ms. Reagon’s band BigLovely for “The Blues Project,” which infuses tap’s rhythms and energy with emotion and soul. Saturday at 8 p.m.; Sunday at 2 p.m. and 7:30 p.m.; Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)★ Flexn  (through Saturday) Flex, a dance style thought to have been born in Jamaica in the ’90s and raised in the clubs of Brooklyn, is defined by dislocated limbs, extreme contortions and stuttering steps reminiscent of animation. It is disconcerting and elegant, nightmarish and divine, and a fitting vessel to consider today’s volatile race relations. This ambitious project by the director Peter Sellars and the flex pioneer Reggie Gray, known as Regg Roc, brings a crew of 20 flex dancers to the Park Avenue Armory’s cavernous hall. At 8 p.m., 643 Park Avenue, at 67th Street, 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org. (Schaefer)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.★ Rashaun Mitchell  (through Saturday) Mr. Mitchell unveils a new work, “Light Years,” turning his astute imagination toward notions of infinitude. How much information can one body hold? What if the boundaries it knows, in time and space, fall away? Populating this universe will be the astronomically talented dancers Hiroki Ichinose, Cori Kresge, Silas Riener and Melissa Toogood, most of whom were Mr. Mitchell’s colleagues in the Merce Cunningham Dance Company. At 7:30 p.m., New York Live Arts, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Siobhan Burke)★ Stephen Petronio Company  (Tuesday through April 12) As a young choreographer, Stephen Petronio was the rock star of the dance world, his work shaped by the ethos of “sex, drugs and rock ’n’ roll.” Three decades later, it has matured but is still driven by a hunger for constant motion. To celebrate his company’s 30th anniversary, Mr. Petronio is introducing “Bloodlines,” a five-year initiative to present postmodern dance classics. On this program, that includes Merce Cunningham’s bewitching 1968 dance “RainForest,” which is paired with new work by Mr. Petronio. Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m.; Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.; Sunday at 2 and 7:30 p.m.; Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-242-0800, joyce.org. (Schaefer)Molly Poerstel  (Friday and Saturday) Many mothers will tell you that there’s something primal in their parental instincts. The New York choreographer Molly Poerstel, who likes to create work with a sinister edge, explores the nature of the matriarch and the animal at the heart of women in her work in progress, part of New York Live Arts’ Studio Series. At 6 p.m., 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts.org. (Schaefer)Gillian Walsh (Thursday through April 11) Some artists celebrate the freedom of the body and the unexpected results of spontaneity in dance; Gillian Walsh is not interested in that. In “Scenario: Script to Perform,” Ms. Walsh uses a written score comprising numerical systems and codes to keep her dancers in line and focused on a complex series of instructions. Though it sounds dry, the method reveals appealing patterns and an intriguing underlying structure, devoid of dance artifice. At 8 p.m., the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea, 212-255-5793, thekitchen.org. (Schaefer)‘Work Up’ (Thursday through April 11) Gibney Dance is making good use of its new downtown performance space, introducing another series to support the work of emerging artists. “Work Up” identifies performers who take risks and address relevant issues. The first of four consecutive weekends includes dance by Abigail Levine, inspired by the paintings of Robert Motherwell; by Chafin Seymour, who tackles race with the help of Chopin and the Notorious B.I.G.; and Sophie Sotsky, who celebrates strong, athletic women but struggles with dance’s demand for softness. At 7:30 p.m., Gibney Dance Performing Arts Center, 280 Broadway, near Chambers Street, Lower Manhattan, 646-837-6809, gibneydance.org. (Schaefer)A version of this schedule appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page C18 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Dance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.