AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10 P.M. (HBO) AMY SCHUMER: LIVE AT THE APOLLO Is it safe? Not so much for Ms. Schumer — the star of Comedy Central’s “Inside Amy Schumer” and the film “Trainwreck” — as she turns her attention to her own body in her first stand-up concert for HBO. Garden gnome. Werewolf. Fat tumbleweed. Those are just a few of the ways she describes herself while expounding on female stereotypes and the sometimes piggish ways of men. Then it’s time to talk about sex: “I’d say in a relationship 50 percent of the time I initiate sex, and then 50 percent we don’t have it.” Mike Hale, writing in The New York Times, described it as “a comfortable kind of self-deprecation, born of insecurity but delivered with a confidence that takes the sting out and gives the listener a snug feeling of complicity.” He added, “There are comics who inspire more raucous, helpless laughter, but no one has the audience so completely on her side.”10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY Fred de Sam Lazaro visits Casa del Migrante, a shelter in northern Mexico created by a Jesuit priest as a safe haven for migrants seeking refuge in the United States.NOON (13) THE OPEN MIND John Opdycke, the president of Open Primaries, talks about nonpartisan elections.8 P.M. (TCM) THE ESSENTIALS: SET IN ARIZONA Robert Osborne and Sally Field explain why Martin Scorsese’s “Alice Doesn’t Live Here Anymore” (1975) — starring an Oscar-winning Ellen Burstyn as Alice Hyatt, who heads to California with her son to pursue her passion after her husband’s sudden death — is required viewing. Among the reasons: Harvey Keitel as the small-town sadist who traps Alice for a while; Kris Kristofferson as the rancher who finally wins her; and Diane Ladd and Valerie Curtin as the waitresses in a diner where she works. “Their marvelous contributions in small roles are a measure of the film’s quality and of Mr. Scorsese’s fully realized talents as one of the best of the new American filmmakers,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times.9 P.M. (CUNY) SMILES OF A SUMMER NIGHT (1957) A lawyer asks his former mistress how to best treat his young wife, who is drawn to his angst-ridden son — take a breath — while the mistress, who still fancies the lawyer, has her hands full with her married lover, whose wife intends to get him back by seducing the lawyer. Got it? Gunnar Bjornstrand, Harriet Andersson, Ulla Jacobsson and Eva Dahlbeck star in Ingmar Bergman’s erotic comedy, which Bosley Crowther, writing in The Times, called “as witty and cheerfully candid about the complexities of love as any recent French essay on l’amour.” John Simon, the critic and author of “Ingmar Bergman Directs,” untangles it all afterward.10 P.M. (Centric) ACCORDING TO ALEX Whoopi Goldberg’s daughter, Alex Martin Dean, gets her own reality show.11:30 P.M. (NBC) SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE Tracy Morgan returns to the “S.N.L.” stage as host more than a year after he was critically injured in an automobile accident. Demi Lovato, whose “Confident” album dropped Friday, is the musical guest.What’s Streaming NowKUNG FU MASTER! (1988) Jane Birkin plays a lonely 40-year-old mother who falls in love with one of her daughters’ teenage schoolmates. She stalks him in video arcades; he invites her to meet him in a hotel bar to celebrate the removal of his braces. It’s not lurid — the most explicit scene shows them snuggling in a sleeping bag — but it is occasionally silly. Agnès Varda directed this family affair, starring her son and Ms. Birkin’s daughters, and its companion piece, “Jane B. par Agnes V.” (1987), what Ms. Varda called “an imaginary biopic” of Ms. Birkin, the singer, actress, fashion plate and muse to Serge Gainsbourg. (fandor.com)Advertisement