AdvertisementSupported byFull reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.Opera★ ‘Don Carlo’ (Monday) For this revival of Nicholas Hytner’s 2010 production of Verdi’s profoundly great “Don Carlo,” the Metropolitan Opera has assembled a strong cast and an exceptional conductor. The Korean tenor Yonghoon Lee brings melting sound and youthful impetuosity to the title role. The soprano Barbara Frittoli as Elisabeth, and the mezzo-soprano Ekaterina Gubanova as Princess Eboli, give winning performances. The suave Russian baritone Dmitri Hvorostovsky excels as Rodrigo, and the great Italian bass Ferruccio Furlanetto owns the role of the isolated, ruthless Philip II. Best of all is the stylish, exciting conducting of Yannick Nézet-Séguin. At 7 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Anthony Tommasini)‘Ernani’ (Saturday and Wednesday) Plácido Domingo, seemingly determined to prolong his career, has taken on another baritone role: Don Carlo, in the Metropolitan Opera’s revival of Verdi’s “Ernani.” This once-glorious tenor’s many fans cheered him on opening night, but his singing these days is compromised, his sound leathery. He was also notably careless in execution. There were still flashes of the great Domingo vocal charisma. But Verdi had a baritone in mind for this music. The rest of the cast is excellent, especially the sumptuous soprano Angela Meade as Elvira, and the youthful Italian tenor Francesco Meli in the title role. James Levine, a great Verdian, conducts. (On Wednesday the Canadian tenor Luc Robert, in his Met debut, takes over the role of Ernani, with Paul Nadler conducting.) Saturday at 1 p.m. and Wednesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Tommasini)‘Lucia di Lammermoor’  (Saturday and Tuesday) The ardent tenor Joseph Calleja is the strongest element in the Metropolitan Opera’s bland revival of Donizetti’s moody masterpiece. The potent Russian coloratura soprano Albina Shagimuratova has accuracy but little passion. The baritone Luca Salsi sings her brother, Enrico, and Maurizio Benini conducts. Saturday at 8 p.m. and Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Zachary Woolfe)★ ‘Lucrezia Borgia’ (Friday, Saturday and Tuesday) Loft Opera, an enterprising start-up, has quickly proved a vital addition to the city’s roster of small opera companies, showcasing gifted young singers in Brooklyn lofts and other nontraditional locations. The lineup this week features this Donizetti work. (Through April 11.) At 8 p.m., LightSpace Studios, 1115 Flushing Avenue, between Porter and Varick Avenues, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, loftopera.com. (Vivien Schweitzer)‘Aida’  (Thursday) Not one to ignore an opportunity to multitask, Plácido Domingo conducts the Metropolitan Opera’s revival of Verdi’s great Egypt opera as he continues a run in that composer’s “Ernani.” The cast includes Oksana Dyka, Violeta Urmana, Marco Berti, Mark Delavan and Stefan Kocan. At 8 p.m., Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center, 212-362-6000, metopera.org. (Woolfe)Classical Music★ L’Arpeggiata  (Tuesday and Wednesday) This vivacious European early-music group brings two programs to Carnegie Hall this week, opening its Before Bach festival. The first looks at arias by the Venetian composer Francesco Cavalli, with the soprano Nuria Rial. All manner of works by Henry Purcell — sacred, profane, theatrical — make up the second, with Ms. Rial joined by the alto Vincenzo Capezzuto. At 7:30 p.m., Zankel Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (David Allen)Boston Early Music Festival (Thursday) The erotically charged music of Monteverdi’s “L’Incoronazione di Poppea” and glittering arias by Handel are the focus of this concert presented by this celebrated early-music festival. The stellar performers include the soprano Amanda Forsythe and the countertenor David Hansen. Paul O’Dette and Stephen Stubbs lead from the continuo section. At 7:30 p.m., Morgan Library & Museum, 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)Calidore String Quartet  (Wednesday) This up-and-coming string quartet presents an idiosyncratic program, with the Pulitzer Prize-winning composer Caroline Shaw’s “Entr’acte” sandwiched between select movements from works by Haydn and Hindemith and Mendelssohn’s brilliant (and complete) String Quartet No. 2 (Op. 13). At 7.30 p.m., SubCulture, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 212-533-5470, subculturenewyork.com. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)★ Lukas Ligeti  (Friday through Sunday) The music of this imaginative percussionist and composer blends diverse elements, including jazz, electronica and African music, into an enticing whole. He completes his six-day residency with programs featuring collaborations with an eclectic range of instrumentalists, including the percussionist Susie Ibarra on Sunday. At 8 and 10 p.m., the Stone, Avenue C and Second Street, East Village, thestonenyc.com. (Schweitzer)‘The Lord of the Rings’ in Concert  (Tuesday through Thursday) Howard Shore’s score for this blockbuster film trilogy gets the live symphonic treatment at Lincoln Center. A full orchestra and the Brooklyn Youth Chorus will perform while the movies are screened, through April 12. At 7:30 p.m., Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, 212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com. (Woolfe)New York Philharmonic (Wednesday through April 11) The brilliant, inquisitive Georgian violinist Lisa Batiashvili continues her tenure as artist in residence with the New York Philharmonic in an enticing program featuring a New York premiere of a Philharmonic co-commission: Thierry Escaich’s Concerto for Violin and Oboe. The other soloist is an artist Ms. Batiashvili knows well: the eminent oboist François Leleux, her husband. They will also be the soloists in Bach’s Concerto for Violin and Oboe. Alan Gilbert conducts the program, which includes Shostakovich’s powerful 10th Symphony. Wednesday and Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org. (Tommasini)★ Pomerium  (Saturday and Thursday) This excellent a cappella choir, which performs music of the Renaissance, offers a program on Saturday exploring the development of sacred music, from Gregorian chant through the elaborate polyphonic works of Monteverdi and Gesualdo. On Thursday, as part of Carnegie Hall’s Before Bach festival, the ensemble performs music composed during the era of Mary Tudor and Elizabeth I. Saturday at 1 and 3 p.m., the Cloisters, 99 Margaret Corbin Drive, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights, 212-923-3700, metmuseum.org. Thursday at 7:30 p.m., Weill Recital Hall, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org. (Schweitzer)Raphaël Sévère (Tuesday) The essential Young Concert Artists organization, which has an impressive record of finding exceptional emerging artists, presents the next program in its New York series, featuring this 19-year-old French clarinetist. Joined by the pianist Paul Montag, Mr. Sévère plays works by Brahms, Boulez, Poulenc, Sylvain Picart and (joined by the violinist Paul Huang) Stravinsky. At 7:30 p.m., Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-501-3330, kaufmanmusiccenter.org. (Tommasini)Talea Ensemble  (Wednesday) Aptly enough, three works by the Italian composer Pierluigi Billone make up the program for the Talea Ensemble’s appearance at the Italian Academy at Columbia University. A solo bassoon work, “Legno.Edre III.Ini” (2003) receives its world premiere, and the ensemble piece “Ebe und Anders” its American premiere. Also on the docket is “Mani.Matta,” a work for percussion. At 7:30 p.m., 1161 Amsterdam Avenue, near 116th Street, Morningside Heights, 212-854-2306, italianacademy.columbia.edu; free. (Allen)Advertisement