
Antiques By                     
EVE M. KAHN

APRIL 2, 2015
Victorian children peered into mass-produced accordion boxes of paper prints called peep shows, which gave the illusion of depth and motion. The layers of scenes, pierced with viewing holes, represented parks, gardens, battlefields, theaters and engineering feats like canals, tunnels and bridges.The Victoria and Albert Museum in London has received about 350 of these fragile toys from the British collectors Jacqueline and Jonathan Gestetner, who own Marlborough Rare Books in London. (The museum is now planning an international touring exhibition of the gifts.) Starting on Thursday, Mr. Gestetner will be selling peep shows depicting scenes from England, France, Germany, Denmark, Italy and New York at the New York Antiquarian Book Fair, where they will be priced up to a few thousand dollars each.The couple have also commissioned a book, “Paper Peepshows: The Jacqueline and Jonathan Gestetner Collection” (Antique Collectors’ Club), by the historian Ralph Hyde.Until now, no major study has covered the peep shows, partly because so few survive. “They’re played with heavily and fall to bits,” Mr. Hyde said.AdvertisementWhen he has opened the stretchable toys in the Gestetner holdings, he said, “It was always a surprise.” In a peepshow scene of Napoleon’s forces at Waterloo, printed in London in the 1830s, Mr. Hyde discovered a tiny portrait of Jean Baptiste De Coster, a Flemish innkeeper who guided Napoleonic forces. “What he was doing was feeding Napoleon all the wrong information,” Mr. Hyde said.AdvertisementPeepshows have also been called tunnel books, areaoramas, cosmoramas and optiques. Their foldout sequences of scenes are considered precursors of animation and movies. The three-dimensionality allowed 19th-century children to imagine attending British coronation ceremonies, French steeplechase races, Chinese wedding processions, Turkish feasts at the end of Ramadan and Egyptian ceremonies for the opening of the Suez Canal.The illustrators, mostly in northern Europe, made numerous errors in rendering exotic backdrops as well as local ones. “There are instances where the wrong building is shown or even the wrong city,” Mr. Hyde writes in the new book.He also gives thumbnail biographies of peep show inventors. “The splendidly named Bondy Yomtob Azulay,” Mr. Hyde writes, was an immigrant from Hamburg, Germany, who described his London printing company as a “perspective view manufacturer.” Mr. Azulay specialized in images of a pedestrian tunnel under the Thames that opened in the 1840s. The tunnel attracted millions of visitors who paid a penny each to enter. (Mr. Azulay found time to patent designs for fuel production machinery as well.) He incorporated recycled materials into his souvenir toys for tunnel tourists. “Quite a number of Azulay’s peep shows are mounted inside discarded covers from unwanted books, sometimes of leather with the original gilt title still in place on the spine,” Mr. Hyde writes.CHRISTIAN MANUSCRIPTSAn unnamed Swiss couple is selling part of their collection of Christian books written a millennium ago. Sixteen volumes, at prices up to millions of dollars each, are in a show at Les Enluminures gallery in Manhattan, “The Idda Collection: Romanesque Biblical Manuscripts c. 1000 to 1240,” opening Thursday.The collection is named after St. Idda, a 12th-century Swiss countess who fled an abusive marriage and became a forest hermit and then a Benedictine nun. Most of the manuscripts originally belonged to monks and nuns who lived within a few hundred miles of Idda’s hermitage. The exhibition catalog, by Laura Light and Christopher de Hamel, traces centuries of provenance trails. Bookplates and inscriptions from former owners are scattered throughout the Idda collection.A gospel book in the show ($6.5 million) was written for a convent in Liesborn, Germany, around 1000. It remained there for 800 years and then passed through institutional and private collections in Europe and the United States. Corrections to the text and even tiny doodles have been added. Scholars determined that a signature at the back of the book, Gfrxxbrd, was the code name for a deacon, Gerwardus, one of the original scribes who labored over the vellum pages.His use of code amounted to “either a sign of humility or an act of how clever he is,” Charlotte Stovell, the art director at Les Enluminures, said during a preview.AdvertisementAnimal hair follicles are still visible on the vellum, and some pages have gaping holes where the skins were stretched to the breaking point. A page from a 12th-century gospel lectionary, made in Spain or Portugal, has long diagonal gashes held together by rough stitches. The book belonged to a Portuguese prince and a Brazilian professor and then surfaced on the market in London in the 1980s.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Prices paid for the Idda volumes are sometimes traceable. In the last few years, at Sotheby’s in London, the Swiss couple spent about $72,000 for epistles from the 12th century and about $60,000 for 12th-century biblical commentary. Both books were written in Italy, and during the last century or so they have been traded among collectors and dealers in Europe, Canada and the United States.Some bindings in the Idda library have been changed, and pages trimmed to fit new covers. The Liesborn book, now clad in carved wood, was originally studded with gold, gemstones and ivory. “That may have been stolen, or sold as a means of income for the abbey,” Ms. Stovell said.Swiss institutions are collaborating on a database of digitized medieval tomes called e-codices, which is also known as the Virtual Manuscript Library of Switzerland. Christoph Flüeler, the project director, said he had not heard of the Idda collection. While some private owners are willing to have their holdings posted online, others prefer to stay unpublished.He is also working on a Fragmentarium, a database that virtually reunites pages of manuscripts that have been separated.Medieval writings still intact in religious libraries will be exhibited starting next month in Venice during the Biennale. In conjunction with a contemporary sculpture installation by Jaume Plensa, the basilica on the island of San Giorgio Maggiore will begin showing newly restored illuminated manuscripts from a collection that has endured despite theft and sales over the years.A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page C28 of the New York edition with the headline: Children’s Peep Shows at Antiquarian Book Fair.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »