AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken JohnsonIn 2006, the art collector Ronald S. Lauder purchased Gustav Klimt’s “Adele Bloch-Bauer I” (1907) for $135 million, then the highest price paid for a painting, and made it the crown jewel of the Neue Galerie, the museum he founded in 2001. Since then other paintings have sold for considerably higher sums, adjusted for inflation, including those by Paul Cézanne and Paul Gauguin.If some of the luster was lost from Klimt’s masterpiece as other works eclipsed its sale price, it is being renewed with the release of the movie “Woman in Gold.” It tells the tale of how Adele Bloch-Bauer’s niece, Maria Altmann (1916-2011), played by Helen Mirren, succeeded in gaining ownership of her aunt’s portrait from the Austrian government decades after it was looted by the Nazis and displayed by the Belvedere in Vienna. The Neue Galerie’s “Gustav Klimt and Adele Bloch-Bauer: The Woman in Gold,” which opened on Thursday, a day after the film, is a small exhibition centered on “Adele Bloch-Bauer I” and conveys the biography of the painting through vintage photographs of the principal players, sketchy preparatory drawings for Adele Bloch-Bauer’s portrait and discursive text panels. The show also features seven other paintings by Klimt from private collections, including two pastoral landscapes; three small, lovely portraits of women; and “The Dancer” (1916-17), a near life-size picture of a standing woman enveloped in a floral-patterned dress. Rounding things out, an assortment of jewelry and decorative objects serves to typify the luxurious lifestyle of Adele and Ferdinand Bloch-Bauer, the art collectors who commissioned the portrait. If you’ve never seen “Adele Bloch-Bauer I” in the flesh or would like to renew your acquaintance with it, now’s probably not a good time, especially for the agoraphobic: There will be lines. Those who brave the crowd will behold the head and bare shoulders of a woman emerging from an opulent field of patterns rendered in gold and silver leaf. Her face is blurry and has a gray pallor accentuated by her upswept black hair and slightly enlivened by pink cheeks. She gazes out with sleepy eyes, a wide, Wiener Werkstätte-style choker wrapped around her elongated neck. She wears a slinky dress covered in a horizontally banded pattern of eyes and triangles and what appears to be an open cape bearing a patchwork pattern of rectangles. A background of gold and silver circles and spirals in different sizes creates an ethereal atmosphere. Clasping clawlike hands before her, she’s a fin de siècle decadent dreamer, a Cassandra-like harbinger of events to come in the 20th century.For all its optical dazzle and dreamy poetry, however, it’s not one of the most exciting paintings of modern times. Flattened to the point of suffocation by its decorative excess, its erotic appeal chastely muted, it has a fusty, languid feeling. Were it not for what happened to it years after its completion, the work would not be nearly so famous as it is today. Klimt started work on the portrait in 1903 and toiled for four years, after which it remained one of the most prized possessions of the Bloch-Bauer family. Here’s where things got tricky. Before her death in 1925, Adele wrote in her final will that she wanted Ferdinand to donate her portrait, as well as a second portrait of her and four landscapes, all by Klimt, to the Austrian Gallery, the former name of the Belvedere. After Germany’s annexation of Austria in 1938, Ferdinand fled the country, leaving behind all his properties, including his art collection. Adele’s portrait went to the Belvedere, where it remained for the rest of the 20th century. Ms. Altmann settled in California in 1942. She requested in 1998 that the Belvedere turn over to her the Klimts that were taken from the Bloch-Bauer collection, but the museum denied her based on Adele’s will. Ms. Altmann didn’t give up. In 1999 in the Central District of California, she sued the Republic of Austria and the Belvedere, seeking return of the paintings. The appeals process brought the case all the way to the United States Supreme Court, which decided in her favor in 2004. In 2006 Austria acceded to binding arbitration that gave Ms. Altmann the 1907 Adele portrait, which Mr. Lauder then purchased from her, and four other paintings that were sold at auction shortly thereafter. Today, loaded with a history that even Klimt couldn’t have imagined, the painting hangs at the intersection of debates about art and its value, whether aesthetic, spiritual or pecuniary. That it’s been elevated to this highly visible position more because of extrinsic circumstances than for its intrinsic qualities is worth observing: It could just as well have been a different painting at the heart of the legal machinations. But it’s uncannily apt, in light of the stratospheric prices some artworks sell for these days, that the disputed object happened to be a picture of a seductive woman clothed and embedded in gold, a symbol equally of the sacred and the profane. “Gustav Klimt and Adele Bloch-Bauer: The Woman in Gold” runs through Sept. 7 at the Neue Galerie, 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street; 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org. Advertisement