
Inside Art By                     
 RANDY KENNEDY
 
APRIL 2, 2015
For decades, La Monte Young, a father of Minimalist music, has preached that sound needs duration — far more than a long evening’s duration — for certain kinds of meaning to accrue. “A one-hour composition,” as Mr. Young said the other day, “is nothing like a six-year composition.”But New York real estate has never been kind to such needs. In the 1980s, a plan for a permanent Manhattan site for Mr. Young’s music and for the work of his wife and longtime collaborator, the artist Marian Zazeela, fell through when the Dia Art Foundation ran into money troubles and had to sell the building on Harrison Street in TriBeCa that the couple had transformed into their “Dream House,” the most ambitious expression of their ethereal ideas of sound and light.Now, Dia — which has continued to support another, smaller “Dream House” in a rented space on Church Street in TriBeCa — is working once again to ensure that the installation will be a permanent part of the city. It has acquired “Dream House” as a work and will present a new version of it at Dia’s building at 545 West 22nd Street in Chelsea from June 17 through Oct. 24, with an eye toward creating a longer-term installation when Dia builds a new headquarters for its collections and programs on West 22nd Street. (Dia officials hope construction will begin within the next three years.)Jessica Morgan, Dia’s new director, said that when she took over the job this year, one of her first priorities was to find a way to protect and promote the work of Mr. Young and Ms. Zazeela, who were among the first group of artists supported by Dia after its founding in 1974. “They’ve made this incredible contribution to music that I think is still very underappreciated nationally and even internationally,” she said, adding: “He should be understood as a John Cage of our era.” The Chelsea “Dream House” will open with a concert of Mr. Young’s and Ms. Zazeela’s Just Alap Raga Ensemble on June 13, and a series of performances will follow.AdvertisementIn a telephone interview, Mr. Young, 79, and Ms. Zazeela, 74, with the artist Jung Hee Choi, a collaborator for many years, said the new space would let them rethink “Dream House,” which has existed in other iterations around the world, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1971. As early as the 1950s, Mr. Young said, “I saw the advantage of having a place where you didn’t have to think about where you’re going to be next,” which led to “the concept of a place where sound and light could evolve over time and musicians would have a permanent place to play and people could experience music through repeated visits over years.”AdvertisementBut given their experience with financial realities (their Church Street landlord is sympathetic but offers no guarantee the work will be able to stay), Mr. Young said he would hold off before celebrating “Dream House” as an enduring part of the city. “If you get permanent paint on your house, that lasts — what? — about a year if you’re lucky,” he said. “We’ll see what happens.”PHOTOGRAPHY CENTER’S NEW HOMEAn empty glass-fronted retail space at 250 Bowery, a block from the New Museum, didn’t look like much on a recent morning. The dusty concrete floors at street level were occupied by a table, some chairs, a blinking Wi-Fi router and two snow shovels lined up to mark where a corridor might be someday. If the International Center of Photography has its way, though, that day might come before the end of the year. That’s when the center, which closed in January after its longtime lease in Midtown expired, hopes to open its highly experimental new space in a commercial condo that it recently bought in a luxury residential building. It is the first home it has owned since 1999, when it moved out of the Upper East Side townhouse where it was founded.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mark Lubell, the center’s executive director, said architects would soon begin remaking the space, which has more than 5,000 square feet for exhibitions on two floors, into raw, airy galleries with a continuous glass front along the Bowery. He said he believes the connection to the street — along with a cafe and screens beaming out images from the center’s programming — will telegraph the institution’s intention to become a hub for conversations about the increasingly complex way pictures circulate and function in the digital age. “It’s going to be a big challenge to think about what an exhibition will even mean in that context,” Mr. Lubell said.By New York museum standards, the turnaround time for the new space is whiplash fast, but Mr. Lubell said that he hoped the center would become known for such nimbleness. “We don’t know everything yet, which is a little discomforting for some people,” he said, “but we’re figuring it out together.”PACE GALLERY DREAMS BIGThe Pace Gallery, which turns 55 this year, making it one of the country’s oldest contemporary art galleries, has never been in the real-estate business. As Marc Glimcher, Pace’s president, has said, “We are serial renters.” But it doesn’t seem to be keeping the gallery from shaping its fortunes in Chelsea, where it has three locations.Over the next two years, along with the landlord of its flagship location at 534 West 25th Street, the gallery will oversee the construction of an eight-story building, at 540 West 25th Street, that will give it 30,000 more square feet for shows, for staff now working at offices on East 57th Street and for visible storage of art in transit through the gallery, an idea that has been growing in the museum world but that will be a novelty in a commercial gallery. The space will let Pace put its 10,000-volume art-scholars’ library front and center and also house the operations of Pace Editions and Pace/MacGill.“We don’t know exactly what it’s going to be, but it’s not going to be the same ritual of show after show and fighting other galleries for the hot artists,” Mr. Glimcher said. “We have a chance here to redefine what it is to be a gallery and to be Pace.”A report in the Inside Art column on Friday about the expansion plans of the Pace Gallery in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan, where it has three locations, misstated in some editions the size of a planned new building and its address. It is to be eight stories tall, not six, and the address will be 540 West 25th Street, not 540 West 22nd Street. The report also misidentified the site of another Pace Gallery and offices in some editions. It is on East 57th Street, not West 57th Street.A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page C22 of the New York edition with the headline: Young and Zazeela’s ‘Dream House’ Is Getting a New Lease at Dia.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »