AdvertisementSupported byArt in ReviewBy Holland CotterAlice Neel is best known for her portraits which, with their controlled painterly drama and psychological nuance, are complete and polished formal statements in a classical genre. Her drawings and watercolors, or at least the 62 in this absorbing show, are closer to diary entries. Ruminative, confiding, sometimes startlingly unguarded in emotion, they add up to a self-portrait sketched in private over some 50 years.The earliest watercolors from the 1920s establish a period mood; they present the New York City that greeted a young artist when she arrived there at age 27 with a Cuban-born husband who would soon leave her and their infant, a daughter, who would soon die. There was little money; life was raw. In watercolors we see nude figures sponging down in a cramped tenement; glimpses of Dostoyevskian neighbors (in 1938 Ms. Neel drew a set of illustrations for “The Brothers Karamazov”); and a bleak Hudson River winter landscape, ash-gray in what was still a coal-heated, bad-air town.Images of Ms. Neel’s lovers appear: the drug-addled sailor Kenneth Doolittle; the wealthy, protective businessman John Rothschild. There are three portraits of the young Puerto Rican musician José Negron, with whom the artist had a son and with whom she moved to Spanish Harlem from Greenwich Village. Perhaps as an indicator of the temperature of their relationship, two of the portraits of him show the couple in bed. And finally there’s the filmmaker Sam Brody, father of Ms. Neel’s second son and her partner for 18 years. He appears twice, in heavily worked-up ink drawings, looking withdrawn and sad. After their 1958 breakup, the artist depicted herself as a wailing, blood-weeping death’s head, a specter of grief.As time goes on, personal note-taking drops away and formal portrait-making takes over. In posed studio images from the 1970s of family and friends (Ms. Neel died in 1984), we are on familiar ground. But thanks to the selection of earlier material and to fine exhibition catalog essays by the independent curator Jeremy Lewison and the novelist Claire Messud, we have a vivid sense of how we — and she — got there.David Zwirner 537 West 20th Street, Chelsea Through April 18 Advertisement