AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CooperThe hot young tenor Michael Fabiano was out running errands near his home in Philadelphia around 1 p.m. on Wednesday when the Metropolitan Opera called, wondering if he could step in for an ailing tenor in its production of Donizetti’s “Lucia di Lammermoor.” The curtain would rise in six and a half hours. In New York.He had never seen the Met’s production, let alone rehearsed it — so doing the performance might strike some as the operatic equivalent of the nightmare about taking the final exam for a class you never attended. But after running home to his piano to make sure he remembered the role, Mr. Fabiano agreed, and caught a 2:05 p.m. Amtrak train to Penn Station.He was a tenor in a hurry. He arrived at the opera house before 4 p.m., and one of the first questions he asked the stage director, Sarah Ina Meyers, was, “Is there any sword fighting?”“Very little,” she replied.He had another, delicate question about sharing the stage for the first time with Albina Shagimuratova, the soprano in the title role: Was there kissing in the love scene? He was told that past performances had relied on embraces, but it had apparently been an attempt to contain whatever bug was going around. There could be kisses.In taking on the role, Mr. Fabiano became the latest in a line of luxury stand-ins at the Met. The Met always has understudies to step in for singers who cannot go on. But when a star withdraws, Peter Gelb, the company’s general manager, sometimes bypasses the scheduled understudy for another star — recognizing that Met audiences who pay high prices expect high-flying singers, even in flu season, and that exciting substitutes can generate buzz and publicity.So when Joseph Calleja, the popular tenor who had been singing the role of Edgardo in “Lucia,” withdrew, the Met called on Mr. Fabiano, who had made a splash this season substituting in “La Bohème.” Mr. Fabiano, 30, won the Richard Tucker Award last year and had just returned home a couple of days ago after singing “Faust” at the Paris Opera and the Sydney Opera House. (Mr. Calleja posted on Twitter that he expected to appear in Saturday’s performance.)Here is a look at his very quick path to the stage.4 P.M. COSTUME FITTING Mr. Fabiano’s first stop was the costume department, which needed to start work on alterations. A group of costumers swarmed around him like a pit crew, taking his measurements, helping him into puffy-sleeved shirts and vests and cloaks, and making notes of where to sew. Then he tried on his boots.“They’re both a little tight in the toe,” Mr. Fabiano said.Borhan Ahmed, a production supervisor, said they could be stretched.“It’s not a big deal,” Mr. Fabiano said. “It’s only one night.”4:30 P.M. QUICK BITE IN THE DRESSING ROOM While waiting for a rehearsal room to open up, Mr. Fabiano had a light dinner in his dressing room while Ms. Meyers, the stage director, showed him photographs of the sets and described where he would enter and exit. “There is a gray ‘X’ here,” she said at one point. “You have to be there for lighting reasons, and so you don’t get hit by the curtain.”4:50 P.M. REHEARSAL UNDERGROUND In a rehearsal room three levels below the stage, Ms. Meyers walked Mr. Fabiano through the opera — and tried to drill the essential bits of stage business into him.There was a cloak he had to remember to throw to the ground at one point, which she said she would ask the prompter, Greg Buchalter, to remind him of. There were the rings he needed to throw aside in a fit of jealous rage — but sideways, not forward. (“We don’t want them going in a tuba,” Mr. Fabiano agreed.) And there was the sword business.6 P.M. MEETING THE MAESTRO The rushed walk-through over, Mr. Fabiano went upstairs to meet with the conductor, Maurizio Benini, in his dressing room near the orchestra pit. Mr. Benini conducted the opera the last time that Mr. Fabiano sang the role, in Paris in 2013.6:55 P.M. FIRST TIME ON THE SET Mr. Fabiano, in costume, went into the auditorium to get a feel for the steeply raked stage, which depicts a craggy patch of Scotland, and which more than one singer has fallen on. While in the wings, he picked up a bent nail — which some singers see as good luck.7:30 P.M. THE OPERA BEGINS The lights dimmed, and Mr. Gelb walked onstage to announce the cast change. The murmur of dissent when he said that Mr. Calleja was not performing turned to cheers when he announced that Mr. Fabiano was taking his place. “He was spending what he thought was a quiet day in Philadelphia this afternoon when we called him, and he hopped on a train to come to our rescue,” Mr. Gelb said.8 P.M. ENTER MR. FABIANO As he stepped onstage for his first scene in his freshly altered costume and wig, Mr. Fabiano received applause — a sign that the audience saw him as a star. His tenor voice easily filled the house, loud and clear. And he remembered when to drop the cloak, where to throw the rings and how to do the brief sword-fighting scene. But at one point, he injured himself, hitting his head and cutting it as he exited the stage after a duet.11:05 P.M. STANDING OVATION As he took his bows after the boffo ending, in which Mr. Fabiano’s Edgardo (spoiler alert!) stabbed himself, the audience roared its “bravos” and gave him a standing ovation. When the audience filed out into the plaza at Lincoln Center, some stopped to photograph the production poster in the glass case outside the opera house, which had been updated with his name pasted onto it.Advertisement