Season 1, Episode 9: “The Reckoning”The pleasures and problems of Starz’s freshman series “Outlander” are precisely the same. Intoxicating though it may be, the series, like the book it’s adapted from, is at constant war with itself. “Outlander” wants to be an escapist, feminist romance novel, and while that’s not an impossible goal to attain, it means that more often than not the series finds itself working at cross-purposes, not unlike its protagonist, Claire Randall. The problem is not that “Outlander” wants to have its cake and eat it, too; it’s that it wants the entire blessed bakery.Ronald D. Moore, the showrunner, is no stranger to reworking beloved franchises, having helmed the reimagined “Battlestar Galactica” series, but in adapting Diana Gabaldon’s novels about a time-traveling World War II nurse who finds herself transported back to Scotland in the mid-1700s and ends up in a love triangle spanning centuries, Mr. Moore has adopted an onerous task, having to carve down the lengthy novels (as the series continues) into something resembling a structured television series. There’s no shortage of plot to work with, as the first novel, which the first season of the series is adapted from, has no less than three books’ worth of story progression sandwiched between its covers. The series makes excellent use of the lengthier cable running time, managing to make episodes simultaneously propulsive and languorous. It takes the time to luxuriate in the lush Scottish Highlands, before cutting to action scenes that rival “Game of Thrones” in their orchestration. The whole of the series to this point has been anchored in Claire’s point of view, a fact underlined by the show’s sporadic use of narration to drive particularly salient bits of information home. Claire is the audience surrogate on any number of levels, not only because the audience is also clueless in the ways of Highland life, but also because the show revolves around the idea that you live and die by the feelings that Claire has, that you love whom she loves and hate whom she hates. The show’s sensibility is inextricably tied to what Claire is feeling in any given moment, for better or worse.It’s this precise thing that undermines what this first episode back after a long hiatus tries to do. “The Reckoning” is the first episode to be told from Jamie’s point of view. It opens with Jamie pontificating about how being a man comes down to a series of choices and that how he chooses determines his entire life. When last we left “Outlander,” over six months ago, Claire had been captured by British soldiers and was in the midst of her second sexual assault of the day, when her husband burst through a window and brought the attack to a halt. With the show’s return, we see how the events play out, how Jamie bluffs his way into the room and knocks his nemesis, Black Jack Randall, out cold, absconding with his wife as his clansmen distract the soldiers before the group rapidly flees. What unfolds next is something of a significant moment in the book and most likely the main reason that the show switches to Jamie’s POV for this episode. After the group flees a fair distance, they stop to water the horses, and Claire and Jamie get into an enormous argument. Jamie, it turns out, is mad at Claire for disobeying his orders and getting herself captured, and Claire is mad at Jamie for thinking she should obey his orders in the first place. The argument escalates, with each party saying things they don’t entirely mean, but included in that is a moment where Jamie not only accuses Claire of getting captured to punish him but also needling her about how hurtful it was for him to see her nearly raped by his archenemy. The two eventually calm and forgive each other, but much more time is spent on Jamie’s anger than is spent on his relief that no real harm has come to his wife. Yet, that’s not the crux of their disagreement. Upon arriving at an inn for the evening, Claire begins to notice that none of the clansmen are acknowledging her presence, even when she tries to thank them for their assistance in her rescue. When she and Jamie retire for the evening, he informs her that were she a man, she’d be severely punished for endangering the lives of so many men and bringing the wrath of the British down upon them. As it is, because he’s her husband, it falls upon him to punish her through a strapping with his belt. Claire, being a worldly 20th-century woman, revolts at the thought of such barbaric actions, and the two begin to argue again over the propriety of corporal punishment and what right Jamie has to inflict such a thing on his beloved. In the end, Jamie gets the upper hand, by which I mean he catches Claire, holds her down and repeatedly wallops her bare backside with his belt.Here’s the problem with this scene (besides the obvious): Throughout it all, there is a jangly tune playing on the score, as Jamie chases his wife around the bedroom to, for lack of a better word, beat her. Jamie and the show alike seem to think it’s a droll little encounter and a necessary evil. There’s even the impression that he sees it as a kind of foreplay, as the final thing he utters to his wife in the scene is: “I said I was going to punish you. I didn’t say I wasn’t going to enjoy it.” The problem, then, is that he is beating a woman he loves, that he’s risked life and limb for. He’s beating a woman who has been threatened, defiled and assaulted multiple times within the last 48 hours. He’s beating a woman that he’s sworn to protect with his own body, his own life, if necessary. The reason this episode couldn’t be from Claire’s POV is because it would have ruined the way the audience saw Jamie forever.Because the episode is from Jamie’s POV, he is afforded a chance to realize the error of his ways and beg forgiveness, swearing an oath at episode’s end that he’ll never raise a hand to Claire again, before she makes her own oath in the midst of their makeup sex, holding his knife to his neck and telling him if he ever hits her again she’ll cut his heart out. The way “The Reckoning” deals with the whole of this particular plot is most likely done as well as it could have been, yet because of the choice, Claire is never afforded a time to grieve for anything that has befallen her or an opportunity to lick her wounds. Ultimately, this is the issue with faithful adaptations. It’s difficult to ascertain what is vital to keep to maintain the spirit of the original text and what can be let go. The punishment scene is pivotal in the book, but a novel, which exists only in the imagination, is less visceral than seeing the protagonist, whom the audience spends a good deal of time inside the head of, assaulted so many times in such short order. Onscreen, the sense of betrayal is magnified and though the series does its best to smooth out a tricky bit of story, it’s difficult to overlook how overtly uncomfortable it is. One of the things the show doesn’t adapt particularly well how the source material addresses Jamie. There is a vulnerability and a depth that is lost. As the show stands, Jamie is simply too good to be believed. Even things like beating his wife come from a place of true concern and loyalty to how his world works. He’s beautiful and strong, smart and kind. He has flaws, but they’re like the flaws you list in a job interview when asked what your weaknesses are: “I have a tendency to care too much and be too passionate,” “I often make decisions without thinking about the risk to myself,” “The whole of my previous sexual history came from watching barnyard animals fornicate, but luckily, I seem to be a prodigy.” As unwaveringly nice as this makes the character, it also makes him slightly dull. Sex appeal and smarts and sweetness and savvy are great, but actual flaws are interesting, and they’re what make good characters great.The future is perilous for Jamie and Claire, with antagonists closing in on every side. And as many obstacles as the duo will surely face in the episodes to come, it’s nothing compared with the challenges in store for the writers’ room tasked with adapting a beloved fantasy novel into something fantastic.Political BeatAs much of “Outlander” is given over to the central romance, another huge element is that of the political maneuverings both within and without the MacKenzie clan. This element of the show has never quite matched the level of intrigue as everything else, so it will be relegated to this subsection.In this episode, the strain between the MacKenzie brothers, Chief Colum and War Chief Dougal, come to a head. Colum is upset that Dougal has been raising money for the Jacobite cause, fearing that such meddling is tantamount to treason and thus endangers everyone in the clan. Dougal disagrees and the two argue, with Dougal, in front of witnesses, admitting that he is the true father of Colum’s son. Eventually, Jamie, ever the peacemaker, persuades Colum to let Dougal keep the funds he raised, as a Jacobite army was a long way off and there will be time enough to decide which side the MacKenzie clan will side with. 