AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck8 P.M. (HBO) JERSEY BOYS (2014) Clint Eastwood transfers the Tony-winning Broadway show about the Four Seasons and its frontman, Frankie Valli (John Lloyd Young), set amid the Mafia milieu of 1950s New Jersey, onto the screen. Christopher Walken plays Gyp DeCarlo, the Genovese crime family member who watched over the boys; Mike Doyle is Bob Crewe, the producer who, starting in 1962, helps the ensemble (rounded out by Erich Bergen, Michael Lomenda and Vincent Piazza) mine gold with the hits “Sherry,” “Big Girls Don’t Cry” and “Walk Like a Man.” “ ‘Jersey Boys’ is a strange movie, and it’s a Clint Eastwood enterprise, both reasons to see it,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times about the film, written by Marshall Brickman and Rick Elice, who also wrote the musical. “For those with a love of doo-wop, it also provides a toe-tapping, ear-worming stroll down rock ‘n’ roll memory lane that dovetails with that deeply cherished American song and dance about personal triumph over adversity through hard work, tough times and self-sacrifice.”NOON (13) RICHARD HEFFNER’S OPEN MIND  Aasif Mandvi of “The Daily Show” talks about his memoir, “No Land’s Man: A Perilous Journey Through Romance, Islam and Brunch.”5:50 P.M. (Starz Cinema) INCENDIES (2011) The adult children (Mélissa Désormeaux-Poulin and Maxim Gaudette) of an Arab woman, Nawal (Lubna Azabal), living in Canada travel to an unnamed country that closely resembles Lebanon to seek out a brother they never knew existed on the instructions of Nawal’s last will and testament. In the process, they learn that their mother, a Christian, had fallen in love with a Muslim and fled her hometown, becoming in succession a student, an activist, a clandestine militant, a political prisoner — and more. The director Denis Villeneuve “tells Nawal’s story in a way that is both subtle and emphatic, and Ms. Azabal, portraying Nawal from hopeful youth to despairing middle age, gives a performance that is all the more powerful for the restrained, unshakable sense of dignity she brings to it,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times about this Oscar nominee for best foreign-language film.9 P.M. (Starz) OUTLANDER Jamie (Sam Heughan) and the Highlanders rescue Claire (Caitriona Balfe) from Black Jack Randall (Tobias Menzies); Laoghaire (Nell Hudson) tries to win Jamie back.9 P.M. (Hallmark, Hallmark Movies & Mysteries) A BONE TO PICK: AN AURORA TEAGARDEN MYSTERY (2014) When her best friend dies unexpectedly, Aurora, a small-town librarian and master sleuth, is left all of her belongings — including clues in a murder mystery. Now Aurora must divine the meaning in a skull, its missing skeleton and some suspicious neighbors before she becomes the killer’s next victim. Candace Cameron Bure and Marilu Henner star in this adaptation of the best seller by Charlaine Harris.9 P.M. (CUNY) THE GAY DESPERADO (1936) In this comedy directed by Rouben Mamoulian, a singer (the Italian tenor Nino Martini) is kidnapped by an opera-loving Mexican bandit (Leo Carrillo), who also entraps a would-be bride (Ida Lupino), when her fiancé leaves her behind. “It works,” Frank S. Nugent wrote in The Times. “It works quite well, in fact.”10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS In 2012, Harold Henthorn’s second wife fell to her death as the couple hiked in Rocky Mountain National Park in Colorado to celebrate their 12th wedding anniversary. Then a reporter received an anonymous tip stating that Mr. Henthorn’s first wife had died in a freakish accident as well. Peter Van Sant investigates.11:30 P.M. (NBC) SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE Michael Keaton hosts for the third time; Carly Rae Jepsen is the musical guest.What’s Streaming Now52 TUESDAYS (2015) Filming only on Tuesdays and using nonprofessional actors, the director Sophie Hyde draws on her own life in this story about 16-year-old Billie (Tilda Cobham-Hervey) and the gender transitioning of her mother (Del Herbert-Jane). “The result of these and other constraints is a frustratingly fragmented yet warmly intimate portrait of an evolving bond that frays but doesn’t sever,” Jeannette Catsoulis wrote in The Times. (fandor.com)Advertisement