By ZACHARY WOOLFEAPRIL 3, 2015
BERLIN —  The straight-arrow, even prissy Wolfram delivers the first entry in the song contest at the heart of Wagner’s “Tannhäuser.” In the choreographer Sasha Waltz’s spare, elegant staging of the opera here, men fall to the ground as he sings, so overcome are they by his stirring performance.With the baritone Christian Gerhaher as Wolfram in a revival of the production that opened Thursday at the Staatsoper, you could hardly blame them. Mr. Gerhaher, among our most ravishingly sensitive singers, brings to the role a riveting mixture of reserve and emotion, an apt combination for an opera that centers on Wolfram’s fellow knight, Tannhäuser, torn between the virginal Elisabeth and the seductions of Venus.In Mr. Gerhaher’s account of the great “Hymn to the Evening Star” in Act III, feeling permeated the melting legato that linked the words “entschwebt dem Tal der Erden,” describing the star soaring beyond the Earth. Each word and phrase in this performance of “Blick, ich umher,” Wolfram’s contest aria, was scrupulously shaped yet uncannily natural. Taking on a visionary quality as the number continued, he was softly rapt in describing how he would shed his heart’s last drop of blood rather than sully the purity of love.This was Wagner as bel canto, in which passion was focused through long, pristine musical lines. Praising Tannhäuser’s singing as full of “Wonn’ und Leid” (“joy and sorrow”) in the first act, Mr. Gerhaher’s voice took on both qualities. He showed the clarity, the subtle balance of modesty and grandeur, expected in a lieder concert but all too rare on the opera stage, where Mr. Gerhaher, best known as a perceptive recitalist, appears infrequently.AdvertisementHe is the most important newcomer to a “Tannhäuser” cast that is largely identical to last year’s, when Ms. Waltz’s production had its premiere as the centerpiece of the Staatsoper’s Eastertime Festtage festival. Wolfram then was Peter Mattei, by all accounts a robustly dramatic, intensely affecting presence in the role.Mr. Gerhaher is more reticent. Dressed in the production’s perhaps Edwardian, perhaps 1950s-style shirt sleeves and suspenders, his Wolfram is bookish and awkward, a bit resentful but with a poetic heart, beginning the “Hymn to the Evening Star” lying on the ground and looking up at the sky. Sounding softly immaculate one moment, commandingly dense the next, he suggests the ambiguities of this strange character, neither Tannhäuser’s friend nor really his foe.AdvertisementHe manages to be persuasive even in the potentially embarrassing bit of tai chi-esque movement Ms. Waltz gives the character during the “Evening Star” hymn. Long an important presence on Germany’s modern dance scene, she has over the past decade dipped her toe into opera with productions of works from Monteverdi’s “L’Orfeo” to Toshio Hosokawa’s contemporary “Matsukaze.”She is more adept than many choreographers-turned-directors at integrating dancers with opera singers and choristers. “Tannhäuser” begins with an erotic ballet set in Venus’ mountaintop lair, and Ms. Waltz sets the scene with nearly naked bodies writhing and sliding in what seems to be a church cupola turned on its side. Yet the flinty mezzo-soprano Marina Prudenskaya, as Venus, managed to rule this world without seeming like an impostor; even the fleshy tenor Peter Seiffert, at 61 singing indefatigably and quite sweetly in the title role, eventually seemed at home among the lithe dancers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Waltz convincingly reimagined the song contest as an aristocrats’ ball, a natural way to add more dancing. A funeral procession on a smoke-filled stage, her vision of the third act was particularly memorable, with the penetrating, if sometimes strident, soprano Ann Petersen’s Elisabeth having fallen from innocence to vacant-eyed melancholy.The resonant, articulate bass Kwangchul Youn was luxury casting as Elisabeth’s uncle. Daniel Barenboim, overseeing both “Tannhäuser” and “Parsifal” this week, conducted the Berlin Staatskapelle with a deliberation that gave a firm sense of the score’s structure: This account of Venus’s orgy was a slow, effective burn rather than a frenzy. If less revelatory than it was in “Parsifal,” the theater’s chorus still sounded firm, and was eloquent both in its singing of the pilgrims’ choruses and in its execution of Ms. Waltz’s ecstatic movements.It was an excellent performance of a stylish, touching staging. But Mr. Gerhaher’s Wolfram made a unique impact. He appears in opera only occasionally — next are a few performances of the title role in “L’Orfeo” (not Ms. Waltz’s production) in Munich in July — and it is an experience with few equals.There is one more performance of “Tannhäuser,” on Sunday, at the Berlin Staatsoper; staatsoper-berlin.de.A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2015, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Love, Lust and Perception.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.