AdvertisementSupported byBy James R. OestreichWe tend to think of Joseph Haydn as a consolidator: the composer who drew together numerous musical currents to perfect the symphony and the string quartet, defining forms of the Classical and Romantic eras. But Haydn was also an innovator, with what James Webster, in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, calls “a ‘modernist’ tendency to problematize music rather than merely to compose it.”Indeed, he remained an experimentalist until late in life. Around 1786, he wrote an orchestral work called “The Seven Last Words of Christ” (in one of many stylings of the title). It is a series of musical reflections on Jesus’ words (actually sayings, like “I thirst,” “It is finished”). Haydn quickly produced a version for string quartet, and around 1795, he completely recast the work as a full-scale oratorio, using a text that another composer had devised to fit the original music.The string quartet version is the one generally heard these days, though not all that often. Surprisingly, it came around twice this week, performed by the Dodd String Quartet at St. Thomas Church Fifth Avenue on Tuesday evening and by the Attacca Quartet in the Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium of the Metropolitan Museum on Thursday evening. The Attacca, which ended its term as the Met’s quartet in residence, has also just released a recording of the piece on an Azica CD.Haydn wrote the hourlong work for the Cádiz Cathedral in Spain, and the terms of the commission evidently intrigued and inspired him. “It was no easy task,” he wrote later, “to compose seven adagios, lasting 10 minutes each, and to succeed one another without fatiguing the listeners.”He succeeded admirably, as the Dodd players — Claire Jolivet and Theresa Salomon, violinists; Jessica Troy, violist; and Lindy Clarke, cellist — proved yet again. Their understated performance on period instruments caught the spirit of the work and of St. Thomas’s little two-concert series, Musical Meditations for Holy Week, beautifully.The Attacca doings, for good and ill, were something else. The recording is excellent, with the quartet — Amy Schroeder and Keiko Tokunaga, violinists; Luke Fleming, violist; and Andrew Yee, cellist — living up to its name with assertive playing and sharp articulation on modern instruments.It plays a new arrangement of the work by Mr. Yee, who dismisses Haydn’s reduction as something of a rush job, bearing “little of the careful crafting typical of the Father of the String Quartet,” and bases his own work on the oratorio version, as the richest musically and presumably representing Haydn’s latest thoughts. Mr. Yee includes the oratorio’s little chorale harmonizations of Jesus’ words (though without the words themselves), and adds countermelodies and other retouchings.The live performance seemed every bit as good, heard through the constant distractions of a live video installation by Ofri Cnaani. On a projection screen behind the players, a bare tree was festooned with mostly abstract colors and images, some of them just blotches, others vaguely animalistic.Things that looked somewhat like birds in flight became mere round blobs when perched on the tree. The movement on screen often jarred with the timing of the music.Other images on smaller screens, representing related art and manuscripts from the museum’s collection, at least had some point and held mild interest. But the general visual bombardment did what Haydn could never do in terms of fatiguing the listener-watchers.Advertisement