AdvertisementSupported byBy Corinna da Fonseca-WollheimLoss and retrospection, irony and passion were themes on Thursday when the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center presented a wide-ranging program of contemporary and 20th-century works for strings and piano at the Kaplan Penthouse. The excellent lineup of performers included the pianists Andrew Armstrong and Gilles Vonsattel, the violinists James Ehnes and Arnaud Sussmann and the cellist Nicholas Canellakis.Both Derek Bermel’s “Death With Interruptions” and Aaron Jay Kernis’s “Two Movements (with Bells) for Violin and Piano” were written after the death of each composer’s father. Mr. Bermel’s work is scored for piano trio, Mr. Kernis’s for violin and piano (with the piano providing the bell-like effects). While each composer has a distinct language — Mr. Kernis’s is angular but polished, Mr. Bermel’s inflected with pop accents — there was a remarkable affinity between the pieces in their evocation of old-school elegance.“Death With Interruptions” is built on a lilting dance theme that is contrasted by sections in which the sound turns dry and pale; eventually, all that is left is the increasingly erratic heartbeat of the dance against gradually darkening piano chords. Mr. Vonsattel, Mr. Ehnes and Mr. Canellakis played it with generous expression and focus.Mr. Ehnes and Mr. Armstrong joined forces for Mr. Kernis’s work, which opens with a burst of speed and bright sound. The second movement, “A Song for My Father,” features a poignant violin melody, which Mr. Ehnes played with great tenderness. There are brief echoes of jazzy dance music before the sound grows distant and disembodied, with Mr. Ehnes producing harmonics that sounded at times like a theremin.Mr. Sussmann and Mr. Canellakis performed six selections from Jörg Widmann’s “24 Duos for Violin and Cello,” a collection of brittle, prickly and unnervingly virtuosic pieces. In the first, “Capriccio,” pulverized dance fragments float through abstract static like dust particles caught in a strong beam of light. The sound in “Canto” was grainy and malleable, and in “Deciso, con brio” bright and incisive. There was humor, too — self-deprecating in the quirky “Valse bavaroise” and campy in the madcap “Toccatina all’inglese,” which quoted the James Bond theme and seemed to share that hero’s ability to cope with speed and danger.The program opened with a darkly mischievous miniature for piano four-hands, “...kahdenkesken” (Two of Us) by the Finnish composer Jukka Tiensuu, which Mr. Armstrong and Mr. Vonsattel played with painterly attention to shade, light and depth. It ended with a bravura performance of Leon Kirchner’s Trio No. 1 for piano (Mr. Vonsattel), violin (Mr. Sussmann) and cello. This is richly expressive, harmonically adventurous music that can turn without warning from rhapsodic to threatening and which the musicians played with sure command of dramatic purpose. Mr. Vonsattel was especially impressive, drawing sounds out of the piano that balanced silkiness and clarity, power and warmth.Advertisement