By NEIL GENZLINGERAPRIL 3, 2015
Are there ratings after the Crucifixion? We begin to find out on Sunday night, when NBC broadcasts the first installment of “A.D.: The Bible Continues,” a 12-episode follow-up to “The Bible,” a surprise success in 2013.It’s more difficult territory than the earlier series, which was basically the Bible’s Greatest Hits, familiar stories that could be lazily told and still tap into the collective knowledge and feelings of Christians. “A.D.” portrays events after the Crucifixion, when matters of faith and internal struggle come more fully into play, requiring subtlety and decent acting that “The Bible” lacked.From the first two episodes (titled “The Tomb Is Open” and “The Body Is Gone”), it seems as if Roma Downey and Mark Burnett, executive producers of both “A.D.” and “The Bible,” are at least making an effort to be up to the challenge. They take a bit more time with character development, and the actors, especially the ones playing Jesus’ disciples, make good use of the opportunities they are given.But first, we’re given the Crucifixion all over again — hey, it’s Easter. It was already covered, in more vivid detail, in “The Bible,” but what better way to draw in the same huge audience than to repeat it? And NBC needs that audience. It’s taking a gamble with “A.D.”Advertisement“The Bible” was on the History channel, a measure of just how little television executives understand the potential Christian audience. But whether that audience is interested in the post-Crucifixion story is another matter; best to serve it something familiar first.AdvertisementAfter the shift to the Resurrection, “A.D.” manages to deliver some effective scenes as Mary Magdalene (Chipo Chung), Peter (Adam Levy), John (Babou Alieu Ceesay) and others come to realize that Jesus has fulfilled his promise to rise again. The producers can’t rein in their tendency toward excessive effects and overwrought dialogue, but they seem at least to be proceeding at a more patient pace.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Give the actors an A for effort, even if the clichéd, florid writing sometimes overwhelms them. A case in point: Vincent Regan as the Roman governor Pontius Pilate and Joanne Whalley as his wife, Claudia.Claudia (building on a theme suggested by her brief mention in the Bible) has had dreams about Jesus that have convinced her that he is a good man who should not be ill-treated.“Killing him won’t be the end of him,” she advises Pilate. In this rendition, he can’t just disagree with her; he has to do it in almost laughably visceral language.“Enough of your dreams and nonsense, Claudia,” he tells her after Jesus is dead. “The Nazarene was only ever flesh and blood, and we have butchered the former, and spilt the latter all over the city. But if you should dream of him again, be sure he proves his true identity by his real incarnation — not as a handsome prophet with charisma, but as a rotting pile of meat on the floor.”If those are the lines you’re given, at least deliver them with gusto, and Mr. Regan certainly does that.A version of this review appears in print on April 4, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: From ‘The Bible’ to the Resurrection.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.