Season 6, Episode 18: Loser EditCBS was at pains to point out to critics that Sunday night’s episode of “The Good Wife” was “written and shot in February,” before Indiana’s passage of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. So if anyone asks, the case of the week — in which R.D. asked Diane to take part in a moot-court version of a lawsuit by a gay couple who were turned away by an Idaho wedding planner — was not ripped from the headlines. It anticipated the headlines. Take that, “Law & Order: SVU.”The episode was also timely in a much more minor and arcane fashion: its title, “Loser Edit,” echoed a recent column by Colson Whitehead in The New York Times Magazine. The term “loser edit” refers to the ability of reality-television producers to selectively portray the contestants who they know ahead of time are going to lose. Here it referred to a TV report on Alicia being put together by an ambitious reporter played by Lily Rabe, who was doing a positive piece until someone leaked to her the sexy emails between Alicia and Will. Eli and Josh (not Johnny, who apparently kept his promise to leave) went into an amusing, highly entertaining lightning round of spin control, and the episode’s A story line offered seminars in both how to do a hit piece and how to sandbag a reporter who has the goods on you.(A sidebar: it’s a little disconcerting that Alicia, despite all the on-screen talk about what a great politician she is, sounds like one of the worst, most inauthentic politicians in history. Just watch her telling Petra, the reporter: “And we will be transparent. Accountable to victims! Worthy of the public’s trust!”)Eli and Josh first went to the station and tried to argue from the moral high ground, in a very funny Abbott and Costello routine. (Eli: “You’ve really all lost all perspective.” Josh: “It’s gross. You’re gross.”) Then they went into war-planning mode, with the help of Marissa. Alicia at first didn’t want to lie about her affair with Will, but Eli played the what-would -Will want card, and she instantly caved. A pre-emptive interview was arranged with a sympathetic lummox of a reporter (a sorry role for Mo Rocca), and Alicia easily lied, saying the emails reflected an unconsummated flirtation. For his part, Eli gave another pre-emptive interview, to the Hollywood journalist Kim Masters, playing herself. And the closer was Peter, who gave a strategically delayed interview to Petra herself in which he denied any knowledge of an affair.Petra was down but not out. In the episode’s cliffhanger ending, Alicia, Eli and Josh watched the interview, which was the promised puff piece until the very end, when Petra hinted at allegations of voter fraud — votes for Frank Prady that were miscounted as votes for Alicia. Shades of Peter’s campaign and the mysterious crates of ballots! Maybe this really will be a loser for Alicia. Eh, not likely.The B story line was the increasingly dark tale of Kalinda Sharma and the Doctored Metadata. Kalinda’s rival investigator Andrew Wiley (Tim Guinee) showed up at the firm asking questions about the email from the Canadian police supposedly deleted by Detective Gary Prima, the one that led to the drug-trafficking charges against Cary being dismissed earlier this season. Kalinda, who actually deleted the email and then watched as Diane innocently presented it as evidence, consulted with Finn. Without using any names, he conveyed to her that it didn’t matter what Diane knew — she could go to jail for what Kalinda did.The irritatingly dogged Wiley — he’s the Louis Canning of investigators — discovered that Prima was on the stand at the time he was supposed to have deleted the email. (As in his past appearances, he was shown doing his job accompanied by his two small children, which was also another chance to juxtapose the non-maternal Kalinda with small children.) Wiley eventually told Kalinda that he knew she had changed the metadata and that he was going to prove it (“You’re caught” were his words). Finn, knowing Kalinda was in trouble, asked her for the proverbial $1 and is now her lawyer. So where does this go, as Archie Panjabi completes her final season and Kalinda leaves the show? I foresee a Hail Mary that keeps her, Diane and Cary out of jail, but you never know.In the case of the week, Diane continued to sleep with the enemy, this time accepting her new client R.D.’s invitation to a conservative think tank and then being lured into participating in the mock trial, which was really a way for R.D. and his associates to strengthen their arguments in favor of religious-accommodation legislation. There were some testy moments between Diane and R.D. when she cast his gay nephew as one of the plaintiffs in the lawsuit, but her arguments won out at every step, and the judge (Richard Masur) ruled in the plaintiff’s favor — anti-discrimination 1, religious freedom 0. But the writers let R.D. have the last word. The legislation was necessary, he argued, to allow people to stand up for their principles — unlike Barack Obama and the Clintons, who had once opposed gay marriage and then flip-flopped out of political expedience.“Loser Edit” pushed both Alicia and Kalinda closer to dangerous reckonings. It also seemed to raise the possibility of Diane taking on R.D., indirectly, in the wedding-planner case, though probably not, because Chicago wouldn’t be the venue. It was most notable, though, as an extreme example of the show’s good taste in guest stars: Ms. Rabe, Mr. Guinee, Mr. Masur and Mr. Platt are some of the best character actors out there, and the episode also featured Ruben Santiago-Hudson as Petra’s equivocating boss, Frankie J. Alvarez of “Looking” as her editor and the exceedingly hip Michael Zegen (“Rescue Me,” “The Walking Dead,” “Frances Ha,” “Girls,” “Boardwalk Empire”) as  one of R.D.’s conservative colleagues.Let us know what you thought of “Loser Edit,” and what you think of Alicia’s and Kalinda’s immediate futures, in the comments.