AdvertisementSupported byBy Kathryn Shattuck10 P.M. (13, 49) WOLF HALL Mark Rylance stars as Thomas Cromwell in this new BBC mini-series — adapted from Hilary Mantel’s novels “Wolf Hall” and “Bring Up the Bodies” — which chronicles his rise in the Tudor court, from his lowly beginnings as a blacksmith’s son to his position as King Henry VIII’s closest adviser. The historical drama, presented here by “Masterpiece,” begins as Cardinal Thomas Wolsey (Jonathan Pryce, above right with Mr. Rylance), having failed to secure the annulment of the marriage of Henry (Damian Lewis) to Katherine of Aragon (Joanne Whalley), is stripped of his powers — placing his hope of returning to the king’s favor on Cromwell. Based on two Booker Prize winners and starring Mr. Rylance, one of the great stage actors of our time, “it’s acutely intelligent, luxuriously dressed and well acted across the board,” Mike Hale wrote in The New York Times. “It’s also notably serious and quiet, despite the occasional beheading or session on the rack.”10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee, discusses the United States’ negotiations with Iran.10:30 A.M. (CBS) FACE THE NATION The guests includes Energy Secretary Ernest J. Moniz; Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina; and the former Senator Rick Santorum, Republican of Pennsylvania.10:30 A.M. (NBC) MEET THE PRESS Cardinal Timothy M. Dolan, leader of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, and Gov. Bobby Jindal, Republican of Louisiana, address the controversy surrounding Indiana’s religious freedom law.8 P.M. (HBO) SINATRA: ALL OR NOTHING AT ALL (2015) Alex Gibney uses a 1971 performance in Los Angeles that Frank Sinatra, left, billed as a retirement concert — although it would not be his last — to support the premise that the songs he chose were both career- and self-defining in this two-night documentary, which uses archival footage and commentary by Sinatra experts, family members and Sinatra. “Four hours may seem like a lot, and some of the commentary sounds as if it’s being read from a script, which doesn’t help the time pass quickly,” Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times. “But if anyone deserves a longer-than-usual television documentary, it’s Sinatra, who would have turned 100 this December.”8 P.M. (Lifetime) IF THERE BE THORNS (2015) This third installment in the film series adapted from the novels by V. C. Andrews picks up as Christopher (Jason Lewis) and Cathy (Rachael Carpani) Dollanganger are living together as husband and wife with her two sons, who are unaware of their parents’ incestuous relationship. But the family’s secrets come tumbling out when Christopher discovers that their mysterious neighbor is his mother (Heather Graham).10 P.M. (Animal Planet) 100 MILES FROM NOWHERE Matt Galland, a runner and a pilot who teaches geography at Brigham Young University in Utah, and his best buddies, Danny Bryson and Blake Josephson, white-knuckle their way along some 100-mile, four-day extreme journeys in this new adventure series. Starting close to home in the Wasatch Mountains, these daredevils seemingly know no bounds — or fear — as they teeter on ridges, wedge themselves into crevasses (did “127 Hours” teach them nothing?), bodysurf down glaciers and outmaneuver mountain lions and bears while filming their own adventures, which typically burn 10,000 calories a day, and refueling at prearranged food drops every 25 miles. But you know what they say about Mother Nature and plans.10 P.M. (AMC) MAD MEN The series returns for its final seven episodes.10 P.M. (WGN America) SALEM A witch war dawns in this Season 2 opener as Mary Sibley (Janet Montgomery, left), having unleashed a plague by completing the Grand Rite, battles adversaries old and new to retain control of the town.What’s Streaming Now JO Jean Reno plays Jo St-Clair, a detective in the Paris police department’s Criminal Brigade who tackles challenging murder cases at landmarks like the Eiffel Tower, Notre Dame, the Catacombs and Place Vendome. (acorn.tv)Advertisement