By KATHRYN SHATTUCKOCT. 2, 2015
9 P.M. (Starz) McFARLAND, USA (2015) A gruffly compassionate Kevin Costner plays Jim White, a washed-up coach in a last-chance job in California’s dusty Central Valley, who turns the sons of Mexican farm workers into a championship cross-country team in Niki Caro’s feel-good drama. This “slick and safe Disney version of a fascinating and complicated reality,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times, “aims to be rousing rather than revelatory, and it mostly succeeds.” (Image: Mr. Costner with actors portraying the team members.)8:30 P.M. (ABC) DR. KEN Ken Jeong mines his former life in this new series about a cranky H.M.O. doctor who routinely vents to his therapist wife (Suzy Nakamura). Mr. Jeong gave up practicing medicine for good around the time he played a doctor in “Knocked Up” (2007). “The show shouldn’t set back the cause of the Asian-American comedy series, which ABC kick-started last year with ‘Fresh Off the Boat,’ ” Mike Hale wrote in The Times, “but it’s a severe disappointment for anyone who has laughed at Mr. Jeong’s high-wire performances in the ‘Hangover’ films or, more aptly, as the paranoid nut case Ben Chang in the series ‘Community.’ ” (Image: Mr. Jeong.)9 P.M. (TLC) LOVE AT FIRST SWIPE For women yet to master the art of online dating, Clinton Kelly (“What Not to Wear”) and Devyn Simone (“The Real World”) are here to help. Each of the unlucky in love gets a style makeover, an updated profile and 100 potential suitors from which she makes her first choice.10 P.M. (13) AI WEIWEI: THE FAKE CASE (2014) “Fake” is the name of the studio of Mr. Ai, the Chinese artist and activist. But in Andreas Johnsen’s documentary, it also points to the spurious charges against Mr. Ai by the Chinese government — a target of his work since 2008, when by his count the Chengdu earthquake in western China killed an estimated 5,000 students in poorly constructed schools. This “POV” presentation takes up the story in 2011 after Mr. Ai had been detained for nearly three months and was then under virtual house arrest, with his design company charged with tax violations. “Mr. Johnsen’s camera never leaves Mr. Ai’s side, giving the film an informal intimacy not unlike the mood in some of the artist’s own videos,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. “Critical and contextual perspectives will have to be sought elsewhere. Mr. Johnsen offers viewers the challenge and pleasure of an important artist’s company, and a chance to appreciate anew his wisdom, his wit and his bravery.”Advertisement1:10 A.M. (HBO) GONE GIRL (2014) After losing their writing jobs in New York, Nick Dunne (Ben Affleck) and his wife, Amy (Rosamund Pike), move to his small Missouri hometown to tend to his mother after her cancer diagnosis. Then she dies, and so does their marriage. So when Amy goes missing on their fifth wedding anniversary after what looks like a struggle, with broken glass and mopped-up blood, Nick is the prime suspect. And suddenly he and the town are trapped in a nationwide media circus. “At its strongest, ‘Gone Girl’ plays like a queasily, at times gleefully, funny horror movie about a modern marriage, one that has disintegrated partly because of spiraling downward mobility and lost privilege,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times about this David Fincher thriller, adapted from the novel by Gillian Flynn. But as dread descends in the movie’s second half, she added, “you may wish that Amy would stay gone.” (Image: Ms. Pike.)1:30 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK The actor Everett Quinton and the director Joe Brancato talk about “Drop Dead Perfect,” the Peccadillo Theater Company production about an overwrought spinster (Mr. Quinton) growing old in the Florida Keys, at the Theater at St. Clement’s in Manhattan. Louise Kerz Hirschfeld, the widow of the caricaturist Al Hirschfeld, and the curator David Leopold discuss “The Hirschfeld Century” at the New-York Historical Society.AdvertisementWhat’s Streaming NowARMISEN, MEYERS & HADER FAVORITES Bill Hader and Fred Armisen chat about filmmaking as part of this collection for the SundanceNow Doc Club, which they curated with Seth Meyers, their collaborator on IFC’s “Documentary Now!” The lineup includes “Bill Cunningham New York,” “Harvard Beats Yale 29-29,” “Into the Abyss,” “Billy Wilder Speaks,” “Crazy Love,” “Gates of Heaven” and “Who is Harry Nilsson?” (docclub.com)A version of this schedule appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page C21 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.