By ZACHARY WOOLFEOCT. 16, 2015
The respected, always conductorless Orpheus Chamber Orchestra opened its season on Thursday evening at Carnegie Hall with three works of German Romanticism, two of them written in the 1800s — and the third in 2015.The degree to which Wolfgang Rihm’s new Duo Concerto for violin and cello apes the style of the past is remarkable: At one point, a soaring horn melody emerges from the orchestra that wouldn’t be out of place in the work of Mendelssohn or Schumann, who shared the program with Mr. Rihm, who, at 63, is among the most influential composers of his generation.Written to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the reopening of the Frauenkirche in Dresden, destroyed during World War II, the Duo Concerto features barbed modern harmonies but a stale mood, an uninterrupted 25-minute movement that grows more and less intense without changing its basic, brownish, middle-of-the-road color. (Indeed, on Thursday this orchestra rarely revealed a wealth of colors, though it had solid spirit in Mendelssohn’s “Midsummer Night’s Dream” Overture and Schumann’s Second Symphony.)A duo concerto — the New York Philharmonic plays the one Brahms composed for violin and cello next week — poses a challenge: triangulating the traditional soloist-orchestra dynamic. Mr. Rihm never found a satisfying solution to this problem. The dialogue between the soloists (here, the violinst Mira Wang and the cellist Jan Vogler, a married couple) is bustling and intimately intertwined, and almost entirely without emotional texture or productive tension. It is never clear what relationship Mr. Rihm intends them to have with the full ensemble, which opens the work in a mystically hushed, waltz-ish mood but then recedes mostly to low-key noodling. While Mr. Rihm has said that his goal in the work, guided by Bach, was to interweave polyphonic strands, the result, at least in this performance, felt muddied rather than transparent.There is a more mysterious, extreme sound landscape in Mr. Rihm’s 1992 violin concerto “Gesungene Zeit,” and more haunting poetry in his 2006 “Konzert in einem Satz” for cello and orchestra. Bringing those two instruments together, the Duo Concerto ends up equaling less than the sum of its parts.­The Orpheus Chamber Orchestra plays Handel, Respighi (and, with the violinist Augustin Hadelich) Stravinsky and Tchaikovsky on Dec. 5 at Carnegie Hall; 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.