AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe CoscarelliWaiting for the real world to catch up to Internet fame can be awkward, especially for a digital native accustomed to a daily cascade of favorites, retweets, streams and followers. Just ask ILoveMakonnen, the 25-year-old singer and rapper from Atlanta (best known as simply Makonnen), whose video for the hit single “Tuesday,” featuring Drake, has been seen more than 73 million times on YouTube.Last month, at the South by Southwest music festival, that buzz was more than enough to get Makonnen into the V.I.P. area of an after-hours party and to have him recognized by a female fan — but one who had not yet mastered his name. “MACK-a-nin!” she shouted repeatedly from behind a barricade. (It’s Muh-KO-nen.) He leaned in for a hug before skeptically eying his handler and disappearing back through the crowd. “You don’t even know my name!” Makonnen, born Makonnen Sheran, said the following week, recalling the run-in. “You’re just yelling because of Drake. If you really know my music, you’re going to know how to say my name. I say it all the damn time.”This is the in-between space where Makonnen resides: recognizable — as the teddy bear with a rich crown of curls, seen by millions on Twitter, Instagram and Snapchat — but still not quite famous after a year that included a Grammy nomination and a performance on “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon” (both for “Tuesday,” a spacey anthem for weekday partyers). On Tuesday, he released the fifth installment in his “Drink More Water” mixtape series, and this month he will set out on his first headlining tour, followed by a slate of summer festivals, ahead of his debut full-length album, due out by year’s end on Drake’s OVO Sound, an imprint of Warner Bros. Records. (Shows at the Bowery Ballroom, on April 28, and the Music Hall of Williamsburg, on April 29, have already sold out.)But Makonnen is also a wild card and an oddball, even for the New Weird Atlanta rap scene with which he is often associated as the city churns out eccentric stars like the robot crooner Future, the mantra-chanting trio Migos and the yelping alien Young Thug. While Makonnen also trades on the singularity of his voice — a gooey Broadway baritone that he can stretch into a squeal — and works with the same trap music producers that built the city’s current opulent drug-den sound, he is barely a rapper at all, splitting the difference between singers like Morrissey and Nate Dogg, and drawing equally from his favorite rock bands, like the Killers, and the Atlanta rap kingmaker Gucci Mane. On “Drink More Water 5,” Makonnen switches easily between tough, club-ready songs about dealing drugs or ducking the police and the drumless, melancholic wail of solo piano numbers like “Get Loose With Me.”“I identify with the Internet more than New Atlanta,” Makonnen said during a break from recording at Red Bull Studios in Manhattan, not far from his newly rented Chelsea apartment. He was at ease in a tie-dye T-shirt that combined the logos for Versace, Gucci, Louis Vuitton and Chanel, with heavy eyelids from a recent smoking session. “I didn’t come out of Atlanta like that, where I was beating up the streets and doing a whole bunch of shows or mixtape after mixtape. I was doing my own thing online.”That was mostly by necessity. The day after his high school graduation, Makonnen, then 18, witnessed the death of his best friend when a gun the two were messing with in a parked car discharged, striking the other teenager in the head. Although the shooting was initially ruled an accident, Makonnen was later arrested and charged with involuntary manslaughter after the victim’s mother encouraged further investigation, he said. The two had planned to attend the Air Force Academy using the “buddy program” to be stationed together. “We were that close of friends,” Makonnen said, remembering sleepovers and trips to church together. “It was a tragedy.” Makonnen would spend the next seven years under state supervision, first in an ankle monitor while awaiting trial, and then, after a plea deal, on probation. Keeping him busy and sane throughout that period, he said, were two pit bulls, Daisy and Snow, “the Internet and my keyboard,” an earlier gift from his mother, who had hoped that learning piano would keep him inside and out of trouble. His old Gateway desktop computer, especially, was a window to the outside world. “I would stay up all night,” Makonnen said. “Everybody’s always up on the Internet.” He became obsessed with MP3 sites and Myspace, before starting his own blog, The Newness, where he posted movie trailers, fantasized about exotic locales and interviewed anyone who would respond to his online messages. They included the rapper Lil B — a spiritual father to ILoveMakonnen, whose hundreds of songs also tend to be one-take stream-of-consciousness sketches — and the chief executive of Zappos.com, Tony Hsieh. “I used to be such a geek,” Makonnen said. In addition to growing his online network, Makonnen was self-producing music for him and his mother to sing over, recording multiple bedroom albums influenced by synth bands like MGMT and Bloc Party. While on probation, Makonnen also attended cosmetology classes, where he specialized in coloring hair and dreamed of styling for “runways in Milan or Paris and Vogue fashion shoots,” he said. “I was just around girls all day. I really became a girl — I learned so much about them.” His songs today feature specific female characters and experiences, and a beauty school mannequin head he calls Martha has become an aesthetic trademark. Although Makonnen knows his interests may be considered outré in rap, he laughs at his reputation as a weirdo with the self-assuredness of someone used to sticking out. But having moved to the mostly black Riverdale section of Atlanta from Los Angeles at 13, Makonnen was also fluent in the language of hip-hop. In high school, “I just hung around hustlers,” selling drugs and fake designer purses for pocket money, he said.Combining these experiences with an indie-rock sensibility and D.I.Y. work ethic caught the attention of Atlanta’s burgeoning producer class, including Mike Will Made-It, who has worked with Rihanna and Miley Cyrus. He signed Makonnen to a publishing deal with Warner Bros. in 2013.But it wasn’t until Makonnen linked with the next-generation beatmakers — and “Tuesday” co-architects — Sonny Digital and Metro Boomin the next year that his sound started to coalesce. “They liked my tone of voice,” Makonnen said.Sonny Digital (real name Sonny Uwaezuoke) said he first learned of Makonnen online and did not know initially that he was based in Atlanta. “It sounded funny at first — it was just him and his keyboard,” Sonny Digital said. “But Makonnen opened up the doors for us to do something different. What ‘Tuesday’ really did for all of us was give us room to be a little more creative and new, to show people that we’re not just confined to doing hard trap music.”Makonnen, fresh off probation, had also recently discovered hallucinogenic drugs, which he credits with “unlocking” his mind, and he said he was tripping on mushrooms and frustrated from a long night in the studio when he first heard that Drake had added a verse to his song — a ticket to ride in rap today. “I cried,” Makonnen said of the moment last August, which was captured on video and went viral. “Tuesday” exploded on radio and hit No. 12 on the Billboard Hot 100. But while his induction into that tastemaking Toronto rapper’s extended crew was like winning the music lottery, it’s not an endgame. “I’m not trying to be in hip-hop and rap, really,” Makonnen said. “It’s so sad, but I just knew that was the way for me to get in, because I’m ‘black’ and I’m ‘urban’ and I’m from Atlanta.”“The rap world thinks I’m gay,” he said. “A lot of people out there do. They think I’m a homosexual, which is not a problem. I don’t want to say I’m gay, I’m straight, I’m bisexual or any of that, because that’s just. ...” he said, trailing off. “Who cares? All that’s doing is dividing us.”By using today’s hot regional sound to acquaint audiences with his theatrical voice and stylistic quirks, Makonnen hopes to ride with “the kids and the Internet” on a new wave, one he likens aesthetically to “a cross between Valentine’s Day and Halloween.” Already, his latest mixtape uses street raps as a Trojan horse for ’80s-influenced piano ballads and psychedelic electropop. “What you do is, you hook them on the drug, and then you start switching the drug,” Makonnen said. “And then they like it.”Advertisement