By DAVID ALLENAPRIL 4, 2015
BOSTON —  Traditions are protean things. Some are ancient, some lapsed. Some are vibrant, some arid. As the historian Eric Hobsbawm pointed out, most are invented, “responses to novel situations which take on the form of reference to old situations.”For the Boston Symphony Orchestra, the novelty is Andris Nelsons, its new music director, who has responded to his role by intentionally aligning himself with the orchestra’s past. In May 2013, he signed a five-year contract to become Boston’s 15th music director. Starting April 15, near the end of his first season in charge, he takes the orchestra to Carnegie Hall for a three-night stand.“I don’t want to change anything,” Mr. Nelsons, 36, said in an interview in his study backstage at Symphony Hall, shortly after a double rehearsal on his first day back in Boston after a spell in Europe in March. “I want to take the great tradition of the orchestra within me, to take what the orchestra offers.”Including a glittering, frothy opening-night gala in September, I have heard all but one of the seven programs that Mr. Nelsons had led before his spring visit to the orchestra began just over a week ago. My take? His vision for what the Boston Symphony might be is still inchoate, pulled between the weight of old customs and the invention of new ones.AdvertisementBut Boston has acquired a preternaturally talented musician. After years of instability, smiles adorn the players’ faces. Houses have looked full and ovations have been long. With a strong caveat — this conductor’s modest relationship with new music — his first season has been a tremendous success.AdvertisementMr. Nelsons has joined the crèche of youthful conductors — including Gustavo Dudamel of Los Angeles, 34; Yannick Nézet-Séguin of Philadelphia, 40; Ludovic Morlot of Seattle, 41; and Krzysztof Urbanski of Indianapolis, 32 — whom American orchestras have grabbed in an apparent attempt to connect with the younger, more diverse audiences of their administrators’ dreams. In their choices and preferences, each conductor has implicitly put forward an idea of what it means to be the very model of a modern music director.“People talk very much about, ‘What can we do with the orchestra in the 21st century?’ ” Mr. Nelsons said. “We should think about the 21st century, of course,” he insisted, but take what he called the “baggage” of the past along, too. While he hopes that people will eventually reflect on his time in Boston and say “that I haven’t spoiled the tradition, the identity, the great qualities of sound,” it’s not yet crystal clear what that tradition means to him, or to what future it points.From what I’ve heard, the core repertoire has already been energized by his flexible physicality. In January, Brahms’s “Variations on a Theme by Haydn” had buoyant sound and a firm structural sense while remaining easygoing. A week later, in Mozart’s Piano Concerto No. 24, even the willful idiosyncrasies of the pianist Lars Vogt could not detract from the pained elegance that Mr. Nelsons elicited from the strings, or the delicious merriment of a finale that jounced easily between furious torrents and a galumphing wind serenade.His strongest statement came in November, with Sibelius’s Symphony No. 2. With Sibelius, he faces a weighty Bostonian history, going back beyond the conductor Colin Davis to Serge Koussevitzky and Wilhelm Gericke. If he often proved too eager and impulsive in a performance captured on record, Mr. Nelsons’s Second had tension even in its most incidental moments, details where none were expected, and a risky energy.A consciously collaborative approach is bearing fruit. Even in an ambivalent January performance of Haydn’s Symphony No. 90 — caught between the grandiosity of a Herbert von Karajan and the sculpted control of a Simon Rattle — he was uncommonly generous in allowing principal wind players space to express themselves. In Boston — more than with the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra, in Britain, of which he has been music director since 2008 — Mr. Nelsons said he has been trying “to let the individuality of the musicians come through freely.” “It’s not at all, ‘No, I want you to play it this way,’ ” he elaborated. “That’s not me.”Already Mr. Nelsons is introducing composers who were never concerns of his predecessor, James Levine, but who reflect his own education in Russia and Germany: Shostakovich, for one, and Bruckner. Speaking onstage before his first performance of Bruckner’s Symphony No. 7 in January, Mr. Nelsons waxed loquacious about the composer’s music, and his desire to “infect” the orchestra and its audience with a similar enthusiasm.It shouldn’t prove difficult with performances like that one. Mr. Nelsons pushed the orchestra further than he had before, taking it by surprise with his structural spontaneity, then leaving it be, his body resting against the rostrum’s rail. At the end of the first movement, where other conductors evoke a desperate plea as the cellos yearn over rolling timpani, he focused instead on little shafts of light, a benediction of gleaming violins and flutes. Later, in the slow movement and the finale, this was Bruckner as liquid gold, pouring freely, luminous in sheen and scorching to the touch.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An attention to history is laudable, particularly when it’s rooted in an orchestra’s specific identity, and Mr. Nelsons is well attuned to the orchestra’s history in Slavic, German and French repertoire. But it’s 2015. If his interest in contemporary work is clear, it’s also been less than insatiable thus far.AdvertisementIn November, there was a plaintive account of Sofia Gubaidulina’s already-canonical “Offertorium,” with the violinist Baiba Skride. Two brief choral works by John Harbison and Eriks Esenvalds, sung by the Tanglewood Festival Chorus, prefaced a combustible account of Prokofiev’s Symphony-Concerto for cello and orchestra, with Yo-Yo Ma. I missed the American premiere of Brett Dean’s “Dramatis Personae,” written for the trumpeter Hakan Hardenberger, and Mr. Nelsons’s spring visit features pieces by the Boston-area composers Michael Gandolfi and Gunther Schuller.In 2015-16, while Mr. Nelsons will lead Henri Dutilleux’s “Métaboles” and Hans Werner Henze’s Symphony No. 8 (given its premiere by the Boston Symphony in 1993), he will conduct just four new works, by Sebastian Currier, Hans Abrahamsen, Giya Kancheli and George Tsontakis, whose “Sonnets,” an English-horn concerto, will receive its world premiere.For the moment, Mr. Nelsons is holding his interest in new music at a distance. “As a trumpet player I was playing Xenakis, Lindberg: very challenging, technical, atonal, and I enjoyed it,” he said. But he is showing a reluctance to commit to presenting such work before he is sure he has the audience with him. “If you have trust through a few seasons, then you can take this journey easier” than simply saying, “ ‘Let’s do a Xenakis season.’ Many people would be absolutely excited. Some people would be absolutely disappointed.”Mr. Nelsons is quick to deny any accusation of conservatism. “It’s not a matter of pleasing or not pleasing,” he said. “It’s not saying, ‘O.K., so you want just the Tchaikovsky Five, of course we play Tchaikovsky Five. You want Beethoven Nine, we play Beethoven Nine.’ It’s not that attitude at all.” The repertoire, he added, “can’t be a museum, of course, but I can’t forget about Bach, Beethoven, Haydn, Mozart, Brahms. You can’t pass those.”During Serge Koussevitzky’s tenure, which lasted from 1924 to 1949, the Boston Symphony was among the world’s most important forces for new music, commissioning important works by Prokofiev, Bartók, Ravel, Stravinsky and various American composers. That innovation continued under Charles Munch (1949-62) and most recently with Mr. Levine (2004-11), who led premieres of works by Elliott Carter, Charles Wuorinen and Mr. Harbison, among others.Mark Volpe, the orchestra’s managing director, acknowledged in an interview that Mr. Nelsons is less zealous when it comes to the contemporary than, say, Mr. Morlot, a former assistant conductor with the Boston Symphony who has championed new music in Seattle. “I don’t think Andris quite thinks that way,” Mr. Volpe said. But he emphasized that Mr. Nelsons understands the orchestra’s legacy of new music, and the need to add to it.“It’s not like we’re in a rush,” Mr. Volpe said.The Boston Symphony still shares its new leader with Birmingham, until his tenure there ends in June, and his American workload has been light thus far. This season, he conducts 10 programs and has summer duties at the Tanglewood Festival. But next year, liberated from Birmingham, he will take charge of almost half of Boston’s season. His 13 subscription programs will include concert performances of Strauss’s “Elektra” with the soprano Christine Goerke; thematic evenings celebrating the quadricentennial of Shakespeare’s death; and the beginning of a Shostakovich project, which will eventually include six symphonies, recorded by Deutsche Grammophon.I agree that Mr. Nelsons need not be in a rush. But with the orchestra in sound financial shape, buoyed by Tanglewood and Pops earnings; with an educated and committed audience; and with the momentum of an exciting new appointment, there is no need to postpone even more programming boldness — especially as rumors already swirl as to what Mr. Nelsons’s next job might be. In 2014, the website Bachtrack.com reported, he was the busiest major conductor in the world.“It’s very human and sometimes amusing to say, ‘Who will be there, who will be there?’ ” he said, when asked about positions with orchestras like the Berlin Philharmonic, which votes for a new chief conductor on May 11. “I really don’t think much about that at all. It’s embarrassing.” Mr. Nelsons’s Boston contract lasts for another four seasons, until the end of the 2018-19 season. And after that?Advertisement“I’m looking forward to many, many great years,” he said. Ample time to polish old traditions — and to start some new ones.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2015, on Page AR10 of the New York edition with the headline: Seeking Tradition’s Place in the Future.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.