AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasIn April 1965, Twyla Tharp spun a yo-yo, stretched forward like a ski jumper while anchored by a pair of wooden shoes and stood in an extended relevé. Such were the ingredients of her first piece, “Tank Dive,” which lasted around 10 minutes and was performed in an art studio at Hunter College.Fifty years later, she’s still making dances.“Woo-hoo,” she said in a deadpan voice that fooled no one. She’s excited. In any field, but especially dance, working for 50 years is a feat, and she knows it. “Very few people make it this far,” she said over a late lunch at a restaurant near Barnard College, her alma mater, where she is now teaching and rehearsing. “And what sustains you to do that?”For Ms. Tharp, 73, it comes down to a question, one she said she asks herself before starting any new project: What is dance?The question will inform two lecture-performances, at Barnard on April 13 and Hunter College on April 16, that kick off Ms. Tharp’s anniversary. She will discuss “Tank Dive” as well as “The Fugue,” her 1970 breakthrough, and present a new work, set to Beethoven’s late String Quartet No. 13, Opus 130. The new piece bursts at the seams, with a labyrinthine arrangement of steps and overlapping structures. The hero, portrayed by Matthew Dibble, may or may not be Beethoven near the end his life, but he is undoubtedly an artist. The dance ends, fittingly enough, with a fugue.Though Ms. Tharp will begin a 10-week national tour of all new dances in the fall — it arrives at the David H. Koch Theater in New York in November — her April presentations will be in a bare-bones studio setting: no costumes, no lights, no sets. In her 1972 work “The Bix Pieces,” Ms. Tharp spoke about her beginnings and ideas about art; this new program further reveals her philosophical approach. She says she now recognizes that “Tank Dive” was something of a manifesto in which three actions — down, out and up — explored the trajectory of movement. As she explained, “It has nothing to do with dance steps, but it has to do with a bigger purpose for dance, which is movement in the world.”Ms. Tharp has sent an immense amount of spellbinding movement into the world, from her genre-crossing dances, performed on stages, in museums and outdoors, to Broadway musicals like “Movin’ Out” and “Come Fly Away.” She’s choreographed for films, including “Hair,” “Amadeus” and “White Nights,” and in 1973 created “Deuce Coupe,” regarded as the first crossover work, mixing modern and classical dance. “In the Upper Room,” “Push Comes to Shove” and “Bach Partita,” to name a few, are now staples of classical repertory. She’s written three books and is working on a fourth. Both erudite and a populist, Ms. Tharp has a little of a life coach in her, judging by the way she both nurtures her dancers and encourages others to find their own creative spark, as she did with her 2003 book, “The Creative Habit: Learn It and Use It for Life.” (Even Howard Stern is a fan.) “You’ve got to be all things,” she said. “Why exclude? You have to be everything.”Along with exploring what dance means to Ms. Tharp, the lecture-performances will also consider time. “I have this very large body of work,” she said, in part “because I never maintained repertory. I hate repertory. It’s always about, what’s the next piece?” “Time moves in one direction only,” she continued, “and that would be forward. To go back is very uncomfortable for me. Memory begins to enter the picture. It screws up my clock.” And yet for all her commitment to the future, she doesn’t believe her old pieces should die. The problem of dance reconstruction — of legacy, essentially — is one that keeps Ms. Tharp up at night. Her archiving system, which she will reveal in her presentation with “The Fugue,” rejects the familiar notion that dance is solely an ephemeral art. As she explained in a lecture at Barnard last fall, she sees dances as entities and not merely experiences. In “The Fugue,” a rhythmically intricate trio modeled on Bach’s “Musical Offering” and based on a single 20-count theme, the accompanying sound is the dancer’s feet. For that dance, Ms. Tharp has written a detailed step-by-step manual in which spatial coordinates are described, and created a video component, in which the original dancers are shown moving to specific counts under a scrolling musical score. “We do all of the archiving now with a score running through it, which takes away any kind of arguing — once I’m no longer with us — among the ballet masters,” she said. “This is what the phrase is, this is where it sits in the music, this is how it works.” Her Barnard students are learning “The Fugue” based on these materials to prove how a dance, like other artifacts, can be rebuilt. “We could teach it to them directly,” she said. “They wouldn’t do it very well, but they’d sort of do a ‘Fugue.’ This way, they have to earn it.” Ms. Tharp’s choreography is challenging to grasp even for seasoned dancers like Savannah Lowery, a New York City Ballet soloist who has joined her group for the tour. (She will miss City Ballet’s fall season.) “I had to let all inhibitions go, because it is so different than straightforward ballet,” Ms. Lowery said. “She uses the ballet and you need it, but it doesn’t feel anything like ballet.”This points to Ms. Tharp’s aversion to being exclusive — toward ballet or anything else. Later at her apartment overlooking Central Park, she considered her coming lecture-performances and sighed. “We have good dancing in our evening, but we don’t have happy.” She clicked on “The Screamer” by the Big Top Orchestra — she likes to work out to circus music — and zipped from one side of the space to the other with such brio you had to stare at her feet to make sure she wasn’t really floating on air. She sat down again, barely out of breath. “Wouldn’t everybody be happy?” she asked. In other words, what if her joyful apartment dance — or something like it — were to conclude the program? She tried out a line on an imaginary audience: “Folks, this is why we dance.” Still, as Ms. Tharp knows, dance is about more than happy endings. “What can it offer us culturally and aesthetically?” she asked. “What kind of choices does it suggest politically? What’s fair? What’s just? This can all be reflected in a dance.”Those questions weren’t at the forefront of her mind when she created “Tank Dive,” but after studying with masters like Martha Graham, Antony Tudor, Merce Cunningham and Paul Taylor, she knew she needed to find a beginning for herself. “I loved all of their answers, but I needed my own question,” Ms. Tharp said. “I didn’t want to synthesize them. And I didn’t want to rebel against them. I wanted to respect them and find a way where what I’d learned would be valuable to me. It was never for me about breaking their conventions. It was always about working in tandem to a new point.” Advertisement