AdvertisementSupported byPlaylistBy Nate ChinenThe Mountain GoatsBEAT THE CHAMP John Darnielle, the intensely self-conscious littérateur behind the Mountain Goats, knows his way around an arch setup, which may be one of several reasons to approach “Beat the Champ” (Merge) a little warily. Due out on Tuesday, it’s an indie-rock concept album about the waning territorial heyday of professional wrestling, just before the commercial consolidation of the 1980s. But it’s also an act of personal archaeology: Growing up in California, Mr. Darnielle was a devoted fan, and he still nurses a sentimental ache for the “comic-book heroes who existed in physical space,” as he puts it in the album notes. Some tracks, like “Werewolf Gimmick,” are studies in colorful conjecture. Others — like “Choked Out,” a bum rush of acoustic punk, and “Foreign Object,” a cheery oath of violence — seem inspired by a scrap of jargon. But the empathy in these songs, paired with wry humor but few traces of condescension, rings disarmingly sincere. “The Legend of Chavo Guerrero,” Mr. Darnielle’s homage to an unwitting protagonist of his own embattled youth, includes this reminiscence:Before a black and white TV in the middle of the nightI’m lying on the floor, I’m bathed in blue lightThe telecast’s in Spanish, I can understand someAnd I need justice in my life. Here it comesJoey CalderazzoGOING HOME The pianist Joey Calderazzo has proved, in the Branford Marsalis Quartet and elsewhere, that he can build a pressurized head of steam within a tune or inhabit a small radius of stillness. On “Going Home” (Sunnyside), his most rewardingly balanced album, he does both, and plenty more. Leading an intuitive trio with the bassist Orlando le Fleming and the drummer Adam Cruz, Mr. Calderazzo pursues swinging revelation; a piece like “Manifold” seems to rattle along a track laid moments before, while “Mike’s Song” features his fervent outpouring over a gospel-pop chord progression. There are a couple of songbook standards and a glowing ballad called “I Never Knew,” featuring Mr. Marsalis on tenor saxophone. But the most expressive moment is the hymnlike title track, played alone on piano as an elegy. Becca Stevens BandPERFECT ANIMAL Poise has apparently never been a problem for the singer-songwriter Becca Stevens. But on her third album, “Perfect Animal” (Universal Music Classics), out Tuesday, she operates with a level of self-assurance that might have been off-putting, if not for the approachability of her style. Ms. Stevens has a wizardly proficiency on an array of stringed instruments, and her singing is luxurious: pliable and hale but often foreshadowing a sob. Her songs are no less rooted in ambivalence, philosophically pensive and emotionally yearning: “It’s impossible/To live in parables,” she sings in the chorus to “Imperfect Animals,” a report of unstable foundations for a romantic partner. She sings in real-time vocal harmony with two members of her band, the accordionist and keyboardist Liam Robinson and the bassist Chris Tordini. Their smoothly alluring blend uplifts the covers on the album: not just Steve Winwood’s “Higher Love” (whose inclusion probably should have been reconsidered), but also thoughtful, earthy revisions of Usher’s “You Make Me Wanna” and Frank Ocean’s “Thinkin Bout You.” Sarah Elizabeth CharlesINNER DIALOGUE There comes a point at which a singer-songwriter rooted in jazz faces the decision to leave the fold. It hasn’t happened yet for Sarah Elizabeth Charles, despite the indie-R&B connotations she teases out on “Inner Dialogue” (Truth Revolution). Ms. Charles has a soulfully articulate vocal style, a mix of strong projection and subtle detail. On the album, which she produced with the trumpeter Christian Scott, she connects deeply with her band, which has Jesse Elder on piano and keyboards, Burniss Earl Travis II on bass and John Davis on drums. (Mr. Scott appears on two tracks.) As a songwriter, Ms. Charles favors earnest generalities over tactile specificity, a limitation that somehow doesn’t feel like one. But it’s striking how free she sounds on a pair of traditional Haitian songs, evoking her father’s heritage, and how much purpose she finds in a searching original called “Haitian Sunrise,” featuring a guest, Camila Meza, on acoustic guitar. Kirk KnuffkeARMS & HANDS Like many musicians in his peer group, the cornetist Kirk Knuffke harbors a dual commitment to formal experimentation and bedrock tradition: There’s no either-or. Still, it’s not often that you encounter the harmony of forces found in “Arms & Hands” (Royal Potato Family), Mr. Knuffke’s excellent new album, out Tuesday. At the core, it’s a trio record, featuring veteran players from different scenes, working together for the first time: the bassist Mark Helias, an avant-garde exemplar, and the drummer Bill Goodwin, a straight-ahead stalwart. They work in a dry sphere of discovery on more than a dozen originals hand-sewn for the occasion. The frame occasionally widens to accommodate a front-line partner: by turns, the trombonist Brian Drye and the saxophonists Jeff Lederer and Daniel Carter. But the focus never strays from Mr. Knuffke’s bond with his rhythm team, with all its groundedness and license.Advertisement