By GIA KOURLASOCT. 16, 2015
H. T. Chen didn’t merely dabble in history for his new “South of Gold Mountain,” a dance-theater exploration of the Chinese immigrants who ventured to the United States and landed in the American South in the 18th and early 19th centuries. He plunged in.“South of Gold Mountain,” performed on Thursday at New York Live Arts, was three years in the making and includes research and interviews with immigrants and their descendants by Mr. Chen — whose work often focuses on social and political subjects — and Dian Dong, the associate director of his company, who is the co-choreographer of the work and also his wife. Chinese immigrants, the program says, referred to the United States as “Gold Mountain,” a term dating to the gold rush.James Lo’s score mixes the blues and traditional Chinese music, sounds taken from restaurants and nature, and segments from the interviews. For the Chinese New Year, one woman recalls, her family always served black-eyed peas: “I thought it was Chinese.”But there was discrimination and segregation, too, indicated when the dancers hold hands and tersely pull away or take one step forward and two steps back. Mr. Chen, who includes children in his cast, has produced a work that hops between being overly vague (generic dance phrases embellished with imploring, reaching arms) and overly illustrative (the “Family Laundry” section, in which children fold clothing). It’s well meaning but dull, even though the subject matter is not.During “Fresh Sprouts,” the cast members dig and pat down invisible soil as if they’re planting seeds on a cotton plantation. Afterward, projections of black-and-white images appear on a screen at the back of the stage to show some of the businesses that the immigrants started: grocery stores, markets, restaurants and laundries. In the scenes, Ms. Dong plays a mother figure; Renouard Gee is the father. They are the owners in the “Restaurant” scene, which includes a rubber chicken and — this is a head scratcher — a moment for the dancers, dressed as waiters and holding plates, to cover the stage in pas de chat jumps while “Swan Lake” plays.And then it’s time for a snack. The cast members walk up and down the aisles to offer audience members fortune cookies. (It’s unusual that a choreographer would actually work the irritating sound of crinkling wrappers into a dance.) My date’s fortune read, “One extends one’s limits only by exceeding them.” If only “South” had done the same.A picture caption on Saturday with a dance review of H. T. Chen & Dancers at New York Live Arts in Manhattan, using information from a publicist, misidentified the dancer shown second from the left. She is Maki Shinagawa, not Ari Someya.H.T. Chen & Dancers continues through Sunday at New York Live Arts, Manhattan; 212-924-0077, newyorklivearts­.org.A version of this review appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: An Immigration Story.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.