Jon Stewart offered his support and encouragement to his coming replacement at “The Daily Show,” saying on the program Monday night that viewers would come to see Trevor Noah as “an incredibly thoughtful and considerate and funny individual,” despite a controversy last week about jokes that he had made on his Twitter account.The Daily ShowDaily Show Full Episodes,  More Daily Show Videos,  Comedy Central Full EpisodesIn his first appearance on “The Daily Show” since Mr. Noah, a 31-year-old comedian from South Africa, was announced as his successor, Mr. Stewart opened his Comedy Central program by acknowledging what he called “the elephant in the room”: that is, the news that the wrestler Seth Rollins (and Mr. Stewart’s sometime nemesis) had won the WWE championship.“Also,” Mr. Stewart added, “they have hired a new ‘Daily Show’ host. Mr. Trevor Noah is going to be hosting the show and I’m very excited about it.”He made reference to a “kerfuffle” that occurred on social media when Mr. Noah was criticized for Twitter jokes that were seen as insensitive to women and to Jews.“But I can say this, I think without hesitation,” Mr. Stewart said. “Trevor Noah will earn your trust and respect. Or not.” After some laughter, he continued: “Just as I earned your trust and respect. Or did not. Or sometimes earned it and then lost it. And then kind of got it back.”Mr. Stewart, who has not yet disclosed when he plans to leave “The Daily Show,” said he hoped audiences would give Mr. Noah “an opportunity to earn that trust and respect,” because he said “my experience with him is that he is an incredibly thoughtful and considerate and funny individual, and man, I think, you give him that time, and it’s going to be well worth it.”“I’m excited for where he’s going to take this thing,” said Mr. Stewart, who added that after more than 16 years at his post, “I’m going to record ‘The Daily Show’ when he takes over.”A version of this article appears in print on 04/08/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Stewart, on ‘Daily Show,’ Voices Support for Successor.