Religious holidays, spring break and warming weather brought big money for Broadway’s biggest shows last week. Nine productions grossed more than a million dollars, including three that crossed the $2 million mark by adding extra performances.But other productions, especially those aimed at adults, didn’t find the week to be much of a holiday, and many of the shows that are opening this month have not yet caught on with paying audiences.Easter week has consistently been strong for Broadway, and this year was no exception. The week’s best performers were the family-friendly musicals “The Lion King,” “Wicked” and “Aladdin,” each of which added a Friday matinee to the usual eight-show week, and each of which grossed more than $2 million.Three shows that opened this season are showing particular strength.  The musical “Finding Neverland,” which is still in previews, had its strongest week yet, earning $1.2 million. “The Audience” and “Fish in the Dark” — new plays dependent on the star power of Helen Mirren and Larry David — also brought in more than $1 million apiece, joining a high-grossing club that also includes three longer-running shows, “The Book of Mormon,” “Matilda the Musical” and “The Phantom of the Opera.” Among the other new shows, the dance-heavy musical “An American in Paris,” based on the 1951 film, looks especially healthy, grossing $967,000 in eight preview performances. Many other shows in previews reported relatively low grosses, but noted that they were setting aside seats for press and discounting heavily as they sought to build word-of-mouth.Among shows that have already opened, the revival of “The Heidi Chronicles” is facing long odds. Despite strong reviews and the presence of “Mad Men” star  Elisabeth Moss in the title role, it grossed only $275,000 and played to theaters that were half-empty. And a final week of performances offered no jackpot to the  musical “Honeymoon in Vegas,” which grossed $369,000 before closing on Sunday. A version of this article appears in print on 04/07/2015, on page C3 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Holidays Smile Upon Family Shows.